
II
ONCE (in those far-off peaceful days when men still had enough grammatical sense to know that
     the word "pacifist" does not exist, but that the less convenient "pacificist" does) I had been
     very depressed for a week, and had scarcely spoken to any one, but had just walked about in my
     rooms and on the Embankment, for I suddenly found myself without any money at all; and it is
     thus with me that when I am without money I am also without ideas, but when I have the first I
     do not necessarily have the last. I wondered if I had not done a very silly thing in being
     independent, and in not doing as my brothers had done, reading "The Times" in an office every
     morning from ten to twelve, and playing dominoes in the afternoon, and auction bridge in the
     evening, and having several thousands a year when I was forty, and a Wolseley car to take my
     wife for a holiday to Windermere, because she
      looked pale, or because we were bored with each other. I smiled to think of the
     look on my brothers' faces if I suddenly appeared at their office one morning, and said that it
     was no good, and that I couldn't write, and was very hungry. I could not make up my mind
     whether they would laugh at me and turn me out, or whether they would teach me how to play
     auction and set me to answer letters about what had happened on such and such a day inst., and
     why the firm of —— thought it unnecessary that it should happen again, while they would sit in
     the next room, marked "Private," signing cheques and talking to visitors about the weather and
     the cotton markets. Perhaps I will do that some day, for, from what I have heard, it seems to
     me the easiest thing in the world to talk about rises and falls and margins without knowing
     anything about them at all.
The same thing happens with regard to books, for one often meets people who seem to have read
     every modern novel, and can discuss quite prettily whether Mr. Wells is a man or a machine, or
     whether Mr. Arnold Bennett, ever since he wrote the last lines to
      "The Old Wives' Tales," has not decided that it is better to be a merchant than a
     writer, or whether Mr. E. V. Lucas thinks he is the second Charles Lamb, and what other grounds
     than his splendid edition has he for thinking so, or whether Mr. George Moore does or does not
     think that indiscretion is the better part of literature, or whether Mr. Chesterton or
     vegetarianism has had the greatest effect on Mr. Shaw's religion; but then, after all this
     talk, it turns out that they read "The Times Literary Supplement" every week, and think
     Epictetus nothing to Mr. Clutton-Brock, or they are steeped in Mr. Clement Shorter's weekly
     criticism en deshabille in the "Illustrated London News."
At last I could stand my depression no longer, and late one night, after a day in which I had
     spoken to no one but a little old woman who said that she wasn't a beggar but that God blessed
     the charitable, I sat down and wrote a long, conceited letter to Shelmerdene; for to her I can
     write whether I am gay or depressed, and be sure that she will not be impatient with me. I told
     her how I had a great fund of ambition,
      but had it not in me to satisfy a tenth part of it; for that is in the character
     of all my people, they promise much greater things in their youth than they can fulfil in their
     mature age. From twenty onwards they are continually growing stale, and bitter with their
     staleness; the little enthusiasm of their youth will not stretch through their whole life, but
     will flicker out shamefully with the conceit of their own precocity, and in trying to fly when
     other people are just learning to walk; and as the years pass on and youth becomes regret, the
     son of Haik, the faded offspring of a faded nation whose only call to exist is because it has
     lived so long and has memories of the sacking of Nineveh and Carchemish, is left without the
     impetus of development, with an ambition which is articulate only in bitterness; while the
     hardy Northerner, descendant of barbarian Druid worshippers whose nakedness was rumoured with
     horror in the courts and pleasure gardens of Hayastan and Persia, slowly grows in mind as in
     body, and soon outstrips the petty outbursts of the other's stationary genius. I told
     Shelmerdene that I, who had
      thought that England had given me at least some of her continually growing
     enthusiasm, that I who had thought I would not, like so many of my
     countrymen, be too soon stranded on "the ultimate islands" of Oriental decay, was even now in
     the stage between the dying of enthusiasm and its realisation; for the first impetus of my
     youthful conceits was vanishing, and there looked to be nothing left to them but an
     "experience" and a "lesson of life" without which I would have been much happier. In moods such
     as these one can hear in the far distance the wailing of a dirge, a knell, indefinitely yet
     distinctly, and the foreboding it brings is of an end to something which should have no end; a
     falling away, a premature decay which is like a growing cloud soon to cover the whole mind....
     Shelmerdene, do you know the story of the Dán-nan-Rón, which Fiona Macleod tells? How there
     lived three brothers on the isle of Eilanmore: Marcus, who was "the Eilanmore," and Gloom,
     whose voice "was low and clear, but cold as pale green water running under ice," and Sheumais,
     on whose brow lay "the dusk of the shadow." Gloom
      was the wisest of the brothers, and played upon an oaten flute, which is called a
      feadan; and men were afraid of the cold, white notes of his barbaric runes,
     as he played his feadan from rock to rock and on the seashore, but most of
     all they feared the playing of the Dán-nan-Rón, which is the Song of the Seal and calls men to
     their death in the sea. And when the eldest brother Marcus was killed with the throwing of a
     knife, the murderer heard the woods of Gloom, which said that he would hear the Dán-nan-Rón the
     night before he died, and lest he should doubt those words, he would hear it again in the very
     hour of his death. It happened as Gloom said: for one night the playing of the
      feadan drove the slayer, Manus MacCodrum, down into the sea, and as he
     battled madly in the water, and the blood gushed out of his body as the teeth of seals tore the
     life out of him, he heard from far away the cold, white notes of the Dán-nan-Rón.
This tale always brings to me that many men, in some sudden moment which even M. Maeterlinck
     would hesitate to define as "a treasure of the humble," hear the playing
      of a tune such as that, which tells them of some ending, unknown and indefinite,
     just as, in the moments of greatest love, a man will feel for a terrible second the shivering
     white ice of sanity, which tells him a different tale to that which he is murmuring to the
     woman in his arms. Men who have heard it must have become morose with the fear this distant
     dirge brought upon them; but of that foreboding nothing certain can be known, and it is only in
     such a mood as this, and to a Shelmerdene of women, that a fool will loosen his foolishness to
     inquire into such things. Clarence Mangan must have heard the tune as he lay drunk and wretched
     in his Dublin garret, for there is more than Celtic gloom in the dirge of his lines. John
     Davidson, whose poetry you so love, and who wrote in a moment of madness "that Death has loaded
     dice," must have heard it, perhaps when first he came to venture his genius in London, a young
     man with a strange, bad-tempered look in his eyes; and he must have heard the exulting notes,
     as clearly as did Manus MacCodrum, when he walked into the sea from Cornwall. Charles
      Meryon must have heard it as he walked hungrily about the streets of Paris, and
     wondered why those gargoyles—strange things to beautify!—on Notre Dame, into which he had put
     so much life, could not scream aloud to the people of Paris that a genius was dying among them
     for lack of food and praise. Do you remember, Shelmerdene, how you and I, when first I began to
     know you, stood before a little imp of wonderfully carved onyx stone which leered at us from
     the centre of your mantelpiece, and I said that it was like one of those gargoyles of Meryon's;
     and that afternoon I told you about his life and death, and when I had finished you said that I
     told the tale as though I enjoyed it, instead of being frightened by the tragedy of it. But I
     admired your imp of onyx stone very much, telling you that I loved its ravenous mouth and
     reptile claws, because they looked so helplessly lustful after something unattainable; and that
     same night I found a little black-and-gold box awaiting me in my rooms, in which was the imp of
     onyx stone, and a note saying that I must put it on my table
      because it would bring me luck. For a second I did not believe your words, but
     thought that you had given it to me to be a symbol for my helplessness, for I had said that it
     lusted after something utterly unattainable. But the second passed, and I found later that you
     had forgotten those words, and had sent it to me because I liked it.... I would like to spend
     these glorious spring days away from London with you, in quietness, perhaps in Galway
     somewhere; but if you cannot come away with me to-morrow, I will take you out to dinner
     instead, and we will talk about yourself and the ci-devants who have loved
     you; and though I have no money at all now, I am quite sure that to-morrow will bring some.
Sure enough a few hours later I awoke to a bright spring morning, which brought happiness in
     itself, even without the help of a cheque which a recreant editor had at last thought fit to
     send me. As I walked out into the blaze of sunshine on the King's Road, I felt that I must
     surely be a miserable fellow to let my ill-nature so often oppress me that only very seldom I
     was allowed to
      enjoy such mornings as this; mornings which seem to spring suddenly out at you
     from a night of ordinary sleep, when, as you walk through streets which perhaps only the day
     before you hated bitterly, the spring sun wholly envelops your mind and comes between yourself
     and your pretty dislikes, and the faces of men and women look brown, and red, and happy as the
     light and shadow play on them; such a day was this, a pearl dropped at my feet from the tiara
     of some Olympian goddess.
Later I telephoned to Shelmerdene to ask her to lunch with me instead of dine, as the day was
     so beautiful; but she said that she had already promised to lunch with some one, a man who had
     loved her faithfully for more than ten years, and as all he wanted from her was her company
     over lunch on this particular day of the week, she could not play him false, even though the
     day was so beautiful. But I told her that I would not be loving her faithfully for ten years,
     and that she must take the best of me while she could, and that on such a day as this it would
     be a shame to lunch with an inarticulate
      lover; for a man who had loved her faithfully for more than ten years, and wanted
     only her company over lunch once a week, must be inarticulate, or perhaps a knave whose subtle
     cunning her innocence had failed to unveil. So in the end we lunched together in Knightsbridge,
     and then walked slowly through the Park.
The first covering of spring lay on every thing. The trees, so ashamed—or was it
     coyness?—were they of their bareness in face of all the greenness around them, were doing their
     best to hurry out that clothing of leaves which, in a few weeks' time, would baffle the rays of
     the sun which had helped their birth; and there was such a greenness and clearness in the air
     and on the grass, and about the flowers which seemed surprised at the new warmth of the world,
     hesitating as yet to show their full beauty for they were afraid that the dark winter was
     playing them a trick and would suddenly lurch clumsily upon them again, that the Park has never
     seemed to me so beautiful as on that spring afternoon when a careless happiness lay about
     everything.
     
So far I have not said a word about Shelmerdene, except that she had found a man—or, rather,
     he had tiresomely found her—to love her faithfully for ten years, and she had so affected him
     that he thought a weekly lunch or dinner was the limit of his destiny with her. And yet, had he
     searched himself and raked out the least bit of gumption, he would have found he was
     tremendously wrong about her—for there were pinnacles to be reached with Shelmerdene
     unattainable within the material limits of a mere lunch or dinner. She was just such a
     delightful adventuress as only a well-bred mixture of American and English can sometimes make;
     such a subtle negation of the morals of Boston or Kensington that she would, in the searching
     light of the one or the other, have been acclaimed the shining light of their William Morris
     drawing-rooms. She drew men with a tentative, all-powerful little finger, and mocked them a
     little, but never so cruelly that they weren't, from the inarticulate beginning to the
     inevitable end, deliriously happy to be miserable about her. She was a Princess Casassimma
     without
      anarchical affectations; and like her she was almost too good to be true.
So much then, for Shelmerdene; for if to cap it all, I should go on to say that she was
     beautiful I would be held to have been an infatuated fool. Which, perhaps, I carelessly was,
     since I can't even now exactly fix upon the colour of her hair, doubting now in memory as I
     must have done actually in those past days with her, whether it was brown or black or, as
     sometimes on a sofa under a Liberty-shaded lamp, a silver-tinted blue, so wonderfully deep....
     Perhaps destined, in that future when Shelmerdene is at last tired of playing at life, to be
     the "blue silver" of the besotted madman to whom she, at the weary end, with but a look back at
     the long-passed procession of ci-devants, will thankfully give herself.
      Dies iræ, dies illa....



