
CHAPTER X.
Miss watson's tyranny, however, one pair succeeds in evading. By a cautious and
      judicious loitering until the tail of the plaid gown has been seen safely to whisk round the
      corner, they find themselves free, absolutely at their own disposition, for as long as the
      Verwalter's windy narrative may last, and with all the Schloss garden for their own—all its
      sunshine, all its shelter, all its old-world grace.
Sun-petted, defended from each one of Heaven's rough winds, it lies at the Schloss foot.
      Around it rise the woody
       hills, the humble low hills of a flat country, but now with their humility made
      proud, with their insignificance rendered significant, by the inexpressible magnificence of
      spring.
Into the very core of Belinda's and Rivers' happy hearts has the spring spirit passed. Too
      happy for common speech, they sit on a time-worn stone bench, with their young and radiant
      eyes pasturing on the sweet, still prospect; the high and ancient Schloss, clock-towered and
      red-roofed, soaring out of the plenteous new leafage; and seen down a vista of thick and
      venerable hedges, so accurately and squarely clipped that not a leaf projects from the
      verdurous primness, an old stone Flora, with her lap full of garden flowers. On the prospect,
      I say, their eyes pasture; but from it they continually turn to each other's faces, as being
      yet lovelier and more joyful.
"Try to be a little depressed!" Crossing her secure bliss, Sarah's worldly-wise precept
      flashes, only to be contemptuously
       dismissed. What needs she any mean ruse to gain him?
For the moment, doubt and fear have vanished from her heart, cast out and slain by an
      exultant certainty of joy. How dare she, looking in his face, have any mean and unworthy
      misgivings as to his being wholly hers, body and soul, through all time, and through whatever
      may follow time? How could she, even if she wished it, feign to be low-spirited? she, in
      comparison with whose high and passionate content even the larks are melancholy and the river
      dull? What need have they for coarse and clumsy words? But, after all, words, though coarse
      and clumsy, are the coin in which human creatures must pay each other, and failing in which,
      they are often bankrupt for life.
It is doubtful whether Sarah would give much approval to a conversation—if such it can be
      called—of so highly unpractical a cast—a conversation made up of hot sighs, and torrid looks,
      and broken syllables
       of ecstasy; but in which there is no most distant allusion to either priest or
      altar.
It is broken in upon before it has reached a more articulate stage by the voices of the
      Schloss seers, who, their task happily accomplished, every cold room and bad daub faithfully
      seen, are now let loose, like schoolboys at noon, upon the silent garden.
In a moment there is not a trim walk or finely-gravelled alley that is not alive and noisy
      with jokes and merriment. They intercept the view of the Flora. They steal the cowslips and
      little white saxifrage that grow on the sternly-prohibited grass. It is impossible to escape
      their laughter and their eyes. They are everywhere. More universally pervasive than anyone
      else, more turbulent, more wildly hilarious are Sarah and her little court. But yet
       there is a method in her madness, as her sister has soon occasion to discover;
      for, protected by the noise of voices round her, she presently draws Belinda aside, to whisper
      in the hardest, soberest, common-sense voice, "Has he spoken?"
Belinda, thus suddenly dragged down from the empyrean, shrinks wincingly away without
      answering; but in vain. "Has he?" repeats the other resolutely, taking hold of her wrist in
      detention; and as a faint un-willing headshake confirms the suspicion she already nourishes,
      "More shame for him!" she says quickly; "try the wood."
There is no time for more. Next moment she is off—a frolicking madcap— with her hussars. If
      Rivers had over-heard her—for one dreadful moment the thought flashes across Belinda, "Is it
      possible?" —he could hardly have worded his next sentence differently.
"What a bedlam they have made of this!" he says, casting an irritated glance round on the
      Bacchic crew; "shall we try the wood?"

Five minutes ago she would have assented gladly, not less thankful than he to escape from
      the empty din; but now the consciousness of the coarse and business- like intent with which,
      did she comply, she would be seeking those innocent shades, makes her answer with almost all
      her old coldness:
"I think we do very well here!"
He does not press his request; only that look of blank disappointment that she knows, comes
      like a creeping, chilly fog across his passionate fair face. He, too, is precipitated from the
      heights. They walk stupidly along, side by-side, for a space. Afterwards they reflect, in
      bitter looking back, that they must have wasted quite a quarter of an hour of their one high
      holiday. Not more than a quarter, however. By the end of that time they have twice met Miss
      Watson, and been closely questioned by her as to what they were talking about. Once, indeed,
      the better to investigate this, she has joined them for several paces, and would probably have
       remained with them, had not the sight of another tête-à-tête that
      looked even more absorbing than theirs, ravished her away to disturb it.
No sooner is her broad back averted, than "You were right," says Belinda, turning to the
      young man with a humorous yet trembling smile, "the wood is best."
"Then, for God's sake, come there at once, or she will be after us!" he cries, with a hot
      and tragic eagerness ludicrously disproportioned to the occasion that has called it forth.
She does not now need to be twice bidden, and away they speed, casting apprehensive glances
      over their shoulders, glances that see black plaid gowns in every harmless bush, until the
      safe covert of the wood is reached.
That is not long. It is only a few paces off, just beyond the garden. And yet, near and
      accessible as it is, none of the revellers have as yet divined it. It has, indeed, a
      too-much-frequented air, of which the well-beaten
       pathway tells; but, for the time, it is silent and safe.
She has sat down, a little quick-breathed from her run—they had even descended to running—on
      the pathside grass, and he has flung all his supple long length at her feet.
"So we are alone again," he says, drawing a heavy sighing breath. "My life is now one long
      manoeuvre to be alone with you; and how seldom I succeed!"
She laughs nervously. With whom but himself does it lie to command her company while life
      lasts? She has no longer the heavenly confident certainty that blessed her in the garden. She
      has changed it for a hot and doubting unrest; for an avoiding, and yet at the same time for a
      contradictory craving to meet and answer those madly asking eyes. Why is it that the eyes
      alone ask?
"Perhaps it is as well for you," she says, with a tremulous brusqueness.
"What do you mean?" he asks, speaking
       hardly above a whisper; already the dread that he has advanced too far, and that
      for the hundredth time she is going to freeze him back again, beginning to stay the beating of
      his leaping heart.
"I mean," she says, forming the words with immense difficulty, and in a tone that to herself
      sounds dry and forbidding, "that perhaps you would not find the charm of tête-à-têtes
      with me increase in the same proportion as their frequency."
"Will you try me?" He cannot speak above a whisper now. How is it likely that he should,
      when his burning heart has sprung up into his throat and is choking him? Has not he thrown the
      die, upon which his universe turns?
But to her his four words have an ambiguous sound that may mean all or nothing. How, then,
      can she answer them?
There is a silence. So hushed and sleeping are all the winds that not even any one of the
      young leaves above their heads rubs, slightly rustling, against
       another. If those leaves, or the flowers on which they lean, or the birds of
      heaven could but have been interpreters between him and her! She has taken off her gloves, the
      better to pull the fresh grasses near her, and her right hand now lies palm upwards on her
      knee. Upon it his eyes, sinking for a moment from her face, have greedily fixed themselves.
      What could not those five slight fingers give him, if they would?
"Why are you looking at my hand?" she asks, laughing unsteadily. "Can you tell me whether I
      have a good line of life? do I live long? am I happy? do I"— 'marry," she is going to say, but
      she stops herself— "is there any great misfortune or dangerous illness in store for me?" She
      is talking rapidly and à bâtons rompus , feeling that she must find words of some
      kind, no matter what, to fill up that too pregnant silence; feeling that the cool- breathed
      wood is stifling, and that if she pause for one moment her tears will have way and for ever
      disgrace her.

For all answer, his heart-hunger mastering him, the poor boy fastens on the hand of which
      she speaks. There is a singing in his ears and a fog before his eyes; but he has it. In his
      own shaking fingers he holds that sacred palm, that never before, save in meaningless comings
      and goings, has he touched. In all its satin warmth and smoothness, it lies in his. Will he
      ever let man or devil rob him of it? He would tell you "No." So the supreme moment has come,
      and she recognises it.
"Do you see that I am to take a long journey?" she says, stooping her quivering face over
      their two locked hands.
What more propitious moment could even Sarah choose in which to tell him of their departure?
      But she does not think of Sarah.
For a moment he seems not to take in the meaning of her words. Is there room in all his
      seeing, hearing, understanding, for aught but the one surpassing fact that his lady has
      deigned at last to lay her hand in his, and that her starry eyes, soft,
       merciful, passionate, are, through a splendid curtain of tears, bent on his
      own.
After a while, "Are you going away?" he says mistily. Even yet words come but strangely to
      him, and his head swims.
"Yes," she answers, she, too, scarce knowing what she speaks; "the cherry-blossoms are gone,
      and the lilacs will soon go, and so must we!" Often beforehand has she rehearsed the scene in
      which she is to tell him of her going. Imagination has tricked it out in various shapes and
      colours, but the reality is unlike them all.
He expresses neither regret nor surprise —he expresses nothing. He only lifts the long lily
      hand that he holds, and laying its palm against his burning mouth, softly passes his lips to
      and fro over the little fair lines in which her history is written.
Where is his timidity now? It was only her displeasure that had ever made him afraid; and
      even he can see that there is no displeasure here. She is pale, indeed, but it is with the
      pallor of conquering passion; and very still, but it is the stillness
       of one who, looking up in awful joy, sees the dawn of a superb new world
      breaking upon her.
"Are you sorry?" she says, with a half- sob. "You do not tell me whether you are sorry."
He is no longer lying at her feet. He is kneeling in his beautiful glad manhood at her
      knee.
" Sorry !" he repeats, with a sort of ecstatic scorn. "Why should I be sorry? It is
      only you who can ever make me sorry again!"
So it has come. For a moment she closes her eyes, as one faint with a bliss whose keenness
      makes it cross the borderland and become pain, and so is gathered into his strenuous
      embrace.
For one second she lies on his heart. For one second the breath of her sweet sighs stirs his
      hair. Their faces are nearing each other slowly, in the luxury of a passionate delay, to make
      yet more poignant the pleasure of their supreme meeting at last, when—

"Mr. Rivers! Mr. Rivers!"
What horrid sound is this that is breaking into and murdering the divine quiet of the wood?
      that is breaking into and murdering their diviner union? That sound once silenced, the wood
      will return to its stillness; but when to them will that moment ever return? When will that
      begun embrace be ended?
For one instant they remain paralysed and uncomprehending in each other's arms; then, as the
      voice comes again, the unmistakable brazen voice, from which in less crucial moments they have
      so often fled in panic aversion, comes nearer and louder, in obviously quick approach to them,
      they spring apart, and stand dazed and panting in wild-eyed consternation that the cruel
      work-a-day world has so early thrust itself again upon them, and that their heavenly trance is
      broken.
Belinda is the first to recover the full use of her senses.
"It is she !" says the girl, breathing quick and short, and putting up her
       trembling hands to her bonnet and hair to ensure that all is neat and tight and
      unbetraying. "We might have known that she would have hunted us down!"
He does not answer. Perhaps his in-toxication was deeper than hers, and that he has more ado
      thus suddenly to shake it off. Perhaps the rage of that lost kiss— of his arms emptied of, as
      soon as filled with, his heart's desire—makes sight and hearing still thick.
"Mr. Rivers! Miss Churchill! Mr. Rivers!"
How loud the voice is now! It must be only just round the next corner; and a heavy foot is
      audible, accompanying it.
"We had better go and meet her," says Belinda desperately; and they go.
"So here you are!" cries Miss Watson cheerfully, coming into view, evidently en
       nage from the speed of her chase. "What a hunt I have had for you! Did not you hear me
      calling? I called quite loud. Where have you been, hiding?"
"Do you want us?" asks Belinda, modulating
       her trembling voice with excessive care; and, after all her pains, wondering
      whether it sounds as extraordinary to her interlocutor as it does to herself.
"I have been collecting everybody," cries the other, fanning herself. "I think," smiling,
      "that I have collected everybody now. I want us all to keep together."
"Why should we herd together in a drove? Are we Cook's tourists?" asks Rivers, speaking for
      the first time, and in a tone of dogged brutality, looking murderously at her. In his face is
      clearly expressed the sentiment of Balaam: "I would I had a sword in my hand, for then would I
      slay thee!"
"I always keep my parties together!" replies Miss Watson, still smiling. "It is so much more
      sociable! It spoils a party to break it up. When I was in the Holy Land, we went a picnic to
      Bethabara, twenty-five of us on donkeys, and we all kept together. If we all keep together
      there will be no difficulty about collecting at starting."

"We are not going yet?" cries the young man, for a moment forgetting him- self, and betrayed
      into a tone of passionate apprehension.
"Well, not immediately, of course. There will be plenty of time to explore this wood a
      little, if you feel inclined. Whose wood is it? The King's, eh? Not much in the way of timber;
      but then there never is much in the way of timber in a German wood. Where does this path lead
      to—have you any idea? What do you say to following this path a little, to see where it leads
      to?"
They have fallen into a stupid silence. That paralysis of the will which overtakes all upon
      whom Miss Watson bestows her company, has seized them with a numbing force proportioned to
      their frenzied inward revolt. She drives them before her, unresisting, through the wood.

"Well?" says Sarah, in a tone of the keenest and most urgent interrogation. It is night, and
      they are at home again.
       The long twilight still lies on the city, but the hour is latish. The two girls
      have been deposited at their house in the Lüttichau Strasse, and are climbing the cold stone
      stairs to their apartment. "Well?"
Belinda's answer is to quicken her pace and race up the remaining steps.
"Two can play at that game," says Sarah, springing after her, active as a cat, and facing
      her again on the landing. "Well?"
But before she has extracted any more answer than before, Tommy has opened the door of the
       ètage and admitted them.
"Well, granny," cries Sarah, marching briskly into the salon, blinking a little from the
      sudden light, taking the old lady's smooth face in both hands, and giving it a sounding kiss,
      "here we are! We have had a very happy day, and I am engaged, more or less, to three people.
      By-the-bye, they are all going to call to-morrow."
"I am delighted to hear it, I am sure, my dear, if it amuses you," replies Mrs.
       Churchill, placidly rearranging the dainty tulles and laces that her
      granddaughter's embrace had ruffled; "but I think I have heard something like it once or twice
      before."
"And Belinda is not engaged at all!" continues Sarah indignantly, looking eagerly towards
      her sister to see whether this direct statement does not call forth any disclaimer. But none
      comes.
"You do not say so?" rejoins Mrs. Churchill, in a tone of civil but tepid interest, stifling
      a slight yawn. She does not care much about Belinda, who does not amuse her, while the
      "Daudet," from whose pages her grandchildren's entrance has roused her, does.
"Is it possible," says Sarah, advancing with a threatening gesture to her sister— "do you
      dare to look me in the face and tell me that you have not brought him up to the point after
      all?"
Still silence, and a look towards the door suggestive of meditated evasion by it. But this
      move the other anticipates by
       placing herself between Belinda and all means of exit.
"Did you take him to the wood?"
"Yes."
"Did you tell him we were going?"
"Yes."
" And nothing came of it ?" cries Sarah in a tone of such profound and unfeigned
      stupefaction that Belinda, though certainly at this moment not mirthfully minded, breaks into
      a laugh. "Bless my soul, what stuff can you both be made of? Granny, what stuff can they be
      made of?"
But granny has gone back, true as the needle to the Pole, to her novel, and declines to take
      any further part beyond a slight shrug in her granddaughter's affairs.
"Well, you know our agreement," continues Sarah, beginning to walk up and down in a fervid
      excitement, that contrasts with the elder woman's phlegm; "you know our agreement:
      to-morrow—you may think I am joking, but I assure you that I never was more in earnest in my
      life—to-morrow I ask him his intentions."

A charming flickering smile breaks like moonlight on water over Belinda's face.
"I give you leave!" she says in a voice that, though low and tremulous, is distinct.
Then, vanquishing all her junior's efforts to detain her, pushing indeed impetuously past
      her, she flies to her own room and double-locks herself in; nor do all Sarah's plaintive
      pipings through the key-hole and angry rattlings of the lock avail to dislodge her.

