
CHAPTER VIII.
"Le monde n'est jamais divisé pour moi, qu'en deux régions; celle où elle est, et celle où
      elle n'est pas."
A week —a whole week—only a week! There are two opposing ways of looking at this or
      any other period of time; one of impatient marvelling at its immensity, the other of gasping
      consternation at its shortness. It is needless to ask which of these two moods is Mrs.
      Forth's, with regard to Rivers' holiday. Only a week! How many times, during its seven days,
      does she, with that all-answering phrase, stop conscience's mouth? Of what use for only
       a week to practise self-government? of what use for only a week to question, with
      too nice a closeness, her heart as to the cause of its leapings and sinkings? her temper as to
      the reason of its endless variabilities? her thoughts as to the path they take? or her
      imagination as to the length of its tether? Only a week! Too short a space to do anything in
      but enjoy —to enjoy—to enjoy! With eyes resolutely shut to the cost—to the heavy score running
      up, that at the week's end will have to be paid. Oh, not too short to enjoy in!
It is not all enjoyment. Already, before two days of it are past, it has been marred by
      irksome labour, by balked expectation, by unreasoning jealousy—a jealousy whose unreason she
      herself, in her calmer moments, recognises; which in Rivers' presence dies of famine, having
      less than nothing to live upon, but, once out of the reassurance of his eyes, revives and
      bulks big again.

Rare indeed is it for one successful excursion not to engender another or several more. The
      weather holds. The Professor's heart or liver—it is never quite clearly understood which of
      these organs is affected—has recovered its balance, upset by his wife's Walpurgis day.
Belinda has three consecutive afternoons of freedom—three afternoons of being swiftly pulled
      down the river, that brave water-way alive with vigorous youthhood— of gaily drinking tea and
      sucking cider-cup through straws at little river-side alehouses— of picking the freakish
      fritillaries in the meadows—of being towed back in dreamy languor at night-fall or star-rise
      —of loitering homewards with hands full of flag-flowers—of parting at the garden gate.
To that parting there comes, each evening, a deeper deadlier sweetness. It does not lie in
      words. There is not one word that, did the Professor protrude his velvetcapped head from his
      bower window, need be withdrawn.

Belinda is living on her capital. At the week's end she will be bankrupt; let her then be
      merry while she may! Perhaps Sarah acquiesces in her sister's view of the unimportance of any
      course of action that must be compressed into so short a period of time as a week. Perhaps,
      being in her way wise, she recognises the futility of interference. Perhaps her hands are too
      full of her own affairs to have much time or attention to spare for her sister's; for seldom
      has Miss Churchill been in such amorous straits of her own making as at present.
The course of allurement which had merely warmed up the heavy German soldiers into a
      pleasant and manageable tenderness, has wrought three inflammable English boys to a white
      heat. Daily, and in proportion as their inconvenient ardour for Sarah increases, does their
      friendship for each other—close and warm to begin with—decline, and tend towards the opposite
      pole of animosity. On the last
       expedition but one, she dare no longer accept a bunch of fritillaries from one,
      without instantly crowding her hands with a similar bunch from each of the others. She can now
      never drink less than three cups of afternoon tea; as that affords to each an opportunity of
      handing her one. Even Bellairs, early convinced of the hopelessness of his adoration of Mrs.
      Forth, is now wholly hers, far more wholly indeed than she at all wishes.
"I am fast getting to hate the sight of them!" she cries, in a tone more nearly approaching
      tearful vexation than is often to be heard in her joyous voice, as she and her sister patrol
      in their wonted fashion the garden, on the morning of the week's last day. "None of them"—by
      this comprehensive phrase she always designates the noble army of her admirers, past and
      present—"none of them have ever given me half so much trouble; why cannot they understand that
      it is not the fox I care for, but the chase ?"

"It will be soon over," replies Belinda slowly.
She says it as a consolation to her sister, but the application that she makes is to
      herself.
"That is all very fine," replies Sarah gloomily; "but there is still to-day. You know that
      we are to go on the New River this afternoon; and in a weak moment I promised that ugly
      Bellairs—but I declare," with a burst of petulance, "that they bother me so that I do not know
      whether I am on my head or my heels—that he should scull me in some little cockle-shell—a
      dinghey, he calls it—he and I, and nobody by, you know," with a laugh of annoyance; "and I
      positively dare not tell the others. What am I to do? I suppose," with something of
      her old sidling, coaxing manner, "that you would not care to break it to them?"
Belinda smiles; a bitter smile of recollection.
"As I was to break to Mr. Forth that
       you meant to jilt him? Thank you! I think not!"
It is true that the last day has come; and the last excursion. All through the previous
      night, all morning, Belinda has been dogged by the icy terror—no weaker word suffices—that
      something may occur to prevent it. She has asked after the Professor's organs, with a
      solicitude whose treachery makes her blush. The very unbearableness of the idea lends it a
      horrid probability. In this our life are not the things too bad to be faced, those that
      oftenest happen?
The hour comes—the meeting at the corner (never again have the enamoured youths ventured
      across the threshold of the house they have desecrated!)—the walk to the river. Sarah has
      vainly tried to hook herself on to her sister; but— Bellairs having out-manoeuvred his
      fellows, and compelled them to content themselves with the chaperone of a former expedition,
      civilly invited to complete the party—has
       dropped resignedly behind with him, her face sufficiently revealing that she is
      braced for the worst.
The river is reached. In the choosing the boats and arranging the cushions a little
      diversion is effected, which gives Sarah the opportunity to pluck her sister by the sleeve,
      and pull her aside.
"It is all up," she says morosely; "he has been telling me as we came along, that if he read
      my eyes aright, he was far from indifferent to me!"
"And you? what did you say?"
"What did I say?" (in a tone of extreme exasperation, and yet unwilling amusement). "I told
      him that he had read them awrong; but"—with a rueful glance at the little craft now being made
      ready for her reception—"you must perceive that the dinghey has become an impossibility; what
      is to be done? There is not room for us all in the other; quick!"
For a moment Mrs. Forth looks before her in blank perplexity; then, all at once,
       an idea, habited in a sudden lovely blush, rushes into her mind. Why not? Is not
      it the last day? But she does not at once clothe it in speech. Instead:
"Cannot you persuade Mrs. Baker to take your place?" she asks.
Sarah shrugs her shoulders impatiently.
"She would not hear of it; she is inclined to scream in a punt!"
There is no help for it, then. What other alternative can she propose? It is no fault of
      hers; accident, rather—fate— ill-luck! She has done her best. How often during the past week
      has she told herself that she has done her best!
"I suppose, then, that I must sacrifice myself," she says hurriedly, and not
      looking at her sister; and then, several voices at once calling upon them, they rejoin the
      rest of the party.
In a moment, as if some devil were behind her—or what in her present frame of mind would
      seem to her both more dangerous and more ugly—some amorous
       undergraduate, Sarah has, to ensure herself against ambush or surprise, skipped
      into the larger boat.
"My sister's courage has failed her," says Belinda, standing flushed and downcast-eyed on
      the bank. "I am afraid that some one will have to scull me instead."
No one answers, and she steps—some one giving her a hand—into the dinghey. Some one
      instantly follows her, and takes up the sculls. It is not till they are well out in the
      stream, and not immediately even then, that she lifts her eyes. A sort of shame weighs them
      down.
The manoeuvre was none of hers; and yet it is by a manoeuvre that she has secured this final
       tête-à-tête with him. She does not even know whether it is in accordance with his
      wishes that she has acted. He has expressed no pleasure in the arrangement; perhaps—her
      jealousy awaked in a moment from its always light sleep—he is vexed to have been baulked of
      Sarah's company. Perhaps, even now,
       he is silently fighting with his disappointment.
She snatches a fugitive glance at him—a glance that, in an instant, is turned away again;
      for it has told her what she wished to learn. The cause of his dumbness is one which does not
      very often make us speechless in this our life. He cannot speak for joy.
She leans back satisfied and smiling. The New River is narrower, less of a great highway
      than the old one. Here are no imperative Eights, out of whose way all lesser boats must clear,
      under penalty of being apostrophized by a ferocious "Look ahead, sir!" and then run down. And
      yet there is no lack of company here either, on this splendid summer day.
Above, the pale bright sky, holding her forget-me-not-coloured shield; and below, the
      windings of the slow broad river, and the great expanse of hedgeless meadowland. The horses,
      summering there, stand knee-deep in the stream, eating, or pretending
       to eat, the weeds; one having a wet roll of utter enjoyment in the shallows.
      Sheets of little ranunculus are all ablow, each stiff, straight stem and small white head
      erect on the water. Countless geese stalk along the meadow, waddling and cropping the grass.
      Others, like a white fleet, paddle and dive for water-weeds.
Into the midst of this feathered Armada they see the larger boat, which has shot ahead of
      them, being lustily pulled to give it a fright; instigated thereto by Sarah, who under the
      ægis of a female friend, and with Bellairs pulling stroke, and consequently divided from her
      by nearly the whole length of the boat, has resumed her usual hilarity, and by voice, gesture,
      and waved parasol, is encouraging her slaves. The geese separate, screeching and oaring away;
      and one gosling, overtaken by the prow, dives and rises again ten paces away.
Both Rivers and Belinda laugh. There is something healthy and clearing to the
       moral atmosphere in a joint laugh. Rivers' mirth dies into a long sigh of
      contentment.
"What a day!" he says, resting on his oars, and staring up at the sky. "I love the
      river; how I missed it at first! I used to dream about it! it was one of the things that I
      dreaded dreaming about!"
She does not ask him what the others were. Possibly she is incurious.
"Perhaps," he says, bringing his eyes down again from the heaven above him, to the, to him,
      better heaven of her face, "perhaps it is worth while to have a holiday only once in two
      years, to enjoy it as I have done mine!"
As he speaks, a slight frown, not of displeasure at his harmless words, but of reflection
      and doubt, puckers her forehead.
"Are you sure," she says slowly, "that it is quite the first holiday that you have had in
      two years?"
He looks surprised.
"Virtually yes. Why?"
"Nothing!" she answers in confusion;
       "only I happened to hear that you were in London last winter."
"I was," he answers calmly, though still surprised. "Our firm sent me up on business: that
      was no holiday."
"And you—you combined business with pleasure?" she says, laughing awkwardly. "You—you went
      to the play?"
Difficult as it is to look him in the face, while guiltily conscious of the drift of her
      question, she yet eagerly fastens upon him a glance whose keenness no least tinge of
      discomfiture can escape. But none such meets her. He has resumed his leisurely rowing, but now
      stops again.
"Where you there?" he cries abruptly. "Is it possible that I missed you? I looked—I
      thought—I hoped."
She shakes her head.
"I was not there! I was not" (with a twinge of self-pity, as she recalls her then mood)—"I
      was not in a very play-going humour; but I was told by some one who had seen you!"

Surely he will now volunteer the mention of the lady by whom he was accompanied. She has
      paused on purpose to give him the opportunity, but he does not take it. He leans on his
      sculls, staring before him in wistful bitter thought.
"You were with a lady," says Belinda presently, unable any longer to contain herself.
"A lady?" he says, starting. "Was I? —oh, of course, my sister. Poor girl! she had not been
      anywhere for so long, that she was naturally keen about it. She was staying with an aunt, who
      gave us our stalls; otherwise," with a laugh, "in the then state of our finances, the shilling
      gallery would have been nearer our mark!"
So it is explained. How simple it sounds! how obvious! What is there in it, upon which any
      but a madwoman could have hung distrust or jealousy? And yet it is upon this cock-and-bull
      story that she elected to shipwreck her life! A sailing-boat, lurching and tacking, and
      heeling
       over, after the manner of such, and out of whose way they have to get, rouses
      them both, and they row on.
The larger boat has pulled into the bank, in order to set the two dogs, in whom Sarah
      affects to detect symptoms of incipient sea-sickness, on shore, where they instantly begin to
      give a great deal of trouble.
Punch—a dog of no ballast of mind, entirely losing his head in joy at his enlargement —first
      frolicsomely nips the sleepy horses' heels, a civility which they return by viciously lashing
      out at him; then chivies the geese, a levity which calls forth from the husband and father an
      awful chastisement of flapping wings, outstretched neck, and dreadfully wide-opened mouth.
      Slutty, on the other hand, for reasons best known to herself has set off galloping in the
      wrong direction, with her tail between her legs. Her recapture and the recovery and
      admonishment of Punch take so long, that the couple in the dinghey have time to get far ahead,
      and,
       rounding a reach of the river, to lose their companions from sight. On and on
      they float in their virtual aloneness, for in nothing do the two men punting, or the happy
      young fellow shooting past in his skiff, disturb their solitude. They speak ever less and
      less. Now and again, indeed, silence becomes too oppressive, and they speak; but then speech
      grows over-pregnant, and they fly back to silence.
Both are strung up to pleasure's highest pitch, that pitch for which they will have to pay,
      and know that they will have to pay, so extortionately; for pleasure, like the scorpion, is an
      animal that carries a sting in its tail. Upon enjoyment is set its keenest edge. The lark,
      lost in light above them, might be their spokesman, only that to their song, unlike his, there
      is ever that minor refrain: "The last day! the last day!"
What a nameless unreckoning elation the warm breeze lends, and the motion and the very
      throbbing of the gentle water against the passing keel! She pulls up
       her sleeve, and dipping in her bared right arm, affects to imitate his gestures,
      and to oar the stream with it.
"I am helping you," she cries, smiling. "I, too, am rowing; do you find any perceptible
      help?"
He does not reply. He rows slowly on in a dream, his eyes intoxicatedly watching that
      pendent hand and swaying lily wrist. He always thinks her last word or action prettier and
      better than all its predecessors. But surely she can never outdo this. He might borrow
      Florizel's words without a changed syllable.

He pulls, still in a dream, beneath the willows. A poplar, shivering perpetually, flutters
      and trembles against the sky's perfect azure over their heads. Still in a dream, and at her
      orders, he leaves her lying pensive and cool on her cushions, and scrambles into the field to
      fetch flowers for her. He comes back with a great nosegay, which he lays in her lap: yellow
      flags, beckabunga, forget-me-nots bigger and bluer than the petted garden ones, a scrap of
      catch-fly, a handful of stitchworts, powdery purple grasses, all plucked haphazard, and yet
      gathered into such a perfect posy as no after-arranging, or sorting, or matching of colours
      could compass. She tells him so. Was ever man, for so poor a gift, so royally thanked?
Their companions have passed them again; the dogs re-embarked, and the whole company singing
      a gay part-song. No other than "The Franklin's Dogge."

How entrancingly sweet and merry sound the nonsensical old words across the water! Belinda
      and Rivers must needs follow them to the rendezvous—the little rural Trout Inn, where they are
      to have tea. It is brought out to them, in an arbour overlooking the stream, by a stout wench;
      thick bread and butter, great wedges of plain cake, a tea-set where no two articles are of the
      same make or pattern.
Sarah, having tided over her Bellairs difficulty, and restored to her happy-go-lucky
      confidence of being able to keep the rest of her team well in hand, is in delightful spirits.
      There are too many other visitors at the Trout to make any more glees advisable; but she is
      good enough to indulge the company with several quiet performances of a juggling nature, which
      make no noise, and need attract no attention—such as sticking half-pence
       into her eyes, and disposing them ingeniously about her other features.
Belinda, too, is in wild mirth—as wild as that of the unlucky day of Blind Man's Buff. She
      is not nearly so clever with the halfpence as her sister; but in point of mere animal spirits
      she almost exceeds her. When, however, the tea-party and its humours are ended—when, in their
      former order, they are on their way home again—those factitious spirits drop like a wind at
      sunset.
The feast is all but over: surely, since the world was, never has any been so poignantly
      relished. In each moment have not they tasted a hundred years of ordinary tame pleasures? But
      it is now nigh being done, and pay-day stands at the door. The light is low and level; the
      geese have gone to bed, grey head and yellow nose tucked beneath greay wing. The horses'
      shadows stretch, longer than camelopards, across the meadow. There is scarcely any need to use
      the oars, wind
       and current helping them; they are floating —oh, how swiftly!—to where the one
      great dome, and the many spires, momently growing taller, tell where the fair city lies.
The last hour of the last day is running out. When that dome and those spires are reached,
      it will have run out. The last hour! How many things there are to be said in a last hour! And
      yet the only phrase that will rise to either of their lips is, "It is the last time!" Even to
      that they do not give utterance: not until they have slidden more than half-way home. Then, at
      sight of those rapidly nearing spires—those spires that mean the end—a sort of panic seizes
      Belinda:
"How fast we go!" she says half-breathlessly, looking down as if she would fain stop on the
      lovely evening water, quickly swishing past with a pleasant low sucking sound; "we shall be
      home in ten minutes!"
"In ten minutes!" he repeats in a tone
       half-mazed, as of one not realizing the sense of the words.
"And it is the last time!" she says very low.
Still the keel quickly cutting the flood, and the water sucking. Why so fast? In pity, why
      so fast? The very sun— their last sun—seems hurrying more rapidly than his wont to his hot
      rose and cowslip coloured bed. At first they had had days ahead of them—such riches seem
      incredible—then hours, now minutes, and but few of them; so few that surely there is not one
      of them to be wasted! Perhaps it is this thought that sends such a passion of haste into the
      words with which he answers her:
"Why should it be the last time?"
She receives the suggestion in dead silence—a silence so dead as to give him time for a cold
      pang of fear that he has employed these priceless moments in offending his dear lady, and that
      she will part from him in displeasure. If his hand
       were laid upon her heart, he would know why she did not speak. In the last
      drunken week, she has not once had the courage to look her life, that is to be, in the eyes.
      Who, squandering and rioting in the now , dare ever face the then ? At last
      she stammers:
"How should not it be the last, since your holiday ends to-morrow?"
"And am I never to have another?"
He is lying on his oars now; but still the boat drifts, drifts. She shakes her head with a
      little unhopeful smile; though surely no hopeless heart ever leaped and sprang as hers is
      doing.
"Perhaps in another two years!"
His oars are quite out of the water; he, at least, will have no share in accelerating the
      end. The drops gently drip from their blades. Twilight is taking her first grey steps across
      the plains, and the warm dew falls. Two or three of their dwindling store of minutes are gone
      before Rivers speaks.

"Term will sooon be over, then you will go away, I suppose?"
"I think not—probably not," she answers idifferently, an unacknowledged disappointment at
      the apparent irrelevance of his remark, at his want of insistance upon his former suggestion,
      chilling heart and voice.
"You will stay here all through the Long?"
Why is there such a catch in his breath as he asks this question? What is it to him whether
      she goes or stays?
"Most likely. Mr. Forth will go to Switzerland; I believe he mostly does; but he will not
      take me."
"He will leave you here?"
"Yes."
"Alone?"
"Unless you count my mother-in-law as society," with a slight satiric laugh.
A pause. A flight of plovers, going bedwards, speck the sky above them.
"Will not you—will not you—be lonely?"

"Not more than usual."
"Will not most of your friends have gone?"
Again she laughs, and her laugh is of the same unmerry character as before.
"With my goodwill they may all go; I am no great hand at making friends."
Another pause. The plovers have dwindled to nothing; the other boat is lost to sight, far
      ahead. What is he going to say that makes him fidget so uneasily with his unused oars?
"It is really no great distance from Yorkshire here."
Again she laughs; but the irony is gone, driven away by a tremor that is even farther from
      gaiety.
"My geography is not my strong point, but I should have scarcely thought that they were
      neighbouring counties."
"Milnthorpe is not more than five hours from here, by a good train."
"Is not it?"
And then again there is silence. How
       twilight is taming day's gaudiness! but doing it with so lovesome a mien, that
      who can regret the gone greens and blues?
"I could," he begins. How dry his throat is! He would be glad of a draught from the river to
      moisten it. "I could —run down—for Sunday—now and then."
It is out now! For good or for evil, it is said; and in uncontrollable anxiety he leans
      forward, the better to read in her face how she takes it.
She is as dead silent as she had been at his first suggestion of the possibility of their
      meeting again; but perhaps he has learnt to interpret that silence better. Must not she needs
      set some order in that riotous heart of hers before she can speak at all? Surely the earth is
      mistaken in thinking that night is coming. Is not it the morning that is born? His hand has
      lifted a corner of the great night-curtain that has hung, black and impenetrable, before
       her future life. Dare she let him lift it all?
"Only now and then! Not often!" he says in great agitation. "If you have not a soul to speak
      to for four months, you might not mind seeing me now and then— quite now and then!"
Not mind seeing him ! At that she cannot choose but smile.
"We knock off work early on Saturday, and there is a fast train that would take me back in
      good time for Monday morning."
There is such a desperate urgency of asking in his eyes, that she dare not look at him. What
      can she answer? Still that unmastered riot in her heart! and how near the landing-place is
      growing! All the sail-boats with furled sails and lowered masts; all the row-boats gathered
      home.
"It is rather a mad plan!" she says, with a laugh that has a touch of the hysteric.

"Is it?" he answers blankly. "I suppose it is."
There are not more than eight boat-lengths to go. In those eight boat-lengths she must
      decide one way or the other; for the rest of the party are gathered in hilarious talk about
      the landing-place—"Little Byngo" and many other worthy partsongs having wrought one and all to
      the highest pitch of good-fellowship—waiting for them.
"Oxbridge is not my private property," she says almost inaudibly, and shaking like a poplar
      leaf, that is never still; "you have other friends here beside me."
"I have," he answers, catching at her suggestion, with a relief proportioned to the
      consternation with which his eye has been measuring the half-dozen yards left him in which to
      plead his cause. "Why should not I come to see them?"
Nor have either he or she the candour to own to themselves or each other what is
       perfectly well known to both, that in the Long Vacation Oxbridge will be innocent
      of the presence of any one of those friends. This is their real parting.

