<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">

A MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE.
WHEN Miss Stanley opened her hazel eyes the morning after the mischance on the way home from
     the theatre, her first waking impression was that something pleasant was to happen. She laughed
     at herself a little when complete wakefulness made her conscious that, after all, it was only
     Count Litvinoff's acquaintance and promised call which were answerable for that dreamy feeling
     of anticipated enjoyment.
She let her thoughts stray in his direction several times that day, and at the table
      d'hôte looked out for him with interest. But he was not there. Bearing in mind Mr
     Stanley's invitation, Count Michael Litvinoff had thought it as well to absent himself from the
      table d'hôte. It would have been rather awkward to meet his new acquaintances at
     dinner and then to call on them immediately afterwards.
'I don't see our Russian friend, Clare,' remarked Mr Stanley as the fish was removed. 'I
     think you must have been mistaken about his staying here.'
'Perhaps I was, papa,' said Clare, submissively, but with a sparkle in her eyes that
     contradicted her words. 'Or perhaps his foot hurt him so much that he couldn't come down.'
'If he doesn't come up after dinner we'd better make inquiries.'

But he did come up after dinner, and when he entered, limping slightly, Mr Stanley received
     him with as much effusion as could be shown by an old gentleman after a heavy meal.
'My daughter tells me you are staying in this hotel,' he began; and as Litvinoff, taking this
     as an introduction, bowed low to her, with his eyes on the ground, she hoped he did not notice
     the sudden flush that swept over her face. But he did; there was, in fact, very little that
     went on within a dozen yards of him that Count Litvinoff did not notice.
'How strange that you should have been on the spot last night, and how fortunate.'
'It was fortunate for me, since it has procured for me this pleasure. May I hope that you are
     not any the worse for the shock?'
'No, I'm not; but I'm afraid you are; do sit down.'
As Litvinoff and her father went on talking, Clare, who had not yet spoken a word, could not
     help thinking that this gentleman with the foreign name was somehow very different from any man
     she had hitherto met, not even excepting those fine specimens of young English manhood, the
     Ferriers. There was about him that air of worldliness which is so attractive to young people.
     'He looks as if he had a history,' she said to herself, with conviction; a remark which did
     credit to her powers of observation. She liked his voice and his way of speaking, for though
     his English was perfect, he spoke it with a precision not usual to Englishmen.
'Will you have tea or coffee?' asked Clare presently, busying herself with the cups and
     saucers that had been brought in.
'Mr Litvinoff will have coffee, of course, my dear; young men don't like tea nowadays.'
'I can't claim to be very young,' said the other, smiling, 'but I do like tea.'

'Ah! you would just please my wife; she says that a liking for tea in a young man is a sign
     of a good moral disposition.'
'I'm afraid in my case it's national instinct, not moral beauty.'
'National!' repeated Mr Stanley, 'national! Why, God bless my soul, you aren't Chinese, are
     you?'
The guest threw his head back and laughed unaffectedly; and Clare smiled behind the
     tea-tray.
'Oh, no; I'm only a Russian.'
'Oh, ah,' said Mr Stanley, in a rather disappointed tone. For the moment he had been quite
     pleased at the thought that here was actually a Chinese who could talk excellent English, and
     whose garments were not exactly the same, to the uninitiated, as those of his wife and
     mother.
'You speak English uncommonly well,' he went on.
'Well, I've been in England some years now,' he said, with a rather sad smile, which
     confirmed Clare in that fancy about his history. 'A turn for languages is like the taste for
     tea, one of our national characteristics. I suppose the ordinary tongue finds such a difficulty
     in twisting itself round Russian, that if it can do that it can do anything. Allow me!'
     springing forward to hand Mr Stanley his cup of coffee.
'My daughter always sings to me while I'm having my coffee,' said Mr Stanley, suppressing the
     fact that under these circumstances he generally went to sleep, and feeling a mistaken
     confidence, as slaves of habit always do, that his ordinary custom could be set at nought on
     the present occasion.
'I hope Miss Stanley will not deny me the privilege of sharing your pleasure,' said
     Litvinoff, rising and making for the piano. Clare followed him.
'What shall I sing, papa?' she said.
'Whatever you like, my dear. "The Ash Grove."'
Clare sang it. Her voice was not particularly powerful, but  she made the most of
     it, such as it was, and sang with enough expression to make it pleasant to listen to her. After
     'The Ash Grove' came one or two plaintive Scotch airs, and before she was well through 'Bonnie
     Doon,' the accompaniment of her father's heavy breathing made her aware that her audience was
     reduced by one-half. The most appreciative half remained, and, when the last notes of the
     regretful melody had died out, preferred a request for Schubert's 'Wanderer.' This happened to
     be her favourite song, and she sang it con amore.
'It always seems to me,' he said when she had finished, 'that that music carries in it all
     the longing that makes the hearts of exiles heavy.'
Clare looked up at him brightly. 'Oh, but their hearts ought not to be heavy, you know,' she
     said. 'The Revolution is of no country—I thought banishment from one country ought merely to
     mean work in another for an exile for freedom. Surely there is a fight to be fought here in
     England, for instance, too. I don't know much about it; I've scarcely seen anything, but it
     seems to me there is much to be put straight here—many wrongs to be redressed, much misery to
     be swept away.'
The Count's bold eyes fixed themselves on her with a new interest in them.
'Yes, yes,' he returned with a little backward wave of his hand. 'Exiles here do what they
     can, I think; but the wronged and miserable will not have long to wait, if there are many Miss
     Stanleys to champion their cause. Still it does make one's heart heavy to know that horrors
     unspeakable, worse than anything here, take place daily in one's own country, which one is
     powerless to prevent. One feels helpless, shut out. Ah, heaven! death itself is less hard to
     bear.'
'You speak as if you had felt it all yourself,' said Clare, a little surprised at the
     earnestness of his tone.

'I did not mean to speak otherwise than generally. I believe in England it is considered "bad
     form" to show feeling of any sort—and you English hate sentiment, don't you?'
'I don't think we hate sincere feeling of any kind; but forgive me for asking—are you really
     an exile?'
Count Litvinoff bowed. 'I have that misfortune—or that honour, as, in spite of all, I suppose
     it is. But won't you sing something else?' he added, with a complete change of manner, which
     made any return on her part to the subject of his exile impossible.
'I really think I've done my duty to-night,' she answered, rising. 'Don't you sing?'
'Yes, sometimes. Music is a consolation. And one is driven to make music for oneself when one
     lives a very lonely life.'
'Won't you make music for us?' she asked, ignoring the fact that her father was still snoring
     with vigour.
'Yes, if you wish it.'
He took her place at the piano, and, in a low voice, sang a Hungarian air, wild and
     melancholy, with a despairing minor refrain.
While her thanks were being spoken his fingers strayed over the keys, and, almost insensibly
     as it seemed, fell into a few chords that suggested the air of the Marseillaise.
'Oh, do sing that! I've never heard anyone but a schoolgirl attempt it, and I long so to hear
     it really sung. I think it's glorious.'
Without a word he obeyed her, and launched into the famous battle song of Liberty. His
     singing of the other song had been a whisper, but in this he gave his voice full play, and sang
     it with a fire, a fervour, a splendid earnestness and enthusiasm, that made the air vibrate,
     and thrilled Clare through and through with an utterly new emotion.
She understood now how this song had been able to stir  men to such deeds as she
     had read of—had nerved ragged, half-starved, untrained battalions to scatter like chaff the
     veteran armies of Europe. She understood it all as she listened to the mingled pathos,
     defiance, confidence of victory, vengeance and passionate patriotism, which Rouget de Lisle
     alone of all men has been able to concentrate and to embody in one immortal song, in every note
     of which breathes the very soul of Liberty.
As the last note was struck and Litvinoff turned round from the piano, he almost smiled at
     the contrasts in the picture before him—a girl leaning forward, her face lighted up with
     sympathetic fire, and her eyes glowing with sympathetic enthusiasm, and an old gentleman
     standing on the hearthrug, very red in the face, very wide awake, and unutterably astonished.
     The girl was certainly very lovely, and if the exile thought so, as he glanced somewhat
     deprecatingly at the old gentleman, who shall blame him?
'How splendid!' said Clare.
'Very fine, very fine,' said her father; 'but—er—for the moment I didn't know where I
     was.'
This reduced the situation to the absurd—and they all laughed.
'I hope I haven't brought down the suspicions of the waiters upon you, Mr Stanley, by my
     boisterous singing; but it's almost impossible to sing that song as one would sing a ballad. I
     evidently have alarmed someone,' he added, as a tap at the door punctuated his remark.
But the waiter, whatever his feelings may have been, gave them no expression. He merely
     announced—
'Mr Roland Ferrier,' and disappeared.
'I'm very glad to see you, my dear boy,' said Mr Stanley, as Roland came forward; 'though
     it's about the last thing I expected. Mr Litvinoff—Mr Ferrier.'

Both bowed. Roland did not look particularly delighted.
'We've come to London on business,' said he.
'We? Then where is your brother?' questioned Clare.
'Well,' said Roland, 'it is rather absurd, but I can't tell you where he is; he's lost,
     stolen, or strayed. We came up together, dined together, and started to come here together. We
     were walking through a not particularly choice neighbourhood between here and St Pancras, when
     I suddenly missed him. I waited and looked about for something like a quarter of an hour, but
     as it wasn't the sort of street where men are garrotted, and as he's about able to take care of
     himself, I thought I'd better come on. I expect he'll be here presently.'
But the evening wore on, and no Richard Ferrier appeared. Clare felt a little annoyed—and
     Roland more than a little surprised. Perhaps, in spite of his sang froid, he was a
     trifle anxious when at eleven o'clock Litvinoff and he rose to go, and still his brother had
     not come.
</div></body></text></TEI>