<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Prophet's Mantle, by Fabian
      Bland.</title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1889</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">

FATHER AND SONS.
THE light was fading among the Derbyshire hills. The trees, now almost bare, were stirred by
     the fretful wind into what seemed like a passionate wail for their own lost loveliness, and on
     the wide bare stretch of moorland behind the house the strange weird cry of the plovers sounded
     like a dirge over the dead summer. The sharp, intermittent rain had beaten all the beauty out
     of the few late autumn flowers in the garden, and it was tender of the twilight to hasten to
     deepen into a darkness heavy enough to hide such a grey desolate picture.
Inside Thornsett Edge another and a deeper darkness was falling. Old Richard Ferrier was sick
     unto death, and he alone of all the household knew it. He knew it, and he was not sorry. Yet he
     sighed.
'What is it, Richard? Can I get you anything?'
A woman sitting behind his bed-curtain leaned forward to put the question—a faded woman, with
     grey curls and a face marked with deep care lines. It was his sister.
'Where are the boys?'
'Gone to Aspinshaw.'
'Both of them?'
'Yes; I asked Dick to take a note for me, and Roland said he'd go too.'
The old man looked pleased.

'Did you want either of them?' she asked.
'I want them both when they come in.'
'Suppose you are asleep?'
'I shall not sleep until I have seen my sons.'
'Art thee better to-night, Richard?' she asked in a tone of tender solicitude, dropping back,
     as people so often do in moments of anxiety, into the soft sing-song accent that had once been
     habitual to her.
'Ay, I'm better, lass,' he said, returning the pressure of the hand she laid on his.
'Wilt have a light?'
'Not yet a-bit,' he answered. 'I like to lie so, and watch the day right out,' and he turned
     his face towards the square of grey sky framed by the window.
There was hardly more pleasantness left in his life than in the dreary rain-washed garden
     outside. And yet his life had not been without its triumphs—as the world counts success. He
     had, when still young, married the woman he passionately loved, and work for her sake had
     seemed so easy that he had risen from poverty to competence, and from competence to wealth.
     Born in the poorest ranks of the workers in a crowded Stockport alley, he had started in life
     as a mill 'hand,' and he was ending it now a millowner, and master of many hands.
He had himself been taught in no school but that of life; but he did not attribute his own
     success to his education any more than he did the fatuous failure of some University men to
     their peculiar training; so he had sent his sons to Cambridge, and had lived to see them leave
     their college well-grown and handsome, with not more than the average stock of prejudices and
     follies, and fit to be compared, not unfavourably, with any young men in the county.
But by some fatality he had never tasted the full sweetness of any of the fruit his life-tree
     had borne him. His parents  had died in want and misery at a time when he himself
     was too poor to help them. His wife, who had bravely shared his earlier struggles, did not live
     to share their reward. She patiently bore the trials of their early married life, but in the
     comfort that was to follow she had no part. She died, and left him almost broken-hearted. Her
     memory would always be the dearest thing in the world to him; but a man's warm, living, beating
     heart needs something more than a memory to lavish its love upon. This something more he found
     in her children. In them all his hopes had been centred; for them all his efforts had been
     made. They were, individually, all that he had dreamed they might be, and they were both
     devoted to him; and yet, as he lay on his deathbed, his mind was ill at ease about them. Did he
     exaggerate? Was it weakness and illness, the beginning of the end, that had made him think,
     through these last few weeks, that there was growing up between these two beloved sons a
     coolness—a want of sympathy, an indisposition to run well in harness together—which might lead
     to sore trouble?
There certainly had been one or two slight quarrels between them which had been made up
     through his own intervention. How would it be, he wondered, when he was not there any more to
     smooth things over? Somehow he did not feel that he cared to live any longer, even to keep
     peace between his boys. That must be done some other way. Truth to say, he was very tired of
     being alive.
The October day faded, and presently the sick-room was lighted only by the red flickering
     glow of the fire, which threw strange fantastic shadows from the handsome commonplace
     furniture, and made the portraits on the walls seem to look out of their frames with quite new
     expressions.
Old Ferrier lay looking at the pictures in a tremor of expectation that made the time seem
     very long indeed. At last  his strained sense caught the faint click of the Brahma
     lock as it was opened by a key from without, and the bang of the front door as it was closed
     somewhat hurriedly from within.
'There they are,' he said at once. 'Send them up, Letitia.'
As she laid her hand on the door to open it, another hand grasped the handle on the other
     side, and a tall, broad-shouldered young fellow came in, with the glisten of rain still on his
     brown moustache, and on his great-coat, seeming to bring with him a breath of freshness and the
     night air.
'Ah, Dick! I was just coming down for you. Where is Roland?'
'He stayed awhile at Aspinshaw. How's father?'
'Awake, and asking for you,' said his aunt, and went away, closing the door softly.
'Well, dad, how goes it?' said the new-comer, stepping forward into the glow of the
     firelight.
'Light the candles,' said his father, without answering the question, and the young man
     lighted two in heavy silver candlesticks which stood on the dressing-table.
As their pale light fell on the white face lying against the hardly whiter pillow, Dick's
     eyes scrutinised it anxiously.
'You don't look any better,' he said, sitting down by the bed, and taking his father's hand.
     'I wish I'd been at home when that doctor came yesterday.'
'I'm glad you weren't Dick; I'd rather tell you myself. I wish your brother were here.'
'I daresay he won't be long,' said the other, frowning a little, while the lines about his
     mouth grew hard and set; 'but what did the doctor say? Aunt Letitia didn't seem to know
     anything about it.'
'He told me I shouldn't live to see another birthday,' said the old man. He had rehearsed in
     his own mind over and over again how he should break this news to his boys, and 
     now he was telling it in a way quite other than any that had been in his rehearsals.
'Not see another birthday!' echoed his son. 'Nonsense! Why, father,' he added, with a sudden
     start, 'your birthday's on Wednesday. How could he? I'll write to him.'
'My dear boy, I felt it before he told me. He only put into words what I've known ever since
     I've been lying here. There's no getting over it. I'm going.'
Dick did not speak. He pressed his father's hand hard, and then, letting it fall, he walked
     over to the hearthrug, and stood with his hands behind him, looking into the fire.
'Come back; come here!' said the wavering voice from the bed. 'I want you, Dick.'
'Can't I do something for you, dad?' he said, in very much lower tones than usual, as he sat
     down again by the bed. He kept his face in the shadow of the curtain.
'We've always got on very well together, Dick.'
'Yes—we've been very good friends.'
'I wish you were as good friends with your brother as you are with your old father.'
'I'm not bad friends with him; and, after all, your father's your father, and that makes all
     the difference.'
'Your brother will soon be the nearest thing in the world to you. Oh, my boy,' said old
     Ferrier, suddenly raising himself on his elbow, and clasping Dick's strong right hand in both
     his, 'for God's sake, don't quarrel with him! If you ever cared for me, keep friends with him.
     If you and he weren't friends, I couldn't lie easy in my grave. And it's been a long life—I
     should like to lie easy at last!'
'I don't quarrel with him, father.'
'Well, lad—well, I've thought you did; perhaps I'm wrong. Anyway, don't quarrel—if it's only
     for your old dad's sake. I've loved you both so dearly.'

'I will try to do everything you wish.'
'I know you will, Dick. You always have done that. Was that Roland just came in? If it is,
     send him to me.'
The young man stood silently for a few moments. Then he bent down over his father and kissed
     his forehead twice. When he left the room he met a servant on the landing.
'Is Mr Roland at home yet?'
'Yes, sir; he's just come in.'
'Tell him Mr Ferrier wishes to see him at once.'
'Miss Ferrier told him, sir, directly he came in.'
He turned and went to his own room.
A quarter of an hour later Roland stood outside his father's door. He opened it gently, and
     entered, his slippered feet treading the floor of the sick-room as silently as a nurse's.
As he stood a moment in the dim light, eyes less keen and less expectant than those looking
     at him from the bed might have easily mistaken him for his brother. The slight difference in
     breadth of shoulder and depth of chest was concealed by the loose indoor jacket he wore. There
     was no trace about him of his wet and muddy walk, and he looked altogether a much fitter
     occupant for the easy-chair that stood at the sick man's bedside than the stalwart,
     weather-stained, and unsympathetic-looking figure that had last sat in it.
'Rowley, why didn't you come before?' began the old man.
'Oh, I couldn't, father. It is a beastly night. I was awfully wet and muddy. I only waited to
     change my things, and make myself presentable. How are you to-night?'
'Your brother came up wet enough,' was all the answer.
'Did he? What a careless fellow he is. He never seems to think of that sort of thing.'
'Oh, well, I suppose you didn't know.'
'Know what, father?'
'How much I wanted to see you.'

'Why, no, of course I didn't,' said Roland in an altered tone, and with a look of new anxiety
     in his face. 'What is it, father? I thought you were better to-day.'
'I shall never be better, lad. Doctor Gibson told me so, and I know he's right. You and Dick
     will soon be masters here. But don't worry, Rowley,' he added, catching both his son's arms;
     'it was bound to come some day.'
For a moment the young man had hardly seemed to realise what the words meant; but now a long,
     anxious, eager look at his father's face made the truth clear to him. An intense anguish came
     into his face, and throwing his arms round the other's neck, he fell on his knees in a burst of
     passionate tears.
'Oh, father, father, no, no—not yet—don't say that—I can't do without you. Oh, why have I
     left you since you have been ill?'
The old man caressed him silently. There was a sort of pleasure in feeling oneself regretted
     with this passion of sorrow and longing. After a while.
'Rowley,' said he, as the sobs grew less frequent and less violent, 'I'm going to ask you to
     do something for me.'
'Anything you like, father—the harder the better.'
'It ought not to be very hard to you, my son. Promise me that you will always keep good
     friends with Dick.'
'Yes—yes—I will, indeed.'
But little more was said. Roland seemed unable to utter anything save incoherent
     protestations of love and sorrow.
At last, warned by the weariness that was creeping into his father's face, he bade him a very
     tender and lingering good-night.
'Have me called at once if you are worse—or if I can do anything,' were his last words as he
     left the room.
The watchful woman's face was by the bed again in an instant.
'I want—' the old man began.
'You want your beef tea, Richard, and here it is.'
As he took it he asked,—

'Is it too late to send for Gates?'
'Oh, no; and it's such a little way for him to come.'
Mr Gates was a member of a firm of Stockport solicitors, and his country house was but a
     stone's-throw from Thornsett Edge. It was not long before he in his turn occupied that chair by
     the bed. He bore with him an atmosphere of jollity which even the hush of that sick-room was
     powerless to dispel. He was not unsympathetic either, by any means, but he seemed made up of
     equal parts of kindheartedness and high spirits, and looked much more like an ideal country
     squire than like the ordinary legal adviser. As a matter of fact, he was more at home on the
     moor side or in the stubble than among dusty documents and leather-bound Acts of Parliament. It
     was his boast that he only had eight clients, and that he lived on them, and, judging by his
     appearance, they furnished uncommonly good living. He had a genial, hearty way with him which
     made him a favourite with every man, woman and child he came across, and he knew quite enough
     law to fully justify the confidence of the eight above mentioned.
'What, Mr Ferrier, still in bed! Why, we thought old Gibson would have had you on your legs
     again in no time. I quite expected to see you driving over to the Wirksvale wakes
     to-morrow.'
'I shall never go behind any but the black horses again, Gates. It's no use. I'm settled, and
     I want you to alter my will.'
'I'll alter your will with pleasure, if you like. Though I must say it's so much more
     sensible than most people's wills that I wonder you want to alter it; but you mustn't talk of
     black horses and that sort of thing for another ten years. Don't lose heart; you'll live to
     alter your will a score of times yet.'
In an eager, tremulous voice Ferrier begged the other to believe that his fate was sealed,
     and that whatever was done must be done quickly. Then he proceeded to explain the changes he
     wished to have made in the will. He told the lawyer, without  any of that reserve
     which ordinarily characterised him, all his fears about his sons, and then unfolded the scheme
     by which he thought to bind the two together. He wished their worldly interests to be so
     strongly bound up in their relations to each other that a quarrel à outrance would
     mean ruin to both of them; and to this end he proposed to leave the mill to them jointly, on
     condition that they worked it together, and both took an active part in the management of it.
     Should they dissolve partnership before twenty-one years, or should either retire with consent
     of the other, the personal property was not to be touched by either, and at end of ten years—if
     they were both alive and still separated—the whole was to go to the Manchester Infirmary.
Mr Gates noted this extraordinary scheme down on the back of an old letter, and when Mr
     Ferrier had ended, read his notes through and shook his head.
'Far better leave it alone, Mr Ferrier; they seem the best of friends, and legacies like this
     never help matters much, anyhow.'
'I can't leave it alone, Gates. I've very little time left. The will is in that despatch-box,
     and there are pen and ink somewhere about.'
'Do be advised,' began Gates, his jolly face considerably graver than usual.
'I tell you I must have it done, and done at once. I'm deadly tired, and I want it over.'
Mr Gates shrugged his shoulders, got out the will, and settled himself at the round table, on
     whose crimson velvet-pile cloth stood a papier-maché inkstand, a recent purchase of
     Miss Letitia's.
He sat there biting his pen, and making aimless little scribbles on a sheet of blank paper.
     After some minutes he leaned forward, and for a little time no sound was heard but the squeak
     of his pen. At last he flung down the quill and rose.
'It is the only way it can be done, sir,' he said, and read it out.
It carried out Ferrier's plans, but placed the personal pro perty in the hands of
     trustees, who were to pay to Roland and Richard the interest thereof so long as they worked the
     mill together. If at the end of twenty-one years there had been no dissolution between them,
     the money was to pass unconditionally to them, in equal shares, or to the survivor of them, or
     to their heirs if they were both dead. If they quarrelled, the interest was to be allowed to
     accumulate for ten years, and then, if the brothers were still not on friendly terms, it should
     go, with the capital, to the Infirmary.
'That's right,' said old Richard, in a voice so changed as to convince the solicitor that he
     was right in saying he had not much more time to spend.
The codicil was signed, duly attested, and attached to the will, and Ferrier lay back
     exhausted, but with a light of new contentment in his eyes.
'I'm right down tired out,' he said; 'I shall sleep now.'
And sleep he did till the cold hour of the dawn, when there came a brief waking interval,
     before the longest, soundest sleep of all.
He opened his eyes then.
'It's nearly over,' he said; 'my boys—my boys!'
He called for them both, but it was Dick on whose broad breast the dying head rested. It was
     Dick who caught the last loving, whispered words, felt the last faint hand pressure, soothed
     the last pang, caught the last look.
For when Aunt Letitia hurried to their rooms, it was Dick who opened his door before she
     reached it, and, fully dressed, sprang to his father's bedside.
Roland was in the sound sleep that often follows violent emotion, and it was hard to rouse
     him. He came in softly just as his brother laid gently down on the pillow the worn old face, at
     rest at last, and closed the kindly eyes that would never meet Roland's any more. Never any
     more!
</div></body></text></TEI>