
CHAPTER V.
 Lord Marney left several children; his heir was five years older than the next son Charles
      who at the period of his father’s death was at Christchurch and had just entered the last year
      of his minority. Attaining that age, he received the sum of fifteen thousand pounds, his
      portion, a third of which amount his expenditure had then already anticipated. Egremont had
      been brought up in the enjoyment of every comfort and every luxury that refinement could
      devise and wealth furnish. He was a favourite child. His parents emulated each other in
      pampering and indulging him. Every freak was pardoned, every whim was gratified. He might ride
      what horses he liked, and if he broke their knees, what in another would have been
      deemed a flagrant sin, was in him held only a proof of reckless spirit. If he were not a
      thoroughly selfish and altogether wilful person, but very much the reverse, it was not the
      fault of his parents, but rather the operation of a benignant nature that had bestowed on him
      a generous spirit and a tender heart, though accompanied with a dangerous susceptibility that
      made him the child and creature of impulse, and seemed to set at defiance even the course of
      time to engraft on his nature any quality of prudence. The tone of Eton during the days of
      Charles Egremont was not of the high character which at present distinguishes that community.
      It was the unforeseen eve of the great change, that, whatever was its purpose or have been its
      immediate results, at least gave the first shock to the pseudo-aristocracy of this country.
      Then all was blooming; sunshine and odour; not a breeze disturbing the meridian splendour.
      Then the world was not only made for a few, but a very few. One could almost tell upon one’s
      fingers the happy families who could do anything, and might have everything. A school-boy’s
      ideas of the Church then were fat-livings, and of the State, rotten-boroughs. To do nothing
      and get something, formed a boy’s ideal of a manly career. There was nothing in the lot,
      little in the temperament, of Charles Egremont, to make him an exception to the multitude.
      Gaily and securely he floated on the brilliant stream. Popular at school, idolized at home,
      the present had no cares, and the future secured him a family seat in Parliament the moment he
      entered life, and the inheritance of a glittering post at court in due time, as its legitimate
      consequence. Enjoyment, not ambition, seemed the principle of his existence. The contingency
      of a mitre, the certainty of rich preferment, would not reconcile him to the self-sacrifice
      which, to a certain degree, was required from a priest, even in those days of rampant
      Erastianism. He left the colonies as the spoil of his younger brothers; his own ideas of a
      profession being limited to a barrack in a London park, varied by visits to Windsor. But there was time enough to think of these things. He had to enjoy Oxford as he had
      enjoyed Eton. Here his allowance from his father was extravagant, though greatly increased by
      tithes from his mother’s pin-money. While he was pursuing his studies, hunting and boating,
      driving tandems, riding matches, tempering his energies in the crapulence of boyish banquets,
      and anticipating life, at the risk of expulsion, in a miserable mimicry of metropolitan
      dissipation, Dukism, that was supposed to be eternal, suddenly crashed.
 The Reform Act has not placed the administration of our affairs in abler hands than
      conducted them previously to the passing of the measure, for the most efficient members of the
      present cabinet with some very few exceptions, and those attended by peculiar circumstances,
      were ministers before the Reform Act was contemplated. Nor has that memorable statute created
      a Parliament of a higher reputation for public qualities, such as politic ability, and popular
      eloquence, and national consideration, than was furnished by the old scheme. On the contrary; one house of Parliament has been irremediably degraded into the decaying
      position of a mere court of registry, possessing great privileges, on condition that it never
      exercises them; while the other chamber that, at the first blush, and to the superficial,
      exhibits symptoms of almost unnatural vitality, engrossing in its orbit all the business of
      the country, assumes on a more studious inspection somewhat of the character of a select
      vestry, fulfilling municipal rather than imperial offices, and beleaguered by critical and
      clamorous millions, who cannot comprehend why a privileged and exclusive senate is required to
      perform functions which immediately concern all, which most personally comprehend, and which
      many in their civic spheres believe they could accomplish in a manner not less satisfactory,
      though certainly less ostentatious.
 But if it have not furnished us with abler administrators or a more illustrious senate, the
      Reform Act may have exercised on the country at large a beneficial influence. Has it? Has it
      elevated the tone of the public mind? Has it cultured the popular sensibilities to
      noble and ennobling ends? Has it proposed to the people of England a higher test of national
      respect and confidence than the debasing qualification universally prevalent in this country
      since the fatal introduction of the system of Dutch finance? Who will pretend it? If a spirit
      of rapacious coveteousness, desecrating all the humanities of life, has been the besetting sin
      of England for the last century and a half, since the passing of the Reform Act the altar of
      Mammon has blazed with triple worship. To acquire, to accumulate, to plunder each other by
      virtue of philosophic phrases, to propose an Utopia to consist only of WEALTH and TOIL, this has been the breathless business of enfranchised England for the last twelve
      years, until we are startled from our voracious strife by the wail of intolerable serfage.
 Are we then to conclude, that the only effect of the Reform Act has been to create in this
      country another of those class interests, which we now so loudly accuse as the obstacles to
      general amelioration? Not exactly that. The indirect influence of the Reform Act
      has been not inconsiderable, and may eventually lead to vast consequences. It set men
      a-thinking; it enlarged the horizon of political experience; it led the public mind to ponder
      somewhat on the circumstances of our national history; to pry into the beginnings of some
      social anomalies which they found were not so ancient as they had been led to believe, and
      which had their origin in causes very different to what they had been educated to credit; and
      insensibly it created and prepared a popular intelligence to which one can appeal, no longer
      hopelessly, in an attempt to dispel the mysteries with which for nearly three centuries it has
      been the labour of party writers to involve a national history, and without the dispersion of
      which no political position can be understood and no social evil remedied.
 The events of 1830 did not produce any change in the modes of thought and life of Charles
      Egremont. He took his political cue from his mother, who was his constant correspondent. Lady
      Marney was a distinguished “stateswoman,” as they called Lady Carlisle in Charles the First’s
      time, a great friend of Lady St Julians, and one of the most eminent and impassioned votaries
      of Dukism. Her first impression on the overthrow of her hero was, astonishment at the
      impertinence of his adversaries, mingled with some lofty pity for their silly ambition and
      short-lived career. She existed for a week in the delightful expectation of his grace being
      sent for again, and informed every one in confidence, that “these people could not form a
      cabinet.” When the tocsin of peace, reform, and retrenchment sounded, she smiled bitterly; was
      sorry for poor Lord Grey of whom she had thought better, and gave them a year, adding with
      consoling malice, “that it would be another Canning affair.” At length came the Reform Bill
      itself, and no one laughed more heartily than Lady Marney; not even the House of Commons to
      whom it was presented.
 The bill was thrown out, and Lady Marney gave a grand ball to celebrate the event, and to
      compensate the London shopkeepers for the loss of their projected franchise. Lady Marney was preparing to resume her duties at court when to her great surprise the firing of
      cannon announced the dissolution of Parliament. She turned pale; she was too much in the
      secrets of Tadpole and Taper to be deceived as to the consequences; she sank into her chair,
      and denounced Lord Grey as a traitor to his order.
 Lady Marney who for six months had been writing to her son at Oxford the most charming
      letters, full of fun, quizzing the whole Cabinet, now announced to Egremont that a revolution
      was inevitable, that all property would be instantly confiscated, the poor deluded king led to
      the block or sent over to Hanover at the best, and the whole of the nobility and principal
      gentry, and indeed every one who possessed anything, guillotined without remorse.
 Whether his friends were immediately to resume power, or whether their estates ultimately
      were to be confiscated, the practical conclusion to Charles Egremont appeared to be the same.
      Carpe diem. He therefore pursued his career at Oxford unchanged, and entered life
      in the year 1833, a younger son with extravagant tastes and expensive habits, with a
      reputation for lively talents though uncultivated,—for his acquisitions at Eton had been quite
      puerile, and subsequently he had not become a student,—with many manly accomplishments, and
      with a mien and visage that at once took the fancy and enlisted the affections. Indeed a
      physiologist would hardly have inferred from the countenance and structure of Egremont the
      career he had pursued, or the character which attached to him. The general cast and expression
      of his features when in repose was pensive: an air of refinement distinguished his
      well-moulded brow; his mouth breathed sympathy, and his rich brown eye gleamed with
      tenderness. The sweetness of his voice in speaking was in harmony with this organization.
 Two years passed in the most refined circles of our society exercised a beneficial
      influence on the general tone of Egremont, and may be said to have finished his education. He
      had the good sense and the good taste not to permit his predilection for sports to degenerate
      into slang; he yielded himself to the delicate and profitable authority of woman,
      and, as ever happens, it softened his manners and brightened his wit. He was fortunate in
      having a clever mother, and he appreciated this inestimable possession. Lady Marney had great
      knowledge of society, and some acquaintance with human nature, which she fancied she had
      fathomed to its centre; she piqued herself upon her tact, and indeed she was very quick, but
      she was so energetic that her art did not always conceal itself; very worldly, she was
      nevertheless not devoid of impulse; she was animated and would have been extremely agreeable,
      if she had not restlessly aspired to wit; and would certainly have exercised much more
      influence in society, if she had not been so anxious to show it. Nevertheless, still with many
      personal charms, a frank and yet, if need be, a finished manner, a quick brain, a lively
      tongue, a buoyant spirit, and a great social position. Lady Marney was universally and
      extremely popular; and adored by her children, for indeed she was a mother most affectionate
      and true.

 When Egremont was four-and-twenty, he fell in love—a real passion. He had fluttered like
      others from flower to flower, and like others had often fancied the last perfume the sweetest,
      and then had flown away. But now he was entirely captivated. The divinity was a new beauty;
      the whole world raving of her. Egremont also advanced. The Lady Arabella was not only
      beautiful: she was clever, fascinating. Her presence was inspiration; at least for Egremont.
      She condescended to be pleased by him: she signalized him by her notice; their names were
      mentioned together. Egremont indulged in flattering dreams. He regretted he had not pursued a
      profession: he regretted he had impaired his slender patrimony; thought of love in a cottage,
      and renting a manor; thought of living a good deal with his mother, and a little with his
      brother; thought of the law and the church; thought once of New Zealand. The favourite of
      nature and of fashion, this was the first time in the life of Egremont, that he had been made
      conscious that there was something in his position which, with all its superficial
      brilliancy, might prepare for him, when youth had fled and the blaze of society grown dim, a
      drear and bitter lot.
 He was roused from his reveries by a painful change in the demeanour of his adored. The
      mother of the Lady Arabella was alarmed. She liked her daughter to be admired even by younger
      sons when they were distinguished, but only at a distance. Mr Egremont’s name had been
      mentioned too often. It had appeared coupled with her daughters, even in a Sunday paper. The
      most decisive measures were requisite, and they were taken. Still smiling when they met, still
      kind when they conversed, it seemed, by some magic dexterity which even baffled Egremont, that
      their meetings every day grew rarer, and their opportunities for conversation less frequent.
      At the end of the season, the Lady Arabella selected from a crowd of admirers equally
      qualified, a young peer of great estate, and of the “old nobility,” a circumstance which, as
      her grandfather had only been an East India director, was very gratifying to the bride.

 This unfortunate passion of Charles Egremont, and its mortifying circumstances and
      consequences, was just that earliest shock in one’s life which occurs to all of us; which
      first makes us think. We have all experienced that disheartening catastrophe, when the
      illusions first vanish; and our balked imagination, or our mortified vanity, first intimates
      to us that we are neither infallible nor irresistible. Happily ‘tis the season of youth for
      which the first lessons of experience are destined; and bitter and intolerable as is the first
      blight of our fresh feelings, the sanguine impulse of early life bears us along. Our first
      scrape generally leads to our first travel. Disappointment requires change of air; desperation
      change of scene. Egremont quitted his country, never to return to it again; and returned to it
      after a year and a-half’s absence, a much wiser man. Having left England in a serious mood,
      and having already tasted with tolerable freedom of the pleasures and frivolities of life, he
      was not in an inapt humour to observe, to enquire, and to reflect. The new objects that
      surrounded him excited his intelligence; he met, which indeed is the principal
      advantage of travel, remarkable men, whose conversation opened his mind. His mind was worth
      opening. Energies began to stir of which he had not been conscious; awakened curiosity led him
      to investigate and to read; he discovered that, when he imagined his education was completed,
      it had in fact not commenced; and that, although he had been at a public school and a
      university, he in fact knew nothing. To be conscious that you are ignorant is a great step to
      knowledge. Before an emancipated intellect and an expanding intelligence, the great system of
      exclusive manners and exclusive feelings in which he had been born and nurtured, began to
      tremble; the native generosity of his heart recoiled at a recurrence to that arrogant and
      frigid life, alike devoid of sympathy and real grandeur.
 In the early spring of 1837, Egremont re-entered the world, where he had once sparkled, and
      which he had once conceived to comprise within its circle all that could interest or occupy
      man. His mother, delighted at finding him again under her roof, had removed some
      long-standing coolness between him and his elder brother; his former acquaintance greeted him
      with cordiality, and introduced him to the new heroes who had sprung up during the season of
      his absence. Apparently Egremont was not disinclined to pursue, though without eagerness, the
      same career that had originally engaged him. He frequented assemblies, and lingered in clubs;
      rode in the park, and lounged at the opera. But there was this difference in his existence,
      before and since his travels: he was now conscious he wanted an object; and was ever musing
      over action, though as yet ignorant how to act. Perhaps it was this want of being roused, that
      led him, it may be for distraction, again to the turf. It was a pursuit that seemed to him
      more real than the life of saloons, full of affectation, perverted ideas, and factitious
      passions. Whatever might be the impulse Egremont however was certainly not slightly interested
      in the Derby; and though by no means uninstructed in the mysteries of the turf, had felt such
      confidence in his information that, with his usual ardour, he had backed to a
      considerable amount the horse that ought to have won, but which nevertheless only ran a
      second.
