
CHAPTER VII.
WHEN the matter was fairly decided, Agnes readily consented to the wish
                    of her future husband, that she would leave all the minor details entirely to
                    him, and not even question him as to his arrangements till they could be put
                    into execution; he was to take all measures requisite with Mr. Hardman and Mr.
                    Clayton; on her he enjoined only the most profound secresy.
During the interval which followed, Agnes seemed desirous to drive the whole
                    affair from her thoughts altogether. She appeared to be animated with a forced
                    and unnatural gaiety; laughed and talked far more than usual; and would not
                    allow the children to quit her for a moment. Richard occupied himself so
                    incessantly with the necessary and somewhat difficult preparations, that he
                    excluded all other thoughts; but the truth was, that neither of them was so calm
                    inwardly as they sought to appear to one another. Without communicating their
                    feelings to each other, they simul‐ taneously
                    avoided the church, for they could not endure to pass the grave of
                    Elizabeth.
No answer was sent to Mr. Hardman’s letter, and it was speedily followed by
                    another full of the most bitter indignation against Agnes. He concluded by
                    saying, that if she did not appear at his house in London within a given time,
                    he would himself come in search of her to B—.
“We shall pass him on the road,” said Richard scornfully, as he handed the letter
                    to Agnes; “we must be married in London.”
“Not here?” asked Agnes, in a tremulous voice. “Here!” replied Richard, angrily;
                    “what are you thinking of?—how is it possible? do you suppose my father, or Mr.
                    Lambert, would ever consent?” Agnes felt a cold shiver pass through her frame,
                    she scarce knew why, but she made no answer.
Richard had found that it was more easy to decide upon such a step than to put it
                    in execution; there were several difficulties to be overcome. He had to
                    investigate into the state of the law respecting marriages of this nature; and
                    he found, although not at that period declared null and void, as they have since
                    been by the passing of the Act to that effect in 1835, they were even then
                        voidable, and capable of being set aside altogether. This could
                    only be done, however, if an action was 
                    brought against them during the life‐time of both parties, and Richard’s fears
                    were quieted at once when he discovered that it was so, as he did not conceive
                    it possible that any one could ever find it his interest to attempt such a
                    measure.
Another obstacle seemed to him more serious, which was the possibility that no
                    clergyman would consent to perform the ceremony. A little reflection, however,
                    soon overcame this difficulty. It was very easy to go to London, where the
                    parish priest of some populous district, in which the names of Richard Clayton
                    and Agnes Maynard were quite unknown, would never think of asking if any
                    peculiar connexion subsisted between them.
Richard wrote to a lady, a cousin of his own, who resided in London, whose theory
                    it was, that all duties which interfered with inclination were overmuch
                    righteousness; and having communicated to her the state of the case, begged of
                    her to receive Agnes into her house during the three weeks which must be given
                    to the publishing of the banns. He received an answer complying with his request
                    and promising secresy. He then told his father that he was going to take Agnes
                    to London for a few weeks to visit a friend, and the next day they left the
                    Mount together.
It was a cold gloomy morning on which  they
                    commenced their journey. Agnes was deadly pale: she shivered violently, and
                    averted her head as they passed the churchyard. Richard asked, with considerable
                    irritation, what was the reason of the tears that filled her eyes? and she
                    answered, that she grieved to leave the children—it was the first time she had
                    quitted them. “Well, now you will be with them always after this; so pray let me
                    see you gay and happy, Agnes. You could not have seemed more dismal, if I had
                    been taking you to Mr. Hardman’s.” This allusion had the effect he desired: her
                    face brightened immediately. She began to laugh merrily at the idea that her
                    guardian was probably leaving London that day in search of her; and Richard had
                    no further reason to complain of her sadness, although her gaiety was somewhat
                    forced.
During the three weeks which followed their arrival in London, Richard took care,
                    with the willing assistance of his cousin, that Agnes should be continually
                    occupied with some amusement, which left her no time for thought. She was
                    thankful, indeed, to be spared all reflection; for, in spite of herself, there
                    was a vague and painful feeling which she could not define, that haunted her at
                    all times when Richard alluded to their marriage. Even the  night before it took place,—the night that surely, in
                    all similar cases, should be devoted to most earnest prayer for grace to perform
                    the solemn vows about to be taken,—was spent by Agnes Maynard at the theatre;
                    and when she awoke next morning, tired and depressed, she could scarce believe
                    that this was indeed her wedding‐day. Her wedding‐day! How differently had she
                    pictured it to herself in her bright visions years ago! How often had she
                    fancied herself going forth an honoured bride, amid warm congratulations and
                    friendly wishes, to become a happy wife in face of all the world! If ever a day
                    in her whole life was to be bright and joyous, she had thought it should be
                    this, when, by a most holy ordinance, she was to receive the promise of
                    unchanging affection from one who was to be her protector and guide even to her
                    life’s end; and to herself was to be given the blessed task of smoothing for him
                    the rugged path of life, and devoting herself to him as tender friend and
                    faithful wife. And now the day was come; but how could she feel glad or thankful
                    for it, when she was going forth stealthily—as if about to do some evil deed—to
                    unite herself to one whom she well knew many would say ought never to have been
                    her husband! Instead of rejoicings and festivities to celebrate her marriage,
                    concealment and decep‐ tion were necessary,
                    before it could be effected at all. The numerous friends sympathising in her
                    happiness were to be replaced by two witnesses whose services were remunerated;
                    and this hour, so momentous and agitating for her, must be met alone and
                    unsupported.
There was a heavy weight at the heart of Agnes Maynard, as she looked out and saw
                    the one single carriage that stood at the door, to convey herself and her future
                    husband to the church. Heaven did not smile upon her; for a dull, heavy rain was
                    pouring from the thick black clouds; and she remembered, with the
                    painfully‐superstitious feeling which at times assails us all, the old proverb,
                    that a weeping sky forebodes a weeping bride.
Richard’s cousin accompanied them; but, as she was a lady profoundly devoted to
                    her own comfort, it was not without considerable difficulty that he could induce
                    her to leave the house in such weather; and she did not scruple to manifest her
                    discontent during the whole of their cheerless drive, shivering and complaining
                    of the cold, without a thought for poor Agnes, who sat crouching in the corner,
                    pale as death. When they reached the church, the lady ensconced herself in a
                    pew, and, desiring them to call her when they were ready to return, left them to
                    proceed alone towards the altar. Agnes 
                    trembled so violently, that she could scarcely walk; and Richard rebuked her
                    somewhat harshly, for being, as he said, absurdly nervous. They had been on too
                    intimate terms during their former intercourse to admit of his treating her with
                    that peculiar homage which is generally offered to a young bride at such an
                    hour; and the angry words that at another time would have affected her but
                    little, seemed cruel to Agnes, as she ascended the altar‐steps. They stood side
                    by side: the clergyman hurried over a duty which the cold and comfortless aspect
                    of all around rendered by no means pleasant. They took those solemn vows whereby
                    two human beings are constituted guardians of one another’s happiness, and each
                    is provided with a friend whom neither time nor change, sickness nor sorrow,
                    shall ever alienate; and at that moment, when surely no other thought should
                    have been in their hearts, save the imploring of a blessing on one another’s
                    heads,—the blessing which henceforward they would seek to embody in every action
                    of their lives,—why was it that before the eyes of Richard Clayton and Agnes
                    Maynard there seemed to pass the form of Elizabeth, turning away from them the
                    wan pale face, as she turned it at the last hour when they would have given her
                    their farewell kiss?
The ceremony was over—the cold, unfelt blessing
                    was uttered by the lips of the stranger, who had never seen them before, and
                    cared never to see them again—and it was not without an involuntary shudder that
                    they heard themselves pronounced man and wife in the very same words which when
                    spoken for Richard and Elizabeth had constituted them brother and sister!
They took leave of their cousin at the door of the church, and proceeded to a
                    village on the sea‐shore, where they remained for some little time before they
                    returned to the Mount to take up their residence once more in the home where
                    they had dwelt together under the plea of a relationship of so very different a
                    nature.
