
CHAPTER II.
WITHIN a week from the funeral of Mr. Maynard, Mr. Hardman’s plans with
                    respect to his orphan daughters had been put into full effect. Agnes was
                    established at a school in Paris, there to have the natural tenderness of her
                    disposition fostered into a weak and pernicious sensibility, and the romance
                    with which her character was already too much tinctured converted into a false
                    sentimentality, in which she learned to believe it was meritorious to indulge.
                    She was taught to imagine that self‐command showed a want of feeling—that
                    self‐discipline and self‐denial were possible only to those who were cold of
                    heart and stern in character. Life was presented before her in an unreal
                    colouring, which a bitter experience was alone to disperse hereafter; and her
                    young unformed mind soon became imbued with that dangerous sophistry which so
                    much pervades the tone of society in France.
Meanwhile, Elizabeth was profoundly un‐ happy at
                    Mr. Hardman’s. His wife was what is called a strong‐minded woman, fiercely
                    intolerant of every sentiment or feeling which she did not herself possess, and
                    which for this reason she assumed to be a weakness. Well versed in all the
                    proprieties of life, she was rigidly implacable in her adherence to them.
One great duty she had placed before herself, the duty of respectability and
                    prosperity, and this she performed with unremitting and unflinching exactitude.
                    Of the gentle charities of home, she knew nothing; the loving sympathy—the
                    tender care—the anxious watchfulness over the comforts and interests of
                    others—still less of that true and beautiful wisdom which remembers always that
                    the sum of domestic happiness is made up of seeming trifles, the little acts of
                    self‐sacrifice, the light words and looks of every hour, and takes care to shed
                    round them all, the sunshine of unselfish love and kindness.
Mrs. Hardman received Elizabeth Maynard into her house because it seemed to her
                    that her husband had given very sufficient reasons why she should do so; but it
                    was no part of her business to love her, or to supply her with that measure of
                    affection which is as necessary to human life as refreshing water to the
                    traveller in the desert. Elizabeth was consigned to a  fate which a mind far more elevated than hers would
                    have found hard to bear—desolation without solitude; she was not even allowed
                    the freedom which might have rendered her position somewhat more tolerable.
Mrs. Hardman took the most careful and annoying cognizance of her every word and
                    action, and there were few which she did not find it necessary to reprehend, in
                    the arrogance of her own fancied perfection. Elizabeth’s sorrow for the absence
                    of her sister she considered a most childish and ridiculous weakness. Her grief
                    for her father’s loss, after the period of her mourning had expired, was
                    positively improper, as being contrary to all laws of etiquette.
Mrs. Hardman could not compassionate the follies which circumstances had given
                    her no temptation to commit, and she would have spurned a penitent from her feet
                    with as little pity as though she was never to stand one day in fearful need of
                    mercy herself. Let no one think that the evil of his own soul is to injure
                    himself alone. These peculiarities of Mrs. Hardman’s character had a terrible
                    effect on the fate of the orphans committed to her care.
The first gleam of sunshine which penetrated into Elizabeth’s most cheerless
                    existence was an event which took place about a year after her  father’s death. One of Mr. Hardman’s children became
                    so seriously unwell, that change of air was pronounced necessary, and the family
                    went to spend the summer in the country. Elizabeth had passed her whole
                    existence in London, where the natural and moral atmosphere are both alike so
                    foul and clouded. The fresh pure air, the bright green fields, the quiet woods,
                    were all therefore so many sources of delight to her.
Man has a strange sympathy with nature. In the solitude which is filled with
                    earth’s loveliness alone, he seems to lose the sentiment of individuality, and
                    the sting is taken from all personal sorrows; he finds himself suddenly in
                    blessed companionship with the glorious stars, and the fragrant flowers, and the
                    waving trees; and these all seem to call out to him, saying, “Be not dismayed,
                    though thou art sad at heart and lonely; behold, we are the creatures of thy
                    God, and thou mayest read in our beauty of His goodness and
                    loving‐kindness.”
To Elizabeth Maynard it seemed new life when she first learned how deep is the
                    eloquence of the living nature, in telling, by the things seen and temporal, of
                    those which are unseen and eternal.
There is not in all England a more charming spot than the village of B—, near
                    which her  new residence was placed. It is
                    situated in the heart of one of the midland counties, and the scenery all around
                    it has that fair peaceful aspect which, for the time, blots out from the memory
                    of him who looks on it, all thoughts of the ghastly sin and woe with which this
                    world is haunted.
There are rich pasture lands, soft and undulating as the green hunting‐fields of
                    the Indian’s Paradise; thick shadowy woods, where the sunshine glances like hope
                    on the soul, and the singing‐birds make merry with the long summer day; and a
                    quiet murmuring river, that glides along serene and bright as a good man’s
                    life.
The village itself, although a portion of it is disfigured by the public house,
                    dissenting chapel, and one or two houses of unseemly pretension, is singularly
                    picturesque; little thatched dwellings nestling among the ivy, inhabited, as the
                    prettiest cottages always are, by withered old women most quaint and simple;
                    huge old trees filling up three quarters of the diminutive gardens, and a broad
                    road turning and winding amongst them, every here and there displaying by an
                    abrupt descent a bright glimpse of the far‐spreading landscape beyond. But the
                    fairest object of all is the beautiful church, with its old grey tower, and the
                    more  modern portion lately restored, so
                    striking from its chaste and simple elegance of architecture.
The light within it is dimmed by the thick branches of the great trees that hang
                    over its green and still churchyard, where the long grass waves on the humble
                    graves of the lowly dead. At night, when the moon is high, there is one broad
                    flat tombstone all wet with the evening dew, on which its pure rays gleam with
                    extraordinary brightness while the rest are left in shadow, as though it would
                    prove how even the grave can be made radiant by a light from heaven.
But the moment when this fair English church is seen to most advantage is at the
                    setting of the sun, when a gush of golden light flows through it from the west,
                    like a path for the angels desiring to enter there; and brightens with a warm
                    glow the stained glass of the rich east window, whilst through the low arch of
                    the open doorway, the evening star may be seen going up into heaven, there to
                    shine with its pure pale light, like a silver lamp burning before the shrine of
                    the Eternal.
Mr. Hardman fixed his residence at “The Mount,” a fine old place close to the
                    village, which was destined to become the scene of the events here recorded.
Mr. Clayton, the vicar of the parish, was  well
                    worthy of the pleasant spot in which his lot had been cast.
He was a noble‐hearted old man; a Christian like unto those who of old were wont
                    to manifest their sincerity in martyrdom, and show forth the brightness of their
                    hopes in torture. He had sought from his youth upward to make his life as it
                    were a sacrament, of which the inward and spiritual grace was faith, the outward
                    and visible sign good works.
Pure in doctrine, uncompromising in practice, his standard of holiness seemed to
                    many whom he taught almost hopelessly exalted; all things were with him resolved
                    into the simple question of right or wrong; he never allowed his feelings and
                    affections, or even his compassion, to interfere with his rigid discharge of
                    duty. From this course, so essentially right, he unwittingly let an
                    error spring up which bore much bitter fruit to himself; he learned to condemn
                    the short‐comings of his weaker brethren too severely, trying them by the
                    inflexible law wherewith he judged himself.
Mr. Clayton had one only child, a son whose birth he had hailed as the crowning
                    joy in his cup of happiness, and at whose hand it was decreed he should receive
                    the full measure of his trial and tribulation in this world.
Richard Clayton had already grown to man’s 
                    estate, and for him, even now, his father wept those tears of exceeding
                    bitterness which we shed for the unfaithfulness, or unworthiness, of those we
                    love. Many might have thought that he was rather one for whom a parent would
                    have given thanks with joy, for he was kind‐hearted, prepossessing in
                    appearance, winning in manner, and generous in temper. But his father saw
                    deeper; he knew that they who are not with Him are against Him, and
                    he saw that other gods had dominion over his son besides the God of all purity,
                    who requires of his children that awful obedience, that they shall be holy even
                    as He is holy.
There is chaos on the human mind till the Spirit of God moves over it and dwells
                    in it; and, despite these bright flashes of goodness, like meteor lights in the
                    gloom, there was darkness yet on the soul of Richard Clayton, even as once on
                    the face of the deep.
Within the shrine of his own spirit, where the High and Lofty One that inhabiteth
                    eternity, and yet dwelleth with the contrite and humble, should have reigned
                    supreme, he had set up the idol Self, before whom he bowed down and worshipped.
                    It might have seemed strange that, with his father’s bright example before him,
                    Richard Clayton should so have  loved this
                    present world; but he was the rather scared by the severe, unqualified holiness
                    of the service rendered by that father to his Master; he had no energy of
                    desire, no thirsting of the soul after the living God, which constrains us to
                    claim, without measure, the promise of the Spirit. Weak and vacillating, he
                    would not remember that nothing is commanded which cannot be performed—that
                    there is no limit set to the strength given wherewith to do His will. Outwardly,
                    he had not cast off the faith of Christ; but he lacked the fortitude and courage
                    to take up his cross and follow Him.
It had been Mr. Clayton’s fondest wish, that his son should follow his own high
                    calling; but as Richard’s character developed itself, he not only abandoned the
                    idea, but he would himself have refused his consent. His child was very dear to
                    him, but dearer still the glory of his God. Not to such an one as Richard could
                    he ever have allowed the inestimable privilege of ministering in the sanctuary;
                    but his son did not desire it, nor was it at all necessary for him to adopt any
                    profession, as Mr. Clayton had succeeded to a considerable property shortly
                    after he had obtained the living of B—, which would ultimately revert of course
                    to his son.

Richard remained therefore without any occupation for his time, which he devoted
                    chiefly to field sports and similar amusements.
Mr. and Mrs. Hardman very soon manifested a strong desire to cultivate the
                    acquaintance of the vicar and his family, and it was not long before Richard
                    became a constant visitor at the Mount.
Mr. Clayton saw them occasionally, for he considered them as his parishioners for
                    the time being; but they were singularly uncongenial to himself on all points,
                    and it was some time before he understood the motive of his son’s frequent
                    visits to their house.
Richard had found a powerful attraction in the society of Elizabeth Maynard. The
                    first feeling with which she inspired him was one of profound compassion for the
                    position in which she was placed. He saw that her young life was wasting away
                    cheerless and dark, unbrightened by one ray of the sweet human love which is the
                    sunshine of this world, and whose gentle influence is mighty in power to still
                    the tempests and the cutting blasts of sorrow which every mortal man shall meet
                    with on his path of life. For her, whose gaze was yet too dim to discern the
                    glory of that Love, to gain one hour of which an eternity of
                    earthly care and tenderness might well be battered, it was in truth a bitter thing to dwell in so chilling an
                    atmosphere.
Her vivid imagination and warm feelings, having no holier aliment whereon to
                    feed, were centred altogether in the joys of earth, and she felt keenly that
                    desolation of affection which is perhaps the saddest trial this life can offer
                    us.
Richard had, as we have said, much kindliness of disposition, though weak and
                    unstable in principle. He endeavoured, by his anxious friendship and tender
                    sympathy, to dispel her bitter sense of loneliness; and he perceived that in
                    consequence her whole heart turned irresistibly to him, with all the
                    concentrated strength of that tenderness which had been allowed to flow in no
                    other channel.
Richard knew that the true and devoted affection of such a person as Elizabeth
                    was by no means a gift to be despised; he could not bear to cast it from him by
                    indifference or contempt, as some might have done; and before the summer was
                    over, their marriage was announced as a settled affair.
Richard acted on impulse, that instinctive law so attractive to our human nature,
                    by which no man ought to be guided; at the same time he was too essentially
                    selfish to have taken this step had he not been really attached to Elizabeth.
                    His attachment, however, was very dif‐ ferent
                    in its nature from hers, whose love was too much akin to idolatry. She little
                    knew how frail and uncertain was that good on which she had staked the whole
                    hopes of her existence, that should have rested rather on that sure Foundation,
                    whereon if a man do build, his work shall abide.
Their marriage gave great satisfaction. Mr. Clayton would indeed have preferred
                    that the life‐long companion of his son should have been a more decided servant
                    of the cross; but Elizabeth seemed humble‐minded and docile, well disposed to
                    profit by the instructions he would now have an opportunity of giving her; and
                    he trusted that she was one whose soul could not long remain in exile from the
                    only source of life and joy which can satisfy our immortality. He trusted much
                    to her influence with Richard, should she indeed become what he hoped; and he
                    gladly afforded them the means of living in comfort, by making an ample
                    allowance to his son.
Mr. and Mrs. Hardman were highly pleased at finding themselves thus suddenly
                    relieved of the care of both their wards; for Elizabeth had made it the sole
                    condition of her marriage that Agnes should reside with them entirely, and that
                    she should never be separated from her sister so long as she remained
                    unmarried.

To this Richard willingly agreed, and it was further decided that they should
                    take up their residence at “The Mount,” where Agnes was to join them after
                    having spent some time in London with the Hardman family.
The delight of Agnes at these arrangements was unbounded, and her letters to her
                    sister were full of such vivid anticipations of happiness for the whole party,
                    that Elizabeth trembled as she read them, with that vague terror which arrests
                    us when we look with too much hope into the future.
Agnes did not leave Paris for London until the week before the wedding took
                    place. On the day when she was expected, Richard came to Mr. Hardman’s at
                    Elizabeth’s own request, in order that he might be present at her sister’s
                    arrival.
They were sitting alone together in the drawing‐room, when the carriage drove to
                    the door, and Elizabeth started to her feet that she might hurry to welcome her.
                    Before, however, they could even reach the door, it burst open, and Agnes flew
                    into the room breathless with an overwhelming joy, and flung herself
                    half‐sobbing half‐laughing into her sister’s arms. For a moment neither spoke;
                    the orphans, who had so long been all in all to each other, were together once
                    more, and their happiness was too  great for
                    utterance. When at length Agnes disengaged herself from her sister’s embrace,
                    Elizabeth almost started in astonishment at the change which an interval of
                    nearly two years had made upon her. Agnes was now nearly eighteen, and the
                    childlike loveliness which had always characterised her had ripened into a most
                    winning beauty. She looked so radiant and joyous, that her entrance was like the
                    passing of a sunbeam into the room; her countenance had retained the soft
                    trusting expression which formed its greatest charm, and her eyes had still
                    their candid and innocent gaze.
Elizabeth turned with a proud delight to present her to Richard, but she stopped
                    short suddenly when she saw his face, whilst an indescribable pang shot through
                    her heart;—her future husband was standing with his eyes fixed on Agnes, gazing
                    at her with a look of the most warm and unqualified admiration, a look such as
                    had never been bestowed on herself! At a moment like this, one of a temper less
                    jealous and suspicious than Elizabeth Maynard would never have dreamt of
                    bestowing a thought on this trifling circumstance; but she was, as we have said,
                    peculiarly sensitive in disposition; her affection for Richard Clayton was so
                    absorbing that her whole heart and mind were bound up in it, and she had not a
                    thought unconnected  with him; she felt indeed
                    that it had most utterly superseded all other sentiments and feelings, for at
                    that moment she could have wished that the fairer and younger sister (her own
                    dear Agnes!) had not been standing by her side, thus to rob her of a single look
                    from one so passionately loved.
But in another instant she repelled this unworthy feeling almost with horror, for
                    she remembered how, in a very few days, Richard Clayton would hold for Agnes
                    Maynard the sacred name of brother. They twain were about to be
                    made by a most holy ordinance ONE FLESH, and from
                    that hour her sister must be his sister also, in the
                    sight of God and man. Her cheek burned with a flush of shame, to think that she
                    should have harboured for one moment what was in truth an unholy thought; and
                    taking Richard by the hand, she drew him towards Agnes, and prayed him to love
                    their sister dearly for her sake.
Richard welcomed her frankly and warmly by that title, telling her, with the
                    utmost kindness in his look and tone, that she must teach him the duties of a
                    brother, as he had never known that gentle tie, which is the source of so much
                    true and enduring happiness on earth. He was in fact greatly interested in the
                    orphan sister of his future wife, for Elizabeth had not  failed to tell him of the solemn charge she had
                    received from her dying mother; and the impression made upon his mind by the
                    description of that scene was so great that he was now equally determined with
                    herself that Agnes should find a happy home in his house. Meanwhile Agnes, who
                    was always won in a moment by kindness, put her hand into his with a bright gay
                    smile, and inwardly resolved that she would do all in her power to please the
                    husband of her dear Elizabeth.
