
 CHAPTER VI. 
MICHAEL'S INTRODUCTION TO ALL THE MISS DOWLINGS — SIR MATTHEW FEEDS HIM WITH HIS OWN
				HAND, AND PRESENTS HIM TO ALL HIS MOST FRIENDS.

				Having given a sharp rap on the door, Peggy was told to "comeen,"
				by the voice of Mademoiselle Beaujoie; whereupon she threw the door wide open before
				her, and stood with Michael Armstrong in her hand, in the presence of three grown-up
				Miss Dowlings, and three middle-sized Miss Dowlings, two little Miss Dowlings, and
				their French governess.
The five youngest, all rushed as by one accord towards Michael. "What a pretty little
				boy!" was exclaimed by two or three of them. "Are you come to play with us? Mayn't
				we have a holiday, Ma'mselle?"
"What an elegant-looking creature!" exclaimed the eldest Miss Dowling, who with her
				two grown-up sisters, had come into the room for the advantage of practising duets
				on a venerable pianoforte totally out of tune, and whose loudest note could by no
				means compete with the shrill accents of the animated group who inhabited the
				apartment. "Did you ever see a prettier boy, Harriet?"
"Who is he, I wonder?" replied the young lady she addressed.
"How he blushes!" said the governess, tittering.
"What's your name, dear?" demanded Miss Martha, the third daughter of the Dowling
				race.
"Michael Armstrong, ma'am," replied the boy, looking up with an air of surprise, for
				Miss Martha, queer-looking as she was, spoke kindly. And queer-looking as she was,
				Michael met her eye with pleasure, for that too spoke kindly, though it was neihter
				large nor bright.
Martha Dowling was in truth, about as ugly as it was possible for a girl of seventeen
				to be, who was neither deformed nor marked by the smallpox, — short, fat,
				snub-nosed, red-faced, with a quantity of sandy hair, that, if not red, looked very
				much as if it intended to be so; eyes of a light, very light gray, and without any
				thing whatever in external appearance to recommend her, except a smooth, plump, neck
				and shoulders, with hands and arms to match, which, in truth, were very fair and
				nice-looking, and a set of well-formed, stout white teeth.
 What made the unlucky appearance of this young lady the more remarkable, was the
				contrast it presented to the rest of her family. All the other young people were,
				like both their parents, "more than common tall," for their respective ages, and,
				like most other tall young people, rather thin, so that Lady Dowling was apt to
				indulge herself by declaring that, "though certainly some of her children might be
				considered prettier than the rest, there was not  one of the whole set
				(except that poor vulgar Martha), who was not most particular genteel-looking." 
" Genteel looking " she certainly was not, nor graceful, nor beautiful in
				any way: and the consequence was, that father, mother, brothers, and sisters, were
				all most heartily ashamed of her. This was a misfortune, and she felt it to be so
				pretty sharply, for poor vulgar Martha was far from being a stupid girl. But, in her
				case, as in a million of others, it might be seen that adversity, though "Like the
				toad, ugly and venomous, Weareth a precious jewel in its head." for of all her race
				she was the only one whose heart was not seared and hardened by the ceaseless
				operation of opulent self-indulgence. She felt that she was rather an object of pity
				than of admiration, of contempt than of envy, of dislike than of love. This is
				severe schooling for a young girl's heart, but if it produce not reckless
				indifference, or callous insensibility, it often purifies, softens, and even
				elevates the character. Such were its effects on Martha Dowling: that coarse-seeming
				exterior contained the only spark of refinement of which the Dowling family could
				boast. Never did a high-born Hidalgo, in Spain's proudest days, inculcate among his
				race the immeasurable importance of pure descent, with more ceaseless or more
				sedulous earnestness, than did Sir Matthew, the omnipotence of wealth among his.
				Every child was taught, as soon as its mind became capable of receiving the
				important truth, that not only was it agreeable to enjoy and cherish all the good
				things which wealth can procure, but that it was their bounden and special duty to
				make it visible before the eyes of all men that they could, and that they did, have
				more money spent upon them, than any other family in the whole country; but Martha
				felt that all this could not apply to her.
Strange to say, the only tie resembling affection which prevented the total isolation
				of this poor girl among her family, was that which existed between her hard-natured
				father and herself; but it was a sentiment not easy to analyze. In Sir Matthew it
				probably arose at first from his having been told that the little girl was very like
				him; and, on hers, from his being the only person in the house who had ever bestowed
				a caress upon her. In both cases, cause and effect went on increasing. Martha's face
				(saving its expression), was incontrovertibly like her father's; and, for that
				reason, or from the habit it had at first created, her father, though rather ashamed
				to confess it, was certainly very fond of her.
 That, as a child, she should love him in return, was almost inevitable; but that, as
				she advanced in years, she should feel for the being, the most completely formed by
				nature to be hateful to her, an affection the most unchanging and devoted, had
				something of mystery in it less easy to be explained. Yet, so it was. Martha Dowling
				adored her hard-hearted, vicious, unprincipled, illiterate, vulgar father, as
				heartily as if he had been the model of every thing she most admired and approved.
				Nay, it may be, that she loved him  better, or, at any rate, more
				strongly still; for it was rather with fanaticism than devotion, or like the pitying
				fondness with which a mother dotes on a deformed child, who sees only that because
				it is less loveable it has more need of love than the rest. 
It was not, however, on the same principle, that Sir Matthew's affection for his ugly
				daughter increased as years rolled on; for he saw, that though as a child she had
				been like him, she was now grown very plain: and, in company, he felt almost as much
				ashamed of her, as Lady Dowling herself. But he could not mistake her love and true
				affection, nor resist the charm of feeling that at least there was one being in
				existence, who would have cherished him, even if he had not been the great man he
				was.
In private he scrupled not to yield to this feeling, and certainly derived
				considerable pleasure from it; but before witnesses, he always joined in the family
				tone respecting " poor Martha ," and scrupled not to push her on one side,
				upon all occasions on which any display of Dowling elegance was contemplated.
It was this ugly Martha Dowling who now startled little Michael with her voice of
				kindness, and, notwithstanding all her lady mother said about the "horrid vulgarity
				of her manners," poor Martha had a sweet and gentle voice. The child looked up at
				her, and with the weakness that appeared constitutionally peculiar to him, his eyes
				were immediately filled with tears. Yet Michael was not a whimpering boy either;
				many had seen him harshly treated, for he had worked almost from babyhood in the
				cotton-factory, but nobody had ever seen him cry under it. But if his mother, or his
				poor sickly brother, touched his little heart, either with joy or tenderness, he
				would weep and laugh both, with very infantine susceptibility. So it was with him
				now, for when Martha added with a good-humoured smile, "And what brings you here,
				Master Armstrong?" he laughed outright as he replied, "Indeed, ma'am, I ain't Master
				Armstrong, and I don't know a bit what I be here for."
This speech, though addressed to Martha, being heard by all, the contrast between his
				appearance and his language considerably excited the curiosity of the two eldest
				Miss Dowlings.
"La! how he talks! I thought he was a gentleman by his jacket, didn't you, Arabella?"
				said Miss Harriet.
"Yes to be sure I did," replied the eldest sister. "But I am sure he is not
				, with that horrid way of speaking, what did you bring him here for Peggy?"
				continued the young lady with an air of authority.
"Because master bid me, miss," was the satisfactory reply.
"Well to be sure, that is queer! I suppose he's the son of somebody or other, or papa
				would never have sent him in to us. It is not at all his way to patronise vulgarity.
				Where do you live, young gentleman?"
Michael looked very much as if he were in danger of laughing again, but he did not,
				and replied very demurely, "in Mr. Sykes's back-kitchen, ma'am, in Hoxley-lane."
 Though the answer was addressed to the inquirer, his eye turned  to
				Martha as he uttered it, as if anxious to see how she bore it, but he encountered a
				look that altogether puzzled him; for though it was at least as kind as before,
				there was uneasiness in it, and she looked round her, as if uncomfortably doubtful
				of what would happen next. 
She did not, however, wait long for the result; for Miss Sophia, Miss Louisa, and
				Miss Charlotte, the three middling-sized Miss Dowlings, who had approached very near
				to the little boy, and were even growing so familiar that Miss Charlotte had taken
				hold of one of his dark curls, were severally and suddenly drawn off by the
				respective hands of their two eldest sisters, and the governess.
"Then he is not a young gentleman after all?" said Miss Sophia.
"La; how funny!" exclaimed Miss Louisa, "where did he get his clothes from?"
				interrogated Miss Harriet.
"Most likely he stole them," responded Miss Arabella.
"Why 'tis Duodecimus's jacket!" ejaculated the observing Miss Charlotte.
"Oh! quelle horreur!" cried the governess driving her pupils all before her to the
				other end of the room.
At this moment, and before any more active measures could be resorted to for the
				safety of the young ladies, the door of the school-room was again thrown open, and
				the portly person of Sir Matthew appeared at it, accompanied by the globe-like
				figure of Doctor Crockley.
"Good morning young ladies!" said the proud father, looking round him, and
				immediately entering into the jest that he saw was afloat. "How do you like the
				young beau I have sent you?"
"Good gracious, papa!" exclaimed the elegant and much admired Miss Arabella, "he is a
				beggar-boy and a thief!"
Sir Matthew, and his friend Doctor Crockley, both burst into such a shout of laughter
				at this sally, that it was a minute before either of them could speak; but at length
				the knight, turning to the doctor, said,
"Leave my girls alone, Crockley, for finding out what's what; I don't believe there's
				one of them but what would have found that fellow out, if I had wrapped him up in
				the king's own mantle."
"They are sharp enough, there is no doubt of that," replied his friend, "but I must
				say you don't perform your charitable acts by halves, Sir Matthew. You have dressed
				up the little scamp so superbly, that nothing but the vulgar dark complexion could
				make one know that he was not one of your own."
"Why yes, there is some difference in the skins I must say," replied Sir Matthew,
				looking with most parental complacency on the fair skins, flaxen hair, and light
				eyelashes of his race.
 Difference, indeed! 'Tis Africa and Europe. And is it not remarkable Sir Matthew to
				see the look of him? Hasn't he got a sort of slavish, terrified air with it? I tell
				you what, Sir Matthew, I should not be at all surprised to find, when the march of
				philosophy has got a little farther, that the blackamoor look comes along  with the condition, and, that the influence of wealth and consequence is as
				quickly shown upon the external appearance of men, women, and children, as a field
				of clover upon the inferior animals. And why not? It is quite natural — perfectly
				conformable to the analogy, that, by accurately tracing cause and effect, may be
				followed through all creation. You have a head, Sir Matthew, for that sort of thing:
				you can understand me, if nobody else can." 
The little doctor knew that this was one of the soft points at which his
				wealthy neighbour was assailable. Sir Matthew loved to be assured that his head was
				of a superior fabric.
"But why, papa, should you send a nasty beggar-boy to us, with Duo's clothes on?"
				inquired the intelligent Louisa. Before he replied to this, the knight exchanged a
				glance with his friend, which seemed to say, "that's the right sort — she's in the
				clover-field."
"I have taken him in for charity, my dear," replied the knight, with a sort of
				pomposity that seemed of a new pattern. The young ladies had never seen papa look so
				before. Martha, from having found herself rather more frequently the object of Dr.
				Crockley's jokes than she desired, had, on his entering the room, retired to the
				window, but now she came up to her father, and quietly, and as often happened,
				almost unnoticed, kissed his hand.
For charity!" exclaimed the fair-haired Arabella, moving a step or two farther away
				from the object of this extraordinary caprice. "La Papa! why don't you send him to
				the hospital?"
Doctor Crockley laughed outrageously. "That girl, Sir Matthew," he said, when he had
				recovered his voice, "that girl is beyond all comparison the most thoroughly-born
				lady that ever I happened to hit upon — and that is saying something, I promise you.
				She hasn't a commonplace vulgar notion in her from top to toe. It is what I call the
				physiology of wealth — it is upon my soul — it is a study, a science. I have not got
				to the end of it, but I am certain I shall make a system out of it — and you'll be
				able to follow me, there's some comfort in that. I declare to God, that if I had not
				found you in the neighbourhood, I should have bolted. I cannot exist without
				occasionally bringing my mind in contact with superior intellect; you find that,
				too, Sir Matthew, I'm sure you do."
Sir Matthew assured him that he did, very much; and then pulling a Belinda lock that
				adorned the olive-coloured throat of Mademoiselle Beaujoie, he asked her if she had
				ever seen a brat, taken in for charity, so nicely dressed as that little
				blackguard."
"Brawt? ça veut dire petit vaut-rien. No, my honor Sire Matue, nayver! you are
				viddout no reval de most — "
Whilst the French governess struggled to find a word sufficiently expressive of
				admiration, and if possible, with some little meaning besides, Sir Matthew took the
				liberty of pinching her ear, while he whispered into it, "What, you little rogue?
				what?"
 She gave him a Parisian æillade , by no means an unkind one, and turned
				away, while the two smallest Miss Dowlings ran up to her, and, in the jargon in
				which their mamma and papa delighted,  demanded "si papa voulait let
				them jouer avec the little beggar-boy?" 
This question, repeated nearly in the same words by Mademoiselle Beaujoie to the
				knight, appeared to cause him some perplexity, and, after reflecting upon it for a
				minute, he turned to consult his philosophical friend.
"I say Crockley, what do you think of that?" Then lowering his voice, he added, "you
				comprehend the job, doctor, — which will do best to help it? Parlour or kitchen,
				school-room or factory, drawing-room or scullery?
"All and every of them," replied his friend, in the same low tone, but very
				decisively. "No doubt in nature about that, Sir Matthew; he must be here, there, and
				every where, and the thing will fly like mad."
"You are always right Crockley, there is nobody like you," replied the grateful
				knight, cordially slapping the round shoulders of his friend, "I twig, I twig, and
				so it shall be, by the Lord Harry."
"You are as rapid as lightning, Sir Matthew! I remember no instance of a cerebral
				formation so absolutely perfect as yours. Now then, let us visit my lady, shall we?
				I am as dry as brickdust, and it is about lunch-time I take it. Bring the boy with
				you, and introduce him before the servants in style."
"So I will — that's it — I twig, Crockley. Go, Martha, and see if the luncheon is
				laid."
The report being favorable to the wishes of the gentleman, the party, consisting of
				the three eldest Miss Dowlings, their papa and the doctor, left the young ladies and
				their governess to dine, while, with little Michael, who was ordered to follow, they
				all repaired to the dinning-room, where a well-covered table awaited them.
Her ladyship and Mr. Augustus were already there, and both expressed exactly the
				degree of curiosity which the knight desired, as to who the little gentleman might
				be whom they brought with them.
Miss Dowling; and Miss Harriet Dowling, burst into a loud laugh; Sir Matthew looked
				towards the sideboard, and seeing two servants in attendance there, spoke as
				follows:
"My dear Lady Dowling, I must bespeak your munificent charity, and universal
				benevolence in favour of this little unhappy boy. His mother is a widow, and — and
				something, I forget exactly what, is very unhappy about her — and this little boy
				behaved remarkably well — " Here Sir Matthew broke off in some degree of
				embrrassment, not wishing particularly to impress upon his lady's mind that it was
				his tender care for the Lady Clarissa, Shrimpton, which had first introduced the
				fortunate factory-boy to his notice. But he passed all that over very skilfully, and
				ended his harangue by saying, "I know perfectly well, my dear lady Dowling, that
				there is not in the whole world so amiable a person as yourself, and therefore I
				entertain not the slightest doubt, that the benevolence which warms my heart on this
				occasion, will communicate itself to yours."

Lady Dowling raised her light eyebrows, and her still lighter eyelashes, into a look
				of the most unmitigated astonishment, and remained thus for a while, contemplating
				the extraordinary spectacle, of one of the handsomest boys she had ever seen,
				dressed in a style of unquestionable fashion, and presented to her as a being so
				deplorably miserable, as to have excited the pity of her husband. The first clear
				and distinct idea that suggested itself was, the necessity of inquiring respecting
				this beautiful child's mother, and of finding out whether she might not happen to be
				beautiful too; the next arose from the sudden recognition of her own son's own
				clothes, and the complexion of the lady became extremely florid."
"I should like to know where he got those clothes from," she said in accents that by
				no means spoke composure of spirit.
"My dearest love," replied the most amiable and the most polite of husbands, "that is
				entirely my doing. You have known me long enough, my sweetest, to be aware that I
				never do any thing by halves — I saw that little fellow ragged and wretched, and I
				clothed him!"
"Well, I must say, I do think — " began her ladyship, when Sir Matthew, seating
				himself at the table, thrust a knife and fork into the very centre of a pigeon-pie,
				and accompanied the act by a sound, something between a slight cough and a grunt,
				which, in language matrimonial, was known to mean, "You had better hold your tongue
				and mind your business." Whereupon, Lady Dowling sat down too, but her fair
				complexion was rather more rosy than was becoming, and it was in no very sweet voice
				that she said to Martha, who ventured to take a chair next her, "Do get a little
				farther, child can't you? — You know I hate to be crushed and crammed up so."
Here Dr. Crockley, who had already fallen with vehemence upon a cold ham, stopped for
				a moment, and laughed vehemently. "My dear madam, you are of the slight and elegant
				order yourself, and you don't make allowance for poor people who are as fat and
				roundabout as Miss Martha and I — we can't squeeze ourselves into an eggshell, Miss
				Martha, can we?"
Her slim sisters tittered, and the witty Augustus observed, that "To be sure, Martha
				did look more like a collar of Oxford brawn, than any thing else in creation."
Meanwhile, the meal proceeded, and little Michael, continued to stand half-way
				between the door and the table, as fixedly as if he had taken root there.
Martha was, in general, very philosophically inclined to let all things round her
				take their course; but she sat exactly opposite to the object of her father's
				benevolence, and there was something in the expression of his eye, as it rested upon
				the dainties before him, that was more than she could bear. "May I give the little
				boy something to eat, papa?" said she addressing her father in a timid voice.
"How shall we manage about that, Crockley?" whispered Sir Matthew into the ear of the
				doctor who sat close to him.

"Cram him, cram him, Sir Matthew. — You'll find it like oil on the surface of water,
				spreading far and wide," replied his counsellor, whispering in return, "Let the boy
				have to boast of his high feeding, and it will do more good than if you were to
				endow him with lands and houses, and keep him lean."
"Say you so, my wise man! Faith, then, the matter is easy enough, for I believe
				Dowling Lodge is rather celebrated for its superfluity of good cheer. We'll have him
				gasping with indigestion within a week, see if we don't." Then raising his voice, he
				answered the petition of Martha, by repeating her words, "May you give the little
				boy something to eat?" and then added with a laugh, "By all manner of means, Miss
				Martha; and," taking some halfdemolished fragments off his own plate, "he may boast
				of feeding as well as his master. Here, Master Factory, catch!" And so saying, the
				benevolent owner of Dowlig Lodge skilfully cut the air with half a pigeon, which,
				taking exactly the direction he intended, struck Michael in the middle of his
				forehead. Whatever might be the effect of this liberality of heart and hand out of
				doors, Sir Matthew had every reason to be satisfied with the result within.
The whole Dowling family, with the exception of stupid Martha, burst into a
				simultaneous shout of delight, while Dr. Crockley clapped his hands, and
				vociferated, "Bravo!" as loud as he could scream.
Just at this moment, the great bell at the front door, and it was a very great bell,
				resounded along passage and halls with prodigious clamour. This is a sound which
				produces, in those who hear it, emotions varying according to their varying
				temperaments. Genuinely fine, poco curante people, if they hear it, heed it
				not. Fussy folks, of whatever rank or station, prepare their looks and their books,
				themselves and their belongings, to receive the threatened visitation
				advantageously; but in a mansion of such professional display as Dowling Lodge, a
				ring at the door-bell is an event of serious importance. In such an establishment,
				the luxuries, or even the comforts of the family, are confessedly of no importance
				at all, when placed in competition with the display of their grandeur; and upon the
				present occasion, the whole family hastened to leave their unfinished repast, in
				order to receive the welcome spectator of their fine clothes and fine furniture in
				the drawing-room.
"My Lady Dowling, and her two light-coloured elder daughters, Sir Matthew, his eldest
				son, and his learned friend, succeeded in reaching their respective sofas and
				bergères half a minute before the door was thrown open, and Lady Clarissa Shrimpton,
				Miss Brotherton, Miss Mogg, and Mr. Osmond Norval were announced.
 Great, of course, and very zealous was the joy expressed by the Dowling family at
				the sight of their illustrious friend and her cortège . Miss Brotherton
				was, indeed of herself, or rather of her purse, a personage pretty sure of being
				well received every where; but  even Miss Mogg was (in yankee phrase)
				well shaken, and Mr. Osmond Norval gazed at by the young ladies, as an emanation
				from the rays that encircle the brow of Apollo; while even the exquisite Augustus
				ventured, in compliment to his titled patroness, to shake him too, though he had
				never been introduced to him at Oxford. 
But the feelings of Sir Matthew, at this prompt reappearance of his fair and noble
				friend, were something vastly different from any thing his family could participate
				in, nor did Lady Clarissa mistake them. There was a look that spoke infinitely more
				than any tongue could utter, and a meaning in the silent pressure of the hand,
				confirming the idea, which had often recurred to her during the night, that it would
				soon be necessary to make Sir Matthew understand the exact nature and extent of the
				flattering, but perfectly innocent preference she was conscious of feeling for
				him.
This first delightful, but somewhat agitating moment over, Lady Clarissa hastened to
				explain the purpose of her visit.
"You guess why I am come, do you not, Sir Matthew?" she said, pointing to Mr. Osmond
				Norval. "Permit me to present to you, and your highly-educated family, this young
				votary of the muses, who, if my judgment errs not, may fairly claim competition with
				the first poets of the age. Nor should we, of this remote neighbourhood, be
				insensible to the honour of being the first to assist in pluming the yet unfledged
				wing, which shall one day bear him aloft into the empyrean regions of eternal
				fame."
Nothing could be more touching than the manner in which Mr. Osmond Norval pressed his
				hat between his two hands, and bowed low, low, low, to the noble lady who thus
				announced him. Sir Matthew, with a stride which, for the vigorous distance it
				carried him, might have been compared to that of the knave of hearts, approached the
				young man, and strenuously pressing one of his slender hands in both his own
				capacious fists, attested the value he attached to her ladyship's introduction by
				saying, "Mr. Osmond Norval! — I will not deny, that I do occasionally myself offer
				tribute at the muse' shrine; and that being in some sort a brother of the craft, I
				most unfeignedly rejoice in making the acquaintance of a gentleman so distinguished
				in it as yourself. But that is not the feeling, sir, which principally leads me to
				tell you, that from this time forth, I shall hold you as one of my most esteemed
				friends — you understand me. That lady, sir," pointing to Lady Clarissa, "is a
				person whose lightest word ought to be law in this neighbourhood, — and to me, is
				so. If you publish any works, put Sir Matthew Dowling's name down, sir, for fifty
				copies; should you find yourself at any time in want of a library, pray remember
				that there is one of no very small limits at Dowling Lodge; and your reception, sir,
				in my drawing-room, and at my dinner-table, will ever be such as befits me to bestow
				on one honoured by the patronage of Lady Clarissa Shrimpton."
 Before this speech was quite finished, Lady Dowling becoming rather fidgetty,
				ventured to mutter something about its being far  better to sit down to
				talk; but Miss Brotherton was greatly too much amused by what was passing to hear
				her; and for Miss Mogg to sit while her patroness stood, was quiet out of the
				question; so that Lady Dowling, and the too eldest Miss Dowlings, continued to stand
				like three finely-dressed flaxen-headed statues, to the end of it. 
Sir Matthew than led the high-born lady to a chair, while Miss Brotherton perceiving
				that her conversation with the knight was now reduced to a whisper, and that
				consequently there would be no more fun in listening to it, condescended at last to
				answer a few of the amiable inquiries after her health, which were addressed to her
				by Mr. Augustus and his two sisters. Meanwhile, the young Norval, with pensive eye
				intent on nature's beauties, stole his way to the open window, and there having
				twice or thrice passed his fingers through his long locks, which descendedlin
				disordered curls almost to his shoulders, and once and again buttoned and unbuttoned
				the broad shirt-collar which fell back, unrestrained by that most unintellectual
				ligature, a cravat, remained partly, it might be, to let the young ladies look at
				him, and partly to receive the fragrant breeze of summer upon his brow.
It was now that Dr. Crockley felt he was called upon to do something that might bring
				him into notice, and waddling up to the young poet, he addressed him with an air of
				incipient friendship which seemed to say, "And I too am somebody."
"You will find this neighbourhood not very prolific, young gentleman, in such gifts
				of intellect as a poet requires in order to be duly appreciated. Nevertheless, I
				will not deny that there is amongst us a knot, a little knot, Mr. Norval, whom, upon
				further acquaintance, you may find not altogether uncongenial. For myself, I may
				venture to say, that I am as warmly devoted to every subject, directly or
				indirectly, connected with the divine, ethereal, immaterial, intellectual part of
				our composite formation, as it is possible for a man to be, and it will give me
				pleasure, sir, to make your acquaintance." As this was spoken with energy, the
				sultry season made itself felt under the exertion, and Dr. Crockley found it
				necessary so far to remember the viler portion of his composite formation, as to
				wipe his face and bald head assiduously.
The poet bowed, but not as he had bowed to Lady Clarissa.
Meanwhile, Lady Dowling, her light-coloured daughters, and Miss Mogg, sat profoundly
				silent upon two chairs and one sofa of the splendid apartment; Miss Brotherton and
				Mr. Augustus continued to talk about nothing, and Sir Matthew and Lady Clarissa
				ceased not to mutter, what none but themselves could hear, upon an ottoman, which
				stood in front of a distant window. If eyebeams could have interrupted a
					tête-à-tête , theirs would not have long continued to proceed
				undisturbed; for the mistress of Dowling Lodge did certainly cast not a few anxious
				glances towards the master of it; but it was not for that reason that he at length
				got up and rather hastily left the room.

While all this was passing in the drawing-room, Martha Dowling and Michael Armstrong
				remained alone together in the dining-room.
The flying pigeon, impelled by the beneficent Sir Matthew, having hit the forehead of
				his highly-favoured protegé at the very moment that the larum, announcing
				Lady Clarissa's arrival made itself heard, the greatly amused company left the room
				before it was possible to ascertain what would become of it.
The child "caught it ere it came to the ground;" but having done so, held it by one
				leg with an air of very comical indecision, till Dr. Crockley, who respectfully
				walked the last out of the room, shut the door behind him.
The eyes of the factory-boy and the ugly girl then met. "Come to the table, my dear,"
				said Martha; "and if you like that bird, eat it — here is a plate and knife and fork
				for you; but if you like any thing else better, leave it, and tell me what you will
				have."
Michael opened his magnificent black eyes, and looked earnestly at her. He approached
				the table, laid down the half-dissected pigeon, but said not a word.
"You would like something else better, would you not?" said Martha, smiling at
				him.
"I don't know," answered Michael, returning the smile.
"You don't know? — cannot you tell what you should like?"
"No ma'am, if you please; I don't know what any of it is."
"My dear child, it is all very good, I believe, only you know some people like one
				thing, and some another. Little boys generally like something very sweet. Here is
				some cake, what do you say to that?"
"I know what I should like best," said Michael.
"Do you? — then you shall have it, if you will tell me what it is."
"Something good for mother," said the child, blushing violently; "but you must send
				me, and order me to take it to her, or else it will be stealing it."
"Very well, I will send something to her; but you must eat something yourself first.
				What shall it be, Michael?" This arrangement seemed to put the boy into a state of
				perfect ecstasy; he clapped his hands, raised one foot, and then the other, with
				childish glee, and exclaimed in an accent from which all timidity had fled, "Oh!
				dear, oh! dear, how nice?"
"What, the cake? — or the grapes? — or what?"
"Taking it to mother! Taking it to mother!" cried Michael.
"Then you love mother very much, Michael?" said Martha, drawing the child towards
				her, and kissing his smooth dark forehead. Michael nodded his head, and nestled
				closer to her.
 "Well, then, never mind about the cake at present; but I must find a little basket,
				must I not? — I will give you a basket if you will take care of it and bring it back
				to me, because perhaps we may want it again. — There, you may eat that if you are
				hungry,  while I am gone away — I shall be back again in a minute." So
				saying, she placed some bread and meat before him, and left the room. 
Michael had by no means lost his appetite by his morning walk to Hoxley-lane, and
				being in excellent spirits to boot, he sat down and began to devour what had been
				set before him with very zealous eagerness.
He had not, however, done one-half of what he was capable of performing, when another
				door, opposite to the one by which Martha had made her exit , opened, and
				Sir Matthew Dowling walked in.
Michael's knife and active fingers remained suspended midway between his mouth and
				the plate; the colour forsook his cheek, and his eye sunk as if unable to meet that
				of his munificent patron.
"What stuffing still, you greedy little rascal? What have you touched with your nasty
				factory fingers? Not the grapes, I hope?"
Michael tried to say "no," but did not succeed in producing the sound; so contented
				himself by letting the forefinger of his left hand drop into his plate to show how
				he had been engaged.
"Don't look so like a fool, you oaf," said Sir Matthew, taking him by the shoulder,
				and shaking him with some vivacity. "You are to come along with me, do you hear
				that? and see a lot of fine folks, and to look up at them too, do you hear that; and
				by G — d if you blubber, or look grumpish, I'll have you strapped ten times over,
				worse than you ever saw done at the factory. Come along! — and mind what I have
				promised, for I'll keep it, and worse, that you may rely."
Michael behaved like a little hero. He remembered the promised basket, and the voice
				that had told him he should have it; he remembered Hoxley-lane too, and his mother,
				and Teddy, and their morsel of dry bread; so he walked manfully along beside Sir
				Matthew, and when they reached the drawing-room door, and his benefactor stretched
				forth a hand to take his, he yielded it to him, with scarcely any perceptible
				shudder.
Sir Matthew walked some steps forward, with the boy in his hand, into the
				drawing-room, and then standing quite still, pointed to the child, and said, "Lady
				Clarissa! behold the factory-boy!"
Nothing could be more skilful than this form of presentation, for it told Lady
				Clarissa every thing, and Lady Dowling nothing. Lady Clarissa sprung from her seat
				and ran towards the child. "Is it possible!" she exclaimed, with every appearance of
				violent emotion. "Oh! Sir Matthew!" these last words were audible only to the knight
				and the little boy; but as the latter could make nothing of them, and the former
				almost any thing he pleased, it was evident that the lady was as well skilled in
				saying more than met the ear, as the gentleman.
"Indeed, indeed," said Lady Clarissa, drawing forth another of the coronetted
				handkerchiefs, "indeed, indeed, this is a noble act, Sir Matthew!"

Here her ladyship pressed her handkerchief to her eyes, and remained in the eloquent
				silence of that position for a moment, then raising herself from the softness that,
				as she hinted to Sir Matthew, in a whisper, she felt stealing upon her, she called
				to Mr. Osmond Norval, and said in a tone audible to all present, "Osmond Norval!
				favoured of Heaven, and the muse! Let not this beautiful subject escape you! Look at
				this pretty boy — look at the delicate air of aristocratic refinement which pervades
				his person. Osmond, the earth has not made her daily circuit round the sun since I
				beheld this child the very type of sordid wretchedness; would you know the hand that
				wrought this wondrous change? Would you learn what heart suggested it? Behold them
				here!" and Lady Clarissa laid her noble fingers on the coat-sleeve of Sir Matthew
				Dowling.
"Her ladyship does Sir Matthew Dowling no more than justice Mr. Norval," said Doctor
				Crockley approaching the group. "This is an act that ought to be given to fame, and,
				if Sir Matthew himself does not object to it, I would suggest its being recorded by
				your pen, in such a form as may give it general circulation.
The poet pressed his hand upon his heart, and bowed profoundly, and then, raising the
				other hand to his forehead, he stood for some time silently meditating on the theme
				thus offered to him. During this interval, the different groups which surrounded him
				formed a most charming picture. The young man himself stood apart, and
				unconsciously, perhaps, became the centre to which every eye-beam converged. Lady
				Clarissa and Sir Matthew, side by side, and, at no great distance from him, awaited
				his reply; her ladyship with an affectionate smile on her lip, that spoke at once
				her confidence in his power and will to do what she required of him. Sir Matthew's
				expression of countenance could not be read so plainly; it was grave, but it might
				be doubtful whether its gravity proceeded from displeasure that the answer should be
				delayed, or solely from the deep interest the subject possessed for him. Lady
				Dowling, with her hands crossed before her, was seated on a sofa exactly in front of
				them, with her light eyes rather more widely open than usual, looking straight
				forward, and her small features seeming to indicate that she was not in the sweetest
				humour in the world. Dr. Crockley, his hands in his waistcoat-pockets, and his short
				legs rather widely extended, in what dancing-masters term the second position,
				swayed himself with nice balance to and fro, as if measuring the interval of
				suspense by seconds vibrated by his person. Miss Arabella Dowling, and Miss Harriet
				Dowling sat close together upon an ottoman, "like to a double cherry," of the
				Bigarreau kind, with their four eyes so fixed upon the poet that it seemed as if
				they had but one heart and one soul between them; and on this subject at least,
				their hearts and souls, if not one, were the same; for they had both, and at the
				very same instant, fallen violently in love with Mr. Osmond Norval.

In a deep arm-chair, in which she had almost buried herself, sat, or rather lay,
				little Miss Brotherton, almost convulsed with laughter, and with her
				pocket-handkerchief by no means elegantly applied to her mouth (being nearly half of
				it within it), in the hope of stifling, at least, the sound of her mirth, while Mr.
				Augustus leant in an attitude of very distinguished elegance on the back of her
				chair.
A little behind her appeared Miss Mogg, who was in truth neither sitting nor
				standing, but perched very insecurely on the extreme edge of a couch, which
				uncomfortable attitude she had chosen from not feeling quite certain whether she
				ought to stand like Lady Clarissa, or sit like Miss Brotherton. The first she feared
				was too dignified and distinguished for her; the last too comfortable, and she
				deserved credit for hitting upon a position so far removed from either; and lastly,
				very near the door by which he had entered, and to which he had slunk back he knew
				not how, stood Michael.
This picturesque state of things having lasted quite long enough, Osmond Norval
				raised his eyes from the ground to the face of Lady Clarissa, and making a sudden
				step forwards, dropped on one knee and seized her hand. He attempted to speak, but
				for some time his voice appeared perfectly choked by emotion. At last, however, he
				recovered the power of articulation and said, "Such a subject! — Oh, heaven! — at
				your bidding too! Best and dearest Lady Clarissa! Can you doubt that all my power
				and strength will be put in requisition for it? But — may I ask — Is it to be
				published by subscription?"
Without immediately replying to this interesting, and to Mr. Osmond Norval most
				important inquiry, Lady Clarissa suddenly clapped her hands together with a sort of
				vehement enthusiasm that looked very like delirium. Even Sir Matthew, though his
				intimacy with her had more than once made him the witness to some extraordinary
				freaks, looked at her with astonishment; Lady Dowling's eyes were more widely opened
				than ever; Miss Mogg instinctively thrust her hand into her bag in search of a
				smelling-bottle; and Miss Brotherton took her handkerchief out of her mouth, and
				looked grave.
"I have got it! Oh, I have got it!" she exclaimed. "What a delicious idea! — Let us
				sit down! Mogg, push forward that couch, child. — Poor girl! She really is almost
				too fat to move. Gracious heaven, Sir Matthew! what would become of my etherealized
				spirit if it were so encumbered? But sit down, — sit down all of you. — Norval!
				Place yourself on that tabouret. — Mary Brotherton! Draw near and listen. — And all
				the rest of you give ear to what I am going to say, and answer the questions I shall
				ask with freedom and sincerity."
Thus conjured, every one in the room, except Lady Dowling, who stirred not an inch,
				drew round the place where Lady Clarissa had seated herself, and prepared with
				considerable curiosity to hear what she was going to say.
"Is not amusement the very soul of life?" she began.

"No doubt of it, my lady," from the lips of Dr. Crockley, was the most articulate of
				the many acquiescent answers which followed.
"Is not a country neighbourhood fearfully, lamentably difficient in this?" pursued
				the animated inquirer.
"There cannot be two opinions on that point," replied Sir Matthew, with
				authority.
"And is it not the duty of neighbours, residing within reach of each other as we do,
				to exert every facility with which nature has endowed them, in order as much as
				possible to soften to each other the privations to which their distance from the
				metropolis obliges them to submit?"
In reply to this demand, there was a perfect clamour of approbation. "Well then,"
				continued Lady Clarissa, "if such be your feelings, I am certain of success in the
				project that has come, like a spirit of light borne upon silver wings to visit my
				dull spirit. This noble act of Sir Matthew's must not pass away like an ordinary
				deed that is hardly performed, ere it be forgotten. No! it shall live in story — it
				shall live in song — it shall live again in action! Norval, dear gifted friend, did
				you ever write a drama?"
"Occasionally a scene or two, Lady Clarissa."
"That is enough, dear Osmond. I ask not a hackneyed worn-out pen. I will relate to
				him, Sir Matthew, this interesting anecdote exactly as it occurred — he shall
				dramatize it — perhaps introduce an episode, or underplot, to increase the business
				of the scene — we will all act it," and here Lady Clarissa gracefully bowed to the
				whole party, "and all the neighbourhood shall be assembled to enjoy the fête. What
				say you to this, Sir Matthew?"
Upon my word, my lady, I think it is one of the cleverest and most agreeable ideas
				that ever entered a lady's head. If you and Mr. Norval will arrange the drama, Lady
				Clarissa, I will take care to have one of the rooms fitted up as a theatre, and
				depend upon it we shall be in no want of actors. Upon my word I never liked any idea
				so much in my life."
"Will it not be pleasant, Mary Brotherton?" said Lady Clarissa, in her most caressing
				tone, to the heiress.
"Very pleasant, indeed," replied the young lady. "I should ask no better fun."
"And what does my Lady Dowling say?" resumed Lady Clarissa, with that stiffness of
				manner with which her ladyship now and then refreshed the memory of her plebeian
				friends, as to the difference of rank between them."
"Oh! dear me, I am sure I don't know," replied Lady Dowling, looking frightened.
"Well! we must not torment Lady Dowling by forcing her to act, Sir Matthew. There
				cannot be a doubt that we shall have volunteers in abundance. You will act, Mary
				Brotherton, will you not?"
 "Act? — Most assuredly I will act, Lady Clarissa," replied the heiress. "People as
				much at liberty to please themselves as I am,  seldom refuse to aid and
				abet a scheme so exceedingly full of amusement as this seems to be." 
"We will set such an example," cried Dr. Crockley, rubbing his hands joyously, "that
				every county in England shall hear of us with envy — I know what Sir Matthew can
				make of a thing if he takes to it. Leave him alone for giving the go-by to all the
				world. Write away, young gentleman, write away; depend upon it you'll have a
				theatre, and actors too, that will do you justice."
At this interesting moment, just as the fair-haired Miss Dowlings began to whisper to
				each other something about characters and dresses, and Mr. Augustus to whisper to
				Miss Brotherton his hope that he should have to act a great deal with her, the great
				bell sent forth another peal, upon which Lady Clarissa held up her finger in token
				of silence; and before the new visiter entered, all the bright sallies of the party
				were as effectually extinguished as if they had been supplied by gas, which was
				suddenly turned off.
