
CHAPTER XXIX.
THE OLD SCOTCH NURSE GOES HOME.
Six months at least—this is clearly not a story of the unities—six months' interval must now
     elapse before the wedding-day. Charles and Emmy—for he called her Emmy still, though Jeanie
     Mackie would persist in mouthing it to "Aamy,"—wished to have it delayed a year, in respect for
     the memory of those who, with all their crime and folly, were not the less a mother and a
     brother: but the general would not hear of such a thing; he was growing very old, he said;
     although actually he seemed to have taken out a new lease of life, so young again and buoyant
     was the new-found heart within him; and thus growing old, he was full of fatherly fear that he
     should not live to see his children's happiness. It was only reasonable and proper that our
     pair of cooing doves should acquiesce in his desire.

Meanwhile, I am truly sorry to say it, Jeanie Mackie died; for it would have been a
     good novel-like incident to have suffered the faithful old creature to have witnessed her
     favourite's wedding, and then to have been forthwith killed out of the way, by—perishing in the
     vestry. However, things were ordered otherwise, and Jeanie Mackie did not live to see the
     wedding: if you wish to know how and where she died, let me tell you at once.
Scotland—Argyleshire—Glenmuir; this was the focus of her hopes and thoughts—that poor old
     Indian exile! She had left it, as a buxom bright-haired lassie: but oaks had now grown old that
     she had planted acorns; and grandmothers had died palsied, whom she remembered born; still,
     around the mountains and the lakes, those changeless features of her girlhood's rugged home,
     the old woman's memory wandered; they were pictured in her mind's eye hard, and clear, and
     definite as if she looked upon them now. And her soul's deep hope was to see them once
     again.
There was yet another object which made her yearn for Scotland. Lieutenant Stuart had been
     the younger of two brothers, the eldest born of whom became, upon his father's, the old
     laird's, death, Glenmuir and Glenmurdock. Now, though twice married, this elder brother, the
     new laird, never had a child; and the clear consequence was, that Amy Stuart was likely to
     become sole heiress of her ancestor's possessions. The lieutenant's marriage with an Italian
     and a Romanist had been, doubtless, any thing but pleasant to his friends; the strict old
     Presbyterians, and the proud unsullied family of Stuart, could not palate it at all.
     Nevertheless, he did marry the girl, according to the rites of both churches, and there was an
     end of it; so, innumerable proverbs coming to their aid about "curing and enduring" and "must
     be's," and the place where "marriages are made," etc., the several aunts and cousins were
     persuaded at length to wink at the iniquity, and to correspond both with Mrs. James and her
     backsliding lieutenant. Of the offspring of that marriage, and her orphaned state, and of Mrs.
     Mackie's care, and the indefinite detention in central Hindostan, they had heard often-times;
     for, as there is no corner of the world where a Scot may not be met with, so, with laudable
     nationality, they all hang together; and Glenmuir was written to frequently, all about the
     child, through Jeanie Mackie, "her mark," and a scholarly sergeant, Duncan Blair.
Amy's rights—or Emmy let us call her still, as Charles did—were now, therefore, the next
     object of Mrs. Mackie's zeal; and all parties
     interested willingly listened to the plan of spending one or two of those weary
     weeks in rubbing up relationships in Scotland; the general also was not a little anxious about
     heritage and acres. Accordingly, off they set in the new travelling-carriage, with due notice
     of approach, heartily welcomed, to Dunstowr Castle, the fine old feudal stronghold of Robert
     Stuart, Laird of Glenmuir and Glenmurdock.
The journey, the arrival, and the hearty hospitality; and how the gray old chieftain kissed
     his pretty niece; and how welcome her betrothed Charles and her kind life-long guardian, and
     her faithful nurse were made; and how the beacons blazed upon the hill-tops, and the mustering
     clan gathered round about old Dunstowr; and how the laird presented to them all their beautiful
     future mistress, and how Jeanie Mackie and her documents travelled up to Edinburgh, where
     writers to the signet pestered her heart-sick with over-caution; and how the case was all
     cleared up, and the distant disappointed cousin, who had irrationally hoped to be the heir, was
     gladdened, if not satisfied, with a pension and a cantle of Glenmuir; and how all was
     joyfulness and feasting, when Amy Stuart was acknowledged in her rights—the bagpipes and the
     wassail, salmon, and deer, and black-cock, with a river of mountain dew: let others tell who
     know Dunstowr; for as I never was there, of course I cannot faithfully describe it. Should such
     an historian as I condescend to sheer inventions?
With respect to Jeanie Mackie, I could learn no more than this: she was sprightly and lively,
     and strong as ever, though in her ninetieth year, till her foster-child was righted, and the
     lawyers had allowed her her claim. But then there seemed nothing else to live for; so her life
     gradually faded from her eye, as an expiring candle; and she would doze by the hour, sitting on
     a settle in the sun, basking her old heart in the smile of those old mountains. None knew when
     she died, to a minute; for she died sitting in the sun, in the smile of those old
     mountains.
They buried her, with much of rustic pomp, in the hill-church of Glenmuir, where all her
     fathers slept around her; and Emily and Charles, hand-in-hand, walked behind her coffin
     mournfully.
