
CHAPTER VI.
What a great man was the Right Honourable Nicholas Rigby! Here was one of the
       first peers of England, and one of the finest ladies in London, both waiting with equal
       anxiety his return to town; and unable to transact two affairs of vast importance yet wholly
       unconnected, without his interposition! What was the secret of the influence of this man,
       confided in by every body, trusted by none? His councils were not deep, his expedients were
       not felicitous; he had no feeling, and he could create no sympathy. It is that in most of the
       transactions of life there is some portion which no one cares to accomplish, and which
       everybody wishes to be
        achieved. This was always the portion of Mr. Rigby. In the eye of the world he
       had constantly the appearance of being mixed up with high dealings, and negotiations and
       arrangements of fine management; where—as in truth, notwithstanding his splendid livery and
       the airs he gave himself in the servants' hall, his real business in life had ever been—to do
       the dirty work.
Mr. Rigby had been shut up much at his villa of late. He was concocting, you could not term
       it composing, an article, a "very slashing article," which was to prove that the Penny
       postage must be the destruction of the Aristocracy. It was a grand subject treated in his
       highest style. His parallel portraits of Rowland Hill, the Conqueror of Almarez, and Rowland
       Hill the devisor of the cheap postage, was enormously fine. It was full of passages in
       italics; little words in great capitals; and almost drew tears. The statistical details also
       were highly interesting and novel. Several of the old postmen, both twopenny and general, who
       had been in office with himself, and who were inspired with an equal zeal
        against that spirit of Reform of which they had alike been victims, supplied
       him with information which nothing but a breach of ministerial duty could have furnished. The
       prophetic peroration as to the irresistible progress of Democracy was almost as powerful as
       one of Rigby's speeches on Aldborough or Amersham. There never was a fellow for giving a good
       hearty kick to the people like Rigby. Himself sprung from the dregs of the populace, this was
       disinterested. What could be more patriotic and magnanimous than his Jeremiads over the fall
       of the Montmorencis and the Crillons, or the possible catastrophe of the Percys and the
       Manners! The truth of all this hullaballoo was that Rigby had a sly pension which, by an
       inevitable association of ideas, he always connected with the maintenance of an Aristocracy.
       All his rigmarole dissertations on the French Revolution were impelled by this secret
       influence; and when he wailed over "la guerre aux châteaux," and moaned like a mandrake over
       Nottingham Castle in flames, the rogue had an eye all the while to Quarter Day!
Arriving in town, the day after Coningsby's
        interview with his grandfather, Mr. Rigby found a summons to Monmouth House
       waiting him, and an urgent note from Lucretia begging that he would permit nothing to prevent
       him seeing her for a few minutes before he called on the Marquess.
Lucretia, acting on the unconscious intimation of Flora, had in the course of
       four-and-twenty hours obtained pretty ample and accurate details of the cause of contention
       between Coningsby and her husband. She could inform Mr. Rigby not only that Lord Monmouth was
       highly incensed against his grandson; but that the cause of their misunderstanding arose
       about a seat in the House of Commons, and that seat too the one which Rigby had long
       appropriated to himself, and over whose registration he had watched with such affectionate
       solicitude. Lady Monmouth arranged this information like a first-rate artist; and gave it a
       grouping and a colour, which produced the liveliest effect upon her confederate. The
       countenance of Rigby was almost ghastly as he received the intelligence; a grin, half of
       malice, half of terror, played over his features.

"I told you to beware of him long ago," said Lady Monmouth. "He is, he has ever been, in
       the way of both of us."
"He is in my power," said Rigby; "we can crush him."
"How?"
"He is in love with the daughter of Millbank, the man who bought Hellingsley."
"Hah!" exclaimed Lady Monmouth in a prolonged tone.
"He was at Coningsby all last summer hanging about her. I found the younger Millbank quite
       domiciliated at the Castle; a fact of itself which, if known to Lord Monmouth, would ensure
       the lad's annihilation."
"And you kept this fine news for a winter campaign, my good Mr. Rigby," said Lady Monmouth
       with a subtile smile. "It was a weapon of service; I give you my compliments."
"The time is not always ripe," said Mr. Rigby.
"But it is now most mature; let us not conceal it from ourselves, that since his first
       visit to Coningsby, we have neither of us really been
        in the same position which we then occupied, or believed we should occupy. My
       Lord, though you would scarcely believe it, has a weakness for this boy; and though I by my
       marriage, and you by your zealous ability, have apparently secured a permanent hold upon his
       habits, I have never doubted that when the crisis comes we shall find that the golden fruit
       is plucked by one who has not watched the garden. You take me? There is no reason why we two
       should clash together; we can both of us find what we want; and more securely if we work in
       company."
"I trust my devotion to you has never been doubted, dear Madam."
"Nor to yourself, dear Mr. Rigby. Go now; the game is before you. Rid me of this Coningsby,
       and I will secure you all that you want. Doubt not me. There is no reason. I want a firm
       ally. There must be two."
"It shall be done," said Rigby, "it must be done. If once the notion gets wind that one of
       the Castle family may perchance stand for Darlford, all the present combinations will be
       disorganized.
        It must be done at once; I know that the government will dissolve."
"So I hear for certain," said Lucretia. "Be sure there is no time to lose. What does he
       want with you to-day?"
"I know not; there are so many things."
"To be sure: and yet I cannot doubt he will speak of this quarrel. Let not the occasion be
       lost. Whatever his mood, the subject may be introduced. If good, you will guide him more
       easily; if dark, the love for the Hellingsley girl, the fact of the brother being in his
       Castle, drinking his wine, riding his horses, ordering about his servants, you will omit no
       details—a Millbank quite at home at Coningsby will lash him to madness! 'Tis quite ripe. Not
       a word that you have seen me. Go, go, or he may hear that you have arrived. I shall be at
       home all the morning. It will be but gallant, that you should pay me a little visit when you
       have transacted your business. You understand— au revoir!"
Lady Monmouth took up again her French novel; but her eye soon glanced over the page,
       unattached by its contents. Her own existence
        was too interesting to find any excitement in fiction. It was nearly three
       years since her marriage; that great step which she ever had a conviction was to lead to
       results still greater. Of late she had often been filled with a presentiment that they were
       near at hand; never more so than on this day. Irresistible was the current of associations
       that led her to meditate on freedom, wealth, power, on a career which should at the same time
       dazzle the imagination and gratify her heart. Notwithstanding the gossip of Paris, founded on
       no authentic knowledge of her husband's character or information, based on the hap-hazard
       observations of the floating multitude, Lucretia herself had no reason to fear that her
       influence over Lord Monmouth if exerted was materially diminished. But satisfied that he had
       formed no other tie, with her ever the test of her position, she had not thought it
       expedient, and certainly would have found it irksome, to maintain that influence by any
       ostentatious means. She knew that Lord Monmouth was capricious, easily wearied, soon palled;
       and that on men who have no affections, affection has no hold. Their passions or their
       fancies
        on the contary, as it seemed to her, are rather stimulated by neglect or
       indifference, provided they are not systematic; and the circumstance of a wife being admired
       by one, who is not her husband, sometimes wonderfully revives the passion or renovates the
       respect of him, who should be devoted to her.
The health of Lord Monmouth was the subject which never was long absent from the vigilance
       or meditation of Lucretia. She was well assured that his life was no longer secure. She knew
       that after their marriage, he had made a will which secured to her a very large portion of
       his great wealth, in case of their having no issue, and after the accident at Paris all hope
       in that respect was over. Recently the extreme anxiety which Lord Monmouth had evinced about
       terminating the abeyance of the barony to which his first wife was a co-heiress in favour of
       his grandson, had alarmed Lucretia. To establish in the land another branch of the House of
       Coningsby was evidently the last excitement of Lord Monmouth, and perhaps a permanent one. If
       the idea were once accepted, notwithstanding the limit to its endowment
        which Lord Monmouth might, at the first start, contemplate, Lucretia had
       sufficiently studied his temperament to be convinced that all his energies and all his
       resources would ultimately be devoted to its practical fulfilment. Her original prejudice
       against Coningsby and jealousy of his influence had therefore of late been considerably
       aggravated; and the intelligence that for the first time there was a misunderstanding between
       Coningsby and her husband filled her with excitement and hope. She knew her Lord well enough
       to feel assured that the cause for the displeasure in the present instance could not be a
       light one, she resolved instantly to labour that it should not be transient; and it so
       happened that she had applied for aid in this endeavour to the very individual in whose power
       it rested to accomplish all her desire while in doing so he felt at the same time he was
       defending his own position and advancing his own interests.
Lady Monmouth was now awaiting with some excitement the return of Mr. Rigby. His interview
       with his patron was of unusual length. An hour, and more than an hour, had elapsed.
        Lady Monmouth again threw aside the book which more than once she had
       discarded. She paced the room; restless rather than disquieted. She had complete confidence
       in Rigby's ability for the occasion; and with her knowledge of Lord Monmouth's character, she
       could not contemplate the possibility of failure, if the circumstances were adroitly
       introduced to his consideration. Still time stole on; the harassing and exhausting process of
       suspense was acting on her nervous system. She began to think that Rigby had not found the
       occasion favourable for the catastrophe; that Lord Monmouth from apprehension of disturbing
       Rigby and entailing explanations on himself had avoided the necessary communication; that her
       skilful combination for the moment had missed. Two hours had now elapsed, and Lucretia, in a
       state of considerable irritation was about to inquire whether Mr. Rigby were with his
       Lordship, when the door of her boudoir opened, and that gentleman appeared.
"How long you have been," exclaimed Lady Monmouth. "Now sit down and tell me what has
       past."

Lady Monmouth pointed to the seat which Flora had occupied.
"I thank your Ladyship," said Mr. Rigby with a somewhat grave and yet perplexed expression
       of countenance, and seating himself at some little distance from his companion, "but I am
       very well here."
There was a pause. Instead of responding to the invitation of Lady Monmouth to communicate,
       with his usual readiness and volubility, Mr. Rigby was silent, and if it were possible to use
       such an expression with regard to such a gentleman, apparently embarrassed.
"Well," said Lady Monmouth. "Does he know about the Millbanks?"
"Everything," said Mr. Rigby.
"And what did he say?"
"His Lordship was greatly shocked," replied Mr. Rigby with a pious expression of features.
       "Such monstrous ingratitude! As his Lordship very justly observed, it is impossible to say
       what is going on under my own roof, or to whom I can trust."
"But he made an exception in your favour, I
        dare say, my dear Mr. Rigby," said Lady Monmouth.
"Lord Monmouth was pleased to say that I possessed his entire confidence," said Mr. Rigby,
       "and that he looked to me in his difficulties."
"Very sensible of him. And what is to become of Mr. Coningsby?"
"The steps which his Lordship is about to take with reference to his establishment
       generally," said Mr. Rigby, "will allow the connection that at present subsists between that
       gentleman and his noble relative, now that Lord Monmouth's eyes are open to his real
       character, to terminate naturally without the necessity of any formal explanation."
"But what do you mean by the steps he is going to take in his establishment generally?"
"Lord Monmouth thinks he requires change of scene."
"Oh! is he going to drag me abroad again," exclaimed Lady Monmouth with great
       impatience.
"Why not exactly," said Mr. Rigby rather demurely.

"I hope he is not going again to that dreadful Castle in Lancashire."
"Lord Monmouth was thinking that as you were tired of Paris, you might find some of the
       German Baths agreeable."
"Why there is nothing that Lord Monmouth dislikes so much as a German bathing place!"
"Exactly," said Mr. Rigby.
"Then how capricious in him, wanting to go to them!"
"He does not want to go to them."
"What do you mean, Mr. Rigby," said Lady Monmouth in a lower voice, and looking him full in
       the face with a glance seldom bestowed.
There was a churlish and unusual look about Rigby. It was as if malignant, and yet at the
       same time a little frightened, he had screwed himself into doggedness.
"I mean what Lord Monmouth means; he suggests that if your Ladyship were to pass the summer
       at Kissingen for example, and a paragraph in the Morning Post were to announce that his
       Lordship was about to join you there, all awkwardness would be removed; and no one
        could for a moment take the liberty of supposing, even if his Lordship did not
       ultimately reach you, that anything like a separation had occurred."
"A separation!" said Lady Monmouth.
"Quite amicable," said Mr. Rigby. "I would never have consented to interfere in the affair,
       but to secure that most desirable point."
"I will see Lord Monmouth at once," said Lucretia rising, her natural pallor aggravated
       into a ghoul-like tint.
"His Lordship has gone out," said Mr. Rigby rather stubbornly.
"Our conversation, sir, then finishes: I wait his return." She bowed haughtily.
"His Lordship will never return to Monmouth House again."
Lucretia sprang from the sofa.
"Miserable craven!" she exclaimed, "has the cowardly tyrant fled? And he really thinks that
       I am to be crushed by such an instrument as this! Pah! He may leave Monmouth House, but I
       shall not. Begone, sir."
"Still anxious to secure an amicable separation,"
        said Mr. Rigby, "your Ladyship must allow me to place the circumstances of the
       case fairly before your excellent judgment. Lord Monmouth has decided upon a course; you know
       as well as me that he never swerves from his resolutions. He has left peremptory
       instructions, and he will listen to no appeal. He has empowered me to represent to your
       Ladyship that he wishes in every way to consider your convenience. He suggests that
       everything in short should be arranged as if his Lordship were himself unhappily no more;
       that your Ladyship should at once enter into your jointure, which shall be made payable
       quarterly to your order, provided you can find it convenient to live upon the continent,"
       added Mr. Rigby with some hesitation.
"And suppose I cannot?"
"Why then we will leave your Ladyship to the assertion of your rights."
"We!"
"I beg your Ladyship's pardon: I speak as the friend of the family; the trustee of your
       marriage settlement; well-known also as Lord Monmouth's executor," said Mr. Rigby, his
        countenance gradually regaining its usual callous confidence, and some degree
       of self-complacency, as he remembered the good things which he enumerated.
"I have decided," said Lady Monmouth; "I will assert my rights. Your master has mistaken my
       character and his own position. He shall rue the day that he assailed me."
"I should be sorry if there were any violence," said Mr. Rigby, "especially as everything
       is left to my management and control. An office indeed which I only accepted for your mutual
       advantage. I think upon reflection I might put before your Ladyship some considerations which
       might induce you on the whole to be of opinion that it will be better for us to draw together
       in this business, as we have hitherto indeed throughout an acquaintance, now of some years."
       Rigby was resuming all his usual tone of brazen familiarity.
"Your self-confidence exceeds even Lord Monmouth's estimate of it," said Lucretia.
"Now, now, you are unkind. Your Ladyship mistakes my position. I am interfering in this
       business for your sake. I might have refused
        the office. It would have fallen to another, who would have fulfilled it
       without any delicacy and consideration for your feelings. View my interposition in that
       light, my dear Lady Monmouth, and circumstances will assume altogether a new colour."
"I beg that you would quit the house, sir."
Mr. Rigby shook his head. "I would with pleasure to oblige you, were it in my power, but
       Lord Monmouth has particularly desired that I should take up my residence here permanently.
       The servants are now my servants. It is useless to ring the bell. For your Ladyship's sake, I
       wish everything to be accomplished with tranquillity, and if possible friendliness and
       good-feeling. You can have even a week for the preparations for your departure if necessary.
       I will take that upon myself. Any carriages too that you desire; your jewels; at least all
       those that are not at the banker's. The arrangement about your jointure, your letters of
       credit, even your passport, I will attend to myself; only too happy if by this painful
       interference, I have in any way contributed to soften the annoyance which at the first blush
        you may naturally experience, but which like everything else, take my word,
       will wear off."
"I shall send for Lord Eskdale," said Lady Monmouth, "he is a gentleman."
"I am quite sure," said Mr. Rigby, "that Lord Eskdale will give you the same advice as
       myself, if he only reads your Ladyship's letters," he added slowly, "to Prince
       Trautsmandorff."
"My letters!" said Lady Monmouth.
"Pardon me," said Rigby, putting his hand in his pockets as if to guard some treasure, "I
       have no wish to revive painful associations; but I have them; and I must act upon them, if
       you persist in treating me as a foe, who am in reality your best friend, which indeed I ought
       to be, having the honour of acting as trustee under your marriage settlement, and having
       known you so many years."
"Leave me for the present alone," said Lady Monmouth. "Send me my servant if I have one. I
       shall not remain here the week which you mention, but quit at once this house, which I wish I
       had never entered. Adieu! Mr. Rigby, you are now Lord of Monmouth House,
        and yet I cannot help feeling you too will be discharged before he dies."
Mr. Rigby made Lady Monmouth a bow such as became the master of the house, and then
       withdrew.

