
CHAPTER III.
The image of Edith Millbank was the last thought of Coningsby as he sank into an
       agitated slumber. To him had hitherto in general been accorded the precious boon of dreamless
       sleep. Homer tells us these phantasmas come from Jove; they are rather the children of a
       distracted soul. Coningsby this night lived much in past years, varied by painful
       perplexities of the present, which he could neither subdue, nor comprehend. The scene flitted
       from Eton to the castle of his grandfather; and then he found himself among the pictures of
       the Rue de Tronchet, but their owner
        bore the features of the senior Millbank. A beautiful countenance that was
       alternately the face in the mysterious picture, and then that of Edith, haunted him under all
       circumstances. He woke little refreshed; restless and yet sensible of some secret joy.
He woke to think of her of whom he had dreamed. The light had dawned on his soul. Coningsby
       loved.
Ah! what is that ambition, that haunts our youth—that thirst for power or that lust of
       fame, that forces us from obscurity into the sunblaze of the world—what are these sentiments
       so high, so vehement, so ennobling! They vanish, and in an instant, before the glance of a
       woman!
Coningsby had scarcely quitted her side the preceding eve. He hung upon the accents of that
       clear sweet voice, and sought with tremulous fascination, the gleaming splendour of those
       soft dark eyes. And now he sat in his chamber with his eyes fixed upon vacancy. All thoughts
       and feelings, pursuits, desires, life, merge in one absorbing sentiment.

It is impossible to exist without seeing her again, and instantly. He had requested and
       gained permission to call on Lady Wallinger; he would not lose a moment in availing himself
       of it. As early as was tolerably decorous, and before in all probability they could quit
       their hotel, Coningsby repaired to the Rue de Rivoli to pay his respects to his new
       friends.
As he walked along, he indulged in fanciful speculations which connected Edith and the
       mysterious portrait of his mother. He felt himself as it were near the fulfilment of some
       fate, and on the threshold of some critical discovery. He recalled the impatient, even
       alarmed, expressions of Rigby at Montem six years ago, when he proposed to invite young
       Millbank to his grandfather's dinner; the vindictive feud that existed between the two
       families; and for which political opinion, or even party passion could not satisfactorily
       account; and he reasoned himself into a conviction, that the solution of many perplexities
       was at hand, and that all would be consummated to the satisfaction of every one, by his
       unexpected but inevitable agency.

Coningsby found Sir Joseph alone. The worthy Baronet was at any rate no participator in Mr.
       Millbank's vindictive feelings against Lord Monmouth. On the contrary, he had a very high
       respect for a Marquess, whatever might be his opinions, and no mean consideration for a
       Marquess' grandson. Sir Joseph had inherited a large fortune made by commerce, and had
       increased it by the same means. He was a middle-class Whig, had faithfully supported that
       party in his native town during the days they wandered in the wilderness, and had well earned
       his share of the milk and honey when they vanquished the promised land. In the spring-tide of
       Liberalism, when the world was not analytical of free opinions, and odious distinctions were
       not drawn between Finality men and progressive Reformers, Mr. Wallinger had been the popular
       leader of a powerful body of his fellow citizens, who had returned him to the first Reform
       Parliament, and where in spite of many a menacing Registration, he had contrived to remain.
       He had never given a Radical vote without the permission of the Secretary of
        the Treasury; and was not afraid of giving an unpopular one to serve his
       friends. He was not like that distinguished Liberal, who after dining with the late Whig
       Premier expressed his gratification and his gratitude by assuring his Lordship that he might
       count on his support on all popular questions.
"I want men who will support the government on all unpopular questions," replied the witty
       statesman.
Mr. Wallinger was one of these men. His high character and strong purse were always in the
       front rank in the hour of danger. His support in the house was limited to his votes; but in
       other places equally important, at a meeting at a political club, or in Downing Street, he
       could find his tongue, take what is called a "practical" view of a question, adopt what is
       called an "independent tone," re-animate confidence in ministers, check mutiny, and set a
       bright and bold example to the wavering. A man of his property, and high character, and sound
       views, so practical and so independent— this was, evidently, the block from which a
        Baronet should be cut, and in due time he figured Sir Joseph.
A Spanish gentleman, of very ample means, and of a very good Catalan family, flying during
       a political convulsion to England, arrived with his two daughters at Liverpool, and bore
       letters of introduction to the house of Wallinger. Some little time after this, by one of
       those stormy vicissitudes of political fortune, of late years not unusual in the Peninsula,
       he returned to his native country, and left his children and the management of that portion
       of his fortune that he had succeeded in bringing with him, under the guardianship of the
       father of the present Sir Joseph. This gentleman was about again to become an exile, when he
       met with an untimely end in one of those terrible tumults of which Barcelona is the frequent
       scene.
The younger Wallinger was touched by the charms of one of his father's wards. Her beauty,
       of a character to which he was unaccustomed, her accomplishments of society, and the
       refinement of her manners conspicuous in the circle in which he lived, captivated him; and
        though they had no heir, the union had been one of great felicity. Sir Joseph
       was proud of his wife; he secretly considered himself, though his "tone" was as liberal and
       independent as in old days, to be on the threshold of aristocracy, and was conscious that
       Lady Wallinger played her part not unworthily in the elevated circles in which they now
       frequently found themselves. Sir Joseph was fond of great people; and not averse to travel;
       because bearing a title and being a member of the British Parliament, and always moving with
       the appendages of wealth, servants, and carriages, and couriers, and fortified with no lack
       of letters from the Foreign Office, he was everywhere acknowledged and received, and treated
       as a personage; was invited to court-balls, dined with ambassadors, and found himself and his
       lady at every festival of distinction.
The elder Millbank had been Joseph Wallinger's youthful friend. Different as were their
       dispositions and the rate of their abilities, their political opinions were the same; and
       commerce habitually connected their interests. During a
        visit to Liverpool, Millbank had made the acquaintance of the sister of Lady
       Wallinger, and had been a successful suitor for her hand. This lady was the mother of Edith,
       and of the school-fellow of Coningsby. It was only within a very few years that she had died;
       she had scarcely lived long enough to complete the education of her daughter, to whom she was
       devoted, and on whom she lavished the many accomplishments that she possessed. Lady Wallinger
       having no children, and being very fond of her niece, had watched over Edith with infinite
       solicitude, and finally had persuaded Mr. Millbank that it would be well that his daughter
       should accompany them in their somewhat extensive travels. It was not therefore only that
       nature had developed a beautiful woman out of a bashful girl since Coningsby's visit to
       Millbank; but really, every means and every opportunity that could contribute in rendering an
       individual capable of adorning the most accomplished circles of life had naturally, and
       without effort, fallen to the fortunate lot of the manufacturer's daughter. Edith possessed
       an intelligence
        equal to those occasions. Without losing the native simplicity of her character,
       which sprang from the heart, and which the strong and original bent of her father's mind had
       fostered, she had imbibed all the refinement and facility of the polished circles in which
       she moved. She had a clear head, a fine taste, and a generous spirit; had received so much
       admiration, that, though by no means insensible to homage, her heart was free; was strongly
       attached to her family; and notwithstanding all the splendour of Rome and the brilliancy of
       Paris, her thoughts were often in her Saxon valley, amid the green hills and busy factories
       of Millbank.
Sir Joseph, finding himself alone with the grandson of Lord Monmouth, was not very anxious
       that the ladies should immediately appear. He thought this a very good opportunity of getting
       at what he called "the real feelings of the Tory party;" and he began to pump with a
       seductive semblance of frankness. For his part, he had never doubted that a Conservative
       government was ultimately inevitable; had told
        Lord John so two years ago, and between themselves Lord John was of the same
       opinion. The present position of the Whigs was the necessary fate of all progressive parties;
       could not see exactly how it would end; thought sometimes it must end in a fusion of parties;
       but could not well see how that could be brought about, at least at present. For his part,
       should be very happy to witness an union of the best men of all parties, for the preservation
       of peace and order, without any reference to any particular opinions. And, in that sense of
       the word, it was not at all impossible he might find it his duty some day to support a
       Conservative government.
Sir Joseph was very much astonished when Coningsby, who being somewhat impatient for the
       entrance of the ladies was rather more abrupt than his wont, told the worthy Baronet that he
       looked upon a government without distinct principles of policy, as only a stop-gap to a
       wide-spread and demoralizing anarchy; that he for one could not comprehend how a free
       government could endure without national
        opinions to uphold it; and that governments for the preservation of peace and
       order, and nothing else, had better be sought in China, or among the Austrians, the Chinese
       of Europe. As for Conservative government, the natural question was, What do you mean to
       conserve? Do you mean to conserve things or only names, realities or merely appearances? Or,
       do you mean to continue the system commenced in 1834, and, with a hypocritical reverence for
       the principles, and a superstitious adhesion to the forms, of the old exclusive constitution,
       carry on your policy by latitudinarian practice?
Sir Joseph stared; it was the first time that any inkling of the views of the New
       Generation had caught his ear. They were strange and unaccustomed accents. He was extremely
       perplexed; could by no means make out what his companion was driving at; at length, with a
       rather knowing smile, expressive as much of compassion as comprehension, he remarked:
"Ah! I see; you are a regular Orangeman."

"I look upon an Orangeman," said Coningsby, "as a pure Whig; the only professor and
       practiser of unadulterated Whiggism."
This was too much for Sir Joseph, whose political knowledge did not reach much further back
       than the ministry of the Mediocrities; hardly touched the times of the Corresponding Society.
       But he was a cautious man, and never replied in haste. He was about feeling his way, when he
       experienced the golden advantage of gaining time, for the ladies entered.
The heart of Coningsby throbbed as Edith appeared. She extended to him her hand; her face
       radiant with kind expression. Lady Wallinger seemed gratified also by his visit. She had much
       elegance in her manner; a calm soft address; and she spoke English with a sweet doric
       irregularity. They all sat down, talked of the last night's ball, of a thousand things. There
       was something animating in the frank, cheerful, spirit of Edith. She had a quick eye both for
       the beautiful and the ridiculous, and threw out her observations in terse and vivid phrases.
       An hour, and more than
        an hour, passed away, and Coningsby still found some excuse not to depart. It
       seemed that on this morning they were about to make an expedition into the antique city of
       Paris to visit some old hotels which retained their character; especially they had heard much
       of the hotel of the Archbishop of Sens, with its fortified courtyard. Coningsby expressed
       great interest in the subject, and showed some knowledge. Sir Joseph invited him to join the
       party, which of all things in the world was what he most desired.

