
CHAPTER XI.
 When the news had arrived in the morning at Mowbray, that the messengers of the Bishop had
       met with a somewhat queer reception at the Mowedale works, Gerard prescient that some trouble
       might in consequence occur there, determined to repair at once to the residence of his late
       employer. It so happened that Monday was the day on which the cottages up the dale and on the
       other side of the river were visited by an envoy of Ursula Trafford, and it was the office of
       Sybil this morning to fulfil the duties of that mission of charity. She had mentioned this to
       her father on the previous day, and as in consequence of the strike, he was no
       longer occupied, he had proposed to accompany his daughter on the morrow. Together therefore
       they had walked until they arrived at the bridge, it being then about two hours to noon, a
       little above their former residence. Here they were to separate. Gerard embraced his daughter
       with even more than usual tenderness; and as Sybil crossed the bridge, she looked round at
       her father, and her glance caught his, turned for the same fond purpose.
 Sybil was not alone; Harold, who had ceased to gambol, but who had gained in stature,
       majesty and weight what he had lost of lithe and frolick grace, was by her side. He no longer
       danced before his mistress, coursed away and then returned, or vented his exuberant life in a
       thousand feats of playful vigour; but sedate and observant, he was always at hand, ever
       sagacious, and seemed to watch her every glance.
 The day was beautiful, the scene was fair, the spot indeed was one which rendered the
       performance of gracious offices to Sybil doubly sweet. She ever begged of the
       Lady Superior that she might be her minister to the cottages up Dale. They were full of
       familiar faces. It was a region endeared to Sybil by many memories of content and tenderness.
       And as she moved along to-day her heart was light, and the natural joyousness of her
       disposition, which so many adverse circumstances had tended to repress, was visible in her
       sunny face. She was happy about her father. The invasion of the miners, instead of prompting
       him as she had feared to some rash conduct, appeared to have filled him only with disgust.
       Even now he was occupied in a pursuit of order and peace, counselling prudence and protecting
       the benevolent.
 She passed through a copse which skirted those woods of Mowbray wherein she had once so
       often rambled with one whose image now hovered over her spirit. Ah! what scenes and changes,
       dazzling and dark, had occurred since the careless though thoughtful days of her early
       girlhood! Sybil mused: she recalled the moonlit hour when Mr Franklin first paid a visit to their cottage, their walks and wanderings, the expeditions which she planned and
       the explanations which she so artlessly gave him. Her memory wandered to their meeting in
       Westminster, and all the scenes of sorrow and of softness of which it was the herald. Her
       imagination raised before her in colours of light and life the morning, the terrible morning
       when he came to her desperate rescue; his voice sounded in her ear; her cheek glowed as she
       recalled their tender farewell.
 It was past noon: Sybil had reached the term of her expedition, had visited her last
       charge; she was emerging from the hills into the open country, and about to regain the river
       road that would in time have conducted her to the bridge. On one side of her was the moor, on
       the other a wood that was the boundary of Mowbray Park. And now a number of women met her,
       some of whom she recognised, and had indeed visited earlier in the morning. Their movements
       were disordered, distress and panic were expressed on their countenances. Sybil stopped, she
       spoke to some, the rest gathered around her. The Hell-cats were coming, they
       said; they were on the other side of the river, burning mills, destroying all they could put
       their hands on, man, woman and child.
 Sybil, alarmed for her father, put to them some questions, to which they gave incoherent
       answers. It was however clear that they had seen no one, and knew nothing of their own
       experience. The rumour had reached them that the mob was advancing up Dale, those who had
       apprised them had, according to their statement, absolutely witnessed the approach of the
       multitude, and so they had locked up their cottages, crossed the bridge, and ran away to the
       woods and moor. Under these circumstances, deeming that there might be much exaggeration,
       Sybil at length resolved to advance, and in a few minutes those whom she had encountered were
       out of sight. She patted Harold, who looked up in her face and gave a bark, significant of
       his approbation of her proceeding, and also of his consciousness that something strange was
       going on. She had not proceeded very far before two men on horseback, at full
       gallop, met her. They pulled up directly they observed her, and said, “You had better go back
       as fast as you can: the mob is out, and coming up Dale in great force.”
 Sybil enquired, with much agitation, whether they had themselves seen the people, and they
       replied that they had not, but that advices had been received from Mowbray of their approach,
       and as for themselves they were hurrying at their utmost speed to a town ten miles off, where
       they understood some yeomanry were stationed, and to whom the Mayor of Mowbray had last night
       sent a despatch: Sybil would have enquired whether there were time for her to reach the
       bridge and join her father at the factory of Trafford, but the horsemen were impatient and
       rode off. Still she determined to proceed. All that she now aimed at was to reach Gerard and
       share his fate.
 A boat put across the river; two men and a crowd of women. The mob had been seen; at least
       there was positively one person present who had distinguished them in the extreme distance, or rather the cloud of dust which they created; there were dreadful stories of
       their violence and devastation. It was understood that a body meant to attack Trafford’s
       works, but, as the narrator added, it was very probable that the greater part would cross the
       bridge and so on to the Moor, where they would hold a meeting.
 Sybil would fain have crossed in the boat, but there was no one to assist her. They had
       escaped, and meant to lose no time in finding a place of refuge for the moment. They were
       sure if they recrossed now, they must meet the mob. They were about to leave her, Sybil in
       infinite distress, when a lady driving herself in a pony carriage, with a couple of grooms
       behind her mounted also on ponies of the same form and colour, came up from the direction of
       the Moor, and observing the group and Sybil much agitated, pulled up and enquired the cause.
       One of the men, frequently interrupted by all the women, immediately entered into a narrative
       of the state of affairs for which the lady was evidently quite unprepared, for her alarm was
       considerable.

 “And this young person will persist in crossing over,” continued the man. “It’s nothing
       less than madness. I tell her she will meet instant death or worse.”
 “It seems to me very rash,” said the lady in a kind tone, and who seemed to recognise
       her.
 “Alas! what am I to do!” exclaimed Sybil. “I left my father at Mr Trafford’s!”
 “Well, we have no time to lose,” said the man, whose companion had now fastened the boat
       to the bank, and so wishing them good morning, and followed by the whole of his cargo, they
       went on their way.
 But just at this moment a gentleman, mounted on a very knowing little cob, came cantering
       up, exclaiming, as he reached the pony carriage, “My dear Joan, I am looking after you. I
       have been in the greatest alarm for you. There are riots on the other side of the river, and
       I was afraid you might have crossed the bridge.”
 Upon this, Lady Joan related to Mr Mountchesney how she had just become acquainted with
       the intelligence, and then they conversed together for a moment or so in a
       whisper: when turning round to Sybil, she said, “I think you had really better come home with
       us till affairs are a little more quiet.”
 “You are most kind,” said Sybil, “but if I could get back to the town through Mowbray
       Park, I think I might do something for my father!”
 “We are going to the Castle through the park at this moment,” said the gentleman. “You had
       better come with us. There you will at least be safe, and perhaps we shall be able to do
       something for the good people in trouble over the water,” and so saying, nodding to a groom
       who, advancing, held his cob, the gentleman dismounted, and approaching Sybil with great
       courtesy, said, “I think we ought all of us to know each other. Lady Joan and myself had once
       the pleasure of meeting you, I think, at Mr Trafford’s. It is a long time ago, but,” he added
       in a subdued tone, “you are not a person to forget.”
 Sybil was insensible to Mr Mountchesney’s gallantry, but alarmed and
       perplexed, she yielded to the representations of himself and Lady Joan, and got into the
       phaeton. Turning from the river, they pursued a road which entered after a short progress
       into the park, Mr Mountchesney cantering on before them, Harold following. They took their
       way for about a mile through a richly-wooded demesne, Lady Joan addressing many observations
       with great kindness to Sybil, and frequently endeavouring, though in vain, to distract her
       agitated thoughts, till they at length emerged from the more covered parts into extensive
       lawns, while on a rising ground which they rapidly approached rose Mowbray Castle, a modern
       castellated building, raised in a style not remarkable for its taste or correctness, but
       vast, grand, and imposing.
 “And now,” said Mr Mountchesney, riding up to them and addressing Sybil, “I will send off
       a scout immediately for news of your father. In the mean time let us believe the best!” Sybil
       thanked him with cordiality, and then she entered—Mowbray Castle.
