
CHAPTER CLIII.   PROCEEDINGS IN CASTELCICALA.
The scene, which they had just witnessed, produced a most painful impression upon the minds
      of the lovely Italian lady and Richard Markham.
For some moments after they were alone in the drawing-room together, they maintained a
      profound silence.
At length Richard spoke.
"It is a mournful occurrence which has brought us together to-day, Isabella," he said.
"And although this meeting between us be unknown to my father," answered Isabella, "yet the
      nature of the circumstance which caused it must serve as my apology in your eyes."
"In my eyes!" ejaculated Markham. "Oh! how can an apology be necessary for an interview with
      one who loves you as I love you?"
"I am not accustomed to act the prude, Richard," returned Isabella; "and therefore I will
      not say that I regret having met you,—apart from the sad event which led to our meeting."
"Oh! Isabella, if I do not now renew to you all my former protestations of affection, it is
      because it were impious for us to think of our love, when death is busy in the same
      house."
"Richard, I admire your feeling in this respect. But you are all our poor dying friend
      proclaimed you—high-minded, honourable, and generous. O Richard! the prophetic language of
      Mary-Anne has produced a powerful impression upon my mind!"
"And on mine, also," answered Markham. "Not that I esteem the prospective honours displayed
      to my view; but because I hope—sincerely hope—that my adored Isabella may one day be
      mine."
The Princess tendered him her hand, which he kissed in rapture.
"Do you know," said Isabella, after a few moments' silence, "that events are taking a turn
      in Castelcicala, which may lead to all that poor Mary-Anne has prophesied? There was a strong
      party in the state opposed to the marriage of the Grand Duke; and the military department was
      particularly dissatisfied."
"I remember that in the accounts which I read of the celebration of that marriage, it was
      stated that the ducal procession experienced a chilling reception from the soldiery."
"True," answered Isabella; "and early last month—a few days after the commencement of the
      new year—that spirit showed itself more unequivocally still. Three regiments surrounded the
      ducal palace, and demanded a constitution. The Grand Duke succeeded in pacifying them with
      vague promises; and the regiments retired to their quarters. It then appears that his Serene
      Highness wished to make an example of those regiments, and drew up a decree ordaining them to
      be disbanded, the officers to be cashiered, and the men to be distributed amongst other
      corps."
"That was a severe measure," remarked Richard.
"So severe," continued Isabella, "that General Grachia, the Minister of War, refused to sign
      the ducal ordinance. He was accordingly compelled to resign, the Duke remaining inflexible.
      The whole of the Cabinet-Ministers then sent in their resignations, which the Grand Duke
      accepted. Signor Pisani, the Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs, was charged with the
      formation of a new ministry—a fact which shows how completely the Duke has alienated from
      himself all the great statesmen of Castelcicala."
"So that he has been compelled to have recourse to an Under Secretary as his Prime
      Minister," observed Richard.
"Precisely," answered Isabella. "Signor Pisani formed an administration; and its first act
      was to carry into force the decree already drawn up against the three discontented regiments.
      The second proceeding of the new ministry was to banish General Grachia from the country."
"This was madness!" ejaculated Markham. "Does the Grand Duke wish to seal his own ruin?"
"It would appear that he is desperate," continued Isabella, "as I shall show you in a
      moment. General Grachia left Montoni, accompanied by his family, and followed by immense
      multitudes, who cheered him as the well-known friend of the Prince my father. The troops also
      crowded in his way, to show their respect for the veteran chief who had so often led them to
      conquest. The next morning a ducal ordinance appeared, which showed that the Grand Duke was
      resolved to throw off the mask, and proclaim a despotism. I have the Montoni
       Gazette in my reticule."
Isabella produced the newspaper, and, opening it, said, "I will translate the ordinance to
      you."
"Nay—rather allow me to read it for myself," returned Markham.
"How? But it is in Italian," exclaimed the Signora.
"And I will read it in that tongue," said Richard.
"I was not aware—I knew not until now——"
"No, dearest Isabella: until lately the Italian language was as Chinese to me," interrupted
      Richard: "but I have studied it intensely—without aid, without guidance; and if I cannot speak
      it fluently nor with the correct pronunciation, I can understand it with ease, and—I flatter
      myself—speak at least intelligibly."
The lovely Italian girl listened to this announcement with the most tender interest. She
      received it as a proof of boundless love for her; and sweet—ineffably sweet was the glance of
      deep gratitude which she threw upon her lover.
Richard took the Montoni Gazette from the fair hand which tendered it to him,
      and then read, with ease and fluency, the following translation of the ducal ordinance alluded
      to:—

"ANGELO III., BY THE GRACE OF GOD, GRAND DUKE OF CASTELCICALA,
 "To all present and to come, Greeting:
 "We have ordered and do order that which follows:—
"I. The censorship of the press is restored from this
       date: and no newspaper nor periodical work shall be published in our dominions,
       without the consent of the Minister of the Interior.
"II. Offences against this law, as well as all others connected with the press, shall
       henceforth be brought before the cognizance of the Captain-General of the province where such
       offences may occur, instead of before the ordinary tribunals.
"III. No assembly of more than seven persons will henceforth be allowed to take place,
       without the consent of the local authorities, save for the purposes of religious worship and
       ceremonial.
"IV. Our Captains-General are hereby authorised to declare martial law in their provinces,
       or any part of their provinces, should signs of insubordination appear.
"V. Our Minister Secretary of State for the Department of the Interior will see to the
       execution of this our ordinance.
"By the Grand Duke, ANGELO III. 
"RAPALLO PISANI, "Minister of the Interior. 
"January 10th, 1840."
"The Grand Duke has thus destroyed the freedom of the press, promulgated a law to suppress
      political meetings, and menaced the country with martial law," said Richard, when he had
      terminated the perusal of this ordinance.
"And it would appear, by the newspapers and by private letters which my father has
      received," added Isabella, "that the Grand Duke would have proceeded to extremes far more
      dangerous to his throne had not his amiable Duchess softened him. But even her
      intercessions—and I understand she is a most deserving princess—were ineffectual in a great
      measure."
"Know you the results of that despotic ordinance?" asked Markham.
"Several riots have taken place at Montoni," answered the Signora; "and the Captain-General
      of the province of Abrantani has proclaimed martial law throughout the districts which he
      governs."
"Matters are then becoming serious in Castelcicala," observed Richard. "What has become of
      General Grachia?"
"No one knows. He left Montoni within twenty-four hours after the receipt of the decree of
      exile; but my father has received no information of his progress or intentions. Oh! my beloved
      country," she exclaimed, in a tone of pious fervour, "may God grant that thou wilt not be the
      scene of anarchy, bloodshed, and civil strife!"
Richard surveyed his beautiful companion with the most enraptured admiration, as she uttered
      that holy wish,—a wish that spoke so eloquently of the absence of all selfishness from her
      pure soul.
The above conversation had been carried on in a subdued tone; and its topic had not excluded
      from the minds of the young lovers the recollection of the sad scene which they had ere now
      witnessed.
Indeed they only pursued their discourse upon that particular subject, because it was
      connected with the chain of events which seemed adapted to carry out the prophetic hopes of
      the dying girl.
Nearly an hour had passed since they had left the chamber of death.
At length the door opened slowly, and Mr. Gregory entered the drawing-room.
His countenance was deadly pale; and yet it wore an expression of pious resignation.
Isabella and Richard knew that all was over.
Mr. Gregory advanced towards them, and taking their hands, said, "She is gone—she died in my
      arms! Almost her last words were, 'Tell Isabella and Richard sometimes to think of
       Mary-Anne.'"
The bereaved parent could subdue his grief no longer: he threw himself upon the sofa and
      burst into tears.
Nor were the cheeks of Isabella and Richard unmoistened by the holy dew of sweet
      sympathy.
"Richard," said Mr. Gregory, after a long pause, "you must write to my sons and tell them of
      this sad affliction. Desire them to return home immediately from college: I was wrong not to
      have sent for them before; but—my God! I knew not that my sweet child's death was so
      near!"
Markham instantly complied with Mr. Gregory's request, and despatched the letter to the
      post.
Scarcely was this duty accomplished, when Count Alteroni's carriage drove up to the door. It
      was, however, empty, having been merely sent to fetch Isabella home.
The Signora took leave of Mr. Gregory, and bade a tender adieu to Richard, who handed her
      into the vehicle.
The carriage then drove away.
Richard passed the remainder of the day with Mr. Gregory, and returned home in the evening
      deeply affected at the misfortune which had overtaken an amiable family.
But Markham, on his arrival at his own house, was doomed to hear tidings of a most
      unpleasant nature.
"Mr. Tracy's footman has been here with very disagreeable news," said Ellen, the moment
      Markham entered the sitting-room. "Had I known whither you were gone, I should have directed
      him on to you."
"Mr. Tracy's footman!" exclaimed Richard. "Why—he was here last evening, with a letter from
      his master inviting me and Mr. Monroe to dine with him next Monday——"
"I am aware of it," interrupted Ellen. "And you declined the invitation."
"Yes—because I do not seek society," observed Richard. "I wrote a proper answer: what, then,
      did his servant require to-day?"
"It appears that a young person in whom you felt some interest——"
"Katherine Wilmot?" said Richard.
"That is the name," returned Ellen.
"What about her?" asked our hero.
"She has committed a crime——"
"A crime!"
"A crime of the blackest dye: she has poisoned Mr. Tracy's housekeeper."
"Ellen you are deceived—you are mistaken: it is impossible!" exclaimed Markham, "I never saw
      her but once, it is true: and still the impression she made upon me was most favourable. I did
      not mention any thing concerning her to either you or your father, because I sought to do an
      act of humanity in tearing her away from a wretched home; and I am not one who speaks of such
      a deed as that."
"I am not deceived—I am not mistaken, Richard," answered Ellen. "The footman came and
      narrated to me the particulars; and he said that his master was too unwell, through horror and
      excitement, to write to you upon the subject."
Ellen then related the few particulars yet known
      in connexion with the case, but the nature of which is already before the
      reader.
Richard remained silent for a long time, after Ellen had ceased to speak.
"If that innocent-looking girl be a murderess," he exclaimed at length, "I shall never put
      faith in human appearances again. But, until she be proved guilty, I will not desert her."
"Do you know," said Ellen, "that I do not like your Mr. Tracy at all! Not that I suppose him
      capable of falsely accusing any one of so heinous a crime as murder; but—I do not like
      him."
"A female caprice, Ellen," observed Richard. "The world in general adores him."
"Ah! those who stand upon the highest pinnacles often experience the most signal falls,"
      said Ellen.
"The breath of calumny has never tainted his fair fame," cried Richard.
"Alas! we have so many—many instances of profound ecclesiastical hypocrisy," persisted Miss
      Monroe.
"Ellen, you wrong an excellent man," said Markham, somewhat severely. "I will call upon him
      to-morrow morning, and learn from his own lips the particulars of this most mysterious
      deed."
