
CHAPTER XXX. THE 26TH OF NOVEMBER.
AS soon as the first gleam of morning penetrated through the curtains of the boudoir in the
      Villa near Upper Clapton, Walter leapt from her couch.
Conflicting feelings of joy and sorrow filled her bosom. The day—the happy day had at length
      arrived, when, according to the promise of the man on whom she looked as her benefactor, that
      grand event was to be accomplished, which would release her from the detestable disguise which
      she had now maintained for a period of nearly five years. The era had come when she was again
      to appear in the garb that suited alike her charms and her inclinations. This circumstance
      inspired her with the most heartfelt happiness.
But, on the other hand, she loved—tenderly loved one who had meditated against her an
      outrage of a most infamous description. Instead of hailing her approaching return to her
      female attire as the signal for the consummation of the fond hopes in which she had a few
      weeks before indulged,—hopes which pictured to her imagination delicious scenes of matrimonial
      bliss in the society of George Montague,—she was compelled to separate that dream of felicity
      from the fact of her emancipation from a thraldom repulsive to her delicacy and her
      tastes.
It was, therefore, with mingled feelings of happiness and melancholy, that she commenced her
      usual toilette—that masculine toilette which she was that day to wear for the last time.
"You ought to be in good spirits this morning, my dearest mistress," said Louisa, as she
      entered the room: "the period so anxiously looked forward to by you has at length
      arrived."
"And to-morrow—to-morrow," exclaimed Walter, her hazel eyes lighting up with a brilliant
      expression of joy, "you, my excellent Louisa, will assist me to adorn myself with that garb
      which I have neglected so of late!"
"I shall be happy both for your sake and mine," returned Louisa, who was indeed deeply
      attached to her mistress; "and when I see you recovering all your usual spirits, in a foreign
      land——"
"In Switzerland," hastily interrupted Walter; "in Switzerland—whither you will accompany me,
      my good and faithful Louisa; and to which delightful country we will proceed without delay!
      There indeed I shall be happy—and, I hope, contented!"
"Mr. Stephens is to be here at ten, is he not?" said Louisa, after a short pause.
"At ten precisely; and we then repair forthwith to the West End of the town, where certain
      preliminaries are requisite previously to receiving an immense sum of money which will be paid
      over to us at the Bank of England. This much Mr. Stephens told me yesterday. He had never
      communicated so much before."
"And this very afternoon it is your determination to leave London?" said Louisa.
"I am now resolved upon that step," replied the lady. "You alone shall accompany me: Mr.
      Stephens has promised to provide for the groom and the old cook. Therefore, while I am absent
      this morning about the momentous business—the real nature of which, by-the-bye, has yet to be
      explained to me—you will make all the preparations that may be necessary for our journey."
This conversation took place while Louisa hastily lighted the fire in the boudoir. In a few
      minutes the grate sent up a cheering and grateful heat; and the flames roared up the chimney.
      The lady, with an elegant dressing-gown folded loosely around her, and her delicate white feet
      thrust into red morocco slippers, threw herself into her luxurious easy-chair while Louisa
      hastened to serve up breakfast upon a little rose-wood table, covered with a napkin as white
      as snow. But the meal passed away almost untouched: the lady's heart was too full of hope and
      tender melancholy to allow her to experience the least appetite.
The mysterious toilette was completed: and Walter descended to the parlour, attired in
      masculine garments for the last time!
At ten o'clock precisely Mr. Stephens arrived. He was dressed with peculiar neatness and
      care; but his countenance was very pale, and his eyes vibrated in a restless manner in their
      sockets. He, however, assumed a bold composure; and thus the profound anxiety to which he was
      at that moment a prey, was unnoticed by Walter Sydney.
They seated themselves upon the sofa, and looked at each other for an instant without
      speaking. Those glances on either side expressed, in the ardent language of the eye, the
      words—"This is the day!"
"Walter," said Mr. Stephens, at length breaking the silence which had prevailed, "your
      conduct to-day must crown my designs with glorious success, or involve me in irretrievable
      ruin."
"You may rely with confidence upon my discretion and prudence," answered Walter. "Command me
      in all respects—consistently with honour."
"Honour!" exclaimed Stephens impatiently: "why do you for ever mention that unmeaning word?
       Honour is a conventional term, and is often used in a manner inconsistently with
      common sense and sound judgment. Honour is all very well when it is brought in
      contact with honour only; but when it has to oppose fraud and deceit, it must succumb
      if it trust solely to its own force. The most honest lawyer sets chichanery and quibble to
      work, to counteract the chichanery and quibble of his pettifogging opponent: the politician
      calls the machinery of intrigue into play, in order to fight his foeman with that foeman's own
      weapons:—if the French employ the aid of riflemen concealed in the thicket while the fair
      fight takes place upon the plain, the English must do the same."
"I certainly comprehend the necessity of frequently fighting a man with his own weapons,"
      said Walter; "but I do not see to what point in our affairs your reasoning tends."
"Suppose, Walter," resumed Stephens, speaking very earnestly, and emphatically accentuating
      every syllable,—"suppose that you had a friend who was entitled to certain rights which were
      withheld from him by means of some detestable quibble and low chicanery; suppose that by
      stating that your friend's name was George instead of William, for instance, you could put him
      in possession of what is justly and legitimately his due, but which, remember, is shamefully
      and most dishonestly kept away from him;—in this case, should you hesitate to declare that his
      name was George, and not William?"
      
"I think that I should be inclined to make the statement, to serve the cause of justice and
      to render a friend a signal service," answered Sydney, after a moment's hesitation.
"I could not have expected a different reply," exclaimed Stephens, a gleam of joy animating
      his pale countenance: "and you would do so with less remorse when you found that you were
      transferring property from one individual who could well spare what he was never justly
      entitled to, to a person who would starve without the restoration of his legitimate
      rights."
"Oh! certainly," said Walter; and this time the reply was given without an instant's
      meditation.
"Then," continued Stephens, more and more satisfied with the influence of his sophistry,
      "you would in such a case eschew those maudlin and mawkish ideas of honour, which
      arbitrarily exact that a falsehood must never be told for a good purpose, and that
      illegitimate means must never—never be adopted to work out virtuous and profitable ends?"
"My conduct in assuming this disguise," returned Sydney, with a smile and a blush, "has
      proved to you, I should imagine, that I should not hesitate to make use of a deceit
      comparatively innocent, with a view to oppose fraud and ensure permanent benefit to my friend
      and myself."
"Oh! Walter, you should have been a man in person as well as in mind!" cried Stephens,
      enthusiastically. "Now I have no fears of the result of my plans; and before sun-set you shall
      be worth ten thousand pounds!"
"Ten thousand pounds!" repeated Walter, mechanically. "How much can be done with such a sum
      as that!"
"You expressed a wish to leave this country, and visit the south of Europe," said Stephens:
      "you will have ample means to gratify all your tastes, and administer to all your
      inclinations. Only conceive a beautiful little cottage on the shore of the lake of Brienz—that
      pearl of the Oberland; the fair boat-women—the daughters of Switzerland—passing in their
      little shallops beneath your windows, and singing their national songs, full of charming
      tenderness, while the soft music mingles with the murmuring waves and the sounds of the
      oars!"
"Oh! what an enchanting picture!" cried Walter. "And have you ever seen such as this?"
"I have; and I feel convinced that the existence I recommend is the one which will best suit
      you. To-day," continued Stephens, watching his companion's countenance with a little anxiety,
      "shall you recover your rights;—to-day shall you oppose the innocent deceit to the enormous
      fraud;—to-day shall you do for yourself what you ere now stated you would do for a
       friend!"
"If you have drawn my own case in putting those queries to me,—if immense advantages will be
      derived from my behaviour in this affair,—if I am merely wresting from the hands of base
      cupidity that which is justly mine own,—and if the enemy whom we oppose can well afford to
      restore to me the means of subsistence, and thus render me independent for the remainder of my
      days,—oh! how can I hesitate for a moment? how can I refuse to entrust myself wholely and
      solely—blindly and confidently—in your hands,—you who have done so much for me, and who have
      taught me to respect, honour, and obey you?"
The lady uttered these words with a species of electric enthusiasm, while her eyes
      brightened, and her cheeks were suffused with the purple glow of animation. The specious
      arguments and the glowing description of Swiss life, brought forward by Stephens with
      admirable dexterity, awakened all the ardour of an impassioned soul; and the bosom of that
      beauteous creature palpitated with hope, with joy, and with excitement, as she gazed upon the
      future through the mirror presented by Stephens to her view.
She was now exactly in a frame of mind suited to his purpose. Without allowing her ardour
      time to abate, and while she was animated by the delicious aspirations which he had conjured
      up, as it were by an enchanter's spell, in her breast, he took her by he hand, and led her up
      to the mantelpiece; then, pointing to the portrait of her brother, he said in a low, hurried,
      and yet solemn tone,—"The fortune which must be wrested from the grasp of cupidity this day,
      would have belonged to your brother; and no power on earth could have deprived him of it; for,
      had he lived, he would yesterday have attained his twenty-first year! His death is unknown to
      him who holds this money: but, by a miserable legal technicality, you—you, his
      sister, and in justice his heiress—you would be deprived of that fortune by
      the man who now grasps it, and who would chuckle at any plan which made it his own. Now do you
      comprehend me? You have but to say that your name is Walter, instead of
       Eliza,—and you will recover your just rights, defeat the wretched chicanery of the
      law, and enter into possession of those resources which belong to you in the eyes of God, but
      which, if you shrink, will be for ever alienated from you and yours!"
"In one word," said the lady, "I am to personate my brother?"
"Precisely! Do you hesitate?" demanded Stephens: "will you allow the property of your family
      to pass into the hands of a stranger, who possesses not the remotest right to its enjoyment?
      or will you by one bold effort—an effort that cannot fail—direct that fortune into its just,
      its proper, and its legitimate channel?"
"The temptation is great," said the lady, earnestly contemplating the portrait of her
      brother; "but the danger—the danger?" she added hastily: "what would be the result if we were
      detected?"
"Nothing—nothing, save the total loss of the entire fortune," answered Stephens: "and,
      therefore, you perceive, that want of nerve—hesitation—awkwardness—blushes—confusion on your
      part, would ruin all. Be firm—be collected—be calm and resolute—and our plans must be
      crowned with unequivocal success!"
"Oh! if I proceed farther, I will pass through the ordeal with ease and safety," exclaimed
      the lady: "I can nerve my mind to encounter any danger, when it is well defined, and I know
      its extent;—it is only when it is vague, uncertain, and indistinct, that I shrink from meeting
      it. Yes," she continued, after a few moments' reflection, "I will follow your counsel in all
      respects: you do know—you must know how much we risk, and how far we
      compromise ourselves;—and when I see you ready to urge on this matter to the end, how can I
      fear to accompany you? Yes," she added, after another pause, much longer than the preceding
      one,—"I will be Walter Sydney throughout this day at least!"
"My dear friend," ejaculated Stephens, in a transport of joy, "you act in a manner worthy of
      your noble-hearted brother, I see—he smiles upon you even in his picture-frame."
"I will retrieve from the hands of strangers that
       which is thine, dear brother," said the lady, addressing herself to the portrait
      as if it could hear the words which she pronounced with a melancholy solemnity: then, turning
      towards Stephens, she exclaimed, "But you must acquaint me with the ceremonies we have to
      fulfil, and the duties which I shall have to perform, in order to accomplish the desired
      aim."
"I need not instruct you now," returned Stephens: "the forms are nothing, and explain
      themselves, as it were;—a few papers to sign at a certain person's house in Grosvenor
      Square—then a ride to the Bank—and all is over. But we must now take our departure: the
      hackney-coach that brought us hither is waiting to convey us to the West End."
Stephens and Sydney issued from the house together. The former gave certain directions to
      the coachman; and they then commenced their memorable journey.
Mr. Stephens did not allow his companion a single moment for calm and dispassionate
      reflection. He continued to expatiate upon the happiness which was within her reach amidst the
      rural scenery of Switzerland: he conjured up before her mental vision the most ravishing and
      delightful pictures of domestic tranquillity, so congenial to her tastes:—he fed her
      imagination with all those fairy visions which were calculated to attract and dazzle a mind
      tinged with a romantic shade;—and then he skilfully introduced those specious arguments which
      blinded her as to the real nature of the deceit in which she was so prominent an agent. He
      thus sustained an artificial state of excitement, bordering upon enthusiasm, in the bosom of
      that confiding and generous-hearted woman; and not for one moment during that long ride, did
      she repent of the step she had taken. In fact, such an influence did the reasoning of Stephens
      exercise upon her mind, that she ceased to think of the possibility of either incurring danger
      or doing wrong;—she knew not how serious might be the consequences of detection;—she believed
      that she was combating the chicanery of the law with a similar weapon, the use of which was
      justified and rendered legitimate by the peculiar circumstances of the case.
The hackney-coach proceeded by way of the New Road, and stopped to take up Mr. Mac Chizzle
      at his residence near Saint Pancras New Church. The vehicle then proceeded to Grosvenor
      Square, where it stopped opposite one of those princely dwellings whose dingy exteriors afford
      to the eye of the foreigner accustomed to the gorgeous edifices of continental cities, but
      little promise of the wealth, grandeur, and magnificence which exist within.
The door was opened by a footman in splendid livery.
This domestic immediately recognised Mr. Stephens, and said, "His lordship expects you,
      sir."
The three visitors alighted from the coach: and as Stephens walked with the disguised lady
      into the hall of the mansion, he said in a hurried whisper, "Courage, my dear Walter: you are
      now about to appear in the presence of the Earl of Warrington!"
The servant led the way up a wide staircase, and conducted the visitors into a library
      fitted up in the most luxurious and costly manner. Cases filled with magnificently bound
      volumes, statues of exquisite sculpture, and pictures of eminent artists, denoted the taste of
      the aristocratic possessor of that lordly mansion.
Two individuals were seated at a table covered with papers and legal documents. One was a
      fine, tall, middle-aged man, with a noble and handsome countenance, polished manners, and most
      kind and affable address:—the other was an old gentleman with a bald head, sharp features, and
      constant smile upon his lips when he addressed the personage just described.
The first was the Earl of Warrington; the other was his solicitor, Mr. Pakenham.
The Earl rose and greeted Mr. Stephens cordially; then, turning towards Walter, he shook her
      kindly by the hand, and said, "I need not ask if you are the young gentleman to whom I am to
      be introduced as Mr. Walter Sydney."
"This is my ward, your lordship," said Mr. Stephens, smiling. "I think it is scarcely
      necessary to call your lordship's attention to the striking resemblance which he bears to his
      lamented father."
"Yes—it would be impossible to mistake him," said his lordship hastily, while a cloud passed
      over his brow. "But sit down—pray sit down; and we will proceed to business. I presume that
      gentleman is your professional adviser?"
"Mr. Mac Chizzle," observed Stephens, introducing the lawyer. "Mr. Pakenham, I have had the
      pleasure of seeing you before," he added, addressing the nobleman's attorney with a placid
      smile.
Mr. Pakenham acknowledged the salutation with a bow; and his eye wandered for a moment, with
      some surprise, towards Mac Chizzle,—as much as to say, "I am astonished to see a person like
      you employed in so important an affair."
When every one was seated, the Earl of Warrington referred to some papers placed before him,
      and said, "The object of this meeting is known to every one present. The duty that devolves
      upon me is to transfer to Walter Sydney, the only son and heir of the late Stanford Sydney,
      upon being satisfied with respect to the identity of the claimant, the sum of forty-one
      thousand pounds now invested in certain stocks in the Bank of England."
"It is needless, I presume," said Mr. Pakenham, "to enter into the particulars of this
      inheritance. We on our side admit our liability to pay the amount specified by his lordship,
      to the proper claimant."
"Quite satisfactory," observed Mac Chizzle, to whom these observations were addressed.
"The proofs of identity are, then, all that your lordship now requires?" said Mr.
      Stephens.
"And I only require them as a mere matter of necessary form and ceremony, Mr. Stephens,"
      returned the Earl of Warrington. "I am well aware of your acquaintance with the late Mrs.
      Sydney, and of the fact that the deceased lady left her children to your care."
"My lord, here are the various certificates," said Stephens, placing a small packet of
      papers before the Earl. "In the first instance you have the marriage certificate of Stanford
      Sydney and Letitia Hardinge, the natural daughter of the late Earl of Warrington, your
      lordship's uncle."
"Well—well," exclaimed the nobleman, somewhat impatiently, as if he were anxious to get rid
      as soon as possible of a business by no means pleasant to him. "That certificate is beyond all
      dispute."
"Here," continued Stephens, "is the certificate of the birth of Eliza Sydney, born October
      12th, 1810; and here is the certificate of her death, which took place on the 14th of
      February, 1831."
"This certificate is not necessary," observed Mr.
       Pakenham; "as in no case, under the provisions of these deeds," he added,
      pointing to a pile of documents before him, "could that young lady have instituted even a
      shadow of a claim to this money."

"We had better possess one deed too many, than one too few," said Mr. Stephens, with another
      bland smile.
"Oh! certainly," exclaimed the Earl. "And this precaution shows the exact condition of the
      late Mr. Stanford Sydney's family. The daughter is no more: the son lives, and is
      present."
"Here, then, my lord," continued Stephens, "is the certificate of the birth of Walter
      Sydney, on the 25th day of November, 1814."
The nobleman examined this document with far more attention than he had devoted to either of
      the former. He then handed it to Mr. Pakenham, who also scrutinized it narrowly.
"It is quite correct, my Lord," said this gentleman. "We now require two witnesses as to
      identity."
"I presume his Lordship will receive me as one," observed Mr. Stephens, "considering my
      intimate acquaintance with all—"
"Oh certainly—certainly," interrupted the Earl hastily.
"And Mr. Mac Chizzle will tender his evidence in the other instance," said Stephens.
      
"I have known this young gentleman for the last six years," exclaimed Mac Chizzle, pointing
      towards Walter, "and I knew his mother also."
"Is your Lordship satisfied?" enquired Mr. Pakenham, after a short pause.
"Perfectly," answered the nobleman, without hesitation. "I am, however, in your hands."
"Oh! as for me," returned Mr. Pakenham, "I have no objection to offer. Your Lordship is
      acquainted with Mr. Stephens."
"Yes—yes," again interrupted the Earl; "I have known Mr. Stephens for some years—and I know
      him to be a man of honour."
"Then there is nothing more to be said," observed Pakenham.
"No—nothing," added Mac Chizzle; "but to complete the business."
"I will now read the release," said Mr. Pakenham.
The solicitor settled himself in a comfortable manner in his chair, and taking up a deed
      consisting of several folios, proceeded to make his hearers as much acquainted with its
      contents as the multifarious redundancies of law terms would allow.
The disguised lady had now time for reflection. She had been more or less prepared for the
      assertion of Mr. Stephens that Eliza Sydney was dead, and that Walter was living:—but the
      bare-faced falsehood uttered by Mac Chizzle (who, so far from having been acquainted with her
      for years, had never seen her until that morning), shocked and astounded her. She had also
      just learnt for the first time, that her late mother was the natural daughter of an Earl; and
      she perceived that she herself could claim a distant kinship with the nobleman in whose
      presence she then was. This circumstance inspired her with feelings in his favour, which were
      enhanced by the urbanity of his manners, and the readiness with which he admitted all the
      proofs submitted to him by Mr. Stephens. She had expected, from the arguments used by this
      gentleman to convince her that she should not hesitate to fight the law with its own weapons,
      etc., that every obstacle would be thrown in the way of her claims by him on whom they were
      to be made;—and she was astonished when she compared all the specious representations of
      Stephens with the readiness, good-will, and alacrity manifested by the Earl in yielding up an
      enormous sum of money. Now also, for the first time, it struck her as remarkable that Stephens
      had promised her ten thousand pounds only—a fourth part of that amount to which, according to
      his own showing, she alone was justly entitled.
All these reflections passed rapidly through her mind while the lawyer was reading the deed
      of release, not one word of which was attended to by her. She suddenly felt as if her eyes
      were opened to a fearful conspiracy, in which she was playing a conspicuous part:—she
      trembled, as if she were standing upon the edge of a precipice;—and yet she knew not how to
      act. She was bewildered: but the uppermost idea in her mind was that she had gone too far to
      retreat.
This was the impression that ruled her thoughts at the precise moment when Mr. Pakenham
      brought the reading of the long wearisome document to a termination. The buzzing, droning
      noise which had filled her ears for upwards of twenty minutes, suddenly ceased;—and she heard
      a voice say in a kind tone. "Will you now please to sign this?"
She started—but immediately recovered her presence of mind, and, taking the pen from the
      lawyer's hand, applied the signature of Walter Sydney to the document. It was next
      witnessed by Pakenham, Stephens, and Mac Chizzle, and handed to the Earl.
The nobleman then took several papers—familiar to all those who have ever possessed Bank
      Stock—from an iron safe in one corner of the library, and handing them to the disguised lady,
      said, "Mr. Walter Sydney, I have much pleasure in putting you in possession of this fortune;
      and I can assure you that my best—my very best wishes for your health and prosperity,
      accompany the transfer."
Walter received the documents mechanically as it were, and murmured a few words of thanks
      and gratitude.
"Perhaps, Mr. Stephens," said the Earl, when the ceremony was thus completed, "you and your
      friends will do me the honour to accept of a slight refreshment in an adjoining room. You will
      excuse my absence; but I have a few matters of pressing importance to transact with my
      solicitor, and which cannot possibly be postponed. You must accept this as my apology; and
      believe in my regret that I cannot keep you company."
The Earl shook hands with both Stephens and Sydney, and bowed to Mac Chizzle. These three
      individuals then withdrew.
An elegant collation was prepared for them in another apartment; but Mac Chizzle was the
      only one who seemed inclined to pay his respects to it. Walter, however, gladly swallowed a
      glass of wine; for she felt exhausted with the excitement she had passed through. Stephens was
      too highly elated either to eat or drink, and too anxious to complete the business in the
      City, to allow Mac Chizzle to waste much time over the delicacies of which the collation
      consisted.
They were, therefore, all three soon on their way to the Bank of England.
"Well, I think we managed the job very correctly," said Mac Chizzle.
"Everything passed off precisely as I had anticipated," observed Mr. Stephens. "But you,
      Walter—you are serious."
"I do not look upon the transaction in the same light as I did a couple of hours since,"
      answered she coldly.
"Ah! my dear friend," cried Stephens, "you are deceived by the apparent urbanity of that
      nobleman, and the mildness of his solicitor. They assumed that appearance because there was no
      help for them;—they had no good to gain by throwing obstacles in our way."
"But the certificate of my death was a forgery," said Walter, bitterly.
"A necessary alteration of names—without which the accomplishment of our plan would have
      been impossible," answered Stephens. "But let me ease your mind in one respect, my dear
      Walter. That nobleman is a relation of yours—and yet until this day his name has never been
      mentioned to you. And why? Because he visits upon you the hatred which he entertained for your
      deceased mother! Did you not observe that he interrupted me when I spoke of her? did you not
      notice that he touched with extreme aversion upon the topics connected with your revered
      parents?"
"I did!—I did!" exclaimed Walter.
"He hates you!—he detests you!" continued Stephens, emphatically; "and he will not
      countenance any claim which you might advance towards kinship with him. His duties as a
      nobleman and a gentleman dictated the outward civility with which he treated you; but his
      heart gave no echo
       to the words of congratulation which issued from his lips."
"I believe you—I know that you are speaking the truth," cried Walter. "Pardon me, if for a
      moment I ceased to look upon you as a friend."
Stephens pressed the hand of the too-confiding being, over whom his dangerous eloquence and
      subtle reasoning possessed an influence so omnipotent for purposes of evil; and he then again
      launched out into glowing descriptions of the sources and means of happiness within her reach.
      This reasoning, aided by the hope that in a few hours she should be enabled to quit London for
      ever, restored the lady's disposition to that same easy and pliant state, to which Stephens
      had devoted nearly five years to model it.
At length the hackney-coach stopped at the Bank of England. Stephens hurried to the rotunda
      to obtain the assistance of a stock-broker, for the purpose of transferring and selling out
      the immense sum which now appeared within his reach, and to obtain which he had devoted his
      time, his money, and his tranquillity!
Walter and the lawyer awaited his return beneath the porch of the entrance. After the lapse
      of a few moments he appeared, accompanied by a broker of his acquaintance. They then all four
      proceeded together to the office where the business was to be transacted.
The broker explained the affair to a clerk, and the clerk, after consulting a huge volume,
      received the documents which Lord Warrington had handed over to Sydney. Having compared those
      papers with the entries in the book, the clerk made a sign to three men who were lounging at
      the upper end of the office, near the stove, and who had the appearance of messengers, or
      porters.
These men moved hastily forward, and advanced up to Stephens, Mac Chizzle, and Walter
      Sydney.
A deadly pallor spread over the countenance of Stephens; Mac Chizzle appeared alarmed; but
      Walter remained still unsuspicious of danger.
"Those are the persons," said the clerk, significantly, as he pointed to the three
      conspirators, to whom he observed, almost in the same breath, "Your plans are detected—these
      men are officers!"
"Officers!" ejaculated Sydney; "What does this mean?"
"We are here to apprehend you," answered the foremost of those functionaries. "Resistance
      will be vain: there are others outside in readiness."
"Merciful heavens!" cried Walter, joining her hands in agony: "Oh! Stephens, to what have
      you brought me!"
That unhappy man hung down his head, and made no reply. He felt crushed by this unexpected
      blow, which came upon him at the very instant when the object of his dearest hopes seemed
      within his reach.
As for Mac Chizzle, he resigned himself with dogged submission to his fate.
The officers and their prisoners now proceeded to the Mansion House, accompanied by the
      clerk and the stock-broker.
Sydney—a prey to the most dreadful apprehensions and painful remorse—was compelled to lean
      for support upon the arm of the officer who had charge of her.
Sir Peter Laurie sat for the Lord Mayor.
The worthy knight is the terror of all swindlers, mock companies, and bubble firms existing
      in the City of London: wherever there is fraud, within the jurisdiction of the civic
      authorities, he is certain to root it out. He has conferred more benefit upon the commercial
      world, and has devoted himself more energetically to protect the interests of the trading
      community, than any other alderman. Unlike the generality of the city magistrates, who are
      coarse, vulgar, ignorant, and narrow-minded men, Sir Peter Laurie is possessed of a high range
      of intellect, and is an enlightened, an agreeable, and a polished gentleman.
It was about three o'clock in the afternoon, when Stephens, Mac Chizzle, and Sydney were
      placed in the dock of the Mansion House Police-office.
The solicitor of the Bank of England attended for the prosecution.
"With what do you charge these prisoners?" demanded the magistrate.
"With conspiring to obtain the sum of forty-one thousand pounds from the hands of the Earl
      of Warrington, and the Governor and Company of the Bank of England."
"Is his lordship present?"
"Your worship, he is, at this moment, unaware of the diabolical fraud that has been
      contemplated, and in part perpetrated upon him. He has given up to the prisoners certain
      documents, which constituted their authority for transferring and selling out the sum I have
      mentioned. By certain means the intentions of the prisoners were discovered some time ago; and
      secret information was given to the Bank directors upon the subject. The directors were not,
      however, permitted to communicate with the Earl of Warrington, under penalty of receiving no
      farther information from the quarter whence the original warning emanated. Under all
      circumstances, I shall content myself with stating sufficient to support the charge to-day, so
      that your worship may remand the prisoners until a period when the attendance of the Earl of
      Warrington can be procured."
"State your case."
"I charge this prisoner," said the solicitor, pointing towards Sydney, "with endeavouring to
      obtain the sum of forty-one thousand pounds from the Governor and Company of the Bank of
      England, under pretence of being one Walter Sydney, a man—whereas the prisoner's name is Eliza
      Sydney, and she is a woman!"
An immense sensation prevailed in the justice-room at this announcement.
The disguised lady moaned audibly, and leant against the bar of the dock for support.
"And I charge the other prisoners, Robert Stephens and Hugh Mac Chizzle, with aiding and
      abetting in the crime," added the solicitor, after a pause.
The unhappy lady, yielding to emotions and feelings which she was now no longer able to
      control, threw herself upon her knees, clasped her hands together in an agony of grief, and
      exclaimed, "It is true! I am not what I seem! I have been guilty of a fearful deception—a
      horrible cheat: but it was he—he," she cried, pointing to Stephens, "who made me do it!"
There was an universal sentiment of deep sympathy with the female prisoner, throughout the
      court; and the worthy alderman himself was affected.
"You must remember," he said, in a kind tone, "that anything which you admit here, may be
      used against you elsewhere."
"I am anxious to confess all that I have done, and all that I know," cried the lady; "and in
      so doing, I shall in some measure atone for the enormity of my guilt, which I now view in its
      true light!"
      
"Under these circumstances," said the alderman, "let the case stand over until
      to-morrow."
The prisoners were then removed.
In another hour they were inmates of the Giltspur-street Compter.
And how terminated the 26th of November for Walter Sydney? Instead of being in possession of
      an ample fortune, and about to visit a clime where she hoped to enjoy all the blessings of
      domestic tranquillity, and the charms of rural bliss, she found herself a prisoner, charged
      with a crime of deep dye!
Oh! what a sudden reverse was this!
Still, upon that eventful day, there was one hope of hers fulfilled. She threw aside her
      masculine attire, and assumed the garb adapted to her sex. A messenger was despatched to the
      villa, to communicate the sad tidings of the arrest to Louisa, and procure suitable clothing
      for her wretched mistress.
But, alas! that garb in which she had so ardently desired to appear again, was now doomed to
      be worn, for the first time, in a prison:—the new epoch of her life, which was to be marked by
      a return to feminine habits, was commenced in a dungeon!
Still that new period had begun; and from henceforth we shall know her only by her real name
      of Eliza Sydney.
