
CHAPTER CCXX.   THE EFFECT OF THE ORIENTAL TOBACCO.—THE OLD HAG'S PAPERS.
Scarcely had Lady Ravensworth risen from the table, whereon stood the untasted morning meal,
      when the housekeeper of the town-mansion entered the room, and informed her mistress that
      Quentin had just arrived on horseback from the Hall, and requested an immediate audience of
      her ladyship.
Adeline was not unprepared for some such circumstance as this; she however affected to
      believe that the sudden appearance of Quentin in town bore reference to the illness of her
      husband; and when the valet entered the apartment, she hastened to meet him, exclaiming, with
      well-assumed anxiety, "Is any thing the matter with your lord? Speak, Quentin—speak!"
"His lordship is certainly worse this morning, my lady: but——"
"But not dangerously so, Quentin?" cried Adeline, as if tortured by acute suspense and
      apprehension.
"My lord is far—very far from well," returned Quentin: "but that is not precisely the object
      of my coming to town so early. The truth is, my lady, that Lydia Hutchinson has decamped."
"Lydia gone!" exclaimed Lady Ravensworth.
"Yes—my lady. But permit me to ask whether your ladyship brought your jewel-casket to town
      with you yesterday morning."
"Certainly not, Quentin: I merely came for a few hours—or at least until this morning——"
"Then our worst fears are confirmed!" ejaculated the valet. "Lydia has decamped with your
      ladyship's jewel-case."
"The ungrateful wretch!" cried Adeline, feigning deep indignation. "Was she not well treated
      at the Hall? was I a severe mistress to her?"
"She was not a favorite with the other dependants of your ladyship's household," observed
      Quentin.
"And when did this happen? how did you discover her flight?" demanded Lady Ravensworth.
"She was not missed until this morning, my lady; although there is every reason to believe
      that she must have taken her departure last evening. She had agreed with the housekeeper to
      take the first half of the night in watching by the side of Lord Dunstable's bed; but as she
      did not make her appearance at the proper time, it was concluded she had gone to rest, and
      another female domestic took her place. This morning, the gardener found the wicket of the
      southern fence open, and the key in the lock: this circumstance excited his suspicions; and,
      on farther investigation, he also found the key in the lock of the private door at the same
      end of the building. He gave an alarm: a search was instituted; and, after a time, your
      ladyship's chamber was visited, when the bureau was discovered to be open and the casket of
      jewels was missed. The servants were mustered; but Lydia had disappeared; and it was
      subsequently ascertained that her bed had not been slept in all night. Moreover, the
      candlestick which Lydia was in the habit of using when she waited upon your ladyship, was
      found lying in the middle of your ladyship's boudoir, as if it had been hastily flung
      down—probably in a moment of alarm."
"And has nothing been missed save my jewels?" demanded Adeline, whose plan had succeeded in
      all its details precisely as she had foreseen.
"Nothing—at least so far as we had been enabled to ascertain before I left for town, my
      lady," answered Quentin. "And what is more remarkable still, is that Lydia took none of her
      own things with her. It seems as if she had gone to your ladyship's boudoir, discovered the
      key of the bureau, and finding the jewel-casket there, was suddenly impelled by the idea of
      the theft; so that she decamped that very moment—for it does not appear that she even took a
      shawl, or a cloak, or a bonnet with her; although, of course, as she had been so short a time
      in your ladyship's service, the other female servants scarcely knew what clothes she
      possessed."
"But the keys of the private door and the wicket?" exclaimed Adeline: "how came she with
      them?"
"They might have been in your ladyship's room—by some accident," answered Quentin, with a
      little embarrassment of manner.
"Yes—I believe they were," said Adeline, blushing deeply—for she guessed the cause of the
      valet's hesitation: he was evidently impressed with the idea that his mistress had possessed
      herself of those keys to favor her supposed amour with Colonel Cholmondeley.
But she willingly incurred even this suspicion, because, by apparently accounting for the
      keys being in her room, it made the evidence stronger against Lydia Hutchinson.
"Does his lordship yet know of this event?" inquired Adeline, after a short pause.
"I communicated the fact to his lordship," answered Quentin; "but he treated it with so much
      indifference, that I did not enter into any details. I shall now, with your ladyship's
      permission, repair to Bow Street, and lodge information of the robbery."
Lady Ravensworth suffered the valet to reach the door ere she called him back; for nothing
      was more opposed to her plan than the idea of giving any notoriety to the transaction,
      inasmuch as such a course might afford Anthony Tidkins a clue to the entire mystery of the
      transaction in which he had played so important a part.
Accordingly, as if impelled by a second thought, she said, "Stay, Quentin: this step must
      not be taken."
"What, my lady?" cried the valet, in astonishment.
"I must show leniency in this respect," was the answer.
"Leniency, my lady, towards one who has robbed your ladyship of jewels worth, as I
      understand, at least two thousand pounds!" ejaculated Quentin, his surprise increasing.
"Yes—such is my desire, upon second thoughts," she continued. "My dear cousin Lady Bounce is
      deeply interested—I scarcely know exactly why—in this young woman; and I feel
      convinced that she would rather induce her husband Sir Cherry to repay me for the loss of my
      jewels, than see Lydia Hutchinson, bad though she must be, involved in so serious a dilemma. I
      shall therefore feel obliged to you, Quentin, to keep the affair as secret as possible—at
      least until I have communicated with Lady Bounce."
"Your ladyship's commands shall be obeyed," said the obsequious valet, with a bow. "In this
      case, I may return immediately to the Park."
"Let the carriage be got ready, and I will myself hasten thither," answered Adeline; "as you
      say that his lordship is somewhat worse."
Quentin retired, well persuaded in his own mind that the leniency of his mistress was caused
      by her fears lest the presumed fact of the keys of the private door and the wicket having been
      kept in her room might lead to inquiries calculated to bring to light her supposed amour with
      Colonel Cholmondeley.
Thus was it that one of the engines of Lydia's vengeance,—namely, the trick by which she had
      induced the Colonel to enter her mistress's boudoir, and the fact of making the other servants
      privy to that visit,—now materially served the purposes of Adeline.
In a quarter of an hour the carriage was ready; and Lady Ravensworth was soon on her way
      back to the Hall.
On her arrival, she found that the circumstance of Lydia Hutchinson's disappearance had
      yielded in interest to one of a more grave and absorbing character.
Lord Ravensworth was dying!
She hastened to his apartment, and found him lying in bed—in a state of complete
      insensibility—and attended by Mr. Graham, who had sent off an express to town (by a shorter
      way than the main road by which Adeline had returned) for eminent medical assistance.
It appeared that about an hour previously the nobleman's bell had rung violently; and when
      the servants hurried to the room, they found their master in a fit. He had probably felt
      himself suddenly attacked with an alarming symptom, and staggered from his chair to the
      bell-rope, and had then fallen upon the floor. Mr. Graham had been immediately summoned; and
      by his orders Lord Ravensworth was conveyed to bed.
But he had continued insensible—with his eyes closed; and the only sign of life was given by
      his faint, low breathing.
It is scarcely necessary to state that Mr. Graham exerted all his skill on behalf of the
      dying man.
Adeline affected the deepest sorrow at the condition in which she found her husband;—but the
      only grief which she really experienced was caused by the prospect of being shortly compelled
      to resign all control over the broad lands of Ravensworth, in case her as yet unborn child
      should prove a daughter.
In the course of the day two eminent physicians arrived from London; but the condition of
      Lord Ravensworth was hopeless: nothing could arouse him from the torpor in which he was
      plunged; and in the evening he breathed his last.
Thus was it that this nobleman had at length accomplished—involuntarily accomplished—his
      self-destruction by the use of the oriental tobacco sent to him by his brother Gilbert
      Vernon!
On the first day of February there had been a marriage at Ravensworth Hall: on the sixteenth
      there was a funeral.
How closely does mourning follow upon the heels of rejoicing, in this world!
On the same night when Lord Ravensworth breathed his last, the following scene occurred in
      London.
It was about eleven o'clock when the Resurrection Man and Mr. Banks entered the cell in
      which the old woman was confined.
"Is your labour done?" demanded Tidkins, in a surly tone, as if he expected a farther delay
      in the business.
"God be thanked!" returned the foul hag; "it is complete."
And she pointed to several sheets of paper, written upon in a hand which showed that the
      harridan had been no contemptible pen-woman in her younger days.
The Resurrection Man greedily seized the manuscript, and began to scrutinise each
      consecutive page. As he read, his countenance displayed grim signs of satisfaction; and when,
      at the expiration of a quarter of an hour, he consigned the papers to his pocket, he said,
      "Well, by what I have seen this really looks like business."
"The old wessel has done her dooty at last," observed Mr. Banks, shaking his head solemnly;
      "and what a blessed consolation it must be for her to know that she has made a friend of you
      that's able to protect her from her enemies while she lives, and of me that'll bury her on the
      newest and most economic principles when she's nothing more than a defunct old carkiss."
"Consolation, indeed!" cried Tidkins: then, counting down ten sovereigns upon the table, he
      said, "Here's what I promised you, old woman, for the fulfilment of the first condition. Now
      me and Banks will take you home again; and when you give me up the written proofs you spoke
      of, you shall have t'other ten quids."
"Alack! I've earned these shining pieces well," muttered the hag, as she wrapped the
      sovereigns in a morsel of paper, and concealed them under her clothes.
The Resurrection Man now proceeded to blindfold her carefully; and the operation reminded
      him of the process to which he had submitted on the preceding night, at the hands of his
      veiled patroness. He next helped the old woman to put on her cloak, the hood of which he threw
      over her bonnet so that a portion of it concealed her face; and Banks then led her away from
      the subterranean, while Tidkins remained behind them for a few moments to secure the
      doors.
The party now proceeded, by the most unfrequented streets, through Globe Town into Bethnal
      Green; but it was not until they reached Shoreditch, that the Resurrection Man removed the
      bandage from the old hag's eyes.
Then she gazed rapidly around her, to ascertain where she was.
"Ah! you'll never guess where you've been locked up for the last ten or twelve days," said
      the Resurrection Man, with a low chuckle.

"Never—as sure as she's a sinful old creetur'!" remarked Banks.
The worthy trio then pursued their way to Golden Lane.
On their arrival at the court, the hag uttered an exclamation of delight when she beheld the
      filthy place of her abode once more: but her joy was suddenly changed into sadness as a
      thought struck her; and she exclaimed, "I wonder what has become of the poor dear children
      that are dependant on me?"
She alluded to the juvenile prostitutes whom she had tutored in the ways of vice.
Heaving a deep sigh at the reflection, she took a key from her pocket, and opened the door
      of her house.
A little delay occurred in obtaining a light; but at length she found a candle and matches
      in a cupboard at the end of the passage.
Mr. Banks now officiously opened the door of the old woman's parlour; but this act was
      followed by a sweeping, rustling noise—and the undertaker started back, uttering a yell of
      agony.
The hag screamed too, and nearly dropped the light; for her large black cat had flown at
      Banks as he entered the room.
The fact was that the poor animal had been left in that apartment, when the old woman first
      set out with the Resurrection Man and the undertaker for Hounslow; and it had gone mad through
      starvation.
Tidkins rushed forward the moment his friend gave vent to that scream of anguish, and caught
      the cat by the neck and hind legs with his powerful fingers, as it clung, furious with rage,
      to the breast of the undertaker, whose dingy shirt frill and front its claws tore to rags.
"Don't strangle it—don't strangle it!" cried the hag, with unfeigned anxiety—for the only
      thing she loved in the world was her huge black cat.
"Stand back, old witch!" exclaimed Tidkins: "this beast is capable of tearing you to
      pieces."
And in spite of the violent pressure he maintained with his fingers upon its throat, the
      animal struggled fearfully.
"They say the cussed wessel has nine lives," observed Mr. Banks, dolefully, as he beheld the
      tattered state of his linen and smarted with the pain of the cat's scratches upon his
      chest.
"Don't kill it, I say!" again screamed the hag: "it will be good with me—it will be good
      with me."
"Too late to intercede," said the Resurrection Man, coolly, as he literally wrung the cat's
      neck: then he tossed the carcass from him upon the stairs.
"Poor thing!" murmured the old woman: "poor thing! I will bury it decently in the yard
      to-morrow morning."
And she actually wiped away a tear,—she who felt no pity, no compunction, no sympathy in
      favour of a human soul!
"She'll bury it, will she?" muttered Banks, endeavouring to smooth his linen: "on economic
      principles, I suppose."
The trio then entered the parlour: but before she could compose herself to attend to
      business, the old hag was compelled to have recourse to her gin; and fortunately there was
      some in her bottle. Her two companions refreshed themselves in a similar manner; and Tidkins
      then said, "Now for the proofs of all you've said in your history."
"Not all—not all: I never said all," cried the hag; "only of a part. And so, if you will lay
      the other ten sovereigns on the table, you shall have the papers."
The old woman spoke more confidently now; for she felt herself to be less in the power of
      her two companions than she so lately was.
The Resurrection Man understood her, and smiled grimly, as he counted the money before
      her.
She then took a pair of scissors, cut a small hole in the mattress of her bed, and drew
      forth a pocket-book, which she handed to Tidkins.
It was tied round with a piece of riband—once pink, now faded to a dingy white; and its
      contents were several letters.
The Resurrection Man glanced over their superscriptions, muttering to himself, "Well, you
      have not deceived me: I have brought you to reason—I thought I should. Ha! what have we here?
       'To Mr. Markham, Markham Place, Lower Holloway.'—And here is another to him—and
      another.—But this next is different. 'To the Marquis of Holmesford, Holmesford
      House.'—Slap-up fellow, that—a regular old rake: keeps a harem, they say.—And here is
      another to him.—Then we have one—two—three, all directed alike—to 'Mrs. Wilmot,' and
      no address: conveyed by hand, I suppose. And that's all."
With a complacent smile—as complacent as a smile on such a countenance could be—the
      Resurrection Man secured the pocket-book with its contents about his person.
He and Banks then took their leave of the old woman.
