
CHAPTER CCXXV.   THE OLD HAG'S HISTORY.
"I must carry my recollection back between seventeen and eighteen years. Not that it
      requires any effort to call to mind the leading facts in this sad history; no—no—they are too
      well impressed upon my memory;—but there are certain details connected with my own position at
      the time which will need the fullest explanation, in order to show how one like me could have
      become the friend of Harriet Wilmot.
"At that epoch I kept a boarding-house—a fashionable boarding-house, in a fashionable street
      at the West End. I was not then ugly and withered as I am now: I had the remains of great
      beauty—for I was very beautiful when young! I was also of pleasant and agreeable
      manners, and knew well how to do the honours of a table. You will not therefore be surprised
      when I tell you that I was a great favourite with the persons who lodged at my establishment,
      and with the still more numerous visitors. It is true that this establishment was a
      boarding-house; and it was conducted to all outward appearances, in a most respectable manner.
      But it had its interior mysteries as well as many other dwellings in this metropolis. The fact
      is, that I was well known to a large circle of nobles and gentlemen who employed all their
      leisure time in intrigues and amours. Having been gay myself from fifteen to forty, I was
      deeply versed in the various modes of entrapping respectable young persons, and even ladies,
      in the meshes artfully spread to ensure a constant supply of new victims to the lust of those
      men of pleasure. Having changed my name and thrown a veil as it were over the past, I opened
      the boarding-house by means of the funds supplied by my patrons, and soon experienced great
      success. By paying all my tradesmen with the utmost punctuality, I acquired a good character
      in the neighbourhood; for your tradesmen can always make or mar you, their shops being the
      scandal-marts where all reports, favourable or unfavourable, are put into circulation; and as
      they consider that those who pay well must necessarily be respectable, regularity on
      that point is certain to ensure their advantageous opinion. Having thus founded the
       respectability of my establishment, the rest was easy enough. The calculations made
      by myself and patrons were these:—Boarding-houses are usually inhabited by ladies possessing
      incomes which, though derived from sources that are sure, are too small to enable them to set
      up in housekeeping for themselves. Elderly widows with their daughters,—young widows who,
      coming from the country or from abroad, are strangers in London, but who wish to marry again,
      and therefore seek that society which is most easily entered,—friendless orphans who possess
      small annuities,—aunts and their nieces,—grandmothers with their grand-daughters,—these are
      the class of ladies who principally support boarding-houses. Thus there is always a large
      proportion of young ladies in those establishments; and out of a dozen there are sure
      to be three or four very good-looking. There can now be no difficulty in understanding the
      motives which induced my patrons to place me at the head of a boarding-house.
"I must now record the plan of operations. In all boarding-houses the number of ladies
      preponderates greatly over that of gentlemen. My average was usually about twenty ladies and
      four or five gentlemen. Three times every week we had music and dancing in the evening; and as
      there was a lack of beaux, I of course supplied the deficiency by inviting
       'some highly respectable gentlemen with whom I had the honour to be acquainted.'
      These were of course my patrons; and when they were at the house they always took care to
      treat me with a proper politeness, as if all they knew of me was highly to my credit and
      honour. They thus became constant visitors, and were enabled to improve their acquaintance
      with any of the young ladies whom they fancied. As they were very attentive also to the
      elderly ladies, and as good wine and negus were never spared upon those occasions, the mammas,
      aunts, and grandmammas were very fond of our evenings' entertainments, and considered the
      gentlemen whom I invited to be 'the most delightful creatures in the world.'
      Sometimes rubbers of whist would vary the amusements; and as my patrons were not only all
      rich, but had their own private purposes to serve in frequenting my house, they allowed the
      old ladies to cheat them without manifesting the least ill will; or else they actually
      played badly to enable the said old ladies to win. It was therefore impossible
      that they could have failed to become especial favourites; and of these advantages they
      availed themselves in their designs upon the young ladies.
"The lodgers in boarding-houses are always mean and avaricious. The smallness of their
      incomes does not permit them to indulge largely in their natural taste for dress; and yet
      nowhere do females maintain such desperate struggles to appear fine in their apparel. Thus the
      ladies in boarding-houses can easily be persuaded to accept of presents; and of these my
      patrons were by no means sparing. A gold chain was a certain passport to a young lady's
      favour; and a velvet or silk dress would secure the good opinion of the aunt or grandmamma,
      and even of the mamma. Moreover, when one of my patrons appeared particularly attentive to any
      young lady, she concluded of course that his intentions were honourable; and in a very short
      time she became his victim. In a word, my boarding-house, though ostensibly so respectable,
      was nothing more nor less than a brothel conducted with regard to outward decencies, and
      carefully hushing up scandals that occurred within.
"I must now proceed to the principal topic of my history. It was, as I said, between
      seventeen and eighteen years ago, that the Marquis of Holmesford, who was one of my best
      patrons, called upon me and said that he had seen a beautiful young woman enter a humble
      lodging-house in a street not far from my own; and he directed me to institute inquiries
      concerning her. I did so; and in due course ascertained that her name was Harriet Wilmot—that
      she lived with her father in poor lodgings—and that they were by no means well off. I managed
      to get acquainted with Harriet, and called upon her. Her father was very ill—dying, indeed, of
      a broken heart, through losses in business. It moreover appeared that he had arrived in London
      only a short time before, and with a small sum of ready money, which he embarked in a little
      speculation that totally failed. They were sorely pressed by penury when I thus sought them
      out; and as I then knew well how to offer assistance in a delicate manner that could give no
      offence, I was looked upon by the poor young woman as an angel sent to minister to the wants
      of her dying father. The Marquis supplied me liberally with the means of thus aiding them; and
      I called regularly every day.
"My plan was to instil into Harriet's mind elevated notions of the position which she ought
      to reach through the medium of her personal attractions. I told her of great lords who had
      fallen in love with females in obscure stations, and who had married them; and as I also
      supplied Harriet with clothes, I took good care that they should be of such a nature as was
      calculated to engender ideas of finery. But all my arts failed to corrupt the pure mind of
      Miss Wilmot: she listened to me with respect—never with interest;—she wore the garments that I
      gave her, because she had none others. I saw that it was no use to think of introducing the
      Marquis to her immediately; and such was the passion he had conceived for her, that he did not
      become lukewarm with delay.
"In three weeks after I first became acquainted with the Wilmots, the old man died. The
      purse of the Marquis supplied, through my agency, the means of respectable interment; and when
      the first week of mourning was over, I touched gently upon Harriet's situation. She threw
      herself into my arms, called me her benefactress and only friend, and thanked me for my
      kindness towards her deceased father and herself, in such sincere—such ardent—and yet such
      artless terms, that for the first time in my life I experienced a remorse at the treacherous
      part I was playing. Harriet declared that she could not possibly think of being a burden to
      me, and implored me to follow up my goodness towards her by procuring her a menial
      situation—as she was determined to go out to service. I told her I would consider what I could
      do for her; and I went away more than half resolved to gratify her wish and place her beyond
      the reach of the Marquis by obtaining for her a situation through the means of my tradesmen.
      But when I reached my own house, I found the Marquis waiting for me; and he was so liberal
      with his gold, and so useful to me as my best patron, that I did not dare offend him. I
      accordingly hushed my scruples, and communicated to him all that had just occurred. He
      directed me to get Harriet into my house on any terms, and leave the rest to him. I was
      over-persuaded; and the next day I went to Harriet, and said to her 'My dear child, I have
      been thinking of your wish to earn your own living; and I have a proposal to make to you. I
      require a young person to act as my housekeeper: will you take the place? You shall have your
      own room to yourself; and I will make you as comfortable as I can.' The tears of gratitude and
      the tokens of affection towards me, with which that friendless young woman met my offer,
      actually wrung my heart. I wept myself—yes, I wept myself! And I weep now, too, as all those
      memories return to me with overwhelming force.
"Harriet Wilmot thus entered my service. But the very same day that she came into my house,
      I was attacked with a sudden and malignant fever, which threw me upon a sick bed. For ten days
      I was insensible to all that was passing around me; and when I awoke from that mental
      darkness, I found Harriet by my bed-side. For ten days and ten nights had she watched near me,
      scarcely snatching a few moments' repose in the arm-chair. She was pale and wan with long
      vigils; but how her beautiful countenance lighted up with the animation of joy, when the
      physician declared that I should recover. And this same physician assured me that I owed my
      life more to the care of the faithful Harriet than to his skill. I was overwhelmed by this
      demonstration of so much gratitude on her part; and I determined to place her beyond the reach
      of danger the moment I was convalescent.
"But when I recovered, and was once more involved in the bustle and intrigues of my
      business, my good resolutions rapidly vanished—for the gold and the patronage of the Marquis
      of Holmesford were so necessary to me! The Marquis now became a more constant visitor than
      ever at the house; and he found opportunities to pay his attentions to Harriet. But she did
      not comprehend his hints; and he soon spoke more boldly. Then she grew alarmed: still, as she
      afterwards told me, she did not choose to annoy me by complaints; and she contented herself by
      shunning the Marquis as much as possible. At length, one evening, when inflamed with wine, he
      forced his way into her chamber, and declared his views in such unequivocal terms, that the
      poor creature could no longer support
      his importunities. She indignantly commanded him to leave her: he grew bolder,
      and attempted violence. She escaped from him, and quitted the house. From a lodging which she
      immediately took, she wrote me a letter, detailing the insults she had endured, reiterating
      all her former expressions of gratitude towards me, acquitting me of all blame in the
      transaction, but declaring that, as she supposed I could not prevent the Marquis from visiting
      at the house, she must respectfully but firmly decline remaining in my service. I hastened to
      her, and was not very urgent in my desire that she should return; for I remembered her
      goodness to me when I was ill, and my heart was softened in her favour. By means of one of my
      tradesmen she almost immediately obtained a situation as nursery-maid in a family residing at
      Lower Holloway. I kept this circumstance concealed from the Marquis of Holmesford, to whom I
      declared that I knew not whither she was gone; and it was impossible that he could now blame
      me, as he himself had driven her by his rashness from my house.
"I must observe that all these incidents,—from the first moment of my acquaintance with
      Harriet until she thus quitted my house,—occurred within a period of three months.
"Harriet was not happy in her new place. She found that her mistress was an ill-tempered
      vixen, and her master a despotic upstart. But an event occurred which entirely changed her
      gloomy prospects, and enabled her to leave her situation without the necessity of seeking for
      another. During her walks with the children whom she had to attend upon, she met with a
      gentleman of middle age, but handsome person and agreeable manners; and some accident, which I
      have forgotten, made them acquainted. From that time they met every day: the gentleman became
      deeply enamoured of her, but never once did he make a dishonourable proposal. She told him
      that she was a poor friendless orphan and he pitied her:—in a short time he learnt to
      appreciate the purity of her mind—and he loved her. He offered her his hand;—but his pride
      imposed a condition. He was wealthy—he was a widower—he had two children; and he probably
      disliked the idea of introducing to the world as his wife one who had been a servant. She was
      unhappy in her place—without friends—without protectors; and she yielded to his solicitations
      for a private union. They were married—married at Norwood, where the register will doubtless
      attest the fact!
"This gentleman was Mr. Markham, of Markham Place. I never was in the neighbourhood of that
      mansion until about a year ago; then I saw it for the first time, and I sighed as I thought of
      Harriet Wilmot! For she ought to have become the mistress of the spacious dwelling;—and so she
      doubtless would have become, had not my treachery blighted all her hopes—all her prospects!
      But I must go back to resume the thread of my history in due course.
"Mr. Markham took a comfortable lodging for his young bride in a street somewhere near
      Brunswick Square. Precisely ten months after their union Katherine was born; and Mr. Markham
      now seriously thought of acknowledging his wife and child. She had hitherto passed by the name
      of Mrs. Wilmot since the marriage; and the husband regretted that he had not at once boldly
      proclaimed his second matrimonial connexion to the world. All these facts I subsequently
      learnt from Harriet's own lips.
"It was about three months after the birth of Katherine that I met Harriet one day in the
      street; and she seemed to me more beautiful than ever. She had written to announce to me that
      she was married, but without saying to whom, nor indicating where she lived. When I thus
      encountered her, holding her babe in her arms, she invited me to her lodgings, for she said,
      'My husband will not be offended with me for communicating all the particulars of my happiness
      to you; since you were the only friend I found in the time of my poverty and, when my poor
      father was on his death-bed. Besides,' she added, with a smile of infinite satisfaction, 'my
      husband is about to acknowledge me as his wife and take me to his own home.' While we were yet
      speaking, the Marquis of Holmesford rode by on horseback; and, as he turned to nod to me, he
      instantly recognised Harriet. She also knew him, and hurrying along with some alarm, entered
      her lodging, which was close by. I followed her: the incident which had disturbed her was soon
      forgotten; and she then told me all the particulars of her first meeting and her subsequent
      marriage with Mr. Markham. And how she doted upon her child! Never did I behold a mother so
      enthusiastic in her tenderness towards the offspring which she loved—and in which she felt
      pride!
"I took leave of her, and promised to call soon again. On my return home I was by no means
      disappointed to find the Marquis waiting for me. He said, 'You are acquainted with Harriet's
      abode. How happens it that you have kept it secret from me?'—I assured him that I had only
      just discovered it—'Well, it may be as you assert,' he continued; 'but do not deceive me in
      what I now require at your hands. Harriet looks more lovely than ever; and all my passion for
      her is revived. She must be mine; and to you I look for aid in obtaining for me the
      gratification of my wishes.'—I told him that Harriet was married, and that the child he had
      seen in her arms was her own; but I did not mention the name of her husband.—'I care nothing
      for her marriage or her maternity,' said the Marquis: 'she is charming, and that is all I
      choose to think of. When money and cunning can produce any thing in this city, it is not
      probable that I should entertain ridiculous scruples. The money I possess; and if cunning were
      wealth, you would be the richest woman in England.'—I remember this conversation as well as if
      it only occurred yesterday. Vainly did I represent to his lordship the difficulty of
      accomplishing the design he had in view. I assured him that Harriet's virtue was beyond the
      possibility of corruption: he replied that artifice could not fail to succeed, and that if I
      appeared cold in the cause, he would employ another and less scrupulous agent. I trembled lest
      I should lose his patronage and that of his friends; and I promised to do my best. The Marquis
      left me, saying, 'Within a week I shall expect that you will have matured some scheme that may
      make her mine; and your reward shall be liberal.'
"I was now sorely perplexed: I no longer hesitated to obey the Marquis, because my own
      interests were concerned; but I knew not what project to devise. At length, after having
      racked my brain for some short time, I hit upon a device which seemed to be the most feasible
      my ingenuity could suggest;
      but I resolved to cultivate the intimacy of Harriet for nearly a week ere I put
      it into execution. I accordingly contrived to be almost constantly with her for the next five
      days, saving when she expected her husband. Of his coming she was usually made aware by
      letters from him: some of those epistles she read to me, in the ingenuous confidence of her
      pure soul; and well might she rejoice in them—well might she treasure them,—for they were
      replete with tenderness and love. I know not exactly now what it was that prompted me to
      possess myself of some of those letters, in which Mr. Markham spoke of Harriet as his wife and
      the infant Katherine as his own child;—but I most probably thought that my knowledge of that
      secret union and its fruit might be turned to advantage, especially as I saw that a wealthy
      and well-born man was struggling with his pride whether to proclaim to the world his marriage
      with an obscure servant or whether he should continue to keep the affair secret. At all events
      I cannot conceal the fact that I abstracted, during a temporary absence of Harriet from the
      room on one occasion when I called, three of the letters from her desk,—three epistles in
      which Mr. Markham alluded in the most unequivocal terms to his private marriage with Harriet
      and the existence of the fruit of that union. These letters were addressed simply 'Mrs.
       Wilmot,' and without the mention of her abode on the envelope; because, as I learnt from
      Harriet, Mr. Markham always sent them by a messenger from a tavern in Lower Holloway—never
      from his own house, nor by any one of his servants; and by omitting the address, no clue could
      be afforded to impertinent curiosity should a letter thus sent happen to be lost.
"But to return to the scheme which I had formed for the ruin of Harriet. During the five
      days that we were so constantly together, as I have stated above, I professed the most sincere
      friendship for Harriet; and she declared that the feeling was not only reciprocal, but that on
      her part 'it was founded on the most sincere gratitude for my former kindness.' And
      grateful she really was. It was her nature to be grateful and good towards any one who was
      good—or seemed good—to her. But she could not even have hated her bitterest enemies, had she
      known any persons who were openly and avowedly her foes. She was all gentleness and
      amiability—all ingenuousness and candour. But why do I thus dwell upon her excellent
      qualities—since the more blameless was she, the less pardonable was I!
"When I took leave of her on the fifth evening she said to me, 'Mr. Markham will not be able
      to visit me at all to-morrow: you would afford me pleasure by dining with me and passing a
      long evening.'—The invitation exactly suited my purposes; and I readily accepted it. But on
      the following day, instead of repairing to Harriet's lodging at four o'clock, as promised, I
      went straight to Holmesford House. The Marquis was at home: he awaited my coming—for I had
      communicated my design to him by note on the preceding evening.
"Holmesford House has long been notorious for the debaucheries of its lordly owner.
      Separated from his wife, and enjoying an immense fortune, the Marquis has for many years led a
      life which, were he a private individual, would exclude him from society, but which does not
      in the least degree injure him in the elevated sphere wherein he moves. His dwelling is fitted
      up in the most luxurious—the most voluptuous manner, and is provided with all possible means
      to facilitate his designs upon those virtuous females who may be entrapped into his mansion,
      but who will not yield to him save when overcome by violence. And to that extreme measure has
      the Marquis never hesitated to resort;—for who would think, however great her wrongs, of
      appealing to the law against a nobleman so powerful, so wealthy, and so unprincipled as the
      Marquis of Holmesford?
"There was one room in Holmesford House which I must particularly describe. It was a
      bed-chamber—small, but furnished in the most sumptuous manner. It had no side windows; but
      there was a sky-light on the roof; and double sets of panes were fixed in the ample wood-work,
      with an interval of perhaps four inches between each pair. Thus no screams—no shrieks could
      penetrate beyond that strangely-contrived window: the double panes deadened every sound which
      transpired in that room. Similar precautions were adopted in respect to the other parts of the
      chamber. The doors were double, and covered with thick baize, so that they fixed tightly in
      their setting. The walls were also double, with a considerable interval between them: there
      was even a false floor half a foot above the proper one; and carpets were spread so thickly
      that not even a footstep echoed in that chamber.
"I shall now continue the narrative of my project against Harriet. Immediately upon my
      arrival at Holmesford House, I wrote a note to the intended victim: it was thus
       worded:—'Come to me, dearest Harriet, without an instant's delay after the receipt of
       this. I am in sad tribulation—at the house of a friend; but I cannot spare a moment to give
       you an idea of the sudden misfortune which has overtaken me. If you ever loved me—and if I
       have the slightest claim upon your kindness—come! The bearer of this note will conduct you to
       the friend's house where I am!'—Poor Harriet! she naturally conceived that it must be
      some serious event which could prevent me from keeping my engagement with her; and she
      hesitated not to accompany the female servant who delivered the note to her. She took her
      child in her arms: the servant of the Marquis suggested that she should leave the babe in the
      care of Harriet's own domestic; but Harriet would never separate herself from her beloved
      infant! The servant could not offer further remonstrance on this point; and Harriet entered
      the hackney-coach which was waiting to convey her to destruction!
"It was in the very depth of winter and consequently quite dark when Harriet reached
      Holmesford House. The lamps over the entrance had been purposely left unlighted; and thus the
      poor young woman did not observe the vast exterior of the mansion to which she had come. But
      when the front door had closed behind her, and she found herself in the hall, she exhibited
      some alarm; for, dimly as it was seen by the lustre of one faint lamp, she observed enough to
      convince her that she was in no common dwelling. The servant (who had of course received her
      cue) noticed the impression thus made upon her, and hastened to say something of a re-assuring
      nature. Thus, in a few minutes, Harriet was inveigled into the chamber which I have before
      described. 'Permit me to hold the baby, madam,' said the servant; 'your friend is ill in that
      bed.'—Harriet, doubtless bewildered
      at the strangeness of the whole proceeding, mechanically passed the child to the
      servant, and advanced towards the bed, the curtains of which were drawn around. She heard the
      doors close: she looked round—the servant had disappeared with the babe;—and Harriet was now
      alone with the Marquis of Holmesford!
"Two hours elapsed! I was awaiting, in a distant part of the mansion, the issue of that foul
      plot. Wine and generous cordials were on the table; and I drank deeply of them to drown the
      sad thoughts which oppressed me. Never had I before experienced—never have I since known such
      terrible emotions! All the particulars of my connexion with Harriet rushed to my mind. I
      remembered how I first beheld her, affectionately tending the dying bed of her father,—how she
      sate day and night by my side, ministering unto me in my malady as if she was my daughter,—how
      I had seen her a happy wife, content with retirement and privacy—content even with being, as
      it were, an unacknowledged wife, so long as she enjoyed her husband's love,—and how she had
      conducted herself as a tender mother, fondling and nursing her innocent little one! I thought
      of all this; and at the same time I was almost distracted with the idea of the infernal
      treachery which had now ensnared her! Years have passed since that foul night; and its memory
      haunts me still. I have made many—many lovely girls victims to the lust of my employers;—but
      none—no, not one—do I regret, save Harriet Markham!
"Two hours elapsed, I say; and at length the Marquis of Holmesford made his appearance. He
      was dreadfully frightened: his manner was wild and excited. I could not gather, from the
      expression of his countenance, whether he had triumphed or lost the victory to which he
      aspired over a virtuous and defenceless woman. I interrogated him with a gesture of
      impatience. 'Damnable woman!' he exclaimed; 'if there were not such creatures as
       you, there would be less scope for the vices of men like me. Begone! I would not endure
       another such scene—no, not were I offered a sovereign crown!'—I made some observation;
      but he interrupted me fiercely, and commanded me to depart. I dared not disobey—his manner was
      actually terrific. He appeared as if he had just witnessed some horrible spectre, or had
      perpetrated a dreadful crime. I returned home; and never did I pass such a miserable
      night.
"All next day I waited in expectation of hearing from the Marquis; but no communication
      arrived. In the evening I went to Harriet's lodging, and saw the landlady. In answer to my
      inquiries, she said, 'Mrs. Wilmot remained out until a very late hour last night, or rather
      this morning. It was nearly one when she came home with her child. She was in almost a frantic
      state, and talked so wildly and incoherently that I could not comprehend her. I persuaded her
      to retire to her chamber, and offered to sit up with her. She allowed me to conduct her to her
      room, but insisted on remaining alone. Poor thing! I heard her walking up and down the chamber
      until past five; and then all became quiet. I supposed she had retired to bed. When I rose at
      eight, I learnt from the servant that she had gone out with her child half an hour previously.
      She has not been back since; and I feel alarmed at her absence.'—'Some sudden calamity has
      perhaps overtaken her,' I said, terribly frightened at these tidings. 'Have the kindness to
      send your servant to let me know when she returns; but you need not tell her that you do so. I
      have my reasons.' The landlady, believing me to be an intimate friend of Harriet, readily
      promised compliance with my request. I was about to depart, when she suddenly recollected
      something, and said, 'I had nearly forgotten to tell you that about an hour ago, the messenger
      that usually comes from the gentleman who visits Mrs. Wilmot, and who she says is her
      husband—'—'Yes, yes,' cried I impatiently.—'The messenger has left a small packet for her,'
      continued the landlady.—'Let me see it,' I said, thinking that its contents might afford some
      clue to the mystery of Harriet's disappearance: 'I am acquainted with all Mrs. Wilmot's
      affairs, for you know how intimate we are.'—The landlady showed me the packet without the
      least hesitation, and I instantly recognised in the address the handwriting of Mr. Markham. I
      longed to open the parcel, but dared not. So I took my departure, having reiterated my desire
      to be informed of Harriet's return, the moment it might happen.
"The next evening came, and I had neither heard from the landlady, nor seen the Marquis. I
      sent a note to the latter; but he had left town on the previous day. A thought struck me:
      could he have persuaded Harriet to accompany him? Had he so far overcome the virtue of that
      pure-minded creature? I thought of the packet from Mr. Markham, and longed to ascertain its
      contents. A strong suspicion lurked in my mind that it was connected with the affair in some
      way or another. I however waited a week; and, hearing no tidings of any kind concerning
      Harriet, went boldly to her lodgings. 'Mrs. Wilmot's disappearance is so strange,' I said to
      the landlady, 'that, having consulted my legal adviser, and acting on the plea of being her
      intimate friend, I am determined to open that packet which was sent for her, and which I think
      must afford some clue to her absence.'—The landlady gave me the packet, saying, 'If you take
      the responsibility on yourself, well and good; but I will have nothing to do with the
      business.'—This was better than I had even expected; and I departed with the parcel.
"I was not long in returning to my house, and the moment I had reached my own chamber, I
      tore open the parcel. It contained four letters: but the contents of one will explain the
      presence of the other three. That one was from Mr. Markham, and ran as nearly as I can
      recollect thus: 'After the terrible discovery which I made last night, I can never see you
      more. You have wantonly betrayed the confidence and affection of a man who descended from his
      eminence to court your love in your social obscurity. But the moral bond that united us is
      riven asunder; and the legal one shall be equally broken should you dare to represent yourself
      as my wife. The most horrible suspicion now haunts me that even your child may not be
       mine. Keep that infant, then; and be good to it, if your depraved heart will allow
      you. And that you may not sink into the lowest grades of crime from the embraces of the noble
      libertine to whom you have abandoned yourself, I have instructed my banker to pay to you, as
       Mrs. Wilmot, a monthly stipend of ten pounds. I have destroyed all your letters,
      save the three which I enclose; and I return them to you in the hope that a
      re-perusal of them
      will place before you in all its glaring flagrancy the contrast between your
      protestations and your deeds.

"This terrible document bore no signature: but it was impossible, either by its nature or
      the handwriting, that it could have emanated from any one save Mr. Markham. The three letters
      accompanying it contained expressions of sincere gratitude and fervent affection towards Mr.
      Markham, and denoted three particular phases in Harriet's connexion with him: namely, her
      assent to their union, the fact that she was in a way to become a mother, and the announcement
      of approaching maternity. I wept as I read them:—I wept as I thought of all I had done in
      accomplishing the ruin of poor Harriet!
"The Marquis came no more to my house;—I saw by the newspapers that he had returned to
      London, a few weeks after the sad incidents just described;—again I sought an interview with
      him, but he would neither see nor correspond with me. My other patrons deserted me: they had
      been introduced by the Marquis; and, finding that he had some private reason to shun me, they
      fell off rapidly. I was compelled to break up my establishment: it ruined me in pocket, as it
      had ruined many, many young females in virtue. But for none of my victims did I reck—no, not
      one, save Harriet Markham.
"I fell gradually lower and lower in the scale of my avocations; but still I contrived to
      gain a living in various ways which have no connexion with the object of this narrative. It
      was about a year after the sad events above recorded, that I one day met Harriet Wilmot face
      to face in the neighbourhood of Bloomsbury. She was poorly clad and sickly in appearance; and
      her countenance was expressive of profound mental dejection. She held a letter in her hand;
      but she had not her child with her; and she was hurrying rapidly along—most probably to the
      post-office. 'Harriet!' I exclaimed, catching her by the hand.—She started at being thus
      accosted; but the moment her eyes fell on my countenance, she shuddered visibly, and cried
      out, 'You!'—then she darted away as if in affright, dropping the letter upon the
      pavement. For some moments I was so stupefied by her abrupt flight, that I stood as it were
      paralyzed. But seeing the letter upon the pavement, I recovered the use of my limbs, and
      hastened to pick it up. It was addressed 'To the
Marquis of Holmesford, Holmesford House.' I hurried away with it, saying
      to myself, 'Now I shall discover how far the connexion between Harriet and the Marquis
      went.'—But I was disappointed: the letter merely contained, as far as I can remember, these
      words:—'I ought not to address your lordship, under the peculiar—the distressing circumstances
      which made us acquainted; but necessity compels me to appeal to your lordship's bounty. It is
      not for myself, however, that I implore your aid; but for the sake of my child, who is
      starving! Oh! my lord, if you only knew what the feelings of a mother are when she beholds her
      infant shrieking for food, and turning its eyes towards her countenance in so piteous a manner
      that they speak the language of famine far more eloquently than its tongue could possibly do,
      were it able to express its wants in words,—if you could understand these feelings, you would
      not think ill of me because I thus appeal to your bounty!'—An address was given in an obscure
      street in Bloomsbury; and the letter was signed 'Harriet Wilmot.'
"Again I felt for that poor creature, who was now reduced, with her poor infant of fifteen
      months old, to such a state of penury; and I do not say it to render myself less despicable
      than I must appear in the eyes of those who may peruse this narrative,—but I merely state it
      as a fact, that I hastened home, gathered together the few shillings which I possessed, and
      hurried off to the address mentioned in Harriet's letter. But when I reached the house
      indicated, I learnt from the landlady that Mrs. Wilmot had suddenly departed half an hour
      before. 'She was very poor,' observed the woman; 'but she was honest. She strove hard to
      maintain herself with her needle, and starved herself to feed her infant. She thought herself
      quite happy when she earned five shillings in a week. Night after night did the poor creature
      sit up till she was nearly blind, toiling constantly at her work. And when she went away so
      suddenly just now, she offered me her shawl in payment of the little arrears of rent due. My
      God! I would sooner have given her all I had than have taken a rag from her! Ah!' added the
      woman, wiping her eyes, 'there's something very wrong somewhere in the country when such good
      mothers are allowed to die by inches through sheer famine!'
"I went away, very miserable. I felt convinced that Harriet, when she perceived she had lost
      her letter, suspected that it might fall into my hands, and that I should thereby learn her
      place of abode. And it was clear that she had departed so abruptly to avoid me! I have kept
      that letter—as well as all the others to which I refer in my history.
"As nearly as I can recollect, two years and three quarters passed away; and I again saw
      Harriet. It was in the month of January, about noon on a bitter cold day; and I was walking
      through Long Acre, when I suddenly perceived her enter a house, which was evidently let in
      lodgings to poor families. She did not observe me; but I felt a violent longing to make my
      peace, if possible, with that unfortunate victim of my treachery. The door stood open for the
      accommodation of the various inmates; and I hurried up the staircase. I heard footsteps before
      me—and I followed them to the very top of the house: then I caught a glimpse of Harriet
      entering a back garret. I advanced to the door, and knocked gently. Harriet immediately opened
      it; but when she beheld me, she recoiled with such an expression of horror and alarm upon her
      death-like countenance, that I was dreadfully embarrassed. 'My dear friend,' I said, at
      length: 'pray—in the name of heaven! hear me!'—'You!' she cried, in that shrieking
      kind of tone which had marked her utterance of the word when we met before, and which showed
      her utter abhorrence of me—a sentiment I well deserved: 'hear you! Oh! no—no!'—and
      she closed the door violently. I knew not how to act. I felt convinced that she had never
      communicated with Mr. Markham since the period when he made that mysterious but 'terrible
       discovery' to which he alluded in his letter that fell into my hands. I thought I would
      acquaint her with the existence of that letter and the nature of its contents; because it
      promised an income which would have placed her above want. So I sate down upon the stairs to
      reflect how I should proceed to induce her to hear me. In a few minutes the door opened
      quickly, and Harriet, with her child (who was then four years old) in her arms and a small
      bundle in her hand, appeared on the landing. She shrank back when she saw me—she evidently
      thought I was gone. Then, recovering herself, she exclaimed, 'Wretch! why do you haunt me?
       Have you not injured me enough already? Will you not even let me die in peace?'—I
      started up, saying, 'Do hear me! You know not how important——.'—But ere I could utter another
      word, she rushed wildly past me, and ran down the stairs with a precipitation which manifested
      her profound horror at my presence.
"Thus had I involuntarily driven her a second time from her humble home! I was sorely
      afflicted, for many reasons—but chiefly because my motives were not on either occasion wrong.
      I was about to take my departure, when I thought I would cast a look at the interior of the
      chamber which she had inhabited. By its appearance I hoped to judge of her circumstances,
      which I sincerely wished might be improved. I entered the room: it was evidently a
      ready-furnished garret. I am able to recognise such facts at a glance. Though not absolutely
      wretched, it was mean—very mean—too mean to permit the idea that she, poor creature! was
      comfortable in her resources. Several papers were burning in the grate: she had evidently set
      fire to them the moment ere she left the room in the precipitate manner described. I hastened
      to extinguish the smouldering flames, but redeemed the fragment of only one important paper.
      It contained the commencement of a letter evidently written that morning, as I discovered by
      the date. Strange to say, it was another epistle addressed 'To the Marquis of Holmesford,
       Holmesford House.' Its contents were to this effect:—'Your lordship will pardon me for
      again intruding myself upon your notice; but a deep sense of the duty I owe to my child, and
      the dread of leaving the poor innocent girl to the mercy of strangers—for the hand of Death
      seems to be already upon me—must serve as my excuse for thus troubling you. And when your
      lordship reflects that it is to you that I owe all the hideous misery which has been my lot
      for nearly four years,—through you that I lost the love and confidence of my husband,—your
      lordship's heart will not allow this appeal to be made in vain. Hitherto your lordship has
      remained unacquainted with the name of that husband of whom I speak; but now it is my
      duty to reveal it to you, that your lordship may see him and ex——'
"The remainder had been so scorched that it was illegible. Conjecture relative to the
      termination of the sentence was vain. Was the unfinished word explain? Or was it
       express? Often—often have I sate and wondered what the end of the passage originally
      was, ere the flames singed that sad letter. She felt the hand of Death already upon
       her; and I had driven her from the place where she wished to die in peace!
      Wretch—wretch that I was!
"From that time forth I never saw her more!
"All that I know of Harriet Markham is now told. The only link that is missing in the chain
      of my narrative is the detailed account of the mode in which Mr. Markham discovered that his
      wife had become the victim of the Marquis of Holmesford. That mystery the Marquis himself may
      be enabled to explain.
"My task is terminated: nor would I for worlds be compelled to accomplish it over again. It
      has given additional poignancy to thoughts that frequently oppress me, and has aroused others
      equally painful, but which had slumbered for years and years until now. And where I write—I
      dare not name the place, nor even those at whose command I write—there is a fearful gloom that
      is congenial, too congenial with those appalling reminiscences. Perhaps I should have felt and
      expressed less remorse for the past, had I written under more pleasant circumstances; perhaps,
      in that case, many of those dread images which here haunt my mind and are reflected
      in the bewailings and self-reproaches which appear in these pages, would not have visited me:
      still, had I performed this task in a cheerful chamber and in the gladdening sun-light,—even
      then I must have felt some remorse—for of all the bad deeds of my life, the treachery
      which I perpetrated towards Harriet is the blackest!
"May her sweet daughter Katharine be more happy—more fortunate!"
