
CHAPTER XCII. THE ITALIAN VALET.
ELLEN retired to her private dressing-room, and hastily threw aside her theatrical garb.
She assumed her usual attire, and then stole away from the establishment, without waiting to
      say farewell either to the manager or any of her acquaintances belonging to the company.
      
As she left the private door of the theatre, she saw several persons loitering
      about—probably in hopes of catching a glimpse of the author who had been so signally disgraced
      that evening, and whose previous departure from the house was unperceived.
She drew her veil closely over her countenance; but not before one fellow, more impudent
      than the rest, and whose cadaverous countenance, shaggy eye-brows, and sinister expression,
      struck a momentary terror into her soul, had peered beneath her bonnet.
Fortunately, as Ellen considered it, a cab was close by; and the driver was standing on the
      pavement with his hand grasping the door-latch, as if he were expecting some one.
"Cab, ma'am?" said he, as Ellen approached.
Ellen answered in the affirmative, mentioned her address, and stepped into the vehicle.
The driver banged the door, and mounted his box.
The man with the cadaverous countenance watched Ellen into the vehicle, and exchanged a sign
      of intelligence with the driver.
The cab then drove rapidly away.
Another cab was standing at a little distance; and into this the man with the cadaverous
      countenance stepped. There was already an individual in it, who, when the former opened the
      door, said, "All right?"
"All right," was the reply.
This second cab, containing these two individuals, then followed rapidly in the traces of
      the first.
Meantime Ellen had thrown herself back in the vehicle, and had given way to her
      reflections.
The events of that memorable evening occupied her attention. A coincidence, of a nature
      fitted only for the pages of a romance, had revealed to Markham and herself the history of
      each other's pursuits. While she had been following the occupation of a figurante, he was
      devoting his time to dramatic composition. He had retained his employment a secret: she had
      dissembled hers. He had accidentally applied for the patronage of the same manager who had
      taken her by the hand. He had assumed a false name: so had she. Chance led her to take a part
      in his drama;—her talent had materially contributed to its success. A triumph was achieved by
      each;—and then came the overwhelming, crushing denunciation which turned his joy to
      mourning—his honour to disgrace—his glory to shame. She felt as if she were identified with
      his fate in this one respect:—he was her benefactor; she esteemed him: and she seemed to
      partake in his most painful emotions as she pondered upon the incidents of that evening.
And then she retrospected over the recent events which had chequered her own life. The cast
      of her countenance embellished statues;—her likeness lent its attraction to pictures;—her bust
      was preserved in marble;—her entire form feasted the eyes of many a libertine in the private
      room of the photographic department of a gallery of science;—her virtue had become the prey of
      one who gave her a few pieces of paltry gold in exchange for the inestimable jewel of her
      purity;—her dreams had been sold to a mesmerist;—her dancing had captivated thousands;—her
      tragic talent had crowned the success of a drama. What remained for her now to sell? what
      talent did she possess which could now be turned to advantage? Alas! she knew not!
Her meditations were painful; and some time elapsed ere she awoke from her reverie.
At length she glanced towards the window: the night was beautifully clear, though piercing
      cold—for it was now the month of December; and the year 1839 was drawing to a close.
The vehicle was proceeding along a road skirted only by a few leafless trees, and wearing an
      aspect strange and new to her.
The country beyond, on either side, seemed to present to her view different outlines from
      those which frequent passage along the road leading to Markham Place had rendered familiar to
      her eyes. Again she gazed wistfully forth:—she lowered the window, and surveyed the adjacent
      scenery with redoubled interest.
And now she felt really alarmed; for she was convinced that the driver had mistaken the
      road.
She called to him, and expressed her fears.
"No—no, ma'am," he exclaimed, without relaxing the speed at which the vehicle was
      proceeding; "there's more ways than one of reaching the place where you live. Don't be afraid,
      ma'am—it's all right."
Ellen's fears were hushed for a short time; but as she leant partially out of the window to
      survey the country through which she was passing, the sounds of another vehicle behind her own
      fell upon her ears.
At any other time this circumstance would not have produced a second thought; but on this
      occasion Ellen felt a presentiment of evil. Whether the mournful catastrophe of the evening,
      or her recent sad reflections,—or both united, had produced this morbid feeling, we cannot
      say. Sufficient is it for us to know that such was the state of her mind; and then she
      remembered the warning contained in the letter so mysteriously sent to her a short time
      previously at the theatre.
Again she addressed the cabman; but this time he made no answer; and in a few minutes he
      drove up to the door of a small house which stood alone by the side of that dreary road.
Scarcely had he alighted from his box, when the second cab came up and stopped also.
"Where am I?" demanded Ellen, now seriously alarmed.
An individual, who had alighted from the second cab, hastened to open the door of the first,
      and assist Ellen to alight.
"You must get down here, Miss," he said, in a dialect and tone which denoted him to be a
      foreigner.
Ellen saw at a glance that he was a tall elderly man, with a dark olive complexion, piercing
      black eyes, but by no means an unpleasant expression of countenance. He was dressed in black,
      and wore a large cloak hanging loosely over his shoulders.
"Get down here!" repeated Ellen. "And why? where am I? who are you? Speak."
"No harm will happen to you, Miss," replied the tall stranger. "A gentleman is waiting in
      this house to see you."
"A gentleman!" cried Ellen. "Ah! can it be Mr. Greenwood?"
"It is, Miss: you need fear nothing."
Ellen was naturally of a courageous disposition; and the circumstances of her life had
      tended to strengthen her mind. It instantly struck her that she was in the power of her
      persecutor's myrmidons, and that resistance against them was calculated to produce effects
      much less beneficial for her than those which remonstrance and firmness might lead to with
      their employer.
She accordingly accompanied the tall stranger into the house.
But what was the astonishment of the poor creature when she encountered in the hall the very
      old hag whom she had known in the court in Goldenlane,
       and who had originally introduced her to the embraces of Mr. Greenwood!
The horrible wrinkled wretch grinned significantly, at she conducted Ellen into a parlour
      very neatly furnished, and where a cheerful fire was burning in the grate.
Meantime the tall stranger issued forth again, and ordered the driver of the cab in which
      Ellen had arrived to await further instructions. He then accosted the cadaverous looking man
      who had accompanied him in the second cab, and who was now loitering about in front of the
      house.
"Tidkins," said he, "we do not require your services any further. The young lady made no
      resistance, and consequently there has been no need for the exercise of your strong arm. Here
      is your reward. You can return to London in the same cab that brought you hither."
"Thank you, my friend," exclaimed the Resurrection Man. "Your master knows my address, the
      next time he requires my services. Good night."
"Good night," said the tall man: and when he had seen the second cab depart, he re-entered
      the house.
In the hall he met Mr. Greenwood.
"Well, Filippo—all right, eh?" said this gentleman, in a whisper.
"All right, sir. We managed it without violence; and the lady is in your power."
"Ah! I thought you would do the business genteelly for me. Lafleur is a faithful fellow, and
      would do any thing to serve me; but he is clumsy and awkward in an intrigue of this kind. No
      one can manage these little matters so well as a foreigner. A Frenchman is clever—but an
      Italian incomparable."
"Thank you, sir, for the compliment," said Filippo, with a low bow.
"Oh! it is no compliment," returned Greenwood. "Three or four little things that I have
      entrusted to you since you have been in my service, were all admirably managed so far as you
      were concerned; and though they every one failed afterwards, yet it was no fault of yours. I
      am well aware of that."
The Italian bowed.
"And now I must present myself to this haughty beauty," said Greenwood.
"Am I to dismiss the vehicle which brought her hither, sir?" demanded Filippo.
"Yes: you will stay here to-night."
The Italian valet bowed once more, and returned to the driver of the vehicle that brought
      Ellen thither.
"My good fellow," said Filippo, in a hurried tone, "here is your money for the service
      rendered up to this moment. Are you now disposed to earn five guineas in addition?"
"Certainly, sir," replied the man.
"Then drive to the bend in the road yonder," continued Filippo. "There you will find a large
      barn, belonging to my master's property here. You can house your horse and cab comfortably
      there. But do not unharness the animal. There is a pond close by; and you will find a bucket
      in the barn. There is also hay for your horse. Wait there patiently till I come to you."
The cabman signified acquiescence; and Filippo returned to the house.
Meantime the old hag, as before stated, had conducted Ellen to a parlour, where the young
      lady threw herself upon a sofa, her mind and body being alike fatigued with the events and
      anxieties of the evening.
"We meet again, Miss," said the old woman, lingering near the table, on which refreshments
      of several luxurious kinds were placed. "You came no more to visit me in the court; and yet I
      watched from a distance the brilliancy of your career. Ah! what fine things—what fine things I
      have introduced you to, since first I knew you."
"If you wish to serve me," said Ellen, "help me away from this place, and I will recompense
      you largely."
"For every guinea that you would give me to let you go, I shall receive two for keeping you
      in safe custody," returned the hag.
"Name the price that you are to have from your employer," cried Ellen; "and I will double
      it."
"That you cannot do. Miss. Besides, have I not your interests to consider? Do I not know
      what is good for you? I tell you that you may become a great lady—ride in a magnificent
      carriage—have fine clothes and sparkling jewels—and never know again what toil is. I should
      not be so squeamish if I were you."
"Silence, wretch!" cried Ellen, exasperated more at the cool language of calculation in
      which the old woman spoke, than with the prospects she held out and the arguments she
      used.
"Ah! Miss," resumed the hag, nothing discomfited, "I am not annoyed with you, for the harsh
      way in which you speak to me. I have seen too much of your stubborn beauties in my life to be
      abashed with a word. Lack-a-day! they all yield in time—they all yield in time!"
And the old hag shook her head seriously, as if she had arrived at some great moral
      conclusion.
Ellen paid no attention to her.
"Ah! Miss," continued the hag, "I was once young like you—and as beautiful too, wrinkled and
      tanned as I now appear. But I was not such a fool to my own interests as you. I lived
      luxuriously for many, many years—God knows how many—I can't count them now—I don't like to
      think of those happy times. I ought to have saved money—much money; but I frittered it all
      away as quick as I got it. Now, do you take my advice: accept Mr. Greenwood's offers;—he is a
      handsome man, and pays like a prince."
The argument of the old hag was cut short by the entrance of the individual of whom she was
      just speaking.
She left the room; and Ellen was now alone with Greenwood.
"Sir, are you the author of this cowardly outrage which has been perpetrated upon me?"
      demanded Ellen, rising from the sofa, and speaking in a firm but cold tone.
"Call it not an outrage, dearest Ellen—"
"It is nothing else, sir; and if you have one spark of honour left—one feeling of respect
      for the mother of your child," added Miss Monroe, sinking her voice, "you will allow me to
      depart without delay. On that condition I will forget all that has transpired this
      evening."
"My dear girl, you cannot think that I have taken all this trouble to be thwarted by a
      trifling obstacle at the end, or that I have merely had you brought hither to have the
      pleasure of letting you depart again after one minute's conversation. No, Ellen: listen to me!
      I have conceived a deep—profound—a fervent affection for you——"
"Cease this libertine's jargon, Mr. Greenwood," interrupted Ellen. "You must know that your
       sophistry cannot deceive me as it has done so many—many others."
"Then in plain terms, Ellen, you shall be mine—wholly and solely mine—and I will remain
      faithful to you until death."
"I will become your wife, for the sake of my child: on no other terms will I consort with
      you. As surely as you attempt to force me to compliance with your will, so certainly will I
      unmask you sooner or later. I will expose you—I will tell the world who you are—I will
      proclaim how you obtained your fortune by the plunder of your own—"
"Silence, Ellen!" thundered Greenwood, his face becoming purple with indignation. "Remember
      that the least word calculated to betray my secret, would lead to a revelation of yours; and
      the result would be the execrations of your father showered down upon your devoted head."
"I care not for that catastrophe—I care not for mine own past dishonour—I care not for the
      existence of that child of whom you are the father," exclaimed Ellen in a rapid and
      impassioned tone. "I will not be immolated to your desires—I will not succumb to your wishes,
      without revenge! Oh! full well do I comprehend you—full well do I know how you calculated when
      you resolved to perpetrate this outrage. You thought that I must suffer every thing at your
      hands, and not dare proclaim my wrongs:—you fancied that my lips are sealed against all and
      every thing connected with you! Mark me, you have reckoned erroneously upon the
      extent of my dread of my father and my benefactor! There is one thing that will make me fall
      at their feet and reveal—all and that is the consummation on your part of this vile outrage
      upon me!"
"Be it so, Ellen," said Greenwood. "I am as determined as you. I will use no force against
      you; but I will keep you a prisoner here; and believe me—for I know the world well—your stern
      resolves will soon melt in the presence of solitude and monotony. You will then solicit me to
      come to you—if it be only to bear you company! Escape is impossible—my spies are around the
      house. Day and night will you be watched as if you were a criminal. And when you consent to
      become mine, in all save the vain ties which priestcraft has invented, and the shackles of
      which shall never curb my proud spirit,—then will I surround you with every luxury, gratify
      your slightest wishes, study your pleasures unceasingly, and do all to make you cling to me
      more fervently than if I were your husband according to monkish ceremony. This is my resolve.
      In the mean time, if you choose to console your father for your absence, write a note telling
      him that you are happy, but that circumstances at present compel you to withhold from him the
      place of your residence; and that letter shall be delivered to-morrow morning at Markham
      Place. I now leave you. This is your sitting-room; your sleeping apartment is above. The
      servant—the old woman whom you know so well," added Greenwood, in a tone slightly ironical,
      "will attend upon you. The house contains every luxury that may gratify the appetite; all your
      wishes shall be complied with. But, again I say, think not of escape; that is impossible. And
      if you feel inclined to write the note of which I have spoken, do so, and give it to your
      attendant. It is now late—the clock has struck one: I leave you to yourself."
Ellen made no reply; and Greenwood left the room.
The moment she was alone, Ellen rose and hastened to the window. She drew aside the curtain,
      and was somewhat surprised to perceive that the casements were not barred; for she had
      expected to find every precaution against escape adopted after the confident manner in which
      Greenwood had spoken upon that head. But her heart sank within her; for she remembered his
      assurance that the house was surrounded by spies. She therefore made up her mind, after some
      reflection, to remain quiet until the next day, and then regulate her endeavours to escape by
      the aspect of the house and its locality when seen by day-light.
She felt exhausted and wearied, and partook of a light refreshment. She then took a candle
      from the table, and proceeded up-stairs to the bed-room prepared for her. Having carefully
      bolted the door, she sate down to reflect upon the propriety of writing to her father the note
      suggested by Greenwood. She felt most acutely on the old man's account; and she knew that she
      would not be permitted to communicate with him in terms more explicit than those mentioned by
      her persecutor. Such terms were too vague and equivocal to be satisfactory;—and she concluded
      in her own mind that silence was the better alternative of the two.
Having once more satisfied herself that the room was safe against all chances of intrusion,
      she thought of retiring to rest. She laid aside her bonnet and shawl, which she had hitherto
      kept on, and then took off her gown. She approached a long Psyche, or full-length mirror, that
      stood near the dressing-table (for the room was elegantly furnished), and for a moment
      contemplated herself with feelings of pride and pleasure—in spite of the vexatious position in
      which she found herself. But vanity was now an essential ingredient of her character. It had
      been engendered, nurtured, and matured by the mode of life she had been compelled to
      adopt.
And, assuredly, hers were charms of which she had full right to be proud. The mirror
      reflected to her eyes a countenance that had been deemed worthy to embellish a Venus on the
      canvass of a great painter. In that same faithful glass was also seen a form the beautiful
      undulations and rich contours of which were perfectly symmetrical, and yet voluptuously
      matured. The delicate white corset yielded with docile elasticity to the shape which no
      invention of art could improve. The form reduced that corset to suit its own proportions; and
      in no way did the corset shape the form. Those swelling globes of snow, each adorned as with a
      delicate rose-bud, needed no support to maintain them in their full and natural rotundity;—the
      curvatures which formed the waist, were not drawn nearer to each other by the compression of
      the stay;—the graceful swell of the hips required no art to improve or augment its
      copiousness. Ellen smiled—in spite of herself,—smiled complacently—smiled almost proudly, as
      she surveyed her perfect form in that mirror.
But, hark! what sound is that which suddenly falls upon her ear?
She starts—looks round—and listens.
Again!—that sound is repeated.
This time she comprehends its source: some one is tapping gently at the side window of the
      room.
Ellen hastily put on her gown once more, and advanced to the casement.
She raised the blind, and beheld the dark form of a man mounted upon a ladder, at the
      window. A second glance convinced her that he was the tall Italian whom she had before
      seen.
She approached as closely as possible, and said, in a low tone, "What do you require? what
      this strange proceeding?"
      

"I am come to save you," answered Filippo, in a voice so low, that his words were scarcely
      intelligible. "Do not be afraid—I am he who wrote the warning letter, which——"
Without a moment's farther hesitation, Ellen gently raised the window.
"I am he who wrote the warning letter which you received at the theatre," repeated Filippo.
      "Although ostensibly compelled to serve my master, yet privately I counteract all his vile
      schemes to the utmost of my power."
"I believe you—I trust you," said Ellen, overjoyed at the arrival of this unlooked-for
      succour. "What would you have me do?"
"Tie the sheets of the bed together—fasten one end to the bed-post, and throw the other
      outside," returned Filippo, speaking in a rapid whisper.
In less than a minute this was done; and Ellen once more assumed her bonnet and shawl.
By the directions of Filippo she then stepped upon the window-sill: he received her in his
      arms, and bore her in safety to the ground.
Then, taking the ladder on his shoulders, he desired her to follow him without speaking a
      word.
They passed behind the house, and stopped for a moment at a stable where Filippo deposited
      the ladder. He then led the way across a field adjoining the garden that belonged to the
      house.
"Lady," said the Italian, when they were at some distance from the dwelling, "if you
      consider that you owe me any gratitude for the service I am now rendering you, all the
      recompense I require is strict silence on your part with respect to the real mode of your
      escape."
"Rest well assured that I shall never betray you," answered Ellen. "But how is it that so
      bad a man as your master can possess so honest and generous a follower as you?"
"That, lady, is a mystery which it is by no means difficult to explain," replied Filippo.
      "Chosen by a noble-hearted lady, who by this time doubtless enjoys a sovereign rank in another
      clime, to counteract the villanies of Greenwood, I came to England; and fortunately I learnt
      that he required a foreign valet. I applied for the situation and obtained it. He believes me
      faithful, because I appear to enter heart and soul into all his schemes; but I generally
      succeed eventually in defeating or mitigating their evil effects upon others. This is the
      simple truth, lady; and you must consider my confidence in
       you as implicitly sacred. Any revelation—the slightest hint, on your part, would
      frustrate the generous purposes of my mistress. And think not, lady, that I am merely acting
      the part of a base spy:—I mean Mr. Greenwood no harm—I shall do him none: all I aim at is the
      prevention of harm springing from his machinations in regard to others. But we are now at the
      spot where a vehicle waits to convey you back to London."
Filippo opened the door of a barn, which they had just reached; and the cabman responded to
      his summons.
In a few minutes the vehicle was ready to depart. Ellen offered the Italian a recompense for
      his goodness towards her; but he drew himself up haughtily, and said, "Keep your gold, lady: I
      require no other reward than silence on your part."
He then handed Miss Monroe into the vehicle; and ordered the driver to conduct the lady
      whithersoever she commanded him.
Ellen desired to be taken home to Markham Place; the Italian raised his hat respectfully;
      and the cab drove rapidly away towards London.
Miss Monroe now began to reflect profoundly upon the nature of the excuse which she should
      offer to her father and Richard Markham, to account for her prolonged absence. We have before
      said that she had ceased to shrink from a falsehood; and she had certain cogent reasons for
      never associating her own name with that of Greenwood;—much less would she acquaint her father
      or Richard with an outrage which would only induce them to adopt means to punish its
      perpetrator, and thus bring them in collision with him.
At length she resolved upon stating that she had been taken ill at a concert where she had
      been engaged for the evening: this course would be comprehended by Markham, who would only
      have to substitute the word "theatre" for "concert" in his own imagination; and it would also
      satisfy her father.
We need merely add to this episode in our eventful history, that Ellen reached home safely
      at four o'clock in the morning, and that the excuse was satisfactory to both Markham and her
      father, who were anxiously awaiting her return.
