
CHAPTER XI. "THE SERVANTS' ARMS."
UPON the same day that this event took place, Mr. Whittingham, the butler of Richard
      Markham, had solicited and obtained permission to pass the evening with a certain Mr. Thomas
      Suggett, who occupied the distinguished post of valet de chambre about the person of
      the Honourable Arthur Chichester. Whittingham was determined to enjoy himself:—he seemed
      suddenly to have cast off twenty years from his back, and to walk the more upright for having
      rid himself of the burthen;—his hat was slightly cocked on one side; and, as he walked along,
      with Mr. Thomas Suggett tucked under his arm, he struck his silver-headed bamboo, which he
      always carried with him when he went abroad on Sundays and holidays, very forcibly upon the
      pavement. Mr. Suggett declared "that, for his part, he was very well disposed for a spree;"
      and he threw into his gait a most awful swagger, which certainly excited considerable
      attention, because all the small boys in the streets laughed at him as he wended on his
      way.
"I wonder what them urchins are garping at so," said Whittingham. "It mystificates me in no
      inconsiderable degree. Raly the lower orders of English is exceedingly imperlite. I feel the
      most inwigorated disgust and the most unboundless contempt for their manners."
"That's jist like me," observed Suggett: "I can't a-bear the lower orders. I hate everythink
      wulgar.—But, by the bye, Mr. Whittingham, do you smoke?"
"I can't say but what I like a full-flavoured Havannah—a threepenny, mind," added the
      butler, pompously.
"Just my taste, Mr. Whittingham. If I can't afford threepennies, I won't smoke at all."
Mr. Suggett entered a cigar shop, purchased half-a-dozen real Havannahs
      (manufactured in St. John-street, Clerkenwell), joked with the young lady who served him, and
      then presented the one which he considered the best to his companion. The two gentlemen's
      gentlemen accordingly lighted their cigars, and then continued their walk along the New Road,
      in the vicinity of which Mr. Whittingham had met Mr. Suggett by appointment upon this
      memorable afternoon.
In a short time Mr. Suggett stopped suddenly at the door of a large white public-house, not
      a hundred miles distant from the new church, St. Pancras.
"This is a nice crib," said he. "Excellent company; and to-night there is a supper at
      eleven."
"The very identified thing," acquiesced Mr. Whittingham; and into the public-house they
      walked.
Nothing could be more neat and cleanly than the bar of the Servants' Arms—no one
      more obliging nor bustling than the "young lady" behind the bar. The Servants' Arms
      was reported to draw the best liquor in all the neighbourhood; and its landlord prided himself
      upon the superiority of his establishment over those which sold beer "at three-pence a-pot in
      your own jugs." And then what a rapid draught the landlord had for all his good things; and
      how crowded was the space before the bar with customers.
"Glass of ale—mild, Miss, if you please," said one.
"A quartern of gin and three outs, Caroline," cried a second, who was more familiar.
"Pint of half-and-half, here," exclaimed a third.
"Six of brandy, warm, Miss—four of gin, cold, and a pint of ale with the chill off—parlour!"
      ejaculated the waiter, who now made his appearance at the bar.
"Pot of porter; and master's compliments, and can you lend him yesterday's
       Advertiser for half an hour or so?" said a pretty little servant girl, placing a
      large yellow jug on the bright lead surface of the bar.
"Pot of ale, and a screw, Miss."
"Pint of gin, for mixing, please."
"Bottle of Cape wine, at eighteen, landlord."
"Four-penn'orth of rum, cold without."
"Half pint of porter, and a pipe, Caroline."
Such were the orders, issued from all quarters at the same moment, and to which Caroline
      responded with incredible alacrity; finding time to crack a joke with the known frequenters of
      the house, and to make a pleasant observation upon the weather to those whose faces were
      strange to her;—while the landlord contented himself with looking on, or every now and then
      drawing a pot of beer, apparently as a great favour and in a lazy independent manner.
      Nevertheless, he was a good, civil kind of a man;
      only somewhat independent, because he was growing rich. He was never afraid at
      the end of month to see Truman and Hanbury's collector, and Nicholson's man, alight from their
      gigs at his door. They were always sure to find the money ready for them, when they sate down
      to write their receipts in the little narrow slip of a parlour behind the bar. In fact, the
      landlord of the Servants' Arms, was reported to be doing "a very snug business:"—and
      so he was.
Messrs. Whittingham and Suggett sauntered leisurely into the parlour of the Servants'
       Arms, and took their seats at the only table which remained unoccupied.
"Good evening, Sir," said the waiter, addressing Mr. Suggett with a sort of
      semi-familiarity, which showed that the latter gentleman was in the habit of "using the
      house."
"How are you, William?" cried Mr. Suggett, in a patronising manner. "George been here
      lately?"
"Not very: I think he's down in the country."
"Oh! Well, what shall we have, Mr. Whittingham—brandy and water?"
"That's my inwariable beverage, Mr. Suggett."
"Two sixes, gentlemen?" said the waiter.
"No," answered Mr. Whittingham, solemnly; "two shillings' worth, to begin with."
The liquor was supplied, and when the two gentlemen had tasted it, and found it to their
      liking, they glanced around the room to survey the company. It soon appeared that Mr. Suggett
      was well known to many of the gentlemen present; for, upon making his survey, he acknowledged,
      with a nod or a short phrase, the bows or salutations of those with whom he was
      acquainted.
"Ah! Mr. Guffins, always up in the same corner, eh?" said he, addressing a middle-aged man
      in seedy black: "got a new work in the press, 'spose? You literary men contrive to enjoy
      yourselves, I know. How do you do, Mr. Mac Chizzle?" looking towards a short, pock-marked man,
      with a quick grey eye, and black hair combed upright off his forehead: "how get on the
      clients? Plenty of business, eh? Ah! you lawyers always contrive to do well. Mr. Drummer, your
      servant, sir. Got a good congregation still, sir?"
"The chapel thriveth well, I thank you—as well as can be expected in these times of heathen
      abominations," answered a demure-looking middle-aged gentleman, who was clad in deep black and
      wore a white neck-cloth, which seemed (together with the condition of his shirt and stockings)
      to denote that although he had gained the confidence of his flock, he had certainly lost that
      of his washer-woman. After having taken a long draught of a pint of half-and-half which stood
      before him, he added, "There is a many savoury vessels in my congregation—reputable, pious,
      and prayer-full people, which pays regular for their sittings and fears the Lord."
"Well, I am glad of that," ejaculated Mr. Suggett. "But, ah!" he cried, observing a thin
      white-haired old gentleman, with huge silver spectacles hanging half-way down his nose,—"I'm
      glad to see Mr. Cobbington here. How gets on the circulating library, eh—sir?"
"Pretty well—pretty well, thank'ee," returned the bookseller: "pretty well—considering."
A great many people qualify their observations and answers by the addition of the word
       "considering;" but they seldom vouchsafe an explanation of what is to be
       considered. Sometimes they use the phrase "considering all things;" and then the mind
      has so much to consider, that it cannot consider any one thing definitively. It would be much
      more straightforward and satisfactory if persons would relieve their friends of all suspense,
      and say boldly at once, as the case may be, "considering the execution I have got in
      my house;" or "considering the writ that's out against me;" or even
       "considering the trifling annoyance of not having a shilling in my pocket, and not
      knowing where to look for one." But, somehow or another, people never will be candid
      now-a-days; and Talleyrand was right when he said that "language was given to man to enable
      him to conceal his thoughts."
But to continue.
Mr. Suggett glanced a little further around the room, and recognized another old
      acquaintance.
"Ah! Snoggles, how are you?"
"Very well, thank'ee—how be you?"
"Blooming; but how come you here?"
"I dropped in quite permiscuously," answered Snoggles, "and finding good company, stayed.
      But it is up'ards o' three years since I see you, Mr. Suggett."
"About. What grade do you now fill in the profession? Any promotion?"
"I'm sorry to say not," replied Mr. Snoggles, shaking his head mournfully. "I've tumbled off
      the box down to a level with the osses;" which, being interpreted, means that Mr. Snoggles had
      fallen from the high estate of coachman to the less elevated rank of ostler. "But what rank do
      you now hold?"
"I left off the uniform of tiger last month," answered Mr. Suggett, "and received
      the brevet of walley-de-chambre."
"That gentleman one of the profession?" demanded Snoggles, alluding to Mr. Whittingham.
"Mr. Markham's butler, sir, at your service," said Whittingham, bowing with awe-inspiring
      stiffness: "and I may say, without exag-gerating, sir, and in no wise compromising my
      indefatigable character for weracity, that I'm also Mr. Markham's confidential friend. And
      what's more, gen'leman," added the butler, glancing proudly around the room, "Mr. Richard
      Markham is the finest young man about this stupendous city of the whole universe—and that's as
      true as that this is a hand."
As Mr. Whittingham concluded this sentence, he extended his arm to display the hand relative
      to which he expressed such confidence; and while he flourished the arm to give weight to his
      language, the aforesaid hand encountered the right eye of the dissenting parson.
"A case of assault and battery," instantly exclaimed Mr. Mac Chizzle, the lawyer; "and here
      are upwards of a dozen witnesses for the plaintiff."
"I really beg the gentleman's pardon," said Whittingham.
"Special jury—sittings after term—damages five hundred pounds;" exclaimed Mac Chizzle.
"No harm was intended," observed Suggett.
"Not a bit," added Snoggles.
"Verdict for Plaintiff—enter up judgment—issue execution—ca. sa. in no time," said
      Mac Chizzle doggedly.
"I am used to flagellations and persecutions at the hands of the ungodly," said the Reverend
      Mr. Drummer, rubbing his eye with his fist, and thereby succeeding in inflaming it.
"Perhaps the reverend gentleman wouldn't take it amiss if I was to offer him my apologies in
      a
       extra powerful glass of brandy and water?" exclaimed Whittingham.
"Bribery," murmured Mac Chizzle.
"No, let us have a bowl of punch at once," exclaimed Suggett.
"And corruption," added the lawyer.
The bowl of punch was ordered, and the company generally was invited to partake of it. Even
      Mr. Mac Chizzle did not hesitate; and the dissenting minister, in order to convince Mr.
      Whittingham that he entirely forgave him, consented to partake of the punch so often that he
      at length began slapping Mr. Whittingham upon the back, and declaring that he was the best
      fellow in the world.
The conversation became general; and some of it is worth recording.
"I hope to have your patronage, sir, for my circulating library," said Mr. Cobbington to the
      butler.
"Depends, sir, upon the specified nature of the books it contains," was the reply.
"I have nothing but moral romances in which vice is always punished and virtue
      rewarded."
"That conduct of yours is highly credulous to you."
"All books is trash, except one," observed Mr. Drummer, winking his eyes in an extraordinary
      manner. "They teaches naught but swearing, lewd conversation, ungodliness, and that worst of
      all vices—intemperance."
"I beg you to understand, sir," exclaimed Mr. Guffins, who had hitherto remained a silent
      spectator of the proceedings, although a persevering partaker of the punch; "I beg you to
      understand, Mr. Drummer, my works, sir, are not the trash you seem to allude to."
"I won't understand nothing nor nobody," answered the reverend gentleman, swaying backwards
      and forwards in his chair. "Leave me to commune with myself upon the vanities of this wicked
      world, and—and—drink my punch in quiet."
"Humbug!" exclaimed the literary man, swallowing his resentment and the remainder of his
      punch simultaneously.
"Ah!" said the bookseller, after a pause; "nothing now succeeds unless it's in the comic
      line. We have comic Latin grammars, and comic Greek grammars; indeed, I don't know but what
      English grammar, too, is a comedy altogether. All our tragedies are made into comedies by the
      way they are performed; and no work sells without comic illustrations to it. I have brought
      out several new comic works, which have been very successful. For instance, 'The Comic
       Wealth of Nations;' 'The Comic Parliamentary Speeches;' 'The Comic Report
       of the Poor-Law Commissioners,' with an Appendix containing the 'Comic Dietary
       Scale;' and the 'Comic Distresses of the Industrious Population.' I even
      propose to bring out a 'Comic Whole Duty of Man.' All these books sell well: they do
      admirably for the nurseries of the children of the aristocracy. In fact they are as good as
      manuals and text-books."
"This rage for the comic is most unexpressedly remarkable," observed the butler.
"It is indeed!" ejaculated Snoggles; and, in order to illustrate the truth of the statement,
      he jerked a piece of lemon-peel very cleverly into the dissenting parson's left eye.
"That's right—stone me to death!" murmured the reverend gentleman. "My name is Stephen—and
      it is all for righteousness' sake! I know I'm a chosen vessel, and may become a martyr. My
      name is Stephen, I tell you—Stephen Drum—um—ummer!"
He then began an eulogium upon meekness and resignation under injuries, and reiterated his
      conviction that he was a chosen vessel; but, becoming suddenly excited by a horse-laugh which
      fell upon his ear, he forgot all about the chosen vessel, and lifted another very savagely
      from the table. In a word, he seized a pewter pot in his hand, and would have hurled it at Mr.
      Snoggles' head, had not Mr. Whittingham stopped the dangerous missile in time, and pacified
      the reverend gentleman by calling for more punch.
"We must certainly have those two men bound over to keep the peace," said Mac Chizzle; "two
      sureties in fifty, and themselves in a hundred, each."
"I shall dress the whole scene up for one of the Monthlies," observed Mr.
      Guffins.
"If you do, you'll be indictable for libel," said Mac Chizzle. "The greater the truth, the
      greater the libel."
In the meanwhile Suggett and his friend Snoggles drew close to each other, and entered into
      conversation.
"It must be about three years since I saw you last," said the latter.
"Three year, come January," observed Suggett.
"Ah! I've seed some strange wicissitudes in the interval," continued Snoggles. "I went
      abroad as coachman, with a dashing young chap of the name of Winchester—"
"The devil you did! how singular! why my present guvner's name is Chichester."
"Well, I des say they're cousins then," said the ostler; "but I hope your'n won't treat you
      as mine did me. He seemed to have no end of tin for some months, and lived—my eye, how he
      lived! King's Bench dinners ain't nothin' to what his'n was; and yet I've heard say that the
      prisoners live there better than their creditors outside. Howsomever—things didn't always go
      on swimmingly. We went to Baden—called so cos of the baths; and there my guvner got involved
      in some gambling transactions, as forced him to make his name Walker. Well, he
      bolted, leaving all his traps behind, and me amongst them, and not a skurrick to pay the hotel
      bill and find my way back agin to England. The landlord he seized the traps, and I was forced
      to walk all the way to—I forget the name of the place—"
"Constantinople, perhaps," said Suggett, kindly endeavouring to assist his friend in his
      little geographical embarrassments.
"No; that ain't it," returned Snoggles. "Howsomever, I had every kind of difficulty to fight
      up against; and I never see my guvner from that day to this. He owed me eight pound, nineteen,
      and sixpence for wages; and he was bound by contract to bring me back to England."
"Disgraceful raskel, that he was!" ejaculated Mr. Suggett. "I raly think that we gentlemen
      ought to establish a society for our protection. The Licensed Witlers have their
      Association; why shouldn't we have the Gentlemen's Gentlemen organized into a society?"
"Why not?" said Snoggles.
The waiter now acquainted the company that supper was ready in an upstairs room for those
      who liked to partake of it. All the gentlemen whose names have been introduced to the reader
      in connection
       with the parlour of the Servants' Arms, removed to the banqueting
      saloon, where the table was spread with a snow-white cloth and black handled knives and forks.
      At intervals stood salt-cellars and pepper boxes, the latter resembling in shape the three
      little domes upon the present National Gallery in Trafalgar Square. A huge round of boiled
      beef tripe both boiled and fried, and rump steaks, formed the supper. The methodist parson
      insisted upon being allowed to say grace—or, as he expressed it, "ask a blessing," for which
      purpose the same neighbours who had kindly helped him up the stairs, now sustained him upon
      his legs. Dread was the havoc then made upon the various dainties on the table, Mr. Guffins
      being especially characterised by a good appetite upon this occasion.
The Reverend Mr. Drummer was also far from being behind-hand in this onslaught upon the
      luxuries supplied by the Servants' Arms; and while he bolted huge mouthfuls of boiled
      beef, he favoured the company with an excellent moral dissertation upon abstemiousness and
      self-mortification. Mr. Drummer was, however, one of those who content themselves with
      inculcating morality, and do not consider it necessary to set an example in their own persons;
      for, after having clearly demonstrated that gluttony and drunkenness lead to blasphemy,
      ungodliness, and profane swearing, he abruptly turned to the landlord, who presided at the
      supper-table, and, holding his plate to be filled for the fourth time, exclaimed, "D—n your
      eyes, don't cut it so infernally thick!"
After supper, "glasses round" of hot brandy and water were introduced, and the conversation
      was carried on with considerable spirit. It was midnight before the party thought of breaking
      up, although several of the gentlemen present had already begun to see three or four Dutch
      clocks staring them in the face besides the one which graced the wall. As for the Reverend Mr.
      Drummer, he declared that he was so affected by the ungodly proceedings of those present that
      he should forthwith endeavour to wash away their guilt with his tears; and it is distressing
      to be compelled to observe that all the reward this truly pious and deserving man experienced
      at the hands of the ungrateful company, was the cruel accusation that he was "crying drunk."
      This disgraceful behaviour produced such an effect upon his naturally nervous temperament,
      that he fell flat upon the floor, and was compelled to be taken in a wheelbarrow to his own
      house close by.
We may also add here that on the following day this proceeding was rumoured abroad, so that
      the much injured minister was necessitated to justify his conduct from the pulpit on the
      ensuing sabbath. This he did so effectually, that two old ladies, who carried small flasks of
      brandy in their pockets, were conveyed out of the chapel in a peculiar state—no doubt
      overpowered by the minister's eloquence. They however recovered at the expiration of some
      hours, and immediately opened a subscription to present a piece of plate to the Reverend
      Stephen Drummer, together with a vote of thanks and confidence on the part of the
      congregation. The vote was respectfully, but gratefully declined by this holy man; but, after
      some little entreaty, he was prevailed upon to accept the plate. From that time to the present
      day his congregation has been rapidly increasing; and, although envy and jealousy have
      declared that he himself helped to augment its numbers in the shape of three innocent little
      children by different servant-girls, he very properly disdained to contradict the report, and
      is considered by his flock to be a chosen and savoury vessel of the Lord.
