
CHAPTER I.
YOUTHFUL COLLOQUY—INTRODUCING CHARACTER
The curtains were drawn close, the large lamp was on the table, and a cheerful fire blazing
      in the grate; for though only September, the room was sufficiently large, and the evenings
      sufficiently chill, for a fire to add greatly to its aspect of true English comfort. There
      were many admirable pictures suspended on the walls, and well-filled book-cases, desks, and
      maps, stands of beautiful flowers, and some ingenious toys, all seeming to proclaim the
      apartment as the especial possession of the young party who were this evening busily engaged
      at the large round table which occupied the centre of the room. They were only four in number,
      but what with a large desk piled with books and some most alarming-sized dictionaries, which
      occupied the elder of the two lads, the embroidery frame of the elder girl, the dissected map
      before her sister, and two or three books scattered round the younger boy, the table seemed so
      well filled that Miss Harcourt had quietly ensconced herself in her own private little corner,
      sufficiently near to take an interest, and sometimes join in the conversation of her youthful
      charge; but so apart as to be no restraint upon them, and to enable her to pursue her own
      occupations of either reading, writing, or working uninterruptedly. Could poor Mrs. Fortescue
      have glanced on the happy group, she certainly might have told her sister, with some show of
      justice, that there was such an equal distribution of interesting and animated expression
      (which is the great beauty of youth), that she could not have known the trial of having such a
      heavy, dull, unhappy child as Ellen. Mrs. Hamilton, indeed, we rather think, would not have
      considered such a trial, except as it proved ill-health and physical pain in the little
      sufferer; and, perhaps her increased care and tenderness (for such with her would have been
      the consequence of the same cause which had created her sister's neglect) might have removed
      both the depression of constant but impalpable illness, and the expression of heaviness and
      gloom. Certain it is, that her own Herbert had, with regard to delicate health, given her more
      real and constant anxiety than Eleanor had ever allowed herself to experience with Ellen; but
      there was nothing in the boy's peculiarly interesting countenance to denote the physical
      suffering he very often endured. Care and love had so surrounded his path with blessings, that
      he was often heard to declare, that he never even wished to be as strong as his brother, or to
      share his active pleasures, he had so many others equally delightful. Whether it was his
      physical temperament, inducing a habitude of reflection and studious thought much beyond his
      years, or whether the unusually gifted mind worked on the frame, or the one combined to form
      the other, it would be as impossible to decide with regard to him as with hundreds of others
      like him; but he certainly seemed, not only to his parents, but to their whole household, and
      to every one who casually associated with him, to have more in him of heaven than earth; as if
      indeed he were only lent, not given. And often, and often his mother's heart ached with its
      very intensity of love, causing the unspoken dread—how might she hope to retain one so
      faultless, and yet so full of every human sympathy and love! The delicate complexion,
      beautiful color of his cheeks and lips, and large soft, very dark blue eye, with its long
      black lash, high, arched brow, shaded by glossy chestnut hair, were all so lit up with the
      rays of mind, that though his face returned again and again to the fancy of those who had only
      once beheld it, they could scarcely have recalled a single feature, feeling only the almost
      angelic expression of the whole.
His brother, as full of mirth and mischief, and as noisy and laughter-loving as Herbert was
      quiet and thoughtful, made his way at once, winning regard by storm, and retaining it by his
      frank and generous qualities, which made him a favorite with young and old. Even in his hours
      of study, there was not the least evidence of reflection or soberness. As a child he had had
      much to contend with, in the way of passion, pride, and self-will; but his home influence had
      been such a judicious blending of indulgence and firmness on the part of both his parents,
      such a persevering inculcation of a strong sense of duty, religious and moral, that at fifteen
      his difficulties had been all nearly overcome; and, except when occasional acts of
      thoughtlessness and hasty impulse lured him into error and its painful consequences, he was as
      happy and as good a lad as even his anxious mother could desire.
The elder of his two sisters resembled him in the bright, dark, flashing eye, the straight
      intellectual brow, the rich dark brown hair and well-formed mouth; but the expression was so
      different at present, that it was often difficult to trace the likeness that actually existed.
      Haughtiness, and but too often ill-temper, threw a shade over a countenance, which when happy
      and animated was not only attractive then, but gave a fair promise of great beauty in after
      years. The disposition of Caroline Hamilton was in fact naturally so similar to that of her
      aunt, Mrs. Fortescue, that Mrs. Hamilton's task with her was not only more difficult and
      painful in the present than with any of the others, but her dread of the future at times so
      overpowering, that it required all her husband's influence to calm her, by returning trust in
      Him, who had promised to answer all who called upon Him, and would bless that mother's toils
      which were based on, and looked up alone, to His influence on her child, and guidance for
      herself.
The blue-eyed, fair-haired, graceful, little Emmeline, not only the youngest of the family,
      but, from her slight figure, delicate, small features, and childish manner, appearing even
      much younger than she was, was indeed a source of joy and love to all, seeming as if sorrow,
      except for others, could not approach her. She had indeed much that required a carefully
      guiding hand, in a yielding weakness of disposition, indolent habit in learning, an
      unrestrained fancy, and its general accompaniment, over-sensitiveness of feeling, but so
      easily guided by affection, and with a disposition so sweet and gentle, that a word from her
      mother was always enough. Mrs. Hamilton had little fears for her, except, indeed, as for the
      vast capability of individual suffering which such a disposition engendered, in those trials
      which it was scarcely possible she might hope to pass through life without. There was only one
      safeguard, one unfailing comfort, for a character like hers, and that was a deep ever-present
      sense of religion, which untiringly, and yet more by example than by precept, her parents
      endeavored to instill. Greatly, indeed, would both Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton have been astonished,
      had they been told that the little girl, Ellen Fortescue, who to both was such an enigma, and
      who was seemingly in all things so utterly unlike their Emmeline, was in natural disposition
      exactly the same; and that the vast difference in present and future character simply
      arose from the fact, that the early influences of the one were sorrow and neglect, and of the
      other, happiness and love.
"I wonder whether mamma and papa will really come home to-night;" observed Caroline, after
      several minutes of unbroken silence, all seemingly so engrossed in their own occupations as to
      have no inclination to speak. "And if they do, I wish we could know the exact time, I do so
      hate expecting and being disappointed."
"Then neither wonder nor expect, my sage sister," replied Percy, without, however, raising
      his head or interrupting his writing; "and I will give you two capital reasons for my advice.
      Firstly, wonder is the offspring of ignorance, and has two opposite effects on my sex and on
      yours. With us it is closely connected with philosophy, for we are told in 'wonder all
      philosophy begins, in wonder it ends, and adoration fills up the interspace;' but with you,
      poor weak creatures, the only effect it produces is increased curiosity, of which you have
      naturally a more than adequate supply. Secondly, if you begin to wonder and expect, and
      speculate as to the ayes and noes of a contingency to-night, you will not cease talking till
      mamma really does appear; and then good-by to my theme, for to write while your tongue is
      running, is impossible. So pray, take my advice, on consideration that you have had as good a
      sermon from me as my reverend brother Herbert can ever hope to give."
"I do not think mamma and papa will be quite satisfied if he do not give us a much better
      one, even the very first time he attempts it;" rejoined Emmeline, with a very arch look at her
      brother.
"What, you against me, Miss Emmy! and beginning to talk too. You forget what an important
      personage I am, during papa's absence especially; and that as such, I am not to be insulted
      with impunity. So here goes—as a fresh exercise for your patience!" And he mingled all the
      fixed and unfixed parts of her map in most bewildering confusion, regardless of her laughing
      entreaty to let them alone.
"You have tried a very bad way to keep me quiet, Percy," continued Caroline; "you must
      either explain why wonder may not equally have the same good effect on us as on you, or
      retract your words entirely. You know you would not have expressed such a contemptuous
      opinion, if mamma had been present."
"My mother is such a very superior person, that when she is present her superiority extends
      over her whole sex, Caroline; even you are safe, because, as her child, it is to be hoped that
      one of these days you may be something like her: exactly, I do not expect—two such woman as my
      mother can not exist."
"As if your opinion were of such importance, Percy," replied Caroline haughtily; "it really
      is very little consequence to me whether you think me like mamma or not."
"It is to me, though," rejoined Emmeline, earnestly; "I would rather be like mamma than like
      any body else, and I should like Percy to think I was, because then he would love me still
      more."
"Bravo, my little Em.; spoken almost as well as I could myself, and, as a reward, as soon as
      this most annoying piece of erudition is accomplished, I will help you with your map why, you
      silly little thing, you have put Kamschatka as the terra firma of South America; no doubt that
      ice and snow would be very welcome there, but how the Americans would stare to see the
      fur-clad Kamschatkans such near neighbors. That's it, go on, puzzle away till I can help you.
      And you Miss Caroline, retain your contempt of my opinion, and may you never repent it."
"I thought you told me not to talk, Percy," replied his sister; "and I should like to know
      who is talking the most, you or I? You will not finish what you are doing before the bell
      rings for prayers, if you go on in this way."
"That proves how little you know the extent of my powers. I have only to make a clean copy
      of these learned reflections. Why, in the name of all the gods, were there such provokingly
      clever people as Seneca, Cicero, Pliny, and a host of others! or, if they must be wise, why
      did they not burn all the written wisdom, instead of leaving it as a means of torture in the
      hands of learned pedagogues, yclept schoolmasters, and as a curse on those poor unfortunates
      whose noddles are not wise enough to contain it."
"I should be very sorry if all the ancient authors were thus annihilated," observed Herbert,
      looking up from his book with a bright smile. "I should lose a great deal of enjoyment even
      now, and still more by-and-by, when I know more."
"Ay, but my dear fellow, your head is not quite so like a sieve as mine. Yours receives,
      contains, digests, and sends forth the matter improved by your own ideas; but as for mine, the
      matter undoubtedly enters, but runs out again, and only leaves behind that which is too large
      and gross to pass through. No, no, Bertie, your head and mine are not related even in the
      twentieth degree of consanguinity, however nearly connected their masters may be. Hush! not a
      word; I have only one line more; what a wise man that was to be sure, who said 'Otiosum esse
      quam nihil agere'—better to be idle than doing nothing. Don't shake your head and laugh, Emmy.
      Vale: never did I say good-by so willingly. Hurrah! mamma and papa may come home when they
      like now. Cast your eyes over it Herbert; just tell me if it look correct, and then vale
      books—vale pens—vale desk for to-night!" He placed his writing on his brother's open bunk,
      threw his dictionary and grammar high in air, and dexterously caught them as they fell, piled
      up his books, closed his desk, and then, with a comical sigh of relief, flung himself full
      length on a sofa.
"Now that you have finished your task, Percy, perhaps you will have the kindness to inform
      us why at this time of the evening you have been writing Latin?" inquired Caroline.
"And open my wound afresh! However, it is quite right that Miss Harcourt should know that,
      if I am ill from over-study to-morrow, it is her doing."
"Mine!" answered Miss Harcourt, laughing; "pray explain yourself, young man, for I am so
      perfectly innocent as not even to understand you."
"Did you not this morning give me a message to Lady Helen Grahame?"
"I did; you passed her house on your way to Mr. Howard's."
"Well, then, if you had not given me the message, much as I felt disinclined to pore over
      musty books and foolscap paper, from the extreme loveliness of the morning, I should have
      nerved myself to go straight on to the Rectory. Lady Helen was not visible, so I tarried,
      believing your message of vital importance, and Annie came to me—by-the-by, what a little
      woman that child is; Emmeline, you are a baby to her. I wonder she condescends to associate
      with you."
"I do not think she is at all fond of me—Caroline is her friend," replied Emmeline; "but
      what can Annie have to do with your Latin?"
"A great deal—for she talked and we walked, and time walked too, and by the time I had seen
      Lady Helen, it was two hours later than I ought to have been with Mr. Howard. On I went,
      feeling not particularly comfortable; but though it is clear logic that if Miss Harcourt had
      not sent me to Lady Helen's I should not have been led into temptation, I was magnanimous
      enough not to mention her, but to lay the whole blame of my non-appearance, on my own
      disinclination for any study but that of nature. Mr. Howard looked grave and sorrowful—I wish
      to heaven he was more like any other schoolmaster; that look and tone of his are worse than
      any rod!—and to redeem my lost time in the morning, I was desired to write a Latin theme on a
      letter of Pliny's this evening. And now that I have satisfied all your inquiries, please
      satisfy mine. Is there any chance of mamma's coming home to-night?"
"Every probability," replied Miss Harcourt. "It only depends on your cousin, who is so very
      delicate, that if she were too fatigued, Mr. Hamilton would remain at Exeter to-night, and
      proceed here early to-morrow."
"Well, my little cousin, though I have not the pleasure of knowing you, I hope you will be
      so kind as to let mamma come on to-night, for we have been too long without her, and I long to
      resign to papa his robes of office, for they sit mightily like borrowed plumes upon me. Mamma
      writes of Ellen and Edward—I wonder what they are like! Come, Tiny, paint them for me—your
      fertile fancy generally fills up the shadow of a name."
"I can not, Percy, for I am afraid my pictures would not be agreeable."
"Not agreeable!" repeated Percy and Miss Harcourt together. "Why not?"
Emmeline hesitated, then answered ingenuously, "We are so very, very happy together, that I
      do not feel quite sure that I am glad my cousins are going to live with us."
"What! are you afraid I shall love Ellen more than you, Emmy?" exclaimed her brother,
      starting up and sitting on her chair; "do not be alarmed, Tiny; no cousin shall take your
      place."
"Indeed I am not afraid of that, Percy, dear," she replied, looking so fondly in his face,
      that he gave her a hearty kiss. "I can not tell why I should feel half sorry that they are
      coming, but I am quite sure I will do all I can to make them happy."
"You could not do otherwise if you were to try, Tiny. Come, Caroline, what say you? We have
      all been thinking about them, so we may as well give each other the benefit of our
      thoughts."
"Suppose I do not feel inclined to do so?"
"Why we must all believe you are ashamed of them," replied Percy quickly, "and if you are, I
      know who has made you so. I would lay any wager, the whole time you have been with Lady Helen
      Grahame, since mamma has been away, she has been talking of nothing else—look, look, she is
      blushing—I am right."
"And if she did," replied Caroline, very much provoked, "she said nothing that I am ashamed
      of repeating. She knew my aunt before she went to India, and I am sure if her children are
      like her, they will be no agreeable additions to our family."
"Bravo, Caroline! you really are an apt pupil; Lady Helen's words and manner completely! but
      you may have one comfort; children are not always like their parents, and if they are as
      unlike Lady Helen's description of my poor aunt (which by the way she had no right to give,
      nor you to listen to) as you are at this moment unlike mamma, we shall get on capitally, and
      need have no fears about them."
"Percy you are intolerably disagreeable!"
"Because I speak the sad, sober truth? Caroline, do pray, get rid of that dawning ill
      temper, before mamma comes; it will not be a pleasant welcome home."
"I am not ill-tempered, Percy: I suppose I may have my own opinion of Ellen and Edward, as
      well as all of you," replied his sister angrily.
"But do not let it be an unkind one, without knowing them, dear Caroline," observed Herbert
      gently; "it is so very difficult to get rid of a prejudice when once it has entered our minds,
      even when we know and feel that it is a wrong one. I am sure if we only thought how sad it is
      that they have neither father nor mother to love them, and are coming all among strangers—born
      in a strange land too—we should find quite enough to think kindly about, and leave all wonder
      as to what they will be like, till we know them. I dare say we shall often have to bear and
      forbear, but that we have to do with each other, and it will only be one brother and sister
      more."
"Brother and sister! I am sure I shall not think of them so, Herbert, however you may. My
      father might have been a nobleman, and who knows any thing of theirs?"
"Caroline, how can you be so ridiculous!" exclaimed Percy, with a most provoking fit of
      laughter. "Their father served and died for his king—as our grandfather did; and had he lived
      might have been offered a title too—and their mother—really I think you are very insulting to
      mamma: her sister's children I should imagine quite as high in rank as ourselves!"
"And even if they were not—what would it signify?" rejoined Herbert. "Dear Caroline, pray do
      not talk or think so; it makes me feel so sorry, for I know how wrong it is—we might have been
      in their place."
"I really can not fancy any thing so utterly impossible," interrupted Caroline, "so you may
      spare the supposition, Herbert."
"It is no use, Bertie; you must bring the antipodes together, before you and Caroline will
      think alike," interposed Percy, perceiving with regret the expression of pain on his brother's
      face, and always ready to guard him either from physical or mental suffering, feeling
      instinctively that, from his extraordinary mind and vivid sense of duty, he was liable to the
      latter, from many causes which other natures would pass unnoticed.
Miss Harcourt did not join the conversation. It had always been Mrs. Hamilton's wish that in
      their intercourse with each other, her children should be as unrestrained as if they had been
      alone. Had Caroline's sentiments received encouragement, she would have interfered; but the
      raillery of Percy and the earnestness of Herbert, she knew were more likely to produce an
      effect than any thing like a rebuke from herself, which would only have caused restraint
      before her in future. It was through this perfect unrestraint that Mrs. Hamilton had become so
      thoroughly acquainted with the several characters of her children. That Caroline's sentiments
      caused her often real pain was true, but it was far better to know them, and endeavor to
      correct and remove them, by causing education to bear upon the faults they revealed, than to
      find them concealed from her by the constant fear of words of reproof.
To remove Herbert's unusual seriousness, Percy continued, laughingly—
"Miss Harcourt, what are your thoughts on this momentous subject? It is no use asking
      Herbert's, we all know them without his telling us; but you are almost the principally
      concerned of the present party, for Ellen will bring you the trouble of another pupil."
"I shall not regret it, Percy; but only shall rejoice if I can in any way lessen your
      mother's increased charge. As for what your cousins will be like, I candidly tell you, I have
      scarcely thought about it. I have no doubt we shall find them strange and shy at first; but we
      must do all we can to make them feel they are no strangers."
"And now, then, it only remains for the right honorable me to speak; and really Emmy and
      Herbert and you have told my story, and left me nothing. I do not know whether I am pleased or
      not, but I am very sorry for them; and it will be capital if this Master Edward turns out a
      lad of spirit and mischief, and not over-learned or too fond of study—one, in fact, that I can
      associate with, without feeling such a painful sensation of inferiority as I do when in
      company with my right reverend brother."
"Dear Percy, do not call me reverend," said Herbert, appealingly: "I feel it almost a
      mockery now, when I am so very far from being worthy to become a clergyman."
"You are a good fellow, Bertie; and I will not tease you, if I can help it—but really I do
      not mean it for mockery; you know, or ought to know, that you are better now than half the
      clergymen who have taken orders, and as much superior to me in goodness as in talent."
"Indeed I know no such thing, Percy; I am not nearly so strong in health as you are, and am
      therefore, naturally more fond of quiet pleasures: and as for talent, if you were as fond of
      application as of frolic, you would leave me far behind."
"Wrong, Bertie, quite wrong! but think of yourself as you please, I know what every body
      thinks of you. Hush! is that the sound of a carriage, or only the wind making love to the old
      oaks?"
"The wind making love, Percy!" repeated Emmeline, laughing; "I neither hear that, nor the
      carriage wheels kissing the ground."
"Well done, Tiny! my poetry is beaten hollow; but there—there—I am sure it is a carriage!"
      and Percy bounded from the table so impetuously as nearly to upset it, flung back the curtain,
      and looked eagerly from the window.
Herbert closed his book to listen; Emmeline left her nearly-completed map, and joined Percy;
      Caroline evidently tried to resume serenity, but, too proud to evince it, industriously
      pursued her work, breaking the thread almost every time that she drew out the needle.
"It is nothing, Percy; how could you disappoint us so?" said Herbert, in a tone of
      regret.
"My good fellow, you must be deaf—listen! nearer and louder—and, look there, Emmeline,
      through those trees, don't you see something glimmering? that must be the lamp of the
      carriage."
"Nonsense, Percy, it is a glowworm."
"A glowworm! why, Em., the thought of seeing mamma has blinded you. What glowworm ever came
      so steadily forward? No! there is no mistake now. Hurrah, it is the carriage; here Robert,
      Morris, Ellis, all of you to the hall! to the hall! The carriage is coming down the avenue."
      And with noisy impatience, the young gentleman ran into the hall, assembled all the servants
      he had named, and others too, all eager to welcome the travelers; flung wide back the massive
      door, and he and Herbert both were on the steps several minutes before the carriage came in
      sight.
