
CHAPTER V.
THE MILL ON FIRE—JEM WILSON TO THE RESCUE.

Learned he was; nor bird, nor insect flew,
 But he its leafy home and history knew;
Nor wild-flower decked the rock, nor moss the well,
 But he its name and qualities could tell.
Elliott.
There is a class of men in Manchester, unknown even to many of the inhabitants, and whose
     existence will probably be doubted by many, who yet may claim kindred with all the noble names
     that science recognises. I said "in Manchester," but they are scattered all over the
     manufacturing districts of Lancashire. In the neighbourhood of Oldham there are weavers, common
     hand-loom weavers, who throw the shuttle with unceasing sound, though Newton's "Principia" lie
     open on the loom, to be snatched at in work hours, but revelled over in meal times, or at
     night. Mathematical problems are received with interest, and studied with absorbing attention
     by many a broad-spoken, common-looking, factory-hand. It is perhaps less astonishing that the
     more popularly interesting branches of natural history have their warm and devoted followers
     among this class. There are botanists among them, equally familiar with either the Linnæan or
     the Natural system, who know the name and habitat of every plant within a day's walk from their
     dwellings; who steal the holiday of a day or two when any particular plant should be in flower,
     and tying up their simple food in their pocket-handkerchiefs, set off with single purpose to
     fetch home the humble-looking weed. There are entomologists, who may be seen with a
     rude-looking net, ready to catch any winged insect, or a kind of dredge, with which they rake
     the green and slimy pools; practical, shrewd, hard-working men, who pore over every new
     specimen with real scientific delight. Nor is it the common and more obvious divisions of
     Entomology and Botany that alone attract these earnest seekers after knowledge. Perhaps it may
     be owing to the great annual town-holiday of Whitsun-week so often falling in May or June that
     the two great, beautiful families of Ephemeridæ and Phryganidæ have been so much and so closely
     studied by Manchester workmen, while they have in a great measure escaped general observation.
     If you will refer to the preface to Sir J. E. Smith's Life (I have it not by me, or I would
     copy you the exact passage), you will find that he names a little circumstance corroborative of
     what I have said. Sir J. E. Smith, being on a visit to Roscoe, of Liverpool, made some
     inquiries from him as to the habitat of a very rare plant, said to be found in certain places
     in Lancashire. Mr. Roscoe knew nothing of the plant; but stated, that if any one could give him
     the desired information, it would be a hand-loom weaver in Manchester, whom he named. Sir J. E.
     Smith proceeded by coach to Manchester, and on arriving at that town, he inquired of the porter
     who was carrying his luggage if he could direct him to So and So.
"Oh, yes," replied the man. "He does a bit in my way;" and, on further investigation, it
     turned out, that both the porter, and his friend the weaver, were skilful botanists, and able
     to give Sir J. E. Smith the very information which he wanted.
Such are the tastes and pursuits of some of the thoughtful, little understood, working men of
     Manchester.
And Margaret's grandfather was one of these. He was a little wiry-looking old man, who moved
     with a jerking motion, as if his limbs were worked by a string like a child's toy, with dun
     coloured hair lying thin and soft at the back and sides of his head; his forehead was so large
     it seemed to overbalance the rest of his face, which had indeed lost its natural contour by the
     absence of all the teeth. The eyes absolutely gleamed with intelligence; so keen, so observant,
     you felt as if they were almost wizard-like. Indeed, the whole room looked not unlike a
     wizard's dwelling. Instead of pictures were hung rude wooden frames of impaled insects; the
     little table was covered with cabalistic books; and a case of mysterious instruments lay
     beside, one of which Job Legh was using when his grand-daughter entered.
On her appearance he pushed his spectacles up so as to rest midway on his forehead, and gave
     Mary a short, kind welcome. But Margaret he caressed as a mother caresses her first-born;
     stroking her with tenderness, and almost altering his voice as he spoke to her.
Mary looked round on the odd, strange things she had never seen at home, and which seemed to
     her to have a very uncanny look.
"Is your grandfather a fortune-teller?" whispered she to her new friend.
"No," replied Margaret, in the same voice; "but you're not the first as has taken him for
     such. He is only fond of such things as most folks know nothing about."
"And do you know aught about them, too?"
"I know a bit about some of the things grandfather is fond on; just because he's fond on 'em
     I tried to learn about them."
"What things are these?" said Mary, struck with the weird looking creatures that sprawled
     around the room in their roughly-made glass cases.
But she was not prepared for the technical names which Job Legh pattered down on her ear, on
     which they fell like hail on a skylight; and the strange language only bewildered her more than
     ever. Margaret saw the state of the case, and came to the rescue.
"Look, Mary, at this horrid scorpion. He gave me such a fright: I'm all of a twitter yet when
     I think of it. Grandfather went to Liverpool one Whitsun-week to go strolling about the docks
     and pick up what he could from the sailors, who often bring some queer thing or another from
     the hot countries they go to; and so he sees a chap with a bottle in his hand, like a
     druggist's physic-bottle; and says grandfather, 'What have ye gotten there?' So the sailor
     holds it up, and grandfather knew it was a rare kind o' scorpion, not common even in the East
     Indies where the man came from; and says he, 'How did ye catch this fine fellow, for he
     wouldn't be taken for nothing I'm thinking?' And the man said as how when they were unloading
     the ship he'd found him lying behind a bag of rice, and he thought the cold had killed him, for
     he was not squashed nor injured a bit. He did not like to part with any of the spirit out of
     his grog to put the scorpion in, but slipped him into the bottle, knowing there were folks enow
     who would give him something for him. So grandfather gives him a shilling."
"Two shilling," interrupted Job Legh, "and a good bargain it was."
"Well! grandfather came home as proud as Punch, and pulled the bottle out of his pocket. But
     you see th' scorpion were doubled up, and grandfather thought I couldn't fairly see how big he
     was. So he shakes him out right before the fire; and a good warm one it was, for I was ironing,
     I remember. I left off ironing, and stooped down over him, to look at him better, and
     grandfather got a book, and began to read how this very kind were the most poisonous and
     vicious species, how their bite were often fatal, and then went on to read how people who were
     bitten got swelled, and screamed with pain. I was listening hard, but as it fell out, I never
     took my eyes off the creature, though I could not ha' told I was watching it. Suddenly it
     seemed to give a jerk, and before I could speak, it gave another, and in a minute it was as
     wild as could be, running at me just like a mad dog."
"What did you do?" asked Mary.
"Me! why, I jumped first on a chair, and then on all the things I'd been ironing on the
     dresser, and I screamed for grandfather to come up by me, but he did not hearken to me."
"Why, if I'd come up by thee, who'd ha' caught the creature, I should like to know?"
"Well, I begged grandfather to crush it, and I had the iron right over it once, ready to
     drop, but grandfather begged me not to hurt it in that way. So I couldn't think what he'd have,
     for he hopped round the room as if he were sore afraid, for all he begged me not to injure it.
     At last he goes to th' kettle, and lifts up the lid, and peeps in. What on earth is he doing
     that for, thinks I; he'll never drink his tea with a scorpion running free and easy about the
     room. Then he takes the tongs, and he settles his spectacles on his nose, and in a minute he
     had lifted the creature up by th' leg, and dropped him into the boiling water."
"And did that kill him?" said Mary.
"Ay, sure enough; he boiled for longer time than grandfather liked though. But I was so
     afeard of his coming round again. I ran to the public-house for some gin, and grandfather
     filled the bottle, and then we poured off the water, and picked him out of the kettle, and
     dropped him into the bottle, and he were there above a twelvemonth."
"What brought him to life at first?" asked Mary.
"Why, you see, he were never really dead, only torpid—that is, dead asleep with the cold, and
     our good fire brought him round."
"I'm glad father does not care for such things," said Mary.
"Are you! Well, I'm often downright glad grandfather is so fond of his books, and his
     creatures, and his plants. It does my heart good to see him so happy, sorting them all at home,
     and so ready to go in search of more, whenever he's a spare day. Look at him now! he's gone
     back to his books, and he'll be as happy as a king, working away till I make him go to bed. It
     keeps him silent, to be sure; but so long as I see him earnest, and pleased, and eager, what
     does that matter? Then, when he has his talking bouts, you can't think how much he has to say.
     Dear grandfather! you don't know how happy we are!"
Mary wondered if the dear grandfather heard all this, for Margaret did not speak in an under
     tone; but no! he was far too deep and eager in solving a problem. He did not even notice Mary's
     leave-taking, and she went home with the feeling that she had that night made the acquaintance
     of two of the strangest people she ever saw in her life. Margaret, so quiet, so common place,
     until her singing powers were called forth; so silent from home, so cheerful and agreeable at
     home; and her grandfather so very different to any one Mary had ever seen. Margaret had said he
     was not a fortune-teller, but she did not know whether to believe her.
To resolve her doubts, she told the history of the evening to her father, who was interested
     by her account, and curious to see and judge for himself. Opportunities are not often wanting
     where inclination goes before, and ere the end of that winter Mary looked upon Margaret almost
     as an old friend. The latter would bring her work when Mary was likely to be at home in the
     evenings and sit with her; and Job Legh would put a book and his pipe in his pocket and just
     step round the corner to fetch his grand-child, ready for a talk if he found Barton in; ready
     to pull out pipe and book if the girls wanted him to wait, and John was still at his club. In
     short, ready to do whatever would give pleasure to his darling Margaret.
I do not know what points of resemblance (or dissimilitude, for the one joins people as often
     as the other) attracted the two girls to each other. Margaret had the great charm of possessing
     good strong common sense, and do you not perceive how involuntarily this is valued? It is so
     pleasant to have a friend who possesses the power of setting a difficult question in a clear
     light; whose judgment can tell what is best to be done; and who is so convinced of what is
     "wisest, best," that in consideration of the end, all difficulties in the way diminish. People
     admire talent, and talk about their admiration. But they value common sense without talking
     about it, and often without knowing it.
So Mary and Margaret grew in love one toward the other; and Mary told many of her feelings in
     a way she had never done before to any one. Most of her foibles also were made known to
     Margaret, but not all. There was one cherished weakness still concealed from every one. It
     concerned a lover, not beloved, but favoured by fancy. A gallant, handsome young man; but—not
     beloved. Yet Mary hoped to meet him every day in her walks, blushed when she heard his name,
     and tried to think of him as her future husband, and above all, tried to think of herself as
     his future wife. Alas! poor Mary! Bitter woe did thy weakness work thee.
She had other lovers. One or two would gladly have kept her company, but she held herself too
     high, they said. Jem Wilson said nothing, but loved on and on, ever more fondly; he hoped
     against hope; he would not give up, for it seemed like giving up life to give up thought of
     Mary. He did not dare to look to any end of all this; the present, so that he saw her, touched
     the hem of her garment, was enough. Surely, in time, such deep love would beget love.
He would not relinquish hope, and yet her coldness of manner was enough to daunt any man; and
     it made Jem more despairing than he would acknowledge for a long time even to himself.
But one evening he came round by Barton's house, a willing messenger for his father, and
     opening the door saw Margaret sitting asleep before the fire. She had come in to speak to Mary;
     and worn out by a long working, watching night, she fell asleep in the genial warmth.
An old-fashioned saying about a pair of gloves came into Jem's mind, and stepping gently up
     he kissed Margaret with a friendly kiss.
She awoke, and perfectly understanding the thing, she said, "For shame of yourself, Jem! What
     would Mary say?"
Lightly said, lightly answered.
"She'd nobbut say, practice makes perfect." And they both laughed. But the words Margaret had
     said rankled in Jem's mind. Would Mary care? Would she care in the very least? They seemed to
     call for an answer by night, and by day; and Jem felt that his heart told him Mary was quite
     indifferent to any action of his. Still he loved on, and on, ever more fondly.
Mary's father was well aware of the nature of Jem Wilson's feelings for his daughter, but he
     took no notice of them to any one, thinking Mary full young yet for the cares of married life,
     and unwilling, too, to entertain the idea of parting with her at any time, however distant. But
     he welcomed Jem at his house, as he would have done his father's son, whatever were his motives
     for coming; and now and then admitted the thought, that Mary might do worse when her time came,
     than marry Jem Wilson, a steady workman at a good trade, a good son to his parents, and a fine
     manly spirited chap—at least when Mary was not by: for when she was present he watched her too
     closely, and too anxiously, to have much of what John Barton called "spunk" in him.
It was towards the end of February, in that year, and a bitter black frost had lasted for
     many weeks. The keen east wind had long since swept the streets clean, though on a gusty day
     the dust would rise like pounded ice, and make people's faces quite smart with the cold force
     with which it blew against them. Houses, sky, people, and every thing looked as if a gigantic
     brush had washed them all over with a dark shade of Indian ink. There was some reason for this
     grimy appearance on human beings, whatever there might be for the dun looks of the landscape;
     for soft water had become an article not even to be purchased; and the poor washerwomen might
     be seen vainly trying to procure a little by breaking the thick gray ice that coated the
     ditches and ponds in the neighbourhood. People prophesied a long continuance to this already
     lengthened frost; said the spring would be very late; no spring fashions required; no summer
     clothing purchased for a short uncertain summer. Indeed there was no end to the evil prophesied
     during the continuance of that bleak east wind.
Mary hurried home one evening, just as daylight was fading, from Miss Simmonds', with her
     shawl held up to her mouth, and her head bent as if in deprecation of the meeting wind. So she
     did not perceive Margaret till, she was close upon her at the very turning into the court.
"Bless me, Margaret! is that you? Where are you bound to?"
"To nowhere but your own house (that is, if you'll take me in). I've a job of work to finish
     to-night; mourning, as must be in time for the funeral to-morrow; and grandfather has been out
     moss-hunting, and will not be home till late."
"Oh, how charming it will be. I'll help you if you're backward. Have you much to do?"
"Yes, I only got the order yesterday at noon; and there's three girls beside the mother; and
     what with trying on and matching the stuff (for there was not enough in the piece they chose
     first), I'm above a bit behindhand. I've the skirts all to make. I kept that work till
     candlelight; and the sleeves, to say nothing of little bits to the bodies; for the missis is
     very particular, and I could scarce keep from smiling while they were crying so, really taking
     on sadly I'm sure, to hear first one and then t'other clear up to notice the sit of her gown.
     They weren't to be misfits I promise you, though they were in such trouble."
"Well, Margaret, you're right welcome as you know, and I'll sit down and help you with
     pleasure, though I was tired enough of sewing to-night at Miss Simmonds'."
By this time Mary had broken up the raking coal, and lighted her candle; and Margaret settled
     herself to her work on one side of the table, while her friend hurried over her tea at the
     other. The things were then lifted en masse to the dresser; and dusting her side of
     the table with the apron she always wore at home, Mary took up some breadths and began to run
     them together.
"Who's it all for, for if you told me I've forgotten?"
"Why for Mrs. Ogden as keeps the greengrocer's shop in Oxford Road. Her husband drank himself
     to death, and though she cried over him and his ways all the time he was alive, she's fretted
     sadly for him now he's dead."
"Has he left her much to go upon?" asked Mary, examining the texture of the dress. "This is
     beautifully fine soft bombazine."
"No, I'm much afeared there's but little, and there's several young children, besides the
     three Miss Ogdens."
"I should have thought girls like them would ha' made their own gowns," observed Mary.
"So I dare say they do, many a one, but now they seem all so busy getting ready for the
     funeral; for it's to be quite a grand affair, well-nigh twenty people to breakfast, as one of
     the little ones told me; the little thing seemed to like the fuss, and I do believe it
     comforted poor Mrs. Ogden to make all the piece o' work. Such a smell of ham boiling and fowls
     roasting while I waited in the kitchen; it seemed more like a wedding nor [7] a funeral. They said she'd spend a matter o' sixty pound on th'
     burial."
"I thought you said she was but badly off," said Mary.
"Ay, I know she's asked for credit at several places, saying her husband laid hands on every
     farthing he could get for drink. But th' undertakers urge her on you see, and tell her this
     thing's usual, and that thing's only a common mark of respect, and that every body has t'other
     thing, till the poor woman has no will o' her own. I dare say, too, her heart strikes her (it
     always does when a person's gone) for many a word and many a slighting deed to him, who's stiff
     and cold; and she thinks to make up matters, as it were, by a grand funeral, though she and all
     her children, too, may have to pinch many a year to pay the expenses, if ever they pay them at
     all."
"This mourning, too, will cost a pretty penny," said Mary. "I often wonder why folks wear
     mourning; it's not pretty or becoming; and it costs a deal of money just when people can spare
     it least; and if what the Bible tells us be true, we ought not to be sorry when a friend, who's
     been good, goes to his rest; and as for a bad man, one's glad enough to get shut [8] on him. I cannot see what good comes out o' wearing
     mourning."
"I'll tell you what I think th' fancy was sent for (Old Alice calls every thing 'sent for,'
     and I believe she's right). It does do good, though not as much as it costs, that I do believe,
     in setting people (as is cast down by sorrow and feels themselves unable to settle to any thing
     but crying) something to do. Why now I told you how they were grieving; for, perhaps, he was a
     kind husband and father, in his thoughtless way, when he wasn't in liquor. But they cheered up
     wonderful while I was there, and I asked 'em for more directions than usual, that they might
     have something to talk over and fix about; and I left 'em my fashion-book (though it were two
     months old) just a purpose."
"I don't think every one would grieve a that way. Old Alice wouldn't."
"Old Alice is one in a thousand. I doubt, too, if she would fret much, however sorry she
     might be. She would say it were sent, and fall to trying to find out what good it were to do.
     Every sorrow in her mind is sent for good. Did I ever tell you, Mary, what she said one day
     when she found me taking on about something?"
"No; do tell me. What were you fretting about, first place?"
"I can't tell you just now; perhaps I may sometime."
"When?"
"Perhaps this very evening, if it rises in my heart; perhaps never. It's a fear that
     sometimes I can't abide to think about, and sometimes I don't like to think on any thing else.
     Well, I was fretting about this fear, and Alice comes in for something, and finds me crying. I
     would not tell her no more than I would you, Mary; so she says, 'Well, dear, you must mind
     this, when you're going to fret and be low about any thing, "An anxious mind is never a holy
     mind."' Oh, Mary, I have so often checked my grumbling sin' [9]
     she said that."
The weary sound of stitching was the only sound heard for a little while, till Mary
     inquired,
"Do you expect to get paid for this mourning?"
"Why I do not much think I shall. I've thought it over once or twice, and I mean to bring
     myself to think I shan't, and to like to do it as my bit towards comforting them. I don't think
     they can pay, and yet they're just the sort of folk to have their minds easier for wearing
     mourning. There's only one thing I dislike making black for, it does so hurt the eyes."
Margaret put down her work with a sigh, and shaded her eyes. Then she assumed a cheerful
     tone, and said,
"You'll not have to wait long, Mary, for my secret's on the tip of my tongue. Mary! do you
     know I sometimes think I'm growing a little blind, and then what would become of grandfather
     and me? Oh, God help me, Lord help me!"
She fell into an agony of tears, while Mary knelt by her, striving to soothe and to comfort
     her; but, like an inexperienced person, striving rather to deny the correctness of Margaret's
     fear, than helping her to meet and overcome the evil.
"No," said Margaret, quietly fixing her tearful eyes on Mary; "I know I'm not mistaken. I
     have felt one going some time, long before I ever thought what it would lead to; and last
     autumn I went to a doctor; and he did not mince the matter, but said unless I sat in a darkened
     room, with my hands before me, my sight would not last me many years longer. But how could I do
     that, Mary? For one thing, grandfather would have known there was somewhat the matter; and, oh!
     it will grieve him sore whenever he's told, so the later the better; and besides, Mary, we've
     sometimes little enough to go upon, and what I earn is a great help. For grandfather takes a
     day here, and a day there, for botanising or going after insects, and he'll think little enough
     of four or five shillings for a specimen; dear grandfather! and I'm so loath to think he should
     be stinted of what gives him such pleasure. So I went to another doctor to try and get him to
     say something different, and he said, 'Oh, it was only weakness,' and gived me a bottle of
     lotion; but I've used three bottles (and each of 'em cost two shillings), and my eye is so much
     worse, not hurting so much, but I can't see a bit with it. There now, Mary," continued she,
     shutting one eye, "now you only look like a great black shadow, with the edges dancing and
     sparkling."
"And can you see pretty well with th' other?"
"Yes, pretty near as well as ever. Th' only difference is, that if I sew a long time
     together, a bright spot like th' sun comes right where I'm looking; all the rest is quite clear
     but just where I want to see. I've been to both doctors again, and now they're both o' the same
     story; and I suppose I'm going dark as fast as may be. Plain work pays so bad, and mourning has
     been so plentiful this winter, I were tempted to take in any black work I could; and now I'm
     suffering from it."
"And yet, Margaret, you're going on taking it in; that's what you'd call foolish in
     another."
"It is, Mary! and yet what can I do? Folk mun live; and I think I should go blind any way,
     and I darn't tell grandfather, else I would leave it off, but he will so fret."
Margaret rocked herself backward and forward to still her emotion.
"Oh Mary!" she said, "I try to get his face off by heart, and I stare at him so when he's not
     looking, and then shut my eyes to see if I can remember his dear face. There's one thing, Mary,
     that serves a bit to comfort me. You'll have heard of old Jacob Butterworth, the singing
     weaver? Well, I know'd him a bit, so I went to him, and said how I wished he'd teach me the
     right way o' singing; and he says I've a rare fine voice, and I go once a week, and take a
     lesson fra' him. He's been a grand singer in his day. He's led th' chorusses at the Festivals,
     and got thanked many a time by London folk; and one foreign singer, Madame Catalani, turned
     round and shook him by th' hand before the Oud Church [10] full
     o' people. He says I may gain ever so much money by singing; but I don't know. Any rate it's
     sad work, being blind."
She took up her sewing, saying her eyes were rested now, and for some time they sewed on in
     silence.
Suddenly there were steps heard in the little paved court; person after person ran past the
     curtained window.
"Something's up," said Mary. She went to the door and stopping the first person she saw,
     inquired the cause of the commotion.
"Eh, wench! donna ye see the fire-light? Carsons' mill is blazing away like fun;" and away
     her informant ran.
"Come, Margaret, on wi' your bonnet, and let's go to see Carsons' mill; it's afire, and they
     say a burning mill is such a grand sight. I never saw one."
"Well, I think it's a fearful sight. Besides I've all this work to do."
But Mary coaxed in her sweet manner, and with her gentle caresses, promising to help with the
     gowns all night long if necessary, nay, saying she should quite enjoy it.
The truth was, Margaret's secret weighed heavily and painfully on her mind, and she felt her
     inability to comfort; besides, she wanted to change the current of Margaret's thoughts; and in
     addition to these unselfish feelings, came the desire she had honestly expressed, of seeing a
     factory on fire.
So in two minutes they were ready. At the threshold of the house they met John Barton, to
     whom they told their errand.
"Carsons' mill! Ay, there is a mill on fire somewhere, sure enough, by the light, and it will
     be a rare blaze, for there's not a drop o' water to be got. And much Carsons will care, for
     they're well insured, and the machines are a' th' oud-fashioned kind. See if they don't think
     it a fine thing for themselves. They'll not thank them as tries to put it out."
He gave way for the impatient girls to pass. Guided by the ruddy light more than by any exact
     knowledge of the streets that led to the mill, they scampered along with bent heads, facing the
     terrible east wind as best they might.
Carsons' mill ran lengthways from east to west. Along it went one of the oldest thoroughfares
     in Manchester. Indeed all that part of the town was comparatively old; it was there that the
     first cotton mills were built, and the crowded alleys and back streets of the neighbourhood
     made a fire there particularly to be dreaded. The staircase of the mill ascended from the
     entrance at the western end, which faced into a wide dingy-looking street, consisting
     principally of public-houses, pawn-brokers' shops, rag and bone warehouses, and dirty provision
     shops. The other, the east end of the factory, fronted into a very narrow back street, not
     twenty feet wide, and miserably lighted and paved. Right against this end of the factory were
     the gable ends of the last house in the principal street—a house which from its size, its
     handsome stone facings, and the attempt at ornament in the front, had probably been once a
     gentleman's house; but now the light which streamed from its enlarged front windows made clear
     the interior of the splendidly fitted up room, with its painted walls, its pillared recesses,
     its gilded and gorgeous fittings up, its miserable, squalid inmates. It was a gin palace.
Mary almost wished herself away, so fearful (as Margaret had said) was the sight when they
     joined the crowd assembled to witness the fire. There was a murmur of many voices whenever the
     roaring of the flames ceased for an instant. It was easy to perceive the mass were deeply
     interested.
"What do they say?" asked Margaret, of a neighbour in the crowd, as she caught a few words,
     clear and distinct, from the general murmur.
"There never is anyone in the mill, surely!" exclaimed Mary, as the sea of upward-turned
     faces moved with one accord to the eastern end, looking into Dunham Street, the narrow back
     lane already mentioned.
The western end of the mill, whither the raging flames were driven by the wind, was crowned
     and turreted with triumphant fire. It sent forth its infernal tongues from every window hole,
     licking the black walls with amorous fierceness; it was swayed or fell before the mighty gale,
     only to rise higher and yet higher, to ravage and roar yet more wildly. This part of the roof
     fell in with an astounding crash, while the crowd struggled more and more to press into Dunham
     Street, for what were magnificent terrible flames, what were falling timbers or tottering
     walls, in comparison with human life?
There, where the devouring flames had been repelled by the yet more powerful wind, but where
     yet black smoke gushed out from every aperture, there, at one of the windows on the fourth
     story, or rather a doorway where a crane was fixed to hoist up goods, might occasionally be
     seen, when the thick gusts of smoke cleared partially away for an instant, the imploring
     figures of two men. They had remained after the rest of the workmen for some reason or other,
     and, owing to the wind having driven the fire in the opposite direction, had perceived no sight
     or sound of alarm, till long after (if any thing could be called long in that throng of terrors
     which passed by in less time than half an hour) the fire had consumed the old wooden staircase
     at the other end of the building. I am not sure whether it was not the first sound of the
     rushing crowd below that made them fully aware of their awful position.
"Where are the engines?" asked Margaret of her neighbour.
"They're coming, no doubt; but, bless you, I think it's bare ten minutes since we first found
     out th' fire; it rages so wi' this wind, and all so dry-like."
"Is no one gone for a ladder?" gasped Mary, as the men were perceptibly, though not audibly,
     praying the great multitude below for help.
"Ay, Wilson's son and another man were off like a shot, well nigh five minute agone. But th'
     masons, and slaters, and such like, have left their work, and locked up the yards."
Wilson! then, was that man whose figure loomed out against the ever increasing dull hot light
     behind, whenever the smoke was clear,—was that George Wilson? Mary sickened with terror. She
     knew he worked for Carsons; but at first she had had no idea any lives were in danger; and
     since she had become aware of this, the heated air, the roaring flames, the dizzy light, and
     the agitated and murmuring crowd, had bewildered her thoughts.
"Oh! let us go home, Margaret; I cannot stay."
"We cannot go! See how we are wedged in by folks. Poor Mary! ye won't hanker after a fire
     again. Hark! listen!"
For through the hushed crowd, pressing round the angle of the mill, and filling up Dunham
     Street, might be heard the rattle of the engine, the heavy, quick tread of loaded horses.
"Thank God!" said Margaret's neighbour, "the engine's come."
Another pause; the plugs were stiff, and water could not be got.
Then there was a pressure through the crowd, the front rows bearing back on those behind,
     till the girls were sick with the close ramming confinement. Then a relaxation, and a breathing
     freely once more.
"'Twas young Wilson and a fireman wi' a ladder," said Margaret's neighbour, a tall man who
     could overlook the crowd.
"Oh, tell us what you see?" begged Mary.
"They've gotten it fixed again the gin-shop wall. One o' the men i' th' factory has fell
     back; dazed wi' the smoke, I'll warrant. The floor's not given way there. God!" said he,
     bringing his eye lower down, "th' ladder's too short! It's a' over wi' them, poor chaps. Th'
     fire's coming slow and sure to that end, and afore they've either gotten water, or another
     ladder, they'll be dead out and out. Lord have mercy on them!"
A sob, as if of excited women, was heard in the hush of the crowd. Another pressure like the
     former! Mary clung to Margaret's arm with a pinching grasp, and longed to faint, and be
     insensible, to escape from the oppressing misery of her sensations. A minute or two.
"They've taken th' ladder into th' Temple of Apollor. Can't press back with it to the yard it
     came from."
A mighty shout arose; a sound to wake the dead. Up on high, quivering in the air, was seen
     the end of the ladder, protruding out of a garret window, in the gable end of the gin palace,
     nearly opposite to the doorway where the men had been seen. Those in the crowd nearest the
     factory, and consequently best able to see up to the garret window, said that several men were
     holding one end, and guiding by their weight its passage to the door-way. The garret
     window-frame had been taken out before the crowd below were aware of the attempt.
At length—for it seemed long, measured by beating hearts, though scarce two minutes had
     elapsed—the ladder was fixed, an aerial bridge at a dizzy height, across the narrow street.
Every eye was fixed in unwinking anxiety, and people's very breathing seemed stilled in
     suspense. The men were nowhere to be seen, but the wind appeared, for the moment, higher than
     ever, and drove back the invading flames to the other end.
Mary and Margaret could see now; right above them danced the ladder in the wind. The crowd
     pressed back from under; firemen's helmets appeared at the window, holding the ladder firm,
     when a man, with quick, steady tread, and unmoving head, passed from one side to the other. The
     multitude did not even whisper while he crossed the perilous bridge, which quivered under him;
     but when he was across, safe comparatively in the factory, a cheer arose for an instant,
     checked, however, almost immediately, by the uncertainty of the result, and the desire not in
     any way to shake the nerves of the brave fellow who had cast his life on such a die.
"There he is again!" sprung to the lips of many, as they saw him at the doorway, standing as
     if for an instant to breathe a mouthful of the fresher air, before he trusted himself to cross.
     On his shoulders he bore an insensible body.
"It's Jem Wilson and his father," whispered Margaret; but Mary knew it before.
The people were sick with anxious terror. He could no longer balance himself with his arms;
     every thing must depend on nerve and eye. They saw the latter was fixed, by the position of the
     head, which never wavered; the ladder shook under the double weight; but still he never moved
     his head—he dared not look below. It seemed an age before the crossing was accomplished. At
     last the window was gained; the bearer relieved from his burden; both had disappeared.
Then the multitude might shout; and above the roaring flames, louder than the blowing of the
     mighty wind, arose that tremendous burst of applause at the success of the daring enterprise.
     Then a shrill cry was heard, asking
"Is the oud man alive, and likely to do?"
"Ay," answered one of the firemen to the hushed crowd below. "He's coming round finely, now
     he's had a dash of cowd water."
He drew back his head; and the eager inquiries, the shouts, the sea-like murmurs of the
     moving rolling mass began again to be heard—but for an instant though. In far less time than
     even that in which I have endeavoured briefly to describe the pause of events, the same bold
     hero stepped again upon the ladder, with evident purpose to rescue the man yet remaining in the
     burning mill.
He went across in the same quick steady manner as before, and the people below, made less
     acutely anxious by his previous success, were talking to each other, shouting out intelligence
     of the progress of the fire at the other end of the factory, telling of the endeavours of the
     firemen at that part to obtain water, while the closely packed body of men heaved and rolled
     from side to side. It was different from the former silent breathless hush. I do not know if it
     were from this cause, or from the recollection of peril past, or that he looked below, in the
     breathing moment before returning with the remaining person (a slight little man) slung across
     his shoulders, but Jem Wilson's step was less steady, his tread more uncertain; he seemed to
     feel with his foot for the next round of the ladder, to waver, and finally to stop half-way. By
     this time the crowd was still enough; in the awful instant that intervened no one durst speak,
     even to encourage. Many turned sick with terror, and shut their eyes to avoid seeing the
     catastrophe they dreaded. It came. The brave man swayed from side to side, at first as slightly
     as if only balancing himself; but he was evidently losing nerve, and even sense: it was only
     wonderful how the animal instinct of self-preservation did not overcome every generous feeling,
     and impel him at once to drop the helpless, inanimate body he carried; perhaps the same
     instinct told him, that the sudden loss of so heavy a weight would of itself be a great and
     imminent danger.
"Help me! she's fainted," cried Margaret. But no one heeded. All eyes were directed upwards.
     At this point of time a rope, with a running noose, was dexterously thrown by one of the
     firemen, after the manner of a lasso, over the head and round the bodies of the two men. True,
     it was with rude and slight adjustment: but, slight as it was, it served as a steadying guide;
     it encouraged the sinking heart, the dizzy head. Once more Jem stepped onwards. He was not
     hurried by any jerk or pull. Slowly and gradually the rope was hauled in, slowly and gradually
     did he make the four or five paces between him and safety. The window was gained, and all were
     saved. The multitude in the street absolutely danced with triumph, and huzzaed and yelled till
     you would have fancied their very throats would crack; and then with all the fickleness of
     interest characteristic of a large body of people, pressed and stumbled, and cursed and swore
     in the hurry to get out of Dunham Street, and back to the immediate scene of the fire, the
     mighty diapason of whose roaring flames formed an awful accompaniment to the screams, and
     yells, and imprecations, of the struggling crowd.
As they pressed away, Margaret was left, pale and almost sinking under the weight of Mary's
     body, which she had preserved in an upright position by keeping her arms tight round Mary's
     waist, dreading, with reason, the trampling of unheeding feet.
Now, however, she gently let her down on the cold clean pavement; and the change of posture,
     and the difference in temperature, now that the people had withdrawn from their close
     neighbourhood, speedily restored her to consciousness.
Her first glance was bewildered and uncertain. She had forgotten where she was. Her cold,
     hard bed felt strange; the murky glare in the sky affrighted her. She shut her eyes to think,
     to recollect.
Her next look was upwards. The fearful bridge had been withdrawn; the window was
     unoccupied.
"They are safe," said Margaret.
"All? Are all safe, Margaret?" asked Mary.
"Ask yon fireman, and he'll tell you more about it than I can. But I know they're all
     safe."
The fireman hastily corroborated Margaret's words.
"Why did you let Jem Wilson go twice?" asked Margaret.
"Let!—why we could not hinder him. As soon as ever he'd heard his father speak (which he was
     na long a doing), Jem were off like a shot; only saying he knowed better nor us where to find
     t'other man. We'd all ha' gone, if he had na been in such a hurry, for no one can say as
     Manchester firemen is ever backward when there's danger."
So saying, he ran off; and the two girls, without remark or discussion, turned homewards.
     They were overtaken by the elder Wilson, pale, grimy, and blear-eyed, but apparently as strong
     and well as ever. He loitered a minute or two alongside of them, giving an account of his
     detention in the mill; he then hastily wished good-night, saying he must go home and tell his
     missis he was all safe and well: but after he had gone a few steps, he turned back, came on
     Mary's side of the pavement, and in an earnest whisper, which Margaret could not avoid hearing,
     he said,
"Mary, if my boy comes across you to-night, give him a kind word or two for my sake. Do!
     bless you, there's a good wench."
Mary hung her head and answered not a word, and in an instant he was gone.
When they arrived at home, they found John Barton smoking his pipe, unwilling to question,
     yet very willing to hear all the details they could give him. Margaret went over the whole
     story, and it was amusing to watch his gradually increasing interest and excitement. First, the
     regular puffing abated, then ceased. Then the pipe was fairly taken out of his mouth, and held
     suspended. Then he rose, and at every further point he came a step nearer to the narrator.
When it was ended, he swore (an unusual thing for him) that if Jem Wilson wanted Mary he
     should have her to-morrow, if he had not a penny to keep her.
Margaret laughed, but Mary, who was now recovered from her agitation, pouted, and looked
     angry.
The work which they had left was resumed: but with full hearts, fingers never go very
     quickly; and I am sorry to say, that owing to the fire, the two younger Miss Ogdens were in
     such grief for the loss of their excellent father, that they were unable to appear before the
     little circle of sympathising friends gathered together to comfort the widow, and see the
     funeral set off.
 
 
