
CHAPTER II.
A MANCHESTER TEA-PARTY.

Polly, put the kettle on,
And let's have tea!
 Polly, put the kettle on,
And we'll all have tea.
"Here we are, wife; didst thou think thou'd lost us?" quoth hearty-voiced Wilson, as the two
     women rose and shook themselves in preparation for their homeward walk. Mrs. Barton was
     evidently soothed, if not cheered, by the unburdening of her fears and thoughts to her friend;
     and her approving look went far to second her husband's invitation that the whole party should
     adjourn from Green Heys Fields to tea, at the Bartons' house. The only faint opposition was
     raised by Mrs. Wilson, on account of the lateness of the hour at which they would probably
     return, which she feared on her babies' account.
"Now, hold your tongue, missis, will you," said her husband, good-temperedly. "Don't you know
     them brats never goes to sleep till long past ten? and haven't you a shawl, under which you can
     tuck one lad's head, as safe as a bird's under its wing? And as for t'other one, I'll put it in
     my pocket rather than not stay, now we are this far away from Ancoats."
"Or I can lend you another shawl," suggested Mrs. Barton.
"Ay, any thing rather than not stay."
The matter being decided, the party proceeded home, through many half-finished streets, all
     so like one another that you might have easily been bewildered and lost your way. Not a step,
     however, did our friends lose; down this entry, cutting off that corner, until they turned out
     of one of these innumerable streets into a little paved court, having the backs of houses at
     the end opposite to the opening, and a gutter running through the middle to carry off household
     slops, washing suds, etc. The women who lived in the court were busy taking in strings of
     caps, frocks, and various articles of linen, which hung from side to side, dangling so low,
     that if our friends had been a few minutes sooner, they would have had to stoop very much, or
     else the half-wet clothes would have flapped in their faces; but although the evening seemed
     yet early when they were in the open fields—among the pent-up houses, night, with its mists,
     and its darkness, had already begun to fall.
Many greetings were given and exchanged between the Wilsons and these women, for not long ago
     they had also dwelt in this court.
Two rude lads, standing at a disorderly looking house-door, exclaimed, as Mary Barton (the
     daughter) passed, "Eh, look! Polly Barton's gotten a sweetheart."
Of course this referred to young Wilson, who stole a look to see how Mary took the idea. He
     saw her assume the air of a young fury, and to his next speech she answered not a word.
Mrs. Barton produced the key of the door from her pocket; and on entering the house-place it
     seemed as if they were in total darkness, except one bright spot, which might be a cat's eye,
     or might be, what it was, a red-hot fire, smouldering under a large piece of coal, which John
     Barton immediately applied himself to break up, and the effect instantly produced was warm and
     glowing light in every corner of the room. To add to this (although the coarse yellow glare
     seemed lost in the ruddy glow from the fire), Mrs. Barton lighted a dip by sticking it in the
     fire, and having placed it satisfactorily in a tin candlestick, began to look further about
     her, on hospitable thoughts intent. The room was tolerably large, and possessed many
     conveniences. On the right of the door, as you entered, was a longish window, with a broad
     ledge. On each side of this, hung blue-and-white check curtains, which were now drawn, to shut
     in the friends met to enjoy themselves. Two geraniums, unpruned and leafy, which stood on the
     sill, formed a further defence from out-door pryers. In the corner between the window and the
     fire-side was a cupboard, apparently full of plates and dishes, cups and saucers, and some more
     nondescript articles, for which one would have fancied their possessors could find no use—such
     as triangular pieces of glass to save carving knives and forks from dirtying table-cloths.
     However, it was evident Mrs. Barton was proud of her crockery and glass, for she left her
     cupboard door open, with a glance round of satisfaction and pleasure. On the opposite side to
     the door and window was the staircase, and two doors; one of which (the nearest to the fire)
     led into a sort of little back kitchen, where dirty work, such as washing up dishes, might be
     done, and whose shelves served as larder, and pantry, and storeroom, and all. The other door,
     which was considerably lower, opened into the coal-hole—the slanting closet under the stairs;
     from which, to the fire-place, there was a gay-coloured piece of oil-cloth laid. The place
     seemed almost crammed with furniture (sure sign of good times among the mills). Beneath the
     window was a dresser with three deep drawers. Opposite the fire-place was a table, which I
     should call a Pembroke, only that it was made of deal, and I cannot tell how far such a name
     may be applied to such humble material. On it, resting against the wall, was a bright green
     japanned tea-tray, having a couple of scarlet lovers embracing in the middle. The fire-light
     danced merrily on this, and really (setting all taste but that of a child's aside) it gave a
     richness of colouring to that side of the room. It was in some measure propped up by a crimson
     tea-caddy, also of japan ware. A round table on one branching leg really for use, stood in the
     corresponding corner to the cupboard; and, if you can picture all this with a washy, but clean
     stencilled pattern on the walls, you can form some idea of John Barton's home.
The tray was soon hoisted down, and before the merry chatter of cups and saucers began, the
     women disburdened themselves of their out-of-door things, and sent Mary up stairs with them.
     Then came a long whispering, and chinking of money, to which Mr. and Mrs. Wilson were too
     polite to attend; knowing, as they did full well, that it all related to the preparations for
     hospitality; hospitality that, in their turn, they should have such pleasure in offering. So
     they tried to be busily occupied with the children, and not to hear Mrs. Barton's directions to
     Mary.
"Run, Mary dear, just round the corner, and get some fresh eggs at Tipping's (you may get one
     a-piece, that will be five-pence), and see if he has any nice ham cut, that he would let us
     have a pound of."
"Say two pounds, missis, and don't be stingy," chimed in the husband.
"Well, a pound and a half, Mary. And get it Cumberland ham, for Wilson comes from there-away,
     and it will have a sort of relish of home with it he'll like,—and Mary" (seeing the lassie fain
     to be off), "you must get a pennyworth of milk and a loaf of bread—mind you get it fresh and
     new—and, and—that's all, Mary."
"No, it's not all," said her husband. "Thou must get sixpennyworth of rum, to warm the tea;
     thou'll get it at the 'Grapes.' And thou just go to Alice Wilson; he says she lives just right
     round the corner, under 14, Barber Street" (this was addressed to his wife), "and tell her to
     come and take her tea with us; she'll like to see her brother, I'll be bound, let alone Jane
     and the twins."
"If she comes she must bring a tea-cup and saucer, for we have but half-a-dozen, and here's
     six of us," said Mrs. Barton.
"Pooh! pooh! Jem and Mary can drink out of one, surely."
But Mary secretly determined to take care that Alice brought her tea-cup and saucer, if the
     alternative was to be her sharing any thing with Jem.
Alice Wilson had but just come in. She had been out all day in the fields, gathering wild
     herbs for drinks and medicine, for in addition to her invaluable qualities as a sick nurse and
     her worldly occupation as a washerwoman, she added a considerable knowledge of hedge and field
     simples; and on fine days, when no more profitable occupation offered itself, she used to
     ramble off into the lanes and meadows as far as her legs could carry her. This evening she had
     returned loaded with nettles, and her first object was to light a candle and see to hang them
     up in bunches in every available place in her cellar room. It was the perfection of
     cleanliness: in one corner stood the modest-looking bed, with a check curtain at the head, the
     whitewashed wall filling up the place where the corresponding one should have been. The floor
     was bricked, and scrupulously clean, although so damp that it seemed as if the last washing
     would never dry up. As the cellar window looked into an area in the street, down which boys
     might throw stones, it was protected by an outside shelter, and was oddly festooned with all
     manner of hedge-row, ditch, and field plants, which we are accustomed to call valueless, but
     which have a powerful effect either for good or for evil, and are consequently much used among
     the poor. The room was strewed, hung, and darkened with these bunches, which emitted no very
     fragrant odour in their process of drying. In one corner was a sort of broad hanging shelf,
     made of old planks, where some old hoards of Alice's were kept. Her little bit of crockery ware
     was ranged on the mantelpiece, where also stood her candlestick and box of matches. A small
     cupboard contained at the bottom coals, and at the top her bread and basin of oatmeal, her
     frying pan, tea-pot, and a small tin saucepan, which served as a kettle, as well as for cooking
     the delicate little messes of broth which Alice sometimes was able to manufacture for a sick
     neighbour.
After her walk she felt chilly and weary, and was busy trying to light her fire with the damp
     coals, and half green sticks, when Mary knocked.
"Come in," said Alice, remembering, however, that she had barred the door for the night, and
     hastening to make it possible for any one to come in.
"Is that you, Mary Barton?" exclaimed she, as the light from her candle streamed on the
     girl's face. "How you are grown since I used to see you at my brother's! Come in, lass, come
     in."
"Please," said Mary, almost breathless, "mother says you're to come to tea, and bring your
     cup and saucer, for George and Jane Wilson is with us, and the twins, and Jem. And you're to
     make haste, please."
"I'm sure it's very neighbourly and kind in your mother, and I'll come, with many thanks.
     Stay, Mary, has your mother got any nettles for spring drink? If she hasn't I'll take her
     some."
"No, I don't think she has."
Mary ran off like a hare to fulfil what, to a girl of thirteen, fond of power, was the more
     interesting part of her errand—the money-spending part. And well and ably did she perform her
     business, returning home with a little bottle of rum, and the eggs in one hand, while her other
     was filled with some excellent red-and-white smoke-flavoured Cumberland ham, wrapped up in
     paper.
She was at home, and frying ham, before Alice had chosen her nettles, put out her candle,
     locked her door, and walked in a very foot-sore manner as far as John Barton's. What an aspect
     of comfort did his houseplace present, after her humble cellar. She did not think of comparing;
     but for all that she felt the delicious glow of the fire, the bright light that revelled in
     every corner of the room, the savoury smells, the comfortable sounds of a boiling kettle, and
     the hissing, frizzling ham. With a little old-fashioned curtsey she shut the door, and replied
     with a loving heart to the boisterous and surprised greeting of her brother.
And now all preparations being made, the party sat down; Mrs. Wilson in the post of honour,
     the rocking chair on the right hand side of the fire, nursing her baby, while its father, in an
     opposite arm-chair, tried vainly to quieten the other with bread soaked in milk.
Mrs. Barton knew manners too well to do any thing but sit at the tea-table and make tea,
     though in her heart she longed to be able to superintend the frying of the ham, and cast many
     an anxious look at Mary as she broke the eggs and turned the ham, with a very comfortable
     portion of confidence in her own culinary powers. Jem stood awkwardly leaning against the
     dresser, replying rather gruffly to his aunt's speeches, which gave him, he thought, the air of
     being a little boy; whereas he considered himself as a young man, and not so very young
     neither, as in two months he would be eighteen. Barton vibrated between the fire and the
     tea-table, his only drawback being a fancy that every now and then his wife's face flushed and
     contracted as if in pain.
At length the business actually began. Knives and forks, cups and saucers made a noise, but
     human voices were still, for human beings were hungry, and had no time to speak. Alice first
     broke silence; holding her tea-cup with the manner of one proposing a toast, she said, "Here's
     to absent friends. Friends may meet, but mountains never."
It was an unlucky toast or sentiment, as she instantly felt. Every one thought of Esther, the
     absent Esther; and Mrs. Barton put down her food, and could not hide the fast dropping tears.
     Alice could have bitten her tongue out.
It was a wet blanket to the evening; for though all had been said and suggested in the fields
     that could be said or suggested, every one had a wish to say something in the way of comfort to
     poor Mrs. Barton, and a dislike to talk about any thing else while her tears fell fast and
     scalding. So George Wilson, his wife and children, set off early home, not before (in spite of
      mal-à-propos speeches) they had expressed a wish that such meetings might often take
     place, and not before John Barton had given his hearty consent; and declared that as soon as
     ever his wife was well again they would have just such another evening.
"I will take care not to come and spoil it," thought poor Alice; and going up to Mrs. Barton
     she took her hand almost humbly, and said, "You don't know how sorry I am I said it."
To her surprise, a surprise that brought tears of joy into her eyes, Mary Barton put her arms
     round her neck, and kissed the self-reproaching Alice. "You didn't mean any harm, and it was me
     as was so foolish; only this work about Esther, and not knowing where she is, lies so heavy on
     my heart. Good night, and never think no more about it. God bless you, Alice."
Many and many a time, as Alice reviewed that evening in her after life, did she bless Mary
     Barton for these kind and thoughtful words. But just then all she could say was, "Good night,
     Mary, and may God bless you."
 
 
