
CHAPTER V.
AGNES MAYNARD was within a few months of her majority when Mrs. Clayton
                    died; and the funeral was scarcely over when Mr. Hardman, with systematic
                    propriety, wrote both to herself and Richard for the purpose of arranging her
                    future residence. His letters were first answered by Mr. Clayton, who informed
                    him that it was his own express desire, as well as that of both Agnes and her
                    brother‐in‐law, that she should remain to take charge of her sister’s infant
                    children.
Mr. Clayton’s views respecting such alliances as that, the very thought of which
                    had terrified Elizabeth into her grave, were so strong and decisive, that it
                    never occurred to him to suppose that Agnes could ever be considered in any
                    other light than as the sister of his son. He, therefore, felt it to be most
                    desirable, both for the children and Richard, that she should be placed at the
                    head of his establishment under that title; an arrangement which would, in
                    truth, be highly advantageous  in almost all
                    similar cases, had no idea of an unlawful union between persons so connected
                    ever been admitted into the minds of men.
None of the parties concerned in this affair had, however, in appearance at
                    least, the most distant idea of any such alliance; and, consequently, no
                    obstacle seemed to exist against a plan in all other respects so very
                    suitable.
Mr. Hardman was quite satisfied that an arrangement which met with the sanction
                    of the vicar of B—, must be perfectly right, and he imagined that he had
                    gathered from Mr. Clayton’s letter that Agnes and his son were to reside with
                    himself. In this Mr. Hardman was altogether mistaken, as Richard had no
                    intention of quitting The Mount. But this erroneous idea satisfied the demands
                    of Mrs. Hardman’s implacable propriety, and she thankfully consented that Agnes
                    should remain at a comfortable distance from her own less attractive
                    daughter.
Richard Clayton was, during some time, completely absorbed in grief for the loss
                    of his wife. There are few who can bear unmoved, that the heart which has loved
                    them best on earth is cold for ever, however little they may have valued the
                    affection while it lasted. And his sorrow was by no means unmingled with
                    remorse. He could not endure the society  of
                    any one excepting Agnes, with whom he could talk of his Elizabeth, and who in
                    voice and manner so often reminded him of her. Agnes, deeply moved at his
                    distress, and feeling that there was a bond between them in the love they had
                    borne to the departed, devoted herself to the task of soothing and consoling
                    him. Her efforts were not without success; she soon removed the first bitterness
                    of his regrets, and, after a time, Richard could not but feel that his home was
                    still a most happy one. He found himself carefully surrounded with all the
                    comforts and elegance which a woman alone can give to the details of domestic
                    life. His children were cared for, his household well arranged; and when he
                    returned in the evening, wearied with his day’s sport, he never failed to be
                    received with a bright smile of welcome, and to find many little preparations
                    for his coming:—the chair drawn towards the fire, the new book placed beside it,
                    and other marks of attention to his wishes, which, trifling in themselves, yet
                    tend wonderfully to promote the happiness of each day as it passes.
Agnes herself, though she never ceased to regret her sister, gradually recovered
                    her natural cheerfulness and gaiety of heart. Occupation is the sovereign remedy
                    for despondency, and she had but little time now to brood over the past. Full of
                    the sad enthusiasm with which we seek  to
                    fulfil our duties to the dead, she gave herself up almost entirely to the care
                    of her sister’s children, both of whom required much of her time and attention.
                    The little Mary was a sweet engaging child, timid and sensitive, and displaying,
                    even at that early age, all her mother’s acuteness of feeling; she and her
                    brother were the only relations Agnes now had in the world, and she loved her
                    little niece with the most passionate affection. Mary continued to regret her
                    mother with a tenacity of recollection very uncommon in so young a child, so
                    that Agnes spent many hours of the day in endeavouring to amuse her.
The infant, for whom this world’s miseries had commenced almost with his first
                    breath, was a still greater anxiety to his young aunt. During his mother’s
                    illness he had been little attended to, and now he was struggling for the life
                    that seemed to have so slight a hold on his little feeble frame. Richard’s
                    physician told him very plainly that the most constant watchfulness and
                    attention alone could preserve an existence so precarious; and he implored of
                    Agnes, almost with tears, to devote herself to this arduous task; for he had
                    long desired most earnestly to have a son, and he could not bear to think that
                    the gift had only been given to be resumed.
Thus she had much to occupy her thoughts;  and
                    Mr. Clayton not unfrequently employed her in attending on the poor of his
                    parish. He was anxious, by making her acquainted with the sober realities of
                    life, to induce her to take a more serious and practical view of our condition
                    in this world, and of the duties incumbent on us all. There was a certain taint
                    of false poetical sentiment and overstrained romance in the character of Agnes
                    Maynard, which she owed no doubt to the influence of her Parisian teachers, and
                    which Mr. Clayton felt to be sadly at variance with the rigid self‐denial and
                    invincible holiness that ought to control the actions of a Christian in all the
                    circumstances of life.
She seemed to think that the unbounded indulgence of her feelings at all times
                    was almost a matter of duty; and her best actions were performed, not because
                    they were right, but because they were generally agreeable to her
                    naturally sweet disposition.
She visited the poor, not from that blessed motive once given for the performance
                    of this duty, which makes it the highest privilege on earth, but simply because
                    it really gave her pleasure to relieve their sufferings; and even her attention
                    to the little children was the mere natural result of her fond regrets for their
                    dead mother, and was never viewed by her as a
                    means given to her whereby she might serve her Master. The manner in which she
                    devoted herself to them however, won for her the esteem and admiration of her
                    acquaintances in the neighbourhood of B—; and it became the fashion to seek her
                    friendship. This was extremely agreeable both to Richard and herself, for they
                    were alike fond of society and amusement, having but few resources in
                    themselves. They failed not to place the highest value on the favour and
                    consideration of those whom wealth or rank seemed to render desirable friends;
                    and Richard especially, who fervently loved this world, was most ambitious of
                    its honours. Their happiness was, therefore, increased in no small degree by the
                    position they had now attained in society, and for considerably more than a year
                    they lived in the enjoyment of the greatest ease and comfort. This state might
                    have continued long, and their contentment would doubtless but have increased as
                    they saw the children improving in health, and Richard acquiring great influence
                    in the county; but they were doomed to suffer by that fatal laxity of principle,
                    which has caused it to be considered as a possibility in Christian
                    England that a man should become the husband of one who is virtually his
                    sister!
No one had ever dreamt of questioning the 
                    propriety of Agnes’s residence with her brother‐in‐law. Mr. Clayton would as
                    soon have thought of objecting to the presence of his own daughter in the house
                    of his son. But there are to be found in every neighbourhood persons whose
                    business it seems to be to attend to the affairs of their neighbours—who occupy
                    themselves in arranging the plans of others, and prosecute their unjustifiable
                    interference with the ostensible motive of offering well meant advice and
                    judicious kindness. B— was infested by a lady of this description. Mrs. Sharp
                    was the wife of a lawyer, who resided in the village because it placed him at a
                    convenient distance from an estate which he managed in the absence of the
                    proprietor. She was a person of a busy, active disposition, and a perfectly
                    vacant mind. She took a singularly microscopic view of those things which are
                    alone of any importance in this world, whilst it was her delight to magnify
                    trifles, especially if they were sources of annoyance, into matters of weight
                    and consequence. She loved to dig out all those little evils of life which men
                    wisely seek to bury in oblivion, and make their sting be thoroughly felt and
                    understood; and she had a sort of spasmodic irritability of temper, which made
                    it impossible for her to endure quietly the resignation or cheerfulness of her
                    friends. Being  excessively ambitious and very
                    vain, she soon found that her standing in society was not by any means what she
                    could have wished, and she therefore betook herself to that peculiar species of
                    self‐aggrandizement, which consisted in the depreciation and abuse of others, so
                    as to produce a comparison favourable to herself; clearly believing, that while
                    enlarging on the faults and follies of her friends, her own virtues grew
                    brighter in proportion. Mr. Sharp systematically encouraged her to take an
                    active and engrossing interest in the affairs of her neighbours, as he thereby
                    diverted her energy of mind and warmth of eloquence from himself and his
                    proceedings.
Thus Mrs. Sharp, with her inquisitive eyes, her busy tongue, and her spiteful
                    disposition, was an object of terror to the whole neighbourhood—from the vicar,
                    who generally saw her enter the cottages of his parishioners as soon as he
                    quitted them, in order to learn what he had been saying, and counteract its
                    effects, down to the little village girl, who as required to enter into minute
                    details respecting the quality of her Sunday dinner, and other such interesting
                    particulars. This lady Agnes Maynard had the misfortune to offend. Mrs. Sharp
                    had been extremely anxious to cultivate her acquaintance when she found how
                    intimate she had be‐ come with the leading
                    families of the country; and Agnes, who was at all times accustomed to think far
                    more of her own pleasure than of the courtesies of life, had not scrupled, as
                    she thought her a particularly disagreeable person, to repel her advances in a
                    very marked and humiliating manner. This slight was never forgiven or forgotten
                    by Mrs. Sharp; she cherished a sense of injury with all the tenacity of a little
                    mind; and from that day it became one of the chief objects of her existence to
                    find some means of indulging her deep‐rooted and bitter dislike of Agnes. It was
                    so, perhaps, unconsciously to herself; for Mrs. Sharp, like most people, was
                    well grounded in the art of self‐deceit; and she persuaded herself that it was a
                    laudable zeal for the well‐being of society, which induced her to spread many
                    evil reports respecting the residence of Agnes Maynard with her brother‐in‐law,
                    instead of a mean and ungenerous desire of revenge.
It so chanced, that in the course of the second year after the death of Elizabeth
                    Clayton, Mrs. Sharp went for a few days to London. One of her first proceedings
                    on arriving there was to call on Mrs. Hardman, as she had long looked forward
                    with a keen relish to some favourable opportunity of stirring up that
                    respectable lady to a virtuous indignation against her ward, for  whose conduct Mr. Hardman was to a certain degree
                    responsible.
Mrs. Sharp had been acquainted with the family during their six months’ residence
                    at the Mount; and the first polite speeches were scarcely over, when she
                    proceeded gradually to insinuate what was in fact the real object of her visit.
                    She began by looking fixedly and with an air of profound compassion on Mrs.
                    Hardman, and having given vent to several heavy sighs, remarked that she was
                    thankful to see her in tolerable spirits.
“I believe my spirits are generally very good,” said Mrs. Hardman, who sat stiff
                    and impassible as usual. “No one can accuse me of being variable: my temper is
                    even and equable, as it ought to be.”
“Ah, well! you are a very strong‐minded person, I know,” said Mrs. Sharp; “still
                    I must say I expected to see you a little moved by such a trial.”
“Mrs. Sharp, may I ask to what you allude?” inquired Mrs. Hardman. “Trials I
                    have, no doubt, such as I believe no one but a person of my strength of
                    character could have undergone; but I am not aware that you are acquainted with
                    them: they are buried in my own bosom.”
“My dear Mrs. Hardman, I can assure you  this
                    one is not buried anywhere,” exclaimed Mrs. Sharp; “no one talks of anything
                    else at B—. It was only the other day that I met Lady C— on the road, and she
                    stopped her carriage, and put her head out of the window, (you know I am very
                    intimate with Lady C—) and she held up her hands just in this way, and
                    said,—“Well, Mrs. Sharp, this is a sad affair, only to think that Mrs. Hardman
                    should have sanctioned— I won’t annoy you by repeating the rest; but it is the
                    opinion of every one. Why, there was Mr. L—; he said to my husband, that his
                    opinion of Mr. Hardman’s good sense and respectability were unavoidably
                    shaken,—these were his words, ‘unavoidably shaken.’”
“Mrs. Sharp, I beg you will explain yourself,” exclaimed Mrs. Hardman, becoming
                    crimson with anger and impatience; “I cannot guess what you are talking of.”
“Can you not, indeed? Well, then, it must be because you do not see it in the
                    light that I do, and that every one else does. Perhaps it is not the kind of
                    misfortune that affects you—people are so different! To be sure, it is not like
                    a loss of money; but, for my part, I am so sensitive, there is no misfortune I
                    would not bear sooner than disgrace. It would be to me worse than any
                    affliction. I declare to you  I would rather
                    see Mr. Sharp expire before my eyes than be disgraced as you have been.”
“Disgrace is not a word that ever applied to me or any of my family,” exclaimed
                    Mrs. Hardman; “I am sure of that, at all events!”
“Of course you are; and that is just what makes this, in my opinion, so heavy a
                    trial to you. If it had been one of your own family, (and I am sure I hope none
                    of them ever will follow her example,) you would have endured it as
                    a domestic affliction; but to be so lowered in the eyes of the world by a person
                    who is not even a relation!”
“How often am I to tell you that I don’t know what you mean?” screamed Mrs.
                    Hardman, fairly driven out of her usual dignity by her frantic curiosity; “if
                    you have anything to say at all, why don’t you speak out?”
At these words Mrs. Sharp turned slowly round, and fixed her staring eyes on the
                    excited lady with a look of well‐acted astonishment:—“Do you really mean to
                    say,” she replied, as the words dropped from her lips with exasperating
                    coolness, “that you have not heard —”
“I have heard nothing,” shouted Mrs. Hardman, “I have been telling you so for the
                    last hour!” With that Mrs. Sharp elevated her eyes, shook her head, clasped her
                    hands, and nodded  mysteriously several times.
                    During these evolutions, Mrs. Hardman looked at her as if she could have
                    devoured her. Finally, losing all patience, she actually shook her by the arm
                    and desired her to speak.
Mrs. Sharp, seeing that she had worked up her friend to a suitable state of
                    excitement, at once complied, and hastened to enlarge on the residence of Agnes
                    Maynard in the house of Richard Clayton, in terms which could have been imagined
                    only by a mind not merely devoid of the slightest refinement or delicacy, but of
                    principle also. We say devoid of principle, because, had she judged Agnes and
                    Richard by the high and holy standard set before us all, she could not have
                    considered them otherwise than as brother and sister.
Mrs. Hardman and her husband, who had now come in, shocked and dismayed at the
                    manner in which she spoke, hurriedly demanded if Agnes had not been residing
                    with the elder Mr. Clayton. They had received but few communications from the
                    Mount since the death of Elizabeth, and were, consequently, ignorant of many
                    details.
A triumphant negative was given to their question by Mrs. Sharp, who further
                    proceeded to mix up with her statement the leaven of falsity and exaggeration
                    which is always to be  found in the discourse
                    of such persons. She assured them that the conduct of Agnes was strongly
                    reprobated by the society in the neighbourhood of B—, and that it was a matter
                    of universal astonishment that Mr. Hardman should permit her to remain in so
                    equivocal a situation. The furious indignation of the Hardmans at this account
                    may be imagined; that their sense of propriety should be called in
                    question by the world of their idolatry, was an affront not to be endured, and
                    it might prove very injurious to Mr. Hardman were it known that he had left his
                    ward in a doubtful position. They declared to Mrs. Sharp, that they were under a
                    deep sense of obligation to her, that they had been grossly deceived, but that
                    they would rectify their unconscious error that very day. To which she responded
                    with an air of virtuous modesty, that she had only done her duty—that she
                    applauded their resolution of speedily interfering in this unpleasant affair;
                    and then took her leave, fortified by their praises for some yet more determined
                    assault on the domestic happiness of a few more of her friends.
By that night’s post a letter was despatched to Agnes, the joint composition of
                    Mr. and Mrs. Hardman, in which her present position, as it appeared in the eyes
                    of the world, was qualified in terms that must
                    wound her beyond endurance; and which terminated with a peremptory order to her
                    to place herself without delay under the escort of the person they would send to
                    conduct her to London, where she was henceforward to reside in their house as
                    her sister had done.
