
Chapter 7
The Hand Again!
Followed by Auriol, who, in his turn, was followed by Ginger and the Sandman, the Tinker
     directed his steps to Great Windmill Street, where he entered a public-house, called the Black
     Lion. Leaving his four-footed attendants with the landlord, with whom he was acquainted, Ginger
     caused the party to be shown into a private room, and, on entering it, Auriol flung himself
     into a chair, while the dog-fancier stationed himself near the door.
“Now, what do you want with me?” demanded Auriol.
“You shall learn presently,” replied the Tinker; “but first, it may be as vell to state, that
     a certain pocket-book has been found.”
“Ah!” exclaimed Auriol. “You are the villains who beset me in the ruined house in the
     Vauxhall Road.”
“Your pocket-book has been found, I tell you,” replied the Tinker, “and from it ve have made
     the most awful diskiveries. Our werry ‘air stood on end ven ve first read the shockin’
     particulars. What a bloodthirsty ruffian you must be! Vy, ve finds you’ve been i’ the habit o’
     makin’ avay with a young ooman vonce every ten years. Your last wictim wos in 1820—the last but
     one, in 1810—and the one before her, in 1800.”
“Hangin’s too good for you!” cried the Sandman; “but if ve peaches you’re sartin to
     sving.”
“I hope that pretty creater I jist see ain’t to be the next wictim?” said Ginger.
“Peace!” thundered Auriol. “What do you require?”
“A hundred pound each’ll buy our silence,” replied the Tinker.
“Ve ought to have double that,” said the Sandman, “for screenin’ sich atterocious crimes as
     he has parpetrated. Ve’re not werry partic’lar ourselves, but ve don’t commit murder
     wholesale.”
“Ve don’t commit murder at all,” said Ginger.
“You may fancy,” pursued the Tinker, “that ve ain’t perfectly acvainted with your history,
     but to prove that ve are, I’ll just rub up your memory. Did you ever hear tell of a gemman as
     murdered Doctor Lamb, the famous halchemist o’ Queen Bess’s time, and, havin’ drank the ‘lixir
     vich the doctor had made for hisself, has lived ever since? Did you ever hear tell of such a
     person, I say?”
Auriol gazed at him in astonishment.
“What idle tale are you inventing?” he said at length.
“It is no idle tale,” replied the Tinker boldly. “Ve can bring a vitness as’ll prove the
     fact—a livin’ vitness.”
“What witness?” cried Auriol.
“Don’t you reckilect the dwarf as used to serve Doctor Lamb?” rejoined the Tinker. “He’s
     alive still; and ve calls him Old Parr, on account of his great age.”
“Where is he?—what has become of him?” demanded Auriol.
“Oh, ve’ll perduce him in doo time,” replied the Tinker cunningly.
“But tell me where the poor fellow is?” cried Auriol. “Have you seen him since last night? I
     sent him to a public-house at Kensington, but he has disappeared from it, and I can discover no
     traces of him.”
“He’ll turn up somewhere—never fear,” rejoined the Tinker. “But now, sir, that ve fairly
     understands each other, are you agreeable to our terms? You shall give us an order for the
     money, and ve’ll undertake, on our parts, not to mislest you more.”
“The pocket-book must be delivered up to me if I assent,” said Auriol, “and the poor dwarf
     must be found.”
“Vy, as to that, I can scarcely promise,” replied the Tinker; “there’s a difficulty in the
     case, you see. But the pocket-book’ll never be brought aginst you—you may rest assured o’
     that.”
“I must have it, or you get nothing from me,” cried Auriol.
“Here’s a bit o’ paper as come from the pocket-book,” said Ginger. “Would you like to hear
     wot’s written upon it? Here are the words: ‘How many crimes have I to reproach myself with! How
     many innocents have I destroyed! And all owing to my fatal compact with——’”
“Give me that paper,” cried Auriol, rising, and attempting to snatch it from the
     dog-fancier.
Just as this moment, and while Ginger retreated from Auriol, the door behind him was
     noiselessly opened—a hand was thrust through the chink—and the paper was snatched from his
     grasp. Before Ginger could turn round, the door was closed again.
“Halloa! What’s that?” he cried. “The paper’s gone!”
“The hand again!” cried the Sandman, in alarm. “See who’s in the passage—open the
     door—quick!”
Ginger cautiously complied, and, peeping forth, said—
“There’s no one there. It must be the devil. I’ll have nuffin’ more to do wi’ the
     matter.”
“Poh! poh! don’t be so chicken-‘arted!” cried the Tinker. “But come what may, the gemman
     shan’t stir till he undertakes to pay us three hundred pounds.”
“You seek to frighten me in vain, villain,” cried Auriol, upon whom the recent occurrence had
     not been lost. “I have but to stamp my foot, and I can instantly bring assistance that shall
     overpower you.”
“Don’t provoke him,” whispered Ginger, plucking the Tinker’s sleeve. “For my part, I shan’t
     stay any longer. I wouldn’t take his money.” And he quitted the room.
“I’ll go and see wot’s the matter wi’ Ginger,” said the Sandman, slinking after him.
The Tinker looked nervously round. He was not proof against his superstitious fears.
“Here, take this purse, and trouble me no more!” cried Auriol.
The Tinker’s hands clutched the purse mechanically, but he instantly laid it down again.
“I’m bad enough—but I won’t sell myself to the devil,” he said.
And he followed his companions.
Left alone, Auriol groaned aloud, and covered his face with his hands. When he looked up, he
     found the tall man in the black cloak standing beside him. A demoniacal smile played upon his
     features.
“You here?” cried Auriol.
“Of course,” replied the stranger. “I came to watch over your safety. You were in danger from
     those men. But you need not concern yourself more about them. I have your pocket-book, and the
     slip of paper that dropped from it. Here are both. Now let us talk on other matters. You have
     just parted from Ebba, and will see her again this evening.”
“Perchance,” replied Auriol.
“You will,” rejoined the stranger peremptorily. “Remember, your ten years’ limit draws to a
     close. In a few days it will be at an end; and if you renew it not, you will incur the penalty,
     and you know it to be terrible. With the means of renewal in your hands, why hesitate?”
“Because I will not sacrifice the girl,” replied Auriol.
“You cannot help yourself,” cried the stranger scornfully. “I command you to bring her to
     me.”
“I persist in my refusal,” replied Auriol.
“It is useless to brave my power,” said the stranger. “A moon is just born. When it has
     attained its first quarter, Ebba shall be mine. Till then, farewell.”
And as the words were uttered, he passed through the door.
