
CHAPTER XIII.

Oh, thou child of many prayers!
Life hath quicksands—life hath snares!
Care and age come unawares.

Like the swell of some sweet tune,
Morning rises into noon,
May glides onward into June.
Longfellow. 
'What is the matter with Amy? What makes her so odd?' asked Charles, as his mother came to
      wish him good night.
'Poor little dear! don't take any notice,' was all the answer he received; and seeing that
      he was to be told no more, he held his peace.
Laura understood without being told. She, too, had thought Guy and Amy were a great deal
      together, and combining various observations, she perceived that her mother must have given
      Amy a caution. She therefore set herself, like a good sister, to shelter Amy as much as she
      could, save her from awkward situations, and, above all, to prevent her altered manner from
      being remarked. This was the less difficult, as Eveleen was subdued and languid, and more
      inclined to lie on the sofa and read, than to look out for mirth.
As to poor little Amy, her task was in one way become less hard, for Guy had ceased to haunt
      her, and seemed to make it his business to avoid all that could cause her embarrassment; but
      in another way it hurt her much more, for she now saw the pain she was causing. If obliged to
      do anything for her, he would give a look as if to ask pardon, and then her rebellious
       heart would so throb with joy as to cause her dismay at having let herself fall
      into so hateful a habit as wishing to attract attention. What a struggle it was not to obey
      the impulse of turning to him for the smile with which he would greet anything in conversation
      that interested them both, and how wrong she thought it not to be more consoled when she saw
      him talking to Eveleen, or to any of the others, as if he was doing very well without her.
      This did not often happen; he was evidently out of spirits, and thoughtful, and Amy was afraid
      some storm might be gathering respecting Mr. Sebastian Dixon, about whom there always seemed
      to be some uncomfortable mystery.
Mrs. Edmonstone saw everything, and said nothing, She was very sorry for them both, but she
      could not interfere, and could only hope she had done right, and protected Amy as far as she
      was able. She was vexed now and then to see Eveleen give knowing smiles and significant
      glances, feared that she guessed what was going on, and wondered whether to give her a hint
      not to add to Amy's confusion; but her great dislike to enter on such a subject prevailed, and
      she left things to take their course, thinking that, for once, Guy's departure would be a
      relief.
The approach of anything in the shape of a party of pleasure was one of the best cures for
      Eveleen's ailments, and the evening before Mary's tea-drinking, she was in high spirits,
      laughing and talking a great deal, and addressing herself chiefly to Guy. He exerted himself
      to answer, but it did not come with life and spirit, his countenance did not light up, and at
      last Eveleen said, 'Ah! I see I am a dreadful bore. I'll go away, and leave you to
      repose.'
'Lady Eveleen!' he exclaimed, in consternation; 'what have I been doing—what have I been
      thinking of?'
' Nay, that is best known to yourself, though I think perhaps I could divine,' said she,
      with that archness and grace that always seemed to remove the unfavourable
       impression that her proceedings might have given. 'Shall I?'
'No, no,' he answered, colouring crimson, and then trying to laugh off his confusion, and
      find some answer, but without success; and Eveleen, perceiving her aunt's eyes were upon her,
      suddenly recollected that she had gone quite as far as decorum allowed, and made as masterly a
      retreat as the circumstances permitted.
'Well, I have always thought a 'penny for your thoughts' the boldest offer in the world, and
      now it is proved.'
This scene made Mrs. Edmonstone doubly annoyed, the next morning, at waking with a disabling
      headache, which made it quite impossible for her to attempt going to Mary Ross's fête
      . With great sincerity, Amy entreated to be allowed to remain at home, but she thought it
      would only be making the change more remarkable; she did not wish Mary to be disappointed;
      among so many ladies, Amy could easily avoid getting into difficulties; while Laura would, she
      trusted, be able to keep Eveleen in order.
The day was sunny, and all went off to admiration. The gentlemen presided over the cricket,
      and the ladies over 'blind-man's buff' and 'thread my needle;' but perhaps Mary was a little
      disappointed that, though she had Sir Guy's bodily presence, the peculiar blitheness and
      animation which he usually shed around him were missing. He sung at church, he filled tiny
      cups from huge pitchers of tea, he picked up and pacified a screaming child that had tumbled
      off a gate—he was as good-natured and useful as possible, but he was not his joyous and
      brilliant self.
Amy devoted herself to the smallest fry, played assiduously for three quarters of an hour
      with a fat, grave boy of three, who stood about a yard-and-a-half from her, solemnly throwing
      a ball into her lap, and never catching it again, took charge of many caps and bonnets, and
      walked about with Louisa Harper, a companion whom no one envied her.

In conclusion, the sky clouded over, it became chilly, and a shower began to fall. Laura
      pursued Eveleen, and Amy hunted up Charlotte from the utmost parts of the field, where she was
      the very centre of 'winding up the clock,' and, sorely against her will, dragged her off the
      wet grass. About sixty yards from the house, Guy met them with an umbrella, which, without
      speaking, he gave to Charlotte. Amy said, 'Thank you,' and again came that look. Charlotte
      rattled on, and hung back to talk to Guy, so that Amy could not hasten on without leaving her
      shelterless. It may be believed that she had the conversation to herself. At the door they met
      Mary and her father, going to dismiss their flock, who had taken refuge in a cart-shed at the
      other end of the field. Guy asked if he could be of any use; Mr. Ross said no; and Mary begged
      Amy and Charlotte to go up to her room, and change their wet shoes.
There, Amy would fain have stayed, flushed and agitated as those looks made her; but
      Charlotte was in wild spirits, delighted at having been caught in the rain, and obliged to
      wear shoes a mile too large, and eager to go and share the fun in the drawing-room. There, in
      the twilight, they found a mass of young ladies herded together, making a confused sound of
      laughter and giggling, while, at the other end of the room, Amy could just see Guy sitting
      alone in a dark corner.
Charlotte's tongue was soon the loudest in the medley, to which Amy did not at first attend,
      till she heard Charlotte saying,—
'Ah! you should hear Guy sing that.'
'What?' she whispered, to Eveleen.
"The Land of the Leal," was the answer.
'I wish he would sing it now,' said Ellen Harper.
'This darkness would be just the time for music,' said Eveleen; 'it is quite a witching
      time.'
'Why don't you ask him?' said Ellen. 'Come, Charlotte, there's a good girl, go and ask
      him.'

'Shall I?' said Charlotte, whispering and giggling with an affectation of shyness.
'No, no, Charlotte,' said Laura.
'No! why not?' said Eveleen. 'Don't be afraid, Charlotte.'
'He is so grave,' said Charlotte.
Eveleen had been growing wilder and less guarded all day, and now, partly liking to teaze
      and surprise the others, and partly emboldened by the darkness, she answered,—
'It will do him all manner of good. Here, Charlotte, I'll tell you how to make him. Tell him
      Amy wants him to do it.'
'Ay! tell him so,' cried Ellen, and they laughed in a manner that overpowered Amy with
      horror and shyness. She sprung to seize Charlotte, and stop her; she could not speak, but
      Louisa Harper caught her arm, and Laura's grave orders were drowned in a universal titter, and
      suppressed exclamation,—'Go, Charlotte, go; we will never forgive you if you don't!'
'Stop!' Amy struggled to cry, breaking from Louisa, and springing up in a sort of agony.
      Guy, who had such a horror of singing anything, deep in pathos or religious feeling, to mixed
      or unfit auditors, asked to do so in her name! 'Stop! oh, Charlotte!' It was too late;
      Charlotte, thoughtless with merriment, amused at vexing Laura, set up with applause, and
      confident in Guy's good nature, had come to him, and was saying,— 'Oh Guy! Amy wants you to
      come and sing us the 'Land of the Leal.''
Amy saw him start up. What did he think of her? Oh, what? He stepped towards them. The silly
      girls cowered as if they had roused a lion. His voice was not loud—it was almost as gentle as
      usual; but it quivered, as if it was hard to keep it so, and, as well as she could see, his
      face was rigid and stern as iron. 'Did you wish it?' he said, addressing himself to her, as if
      she was the only person present.

Her breath was almost gone. 'Oh! I beg your pardon,' she faltered. She could not exculpate
      herself; she saw it looked like an idle, almost an indecorous trick, unkind, everything
      abhorrent to her and to him, especially in the present state of things. His eyes were on her,
      his head bent towards her; he waited for an answer. 'I beg your pardon,' was all she could
      say.
There was—yes, there was—one of those fearful flashes of his kindling eye. She felt as if
      she was shrinking to nothing; she heard him say, in a low, hoarse tone, 'I am afraid I
      cannot;' then Mr. Ross, Mary, lights came in; there was a bustle and confusion, and when next
      she was clearly conscious, Laura was ordering the carriage.
When it came, there was an inquiry for Sir Guy.
'He is gone home,' said Mr. Ross. 'I met him in the passage, and wished him good night.'
Mr. Ross did not add what he afterwards told his daughter, that Guy seemed not to know
      whether it was raining or not; that he had put an umbrella into his hand, and seen him march
      off at full speed, through the pouring rain, with it under his arm.
The ladies entered the carriage. Amy leant back in her corner; Laura forebore to scold
      either Eveleen or Charlotte till she could have them separately; Eveleen was silent, because
      she was dismayed at the effect she had produced, and Charlotte, because she knew there was a
      scolding impending over her.
They found no one in the drawing-room but Mr. Edmonstone and Charles, who said they had
      heard the door open, and Guy run up-stairs, but they supposed he was wet through, as had not
      made his appearance. It was very inhospitable in the girls not to have made room for him in
      the carriage.
Amy went to see how her mother was, longing to tell her whole trouble, but found her asleep,
      and was obliged to leave it till the morrow. Poor child, she slept very little, but she would
      not go to her mother before breakfast, lest she should provoke the headache
       into staying another day. Guy was going by the train at twelve o'clock, and she
      was resolved that something should be done; so, as soon as her father had wished Guy good bye,
      and ridden off to his justice meeting, she entreated her mother to come into the
      dressing-room, and hear what she had to say.
'Oh, mamma! the most dreadful thing has happened!' and, hiding her face, she told her story,
      ending with a burst of weeping as she said how Guy was displeased. 'And well he might be! That
      after all that has vexed him this week, I should teaze him with such a trick. Oh, mamma! what
      must he think?'
'My dear, there was a great deal of silliness; but you need not treat it as if it was so
      very shocking.'
'Oh, but it hurt him! He was angry, and now I know how it is, he is angry with himself for
      being angry. Oh, how foolish I have been! What shall I do?'
'Perhaps we can let him know it was not your fault,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, thinking it might
      be very salutary for Charlotte to send her to confess.
'Do you think so?' cried Amy, eagerly. 'Oh! that would make it all comfortable. Only it was
      partly mine, for not keeping Charlotte in better order, and we must not throw it all on her
      and Eveleen. You think we may tell him?'
'I think he ought not to be allowed to fancy you let your name be so used.'
A message came for Mrs. Edmonstone, and while she was attending to it, Amy hastened away,
      fully believing that her mother had authorized her to go and explain it to Guy, and ask his
      pardon. It was what she thought the natural thing to do, and she was soon by his side, as she
      saw him pacing, with folded arms, under the wall.
Much had lately been passing in Guy's mind. He had gone on floating on the sunny stream of
      life at Hollywell, too happy to observe its especial charm, till the change in Amy's manner
      cast a sudden gloom
       over all. Not till then did he understand his own feelings, and recognise in her
      the being he had dreamt of. Amy was what made Hollywell precious to him. Sternly as he was
      wont to treat his impulses, he did not look on his affection as an earthborn fancy, liable to
      draw him from higher things, and, therefore, to be combated; he deemed her rather a guide and
      guard, whose love might arm him, soothe him, and encourage him. Yet he had little hope, for he
      did not do justice to his powers of inspiring affection; no one could distrust his temper and
      his character as much as he did himself, and with his ancestry and the doom he believed
      attached to his race, with his own youth and untried principles, with his undesirable
      connexions, and the reserve he was obliged to exercise regarding them, he considered himself
      as objectionable a person, as could well be found, as yet untouched by any positive crime, and
      he respected the Edmonstones too much to suppose that these disadvantages could be
      counterbalanced for a moment by his position; indeed, he interpreted Amy's coolness by
      supposing that there was a desire to discourage his attentions. No poor tutor or penniless
      cousin ever felt he was doing a more desperate thing in confessing an attachment, than did Sir
      Guy Morville when he determined that all should be told, at the risk of losing her for ever,
      and closing against himself the doors of his happy home. It was not right and fair by her
      parents, he thought, so to regard their daughter, and live in the same house with his
      sentiments unavowed, and as to Amy herself, if his feelings had reached such a pitch of
      sensitiveness that he must needs behave like an angry lion, because her name had been dragged
      into an idle joke, it was high time it should be explained, unpropitious as the moment might
      be for declaring his attachment, when he had manifested such a temper as any woman might
      dread. Thus he made up his mind that, come of it what might, he would not leave Hollywell that
      day till the truth was told. Just as he was turning to find Mrs. Edmonstone
       and 'put his fate to the touch,' a little figure stood beside him, and Amy's own
      sweet, low tones were saying, imploringly,—
'Guy, I wanted to tell you how sorry I am you were so teazed last night.'
'Don't think of it!' said he, taken extremely by surprise.
'It was our fault, I could not stop it; I should have kept Charlotte in better order, but
      they would not let her hear me. I knew it was what you dislike particularly, and I was very
      sorry.'
'You—I was—I was. But no matter now. Amy,' he added, earnestly, 'may I ask you to walk on
      with me a little way. I must say something to you.'
Was this what 'mamma' objected to? Oh no! Amy felt she must stay now, and, in truth, she was
      glad it was right, though her heart beat fast, fast, faster, as Guy, pulling down a long,
      trailing branch of Noisette rose, and twisting it in his hand, paused for a few moments, then
      spoke collectedly, and without hesitation, though with the tremulousness of subdued agitation,
      looking the while not at her, but straight before him.
'You ought to be told why your words and looks have such effect on me as to make me behave
      as I did last night. Shame on me for such conduct! I know its evil, and how preposterous it
      must make what I have to tell you. I don't know how long it has been, but almost ever since I
      came here, a feeling has been growing up in me towards you, such as I can never have for any
      one else.'
The flame rushed into Amy's cheeks, and no one could have told what she felt, as he paused
      again, and then went on speaking more quickly, as if his emotion was less under control.
'If ever there is to be happiness for me on earth, it must be through you, as you, for the
      last three years, have been all my brightness here. What I feel for you is beyond all power of
      telling you, Amy! But I
       know full well all there is against me—I know I am untried, and how can I dare
      to ask one born to brightness and happiness to share the doom of my family?'
Amy's impulse was that anything shared with him would be welcome; but the strength of the
      feeling stifled the power of expression, and she could not utter a word.
'It seems selfish even to dream of it,' he proceeded; 'yet I must,—I cannot help it. To feel
      that I had your love to keep me safe, to know that you watched for me, prayed for me, were my
      own, my Verena,—oh Amy! it would be more joy than I have ever dared to hope for. But mind,' he
      added, after another brief pause, 'I would not even ask you to answer me now, far less to bind
      yourself, even if—if it were possible. I know my trial is not come; and were I to render
      myself, by positive act, unworthy even to think of you, it would be too dreadful to have
      entangled you, and made you unhappy. No. I speak now, because I ought not to remain here with
      such feelings unknown to your father and mother.'
At that moment, close on the other side of the box-tree clump, were heard the wheels of
      Charles's garden-chair, and Charlotte's voice talking to him, as he made his morning tour
      round the garden. Amy flew off, like a little bird to its nest, and never stopped, till,
      breathless and crimson, she darted into the dressing room, threw herself on her knees, and
      with her face hidden in her mother's lap, exclaimed, in panting, half-smothered whispers,
      which needed all Mrs. Edmonstone's intuition to make them intelligible,—
'O mamma, mamma, he says—he says he loves me!'
Perhaps Mrs. Edmonstone was not so very much surprised; but she had no time to do more than
      raise and kiss the burning face, and see, at a moment's glance, how bright was the gleam of
      frightened joy, in the downcast eye and troubled smile; when two knocks, given rapidly, were
      heard, and almost at the same moment the door opened, and Guy stood before her, his
       face no less glowing than that which Amy buried again on her mother's knee.
'Come in, Guy,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, as he stood doubtful for a moment at the door, and
      there was a sweet smile of proud, joyful affection on her face, conveying even more
      encouragement than her tone. Amy raised her head, and moved as if to leave the room.
'Don't go,' he said, earnestly, 'unless you wish it.'
Amy did not wish it, especially now that she had her mother to save her confusion, and she
      sat on a footstool, holding her mother's hand, looking up to Guy whenever she felt bold
      enough, and hanging down her head when he said what showed how much more highly he prized her
      than silly little Amy could deserve.
'You know what I am come to say,' he began, standing by the mantel-shelf, as was his wont in
      his conferences with Mrs. Edmonstone, and he repeated the same in substance as he had said to
      Amy in the garden, though with less calmness and coherence, and far more warmth of expression,
      as if, now that she was protected by her mother's presence, he exercised less force in
      self-restraint.
Never was any one happier than was Mrs. Edmonstone; loving Guy so heartily, seeing the
      beauty of his character in each word, rejoicing that such affection should be bestowed on her
      little Amy, exulting in her having won such a heart, and touched and gratified by the free
      confidence with which both had at once hastened to pour out all to her, not merely as a duty,
      but in the full ebullition of their warm young love. The only difficulty was to bring herself
      to speak with prudence becoming her position, whilst she was sympathizing with them as
      ardently as if she was not older than both of them put together. When Guy spoke of himself as
      unproved, and undeserving of trust, it was all she could do to keep from declaring there was
      no one whom she thought so safe.
'While you go on as you have begun, Guy.'
'If you tell me to hope! Oh, Mrs. Edmonstone!
       is it wrong that an earthly incentive to persevere should have power which
      sometimes seems greater than the true one?'
'There is the best and strongest ground of all for trusting you,' said she. 'If you spoke of
      keeping right only for Amy's sake, then I might fear; but when she is second, there is
      confidence indeed.'
'If speaking were all!' said Guy.
'There is one thing I ought to say,' she proceeded; 'you know you are very young, and
      though—though I don't know that I can say so in my own person, a prudent woman would say, that
      you have seen so little of the world, that you may easily meet a person you would like better
      than such a quiet little dull thing as your guardian's daughter.'
The look that he cast on Amy was worth seeing, and then, with a smile, he answered,—
'I am glad you don't say it in your own person.'
'It is very bold and presumptuous in me to say anything at all in papa's absence,' said Mrs.
      Edmonstone, smiling; 'but I am sure he will think in the same way, that things ought to remain
      as they are, and that it is our duty not to allow you to be, or to feel, otherwise than
      entirely at liberty.'
'I dare say it may be right in you,' said Guy, grudgingly. 'However, I must not complain. It
      is too much that you should not reject me altogether.'
To all three that space was as bright a gleam of sunshine as ever embellished life, so short
      as to be free from a single care, a perfectly serenely happy present, the more joyous from
      having been preceded by vexations, each of the two young things learning that there was love
      where it was most precious. Guy especially, isolated and lonely as he stood in life, with his
      fear and mistrust of himself, was now not only allowed to love, and assured beyond his hopes
      that Amy returned his affection, but found himself thus welcomed by her mother, and gathered
      into the family where his warm feelings had taken up their abode,
       while he believed himself regarded only as a guest and a stranger.
They talked on, with happy silences between, Guy standing all the time with his branch of
      roses in his hand, and Amy looking up to him, and trying to realize it, and to understand why
      she was so very, very happy.
No one thought of time till Charlotte rushed in, like a whirlwind, crying,—
'Oh, here you are! We could not think what had become of you. There has Deloraine been at
      the door these ten minutes, and Charlie sent me to find you, for he says if you are too late
      for Mrs. Henley's dinner, she will write such an account of you to Philip as you will never
      get over.'
Very little of this was heard, there was only the instinctive consternation of being too
      late. They started up, Guy threw down his roses, caught Amy's hand, and pressed it, while she
      bent down her head, hiding the renewed blush; he dashed out of the room, and up to his own,
      while Mrs. Edmonstone and Charlotte hurried down. In another second, he was back again, and
      once more Amy felt the pressure of his hand on hers,—
'Good-bye!' he said, and she whispered another 'Good-bye!' the only words she had
      spoken.
One moment more he lingered,—
'My Verena!' said he; but the hurrying sounds in the hall warned him,—he sprang down to the
      drawing-room. Even Charles was on the alert, standing, leaning against the table, and looking
      eager; but Guy had not time to let him speak, he only shook hands, and wished good-bye, with a
      sort of vehement agitated cordiality, concealed by his haste.
'Where's Amy?' cried Charlotte. 'Amy! Is not she coming to wish him good-bye?'
He said something, of which 'upstairs' was the only audible word; held Mrs. Edmonstone's
      hand fast, while she said in a low voice,—'You shall hear from
       papa to-morrow,' then sprung on his horse, and looked up. Amy was at the window,
      he saw her head bending forward, under its veil of curls, in the midst of the roses round the
      lattice; their eyes met once more, he gave one beamy smile, then rode off at full speed, with
      Bustle racing after him, while Amy threw herself on her knees by her bed, and with hands
      clasped over her face prayed that she might be thankful enough, and never be unworthy of
      him.
Every one wanted to get rid of every one else except Mrs. Edmonstone; for all but Charlotte
      guessed at the state of the case, and even she perceived that something was going on. Lady
      Eveleen was in a state of great curiosity; but she had mercy, she knew that they must tell
      each other before it came to her turn, and very good naturedly she invited Charlotte to come
      into the garden with her, and kept her out of the way by a full account of her last fancy
      ball, given with so much spirit and humour that Charlotte could not help attending.
Charles and Laura gained little by this kind manoeuvre, for their mother was gone up again
      to Amy, and they could only make a few conjectures. Charles nursed his right hand, and asked
      Laura how hers felt? She looked up from her work, to which she had begun to apply herself
      diligently, and gazed at him inquiringly, as if to see whether he intended anything.
'For my part,' he added, 'I certainly thought he meant to carry off the hands of some of the
      family.'
'I suppose we shall soon hear it explained,' said Laura, quietly.
'Soon! If I had as many available legs as you, would I wait for other people's soon?'
'I should think she had rather be left to mamma,' said Laura, going on with her work.
'Then you do think there is something in it?' said Charles, peering up in her face; but he
      saw he was teazing her, recollected that she had long seemed out of spirits, and forebore to
      say any more. He was,
       however, too impatient to remain longer quiet, and presently Laura saw him
      adjusting his crutches.
'O Charlie! I am sure it will only be troublesome.'
'I am going to my own room,' said Charles, hopping off. 'I presume you don't wish to forbid
      that.'
His room had a door into the dressing-room, so that it was an excellent place for
      discovering all from which they did not wish to exclude him, and he did not believe he should
      be unwelcome; for though he might pretend it was all fun and curiosity, he heartily loved his
      little Amy.
The tap of his crutches, and the slow motion with which he raised himself from step to step,
      was heard; and Amy, who was leaning against her mother, started up, exclaiming,—
'O mamma, here comes Charlie! May I tell him? I am sure I can't meet him without.'
'I suspect he has guessed it already,' said Mrs. Edmonstone, going to open the door, just as
      he reached the head of the stairs, and then leaving them.
'Well, Amy,' said he, looking full at her carnation cheeks, 'are you prepared to see me turn
      lead-coloured, and fall into convulsions, like the sister with the spine complaint.'
'O Charlie! You know it. But how?'
Amy was helping him to the sofa, laid him down, and sat by him on the old footstool; he put
      his arm round her neck, and she rested her head on his shoulder.
Well, Amy, I give you joy, my small woman,' said he, talking the more nonsense because of
      the fullness in his throat; 'and I hope you give me credit for amazing selfdenial in so
      doing.'
'O Charlie,—dear Charlie!' and she kissed him, she could not blush more, poor little thing,
      for she had already reached her utmost capability of redness,—'it is no such thing.'
'No such thing! What has turned you into a turkey-cock all at once, or what made him nearly
       squeeze off my unfortunate fingers? No such thing, indeed!'
'I-mean—I mean, it is not that . We are so very young, and I am so silly.'
'Is that his reason?'
'You must make me so much better and wiser! Oh, if I could but be good enough!'
'For that matter, I don't think any one else would be good enough to take care of such a
      silly little thing. But what is the that , that it is, or is not?'
'Nothing now, only when we are older. At least, you know papa has not heard it.'
'Provided my father gives his consent, as the Irish young lady added to all her responses
      through the marriage service. But tell me all—all you like, I mean,—for you will have lovers'
      secrets now, Amy.'
Mrs. Edmonstone had, meantime, gone down to Laura. Poor Laura, as soon as her brother had
      left the room, she allowed the fixed composure of her face to relax into a restless, harassed,
      almost miserable expression, and walked up and down with agitated steps.
'O wealth, wealth!'—her lips formed the words, without uttering them—'what cruel differences
      it makes? All smooth here! Young, not to be trusted, with strange reserves, discreditable
      connexions,—that family,—that fearful temper, showing itself even to her! All will be
      overlooked! Papa will be delighted, I know he will! And how is it with us? Proved, noble,
      superior, owned as such by all, as Philip is, yet, for that want of hateful money, he would be
      spurned. And for this—for this—the love that has grown up with our lives must be crushed down
      and hidden—our life is wearing out in wearying self-watching!'
The lock of the door turned, and Laura had resumed her ordinary expression before it opened,
      and her mother came in; but there was anything but calmness beneath, for the pang of
      self-reproach had come,—
       'Was it thus that she prepared to hear these tidings of her sister?'
'Well, Laura,' began Mrs. Edmonstone, with the eager smile of one bringing delightful news,
      and sure of sympathy.
'It is so then?' said Laura. 'Dear, dear little Amy! I hope'—and her eyes filled with tears;
      but she had learnt to dread any outbreak of feeling, conquered it in a minute, and said,—
'What has happened? How does it stand?'
'It stands, at least as far as I can say without papa, as the dear Guy very rightly and
      wisely wished it to stand. There is no positive engagement, they are both too young; but he
      thought it was not right to remain here without letting us know his sentiments towards
      her.'
A pang shot through Laura; but it was but for a moment. Guy might doubt where Philip need
      never do so. Her mother went on,—
'Their frankness and confidence are most beautiful. We know dear little Amy could not help
      it; but there was something very sweet, very noble, in his way of telling all.'
Another pang for Laura. But no! it was only poverty that was to blame. Philip would speak as
      plainly if his prospects were as fair.
'Oh, I hope it will do well,' said she.
'It must,—it will!' cried Mrs. Edmonstone, giving way to her joyful enthusiasm of affection.
      'It is nonsense to doubt, knowing him as we do. There is not a man in the world with whom I
      could be so happy to trust her.'
Laura could not hear Guy set above all men in the world, and she remembered Philip's warning
      to her, two years ago.
'There is much that is very good and very delightful about him,' she said hesitatingly.
'You are thinking of the Morville temper,' said her
       mother; 'but I am not afraid of it. A naturally hot temper, controlled like his
      by strong religious principle, is far safer than a cool easy one, without the principle.'
Laura thought this going too far; but she felt some compensation due to Guy, and
      acknowledged how strongly he was actuated by principle. However—and it was well for her—they
      could not talk long, for Eveleen and Charlotte were approaching, and she hastily asked what
      was to be done about telling Eva, who could not fail to guess something.
'We must tell her, and make her promise absolute secrecy,' said Mrs. Edmonstone. 'I will
      speak to her myself; but I must wait till I have seen papa. There is no doubt of what he will
      say; but we have been taking quite liberties enough in his absence.'
Laura did not see her sister till luncheon, when Amy came down, with a glow on her cheeks
      that made her so much prettier than usual, that Charles wished Guy could have seen her. She
      said little, and ran up again as soon as she could. Laura followed her; and the two sisters
      threw their arms fondly round each other, and kissed repeatedly.
'Mamma has told you?' said Amy. 'Oh, it has made me so very happy; and everyone is so
      kind.'
'Dear, dear Amy!'
'I'm only afraid—'
'He has begun so well—'
'Oh, nonsense! You cannot think I could be so foolish as to be afraid for him? Oh, no! But
      if he should take me for more than I am worth. O Laura, Laura! What shall I do to be as good
      and sensible as you? I must not be silly little Amy any more.'
'Perhaps he likes you best as you are?'
'I don't mean cleverness; I can't help that,—and he knows how stupid I am,—but I am afraid
      he thinks there is more worth in me. Don't you know, he has a sort of sunshine in his eyes and
      mind, that makes all he cares about seem to him brighter and
       better than it really is. I am afraid he is only dressing me up with that
      sunshine.'
'It must be strange sunshine that you want to make you better and brighter than you are,'
      said Laura, kissing her.
'I'll tell you what it is,' said Amy, folding her hands, and standing with her face raised,
      'it wont do now, as you told me once, to have no bones in my character. I must learn to be
      steady and strong, if I can; for if this is to be, he will depend on me, I don't mean, to
      advise him, for he knows better than anybody; but to be—you know what—if vexation or trouble
      was to come! And, Laura, think if he was to depend on me, and I was to fail! Oh, do help me to
      have firmness and self-command, like you!'
'It was a long time ago that we talked of your wanting bones.'
'Yes, before he came; but I never forget it.'
Laura was obliged to go out with Eveleen. All went their different ways; and Amy had the
      garden to herself to cool her cheeks in. But this was a vain operation, for a fresh access of
      burning was brought on while Laura was helping her to dress for dinner, when her father's
      quick steps sounded in the passage. He knocked at her door, and as she opened it, he kissed
      her on each cheek; and, throwing his arm round her, exclaimed,—
'Well, Miss Amy, you have made a fine morning's work of it! A pretty thing, for young ladies
      to be accepting offers while papa is out of the way. Eh, Laura?'
Amy knew this was a manifestation of extreme delight; but it was not very pleasant to
      Laura.
'So you have made a conquest!' proceeded Mr. Edmonstone; 'and I heartily wish you joy of it,
      my dear. He is as amiable and good-natured a youth as I would wish to see; and I should say
      the same if he had not a shilling in the world.'
Laura's heart bounded; but she knew, whatever her
       father might fancy, the reality would be very different if Guy were as poor as
      Philip.
'I shall write to him this very evening,' he continued, 'and tell him, if he has the bad
      taste to like such a silly little white thing, I am not the man to stand in his way. Eh, Amy?
      Shall I tell him so?'
'Tell him what you please, dear papa.'
'Eh? What I please? Suppose I say we can't spare our little one, and he may go about his
      business?'
'I'm not afraid of you, papa.'
'Come, she's a good little thing,—sha'n't be teazed. Eh, Laura, what do you think of it, our
      beauty, to see your younger sister impertinent enough to set up a lover, while your pink
      cheeks are left in the lurch!'
Laura not being wont to make playful repartees, her silence passed unnoticed. Her feelings
      were mixed; but perhaps the predominant one was satisfaction that it was not for her pink
      cheeks that she was valued.
It had occurred to Mrs. Edmonstone that it was a curious thing, after her attempt at
      scheming for Eveleen, to have to announce to her that Guy was attached to her own daughter;
      nay, after the willingness Eveleen had manifested to be gratified with any attention Guy
      showed her, it seemed doubtful for a moment whether the intelligence would be pleasing to her.
      However, Eveleen was just the girl to like men better than women, and never to be so happy as
      when on the verge of flirting; it would probably have been the same with any other youth that
      came in her way; and Guy might fully be acquitted of doing more than paying her the civilities
      which were requisite from him to any young lady visitor. He had, two years ago, when a mere
      boy, idled, laughed, and made fun with her; but his fear of trifling away his time had made
      him draw back, before he had involved himself in what might have led to anything further; and
      during the present visit, no one could doubt that he was pre-occupied with Amy. At any rate,
      it was right that Eveleen
       should know the truth, in confidence, if only to prevent her from talking of any
      surmises she might have.
Mrs. Edmonstone was set at ease in a moment. Eveleen was enchanted, danced round and round
      the room, declared they would be the most charming couple in the world; she had seen it all
      along; she was so delighted they had come to an understanding at last, poor things, they were
      so miserable all last week; and she must take credit to herself for having done it all. Was
      not her aunt very much obliged to her?
'My dear Eva!' exclaimed Mrs. Edmonstone, into whose mind the notion never entered that any
      one could boast of such a proceeding as hers last night; but the truth was that Eveleen,
      feeling slightly culpable, was delighted that all had turned out so well, and resolved to
      carry it off with a high hand.
'To be sure! Poor little Amy! when she looked ready to sink into the earth, she little knew
      her obligations to me! Was not it the cleverest thing in the world? It was just the touch they
      wanted—the very thing!'
'My dear, I am glad I know that you are sometimes given to talking nonsense,' said Mrs.
      Edmonstone, laughing.
'And you wont believe me serious? You wont be grateful to me for my lucky hit?' said
      Eveleen, looking comically injured. 'Oh auntie, that is very hard, when I shall believe to my
      dying day that I did it!'
'Why, Eva, if I thought it had been done by design, I should find it very hard to forgive
      you for it at all, rather hard even to accept Guy, so you had better not try to disturb my
      belief that it was only that spirit of mischief that makes you now and then a little mad.'
'Oh dear! what a desperate scolding you must have given poor little Charlotte!' exclaimed
      Eveleen, quaintly.
Mrs. Edmonstone could not help laughing as she confessed that she had altogether forgotten
      Charlotte.

'Then you will. You'll go on forgetting her,' cried Eveleen. 'She only did what she was
      told, and did not know the malice of it. There, you're relenting! There's a good aunt! And
      now, if you wont be grateful, as any other mamma in the world would have been, and as I
      calculated on, when I pretended to have been a prudent, designing woman, instead of a wild,
      mischievous monkey, at least you'll forgive me enough to invite me to the wedding. Oh! what a
      beauty of a wedding it will be! I'd come from Kilcoran all the way on my bare knees to see it.
      And you'll let me bridesmaid, and have a ball after it?'
'There is no saying what I may do, if you'll only be a good girl, and hold your tongue. I
      don't want to prevent your telling anything to your mamma, of course, but pray don't let it go
      any further. Don't let Maurice hear it. I have especial reasons for wishing it should not be
      known. You know, it is not even an engagement, and nothing must be done which can make Guy
      feel in the least bound.'
Eveleen promised, and Mrs. Edmonstone knew that she had sense and proper feeling enough for
      her promise to deserve trust.

