
CHAPTER XIII.

Shall I sit alone in my chamber,
   And set the chairs by the wall,
While you sit with lords and princes,
   Yet have not a thought at all?
Shall I sit alone in my chamber,
   And duly the table lay,
Whilst you stand up in the diet,
   And have not a word to say?Old Danish Ballad.
'O Norman , are you come already?' exclaimed Margaret, as her brother opened the
      door, bringing in with him the crisp breath of December.
'Yes, I came away directly after collections. How are you Margaret?'
'Pretty brave, thank you;' but the brother and sister both read on each other's features,
      that the additional three months of suspense had told. There were traces of toil and study on
      Norman's brow, the sunken look about his eyes, and the dejected outline of his cheek, Margaret
      knew betokened discouragement; and though her mild serenity was not changed, she was almost
      transparently thin and pale. They had long ago left off asking whether there were tidings, and
      seldom was the subject adverted to, though the whole family seemed to be living beneath a dark
      shadow.
'How is Flora?' he next asked.
'Going on beautifully, except that papa thinks she does too much in every way. She declares
      that she shall bring the baby to show me in another week, but I don't think it will be
      allowed.'
'And the little lady prospers?'
'Capitally, though I get rather contradictory reports of her. First, papa declared her
      something surpassing—exactly like Flora, and so I suppose she is; but Ethel and Meta will say
      nothing for her beauty, and Blanche calls her a fright. But papa is her devoted admirer—he
      does so enjoy having a sort of property again in a baby.'
'And George Rivers?' said Norman, smiling.
'Poor George! he is very proud of her in his own way. He has just been here with a note from
      Flora, and actually talked! Between her and the election, he is wonderfully brilliant.'

'The election? Has Mr. Esdaile resigned?'
'Have you not heard? He intends it, and George himself is going to stand. The only danger
      is, that Sir Henry Walkinghame should think of it.'
'Rivers in parliament! Well, sound men are wanted.'
'Fancy Flora, our member's wife. How well she will become her position.'
'How soon is it likely to be?'
'Quickly, I fancy. Dr. Spencer, who knows all kinds of news (Papa says he makes a scientific
      study of gossip, as a new branch of comparative anatomy), found out from the Clevelands, that
      Mr. Esdaile meant to retire, and happened to mention it the last time that Flora came to see
      me. It was like firing a train. You would have wondered to see how it excited her, who usually
      shows her feelings so little. She has been so much occupied with it, and so anxious that
      George should be ready to take the field at once, that papa was afraid of its hurting her, and
      Ethel comes home declaring that the election is more to her than her baby.'
'Ethel is apt to be a little hard on Flora. They are too unlike to understand each
      other.'
'Ethel is to be godmother though, and Flora means to ask Mr. Ogilvie to come and stand.'
'I think he will be gone abroad, or I should have asked him to fulfil his old promise of
      coming to us.'
'I believe he must be lodged here, if he should come. Flora will have her house full, for
      Lady Leonora is coming. The baby is to be called after her.'
'Indeed!' exclaimed Norman.
'Yes, I thought it unnecessary, as she is not George's aunt, but Flora is grateful to her
      for much kindness, and she is coming to see Meta. I am afraid papa is a little hurt, that any
      name but one should have been chosen.'
'Has Meta been comfortable?'
'Dear little thing! Everyone says how beautifully she has behaved. She brought all her
      housekeeping books to Flora at once, and only begged to be made helpful in whatever way might
      be most convenient. She explained, what we never knew before, how she had the young maids in
      to read with her, and asked leave to go on. Very few could have been set aside so simply and
      sweetly in their own house.'
'Flora was sensible of it, I hope.'
'O yes. She took the management of course, but Meta is charmed with her having the girls in
      from the village, in turn, to help in the scullery. They have begun family prayers too, and
       George makes the stable men go to Church—a matter which had been past Meta, as
      you may guess, though she had been a wonderful little manager, and Flora owned herself quite
      astonished.'
'I wonder only at her being astonished.'
'Meta owned to Ethel that what had been worst of all to her was the heart sinking, at
      finding herself able to choose her occupations, with no one to accommodate them to. But she
      would not give way— she set up more work for herself at the school, and has been talking of
      giving singing lessons at Cocksmoor; and she forced herself to read, though it was an effort.
      She has been very happy lately in nursing Flora.'
'Is Ethel there?'
'No; she is, as usual, at Cocksmoor. There are great councils about sending Cherry to be
      trained for her new school.'
'Would Flora be able to see me, if I were to ride over to the Grange?'
'You may try; and, if papa is not there, I dare say she will.
'At least, I shall see Meta, and she may judge. I want to see Rivers too, so I will ask if
      the bay is to be had. Ah! you have the Claude, I see.'
'Yes, it is too large for this room; but papa put it here that I might enjoy it, and it is
      almost a companion. The sky improves so in the sunset light.
Norman was soon at Abbotstoke; and, as he drew his rein, Meta's bright face nodded to him
      from Flora's sitting-room window; and, as he passed the conservatory, the little person met
      him, with a summons, at once, to his sister.
He found Flora on the sofa, with a table beside her, covered with notes and papers. She was
      sitting up writing; and, though somewhat pale, was very smiling and animated.
'Norman, how kind to come to me the first thing!'
'Margaret encouraged me to try whether you would be visible.'
'They want to make a regular prisoner of me,' said Flora, laughing. 'Papa is as bad as the
      old nurse! But he has not been here to-day, so I have had my own way. Did you meet
      George?'
'No; but Margaret said he had been with her.'
'I wish he would come. We expect the second post to bring the news that Mr. Esdaile has
      accepted the Chiltern Hundreds. If he found it so, he meant to go and talk to Mr. Bramshaw;
      for, though he is so dull, we must make him agent.'
'Is there any danger of opposition?'
'None at all, if we are soon enough in the field. Papa's name will secure us, and there is
      no one else on the right side to come forward, so that it is an absolute rescue of the
      seat.'

'It is the very moment when men of principle are most wanted,' said Norman. 'The questions
      of the day are no light matters; and it is an immense point to save Stoneborough from being
      represented by one of the Tomkins' set.'
'Exactly so,' said Flora. 'I should feel it a crime to say one word to deter George, at a
      time when every effort must be made to support the right cause. One must make sacrifices when
      the highest interests are at stake.'
Flora seemed to thrive upon her sacrifice—she had never appeared more brilliant and joyous.
      Her brother saw, in her, a Roman matron; and the ambition that was inherent in his nature,
      began to find compensation for being crushed, as far as regarded himself, by soaring for
      another. He eagerly answered that he fully agreed with her, and that she would never repent
      urging her husband to take on himself the duties incumbent on all who had the power.
Highly gratified, she asked him to look at a copy of George's intended address, which was
      lying on the table. He approved of the tenor, but saw a few phrases susceptible of a better
      point. 'Give it,' she said, putting a pen into his hand; and he began to interline and erase
      her fair manuscript, talking earnestly, and working up himself and the address at the same
      time, till it had grown into a composition far superior to the merely sensible affair it had
      been. Eloquence and thought were now in the language, and substance—and Flora was
      delighted.
'I have been very disrespectful to my niece all this time,' said Norman, descending from the
      clouds of patriotism.
'I do not mean to inflict her mercilessly on her relations,' said Flora, but I should like
      you to see her. She is so like Blanche.'
The little girl was brought in, and Flora made a very pretty young mother, as she held her
      in her arms, with so much graceful pride. Norman was perfectly entranced—he had never seen his
      sister so charming or so admirable, between her delight in her infant, and her self-devotion
      to the good of her husband and her country— acting so wisely, and speaking so considerately;
      and praising her dear Meta with so much warmth. He would never have torn himself away, had not
      the nurse hinted that Mrs. Rivers had had too much excitement and fatigue already to-day; and,
      besides, he suspected that he might find Meta in the drawing-room, where he might discuss the
      whole with her, and judge for himself of her state of spirits.
Flora's next visitor was her father, who came as the twilight was enhancing the comfortable
      red brightness of the fire. He was very happy in these visits—mother and child had both
      prospered so well, and it was quite a treat to be able to expend his tenderness on Flora.
       His little grandchild seemed to renew his own happy days, and he delighted to
      take her from her mother, and fondle her. No sooner was the baby in his arms, than Flora's
      hands were busy among the papers, and she begged him to ring for lights.
'Not yet,' he said. 'Why can't you sit in the dark, and give yourself a little rest?'
'I want you to hear George's address. Norman has been looking at it, and I hope you will not
      think it too strong,' and she turned, so that the light might fall on the paper.
'Let me see,' said Dr. May, holding out his hand for it.
'This is a rough copy, too much scratched for you to make out.'
She read it accordingly, and her father admired it exceedingly— Norman's touches, above all;
      and Flora's reading had dovetailed all so neatly together that no one knew where the joins
      were. 'I will copy it fairly,' she said, 'if you will shew it to Dr. Spencer, and ask whether
      he thinks it too strong. Mr. Dodsley too; he would be more gratified if he saw it first, in
      private, and thought himself consulted.'
Dr. May was dismayed at seeing her take up her pen, make a desk of her blotting-book, and
      begin her copy by firelight.
'Flora, my dear,' he said, 'this must not be. Have I not told you that you must be content
      to rest?'
'I did not get up till ten o'clock, and have been lying here ever since.'
'But what has this head of yours been doing? Has it been resting for ten minutes together?
      Now, I know what I am saying, Flora—I warn you, that if you will not give yourself needful
      quiet now, you will suffer for it by-and-by.'
Flora smiled, and said, 'I thought I had been very good. But, what is to be done when one's
      wits will work, and there is work for them to do?'
'Is not there work enough for them here?' said Dr. May, looking at the babe. 'Your mother
      used to value such a retirement from care.'
Flora was silent for a minute, then said, 'Mr. Esdaile should have put off his resignation
      to suit me. It is an unfortunate time for the election.
'And you can't let the election alone?'
She shook her head, and smiled a negative, as if she would, but that she was under a
      necessity.
'My dear, if the election cannot go on without you, it had better not go on at all.'
She looked very much hurt, and turned away her head.
Her father was grieved. 'My dear,' he added, 'I know you
       desire to be of use, especially to George; but do you not believe that he would
      rather fail, than that you, or his child, should suffer?'
No answer.
'Does he stand by his own wish, or yours, Flora?'
'He wishes it. It is his duty,' said Flora, collecting her dignity.
'I can say no more, except to beg him not to let you exert yourself.'
Accordingly, when George came home, the Doctor read him a lecture on his wife's over-busy
      brain; and was listened to, as usual, with gratitude and deference. He professed that he only
      wished to do what was best for her, but she never would spare herself; and, going to her side,
      with his heavy, fond solicitude, he made her promise not to hurt herself, and she laughed and
      consented.
The promise was easily given, for she did not believe she was hurting herself; and, as to
      giving up the election, or ceasing secretly to prompt George, that was absolutely out of the
      question. What could be a greater duty than to incite her husband to usefulness?'
Moreover it was but proper to invite Meta's aunt and cousin to see her, and to project a few
      select dinners for their amusement, and the gratification of her neighbours. It was only
      grateful and cousinly likewise, to ask the "Master of Glenbracken;" and as she saw the thrill
      of colour on Ethel's cheeks, at the sight of the address to the Honorable Norman Ogilvie, she
      thought herself the best of sisters. She even talked of Ogilvie as a second Christian name,
      but Meta observed that old aunt Dorothy would call it Leonorar Rogilvie Rivers, and thus
      averted it, somewhat to Ethel's satisfaction.
Ethel scolded herself many times for wondering whether Mr. Ogilvie would come. What was it
      to her? Suppose he should; suppose the rest. What a predicament! How unreasonable and
      conceited, even to think of such a thing, when her mind was made up. What could result, save
      tossings to and fro, a passing gratification set against infinite pain, and strife with her
      own heart, and with her father's unselfishness! Had he but come before Flora's marriage! No;
      Ethel hated herself for the wish that arose for the moment. Far better he should keep away,
      if, perhaps, without the slightest inclination towards her, his mere name could stir up such a
      tumult—all, it might be, founded in vanity. Rebellious feelings and sense of tedium had once
      been subdued—why should they be roused again?
The answer came. Norman Ogilvie was setting off for Italy, and regretted that he could not
      take Abbotstoke on his way. He desired his kind remembrances and warm Christmas wishes to all
      his cousins.

If Ethel breathed more freely, there was a sense that tranquillity is uninteresting. It was,
      it must be confessed, a flat end to a romance, that all the permanent present effect was a
      certain softening, and a degree more attention to her appearance; and after all, this might,
      as Flora averred, be ascribed to the Paris outfit having taught her to wear clothes; as well
      as to that which had awakened the feminine element, and removed that sense of not being like
      other women, which sometimes hangs painfully about girls who have learnt to think themselves
      plain or awkward.
There were other causes why it should be a dreary winter to Ethel, under the anxiety that
      strengthened by duration, and the strain of acting cheerfulness for Margaret's sake. Even Mary
      was a care. Her round rosy childhood had worn into height and sallowness, and her languor and
      indifference fretted Miss Bracy, and was hunted down by Ethel, till Margaret convinced her
      that it was a case for patience and tenderness, which, thenceforth, she heartily gave, even
      encountering a scene with Miss Bracy, who was much injured by the suggestion that Mary was
      oppressed by perspective. Poor Mary, no one guessed the tears nightly shed over Harry's
      photograph.
Nor could Ethel quite fathom Norman. He wore the dispirited, burthened expression that she
      knew too well, but he would not, as formerly, seek relief in confidence to her, shunning the
      being alone with her, and far too much occupied to offer to walk to Cocksmoor. When the
      intelligence came that good old Mr. Wilmot of Settlesham had peacefully gone to his rest,
      after a short and painless illness, Tom was a good deal affected, in his peculiar silent and
      ungracious fashion; but Norman did not seek to talk over the event, and the feelings he had
      entertained two years ago—he avoided the subject, and threw himself into the election matters
      with an excitement, foreign to his nature.
He was almost always at Abbotstoke, or attending George Rivers at the committee room at the
      Swan, talking, writing, or consulting, concocting squibs, and perpetrating bon mots ,
      that were the delight of friends and the confusion of foes. Flora was delighted, George adored
      him, Meta's eyes danced whenever he came near, Dr. Spencer admired him, and Dr. Hoxton
      prophesied great things of him; but Ethel did not feel as if he were the veritable Norman, and
      had an undefined sensation of discomfort, when she heard his brilliant repartees, and the
      laughter with which he accompanied them, so unlike his natural rare and noiseless laugh. She
      knew it was false excitement, to drive away the suspense that none dared to avow, but which
      did not press on them the less heavily, for being endured in silence. Indeed, Dr. May could
      not help now and then giving way to outbursts of
       despondency, of which his friend, Dr. Spencer, who made it his special charge to
      try to lighten his troubles, was usually the kind recipient.
And though the bustle of the election was incongruous, and seemed to make the leaden weight
      the more heavy, there was a compensation in the tone of feeling that it elicited, which gave
      real and heartfelt pleasure.
Dr. May had undergone numerous fluctuations of popularity. He had always been the same man,
      excellent in intention, though hasty in action, and heeding neither praise nor censure; and
      while the main tenor of his course never varied, making many deviations by-flying to the
      reverse of the wrong, most immediately before him; still his personal character gained esteem
      every year; and though sometimes his merits, and sometimes his failings, gave violent umbrage,
      he had steadily risen in the estimation of his fellow-townsmen, as much as his own
      inconsistencies and theirs would allow, and every now and then was the favourite with all,
      save with the few who abused him for tyranny, because he prevented them from tyrannizing.
He was just now on the top of the wave, and his son-in-law had nothing to do but to float in
      on the tide of his favour. The opposite faction attempted a contest, but only rendered the
      triumph more complete, and gave the gentlemen the pleasure of canvassing, and hearing, times
      without number, that the constituents only wished the candidate were Dr. May himself. His sons
      and daughters were full of exultation—Dr. Spencer, much struck, rallied "Dick" on his
      influence—and Dr. May, the drops of warm emotion trembling on his eye-lashes, smiled, and bade
      his friend see him making a Church-rate.
The addresses and letters that came from the Grange were so admirable, that Dr. May often
      embraced Norman's steady opinion, that George was a very wise man. If Norman was unconscious
      how much he contributed to these compositions, he knew far less how much was Flora's. In his
      ardour, he crammed them both, and conducted George when Flora could not be at his side. George
      himself was a personable man, wrote a good bold hand, would do as he was desired, and was not
      easily put out of countenance; he seldom committed himself by talking; and when a speech was
      required, was brief, and to the purpose. He made a very good figure, and in the glory of
      victory, Ethel herself began to grow proud of him, and the children's great object in life was
      to make the jackdaws cry, "Rivers for ever!"
Flora had always declared that she would be at Stoneborough for the nomination. No one
      believed her, until three days before, she presented herself and her daughter before the
      astonished Margaret,
       who was too much delighted to be able to scold. She had come away on her own
      responsibility, and was full of triumph. To come home in this manner, after having read
      "Rivers for ever!" on all the dead walls, might be called that for which she had lived. She
      made no stay—she had only come to show her child, and establish a precedent for driving out,
      and Margaret had begun to believe the apparition a dream, when the others came in, some from
      Cocksmoor, others from the Committee-room at the Swan.
'So she brought the baby,' exclaimed Ethel. 'I should have thought she would not have taken
      her out before her Christening.'
'Ethel,' said Dr. Spencer, 'permit me to make a suggestion. When relations live in the same
      neighbourhood, there is no phrase to be more avoided than "I should have thought—"'
The nomination-day brought Flora, Meta, baby and all to be very quiet, as was said; but how
      could that be? when every boy in the house was frantic, and the men scarcely less so. Aubrey
      and Gertrude, and the two jackdaws, each had a huge blue and orange rosette, and the two
      former went about roaring "Rivers for ever!" without the least consideration for the baby, who
      would have been decked in the same manner, if Ethel would have heard of it without
      indignation, at her wearing any colour before her Christening white; as to Jack and Jill,
      though they could say their lesson, they were too much distressed by their ornaments
      to do ought but lurk in corners, and strive to peck them off.
Flora comported herself in her usual quiet way, and tried to talk of other things, though a
      carnation spot in each cheek shewed her anxiety and excitement. She went with her sisters to
      look out from Dr. Spencer's windows towards the Town Hall. Her husband gave her his arm as
      they went down the garden, and Ethel saw her talking earnestly to him, and pressing his arm
      with her other hand to enforce her words, but if she did tutor him, it was hardly visible, and
      he was very glad of whatever counsel she gave.
She spoke not a word after the ladies were left with Aubrey, who was in despair at not being
      allowed to follow Hector and Tom, but was left, as his prematurely classical mind expressed
      it, like the Gaulish women with the impedimenta in the marshes—whereas Tom had added insult to
      injury, by a farewell to "Jack among the maidens."
Meta tried to console him, by persuading him that he was their protector, and he began to
      think there was need of a guard, when a mighty cheer caused him to take refuge behind Ethel.
      Even when assured that it was anything but terrific, he gravely declared that he thought
      Margaret would want him, but—he could not cross the garden without Meta to protect him.

She would not allow anyone else to relieve her from the doughty champion, and thereby she
      missed the spectacle. It might be that she did not regret it, for though it would have been
      unkind to refuse to come in with her brother and sister, her wound was still too fresh for
      crowds, turmoil, and noisy rejoicing to be congenial. She did not withdraw her hand, which
      Aubrey squeezed harder at each resounding shout, nor object to his conducting her to see his
      museum in the dark corner of the attics, most remote from the tumult.
The loss was not great. The others could hear nothing distinctly, and see only a wilderness
      of heads; but the triumph was complete. Dr. May had been cheered enough to satisfy even
      Hector; George Rivers had made a very fair speech, and hurrahs had covered all deficiencies;
      Hector had shouted till he was as hoarse as the jackdaws; the opposite candidate had never
      come forward at all; Tomkins was hiding his diminished head; and the gentlemen had nothing to
      report but success, and were in the highest spirits.
By-and-by Blanche was missing, and Ethel, going in quest of her, spied a hem of blue merino
      peeping out under all the cloaks in the hall cupboard, and found the poor little girl sobbing
      in such distress, that it was long before any explanation could be extracted, but at last it
      was revealed—when the door had been shut, and they stood in the dark, half stifled among the
      cloaks, that George's spirits had taken his old facetious style with Blanche, and in the very
      hearing of Hector! The misery of such jokes to a sensitive child, conscious of not
      comprehending their scope, is incalculable, and Blanche having been a baby-coquette, was the
      more susceptible. She hid her face again from the very sound of her own confession, and
      resisted Ethel's attempts to draw her out of the musty cupboard, declaring that she could
      never see either of them again. Ethel, in vain, assured her that George was gone to the dinner
      at the Swan; nothing was effectual but being told that, for her to notice what had passed, was
      the sure way to call Hector's attention thereto, when she bridled, emerged, and begged to know
      whether she looked as if she had been crying. Poor child, she could never again be
      unconscious, but, at least, she was rendered peculiarly afraid of a style of notice, that
      might otherwise have been a temptation.
Ethel privately begged Flora to hint to George to alter his style of wit, and the suggestion
      was received better than the blundering manner deserved; Flora was too exulting to take
      offence, and her patronage of all the world was as full-blown as her ladylike nature allowed.
      Ethel, she did not attempt to patronize, but she promised all the sights in London to the
      children, and masters to Mary and Blanche, and she perfectly overwhelmed Miss Bracy with
      orphan asylums for her sisters. She would have liked nothing better than
       dispersing cards, with Mrs. Rivers prominent among the recommenders of the
      case.
'A fine coming-out for you, little lady,' said she to her baby, when taking leave that
      evening. 'If it was good luck for you to make your first step in life upwards, what is
      this?'
'Excelsior? ' said Ethel, and Flora smiled, well-pleased, but she had not caught
      half the meaning. 'May it be the right excelsior ,' added Ethel, in a low voice, that
      no one heard, and she was glad they did not. They were all triumphant, and she could not tell
      why she had a sense of sadness, and thought of Flora's story long ago, of the girl who
      ascended Mont Blanc, and for what?
All she had to do at present was to listen to Miss Bracy, who was sure that Mrs. Rivers
      thought Mary and Blanche were not improved, and was afraid she was ungrateful for all the
      intended kindness to her sister.
Ethel had more sympathy here, for she had thought that Flora was giving herself airs, and
      she laughed and said her sister was pleased to be in a position to help her friends; and tried
      to turn it off, but ended by stumbling into allowing that prosperity was apt to make people
      over lavish of offers of kindness.
'Dear Miss Ethel, you understand so perfectly. There is no one like you!' cried Miss Bracy,
      attempting to kiss her hand.
If Ethel had not spoken rightly of her sister, she was sufficiently punished.
What she did was to burst into a laugh, and exclaim, 'Miss Bracy! Miss Bracy! I can't have
      you sentimental. I am the worst person in the world for it.'
'I have offended. You cannot feel with me!'
'Yes, I can, when it is sense; but please don't treat me like a heroine. I am sure there is
      quite enough in the world that is worrying, without picking shades of manner to pieces. It is
      the sure way to make an old crab of me, and so I am going off. Only, one parting piece of
      advice, Miss Bracy—read 'Frank Fairlegh,' and put everybody out of your head.'
And, thinking she had been savage about her hand, Ethel turned back, and kissed the little
      governess's forehead, wished her good-night, and ran away.
She had learnt that, to be rough and merry, was the best way of doing Miss Bracy good in the
      end; and so she often gave herself the present pain of knowing that she was being supposed
      careless and hard-hearted; but the violent affection for her proved that the feeling did not
      last.
Ethel was glad to sit by the fire at bed-time, and think over the day, outwardly so gay,
      inwardly so fretting and perplexing.

It was the first time that she had seen much of her little niece. She was no great
      baby-handler, nor had she any of the phrases adapted to the infant mind; but that pretty
      little serene blue-eyed girl had been her chief thought all day, and she was abashed by
      recollecting how little she had dwelt on her own duties as her sponsor, in the agitations
      excited by the doubts about her coadjutor.
She took out her Prayer-book, and read the service for Baptism, recollecting, the thoughts
      that had accompanied her youngest sister's orphaned Christening, 'The vain pomp and glory of
      the world, and all covetous desires of the same.' They seemed far enough off then, and
      now—poor little Leonora!
Ethel knew that she judged her sister hardly; yet she could not help picturing to herself
      the future—a young lady, trained for fashionable life, serious teaching not omitted, but right
      made the means of rising in the world; taught to strive secretly, but not openly, for
      admiration—a scheming for her marriage—a career like Flora's own. Ethel could scarcely feel
      that it would not be a mockery to declare, on her behalf, that she renounced the world. But,
      alas! where was not the world? Ethel blushed at having censured others, when, so lately, she
      had herself been oblivious of the higher duty. She thought of the prayer, including every
      Christian in holy and loving intercession—'I pray not that Thou wouldest take them out of the
      world, but that Thou wouldest keep them from the evil.'
"Keep her from the evil—that shall be my prayer for my poor little Leonora. His Grace can
      save her, were the surrounding evil far worse than ever it is likely to be. The intermixture
      with good is the trial, and is it not so everywhere—ever since the world and the Church have
      seemed fused together? But she will soon be the child of a Father who guards His own; and, at
      least, I can pray for her, and her dear mother. May I only live better, that so I may pray
      better, and act better, if ever I should have to act."
There was a happy family gathering on the New Year's Day, and Flora, who had kindly felt her
      way with Meta, finding her not yet ready to enjoy a public festivity for the village, added a
      supplement to the Christmas beef; that a second dinner might be eaten at home, in honour of
      Miss Leonora Rivers.
Lady Leonora was highly satisfied with her visit, which impressed her far more in favour of
      the Abbotstoke neighbourhood than in the days of poor old Mr. Rivers. Flora knew everyone, and
      gave little select dinner parties, which, by her good management, even George, at the bottom
      of the table, could not make heavy. Dr. Spencer enjoyed them greatly, and was an unfailing
      resource for conversation; and as to the Hoxtons, Flora felt herself amply repaying the
      kindness
       she had received in her young lady days, when she walked down to the dining-room
      with the portly head master, or saw his good lady sit serenely admiring the handsome rooms. 'A
      very superior person, extremely pleasing and agreeable,' was the universal verdict on Mrs.
      Rivers. Lady Leonora struck up a great friendship with her, and was delighted that she meant
      to take Meta to London. The only fault that could be found with her was that she had so many
      brothers; and Flora, recollecting that her Ladyship mistrusted those brothers, avoided
      encouraging their presence at the Grange, and took every precaution against any opening for
      the suspicion that she threw them in the way of her little sister-in-law.
Nor had Flora forgotten the Ladies' Committee, or Cocksmoor. As to the Muses, they gave no
      trouble at all. Exemplary civilities about the chair passed between the Member's lady and Mrs.
      Ledwich, ending in Flora's insisting that priority in office should prevail, feeling that she
      could well afford to yield the post of honour, since anywhere she was the leader. She did not
      know how much more conformable the ladies had been ever since they had known Dr. Spencer's
      opinion; and yet he only believed that they were grateful for good advice, and went about
      among them, easy, good-natured, and utterly unconscious, that for him, sparkled Mrs. Ledwich's
      bugles, and for him waved every spinster's ribbon, from Miss Rich down to Miss Boulder.
The point carried by their united influence was Charity Elwood's being sent for six months'
      finish at the Diocesan Training School; while a favourite pupil teacher from Abbotstoke took
      her place at Cocksmoor.
Dr. Spencer looked at the Training School, and talked Mrs. Ledwich into magnanimous
      forgiveness of Mrs. Elwood. Cherry dreaded the ordeal, but she was willing to do anything that
      was thought right, and likely to make her fitter for her office.
