
CHAPTER XI.
It was indeed high time for me to cherish my mother. Her pain at leaving
                            the place where she had known her little all of happiness—for her
                            childhood had been overcast with trouble—her pain was so acute and
                            overpowering that all my deep impassioned feelings sunk reproved before
                            it.
My guardian now seemed much embittered against me, and anxious for our
                            departure. He came once or twice, in my illness, to ask for and to see
                            me; and he brought back, unperceived by any one, the weapon for which I
                            raved. But ere I was quite recovered, he wrote, requesting to see me on
                            business in his study. I could not speak yet without pain, having bitten
                            my tongue severely.
"Your mother shall have a home here," he said, "as long as ever she wants
                            one; but as for you, malignant or mad, I will try no more to soften you.
                            When first I saw you in your early childhood, you flew at me as a
                            murderer. Soon after you ransacked my cupboards and stole my boots, to
                            compare them with some impressions or casts you kept. Yes, you look
                            astonished. I never told you of it, but I knew it for all that. Of those
                            absurdities I thought little, for I regarded them as the follies of a
                            mad child, and I pitied you deeply, and even liked you for your filial
                            devotion. But now I find that you have grown up in the same belief, and
                            you dare even now to avow it. You know that I have no fear of you."
"Then why had you got that pistol?"
I saw that he was vexed and surprised at my having perceived it.
"In a house like this, where such deeds have been done, I think it right
                            to be armed. Do you think if I had feared you, or your evidence, I would
                            have restored that dagger?"
"Whose was it?"
"I told you the other night that I once saw a weapon like it, for which
                            at first I mistook it, but closer examination convinced me of the
                            difference."
"How does it differ?"
"In this. There was no snake on the handle of the other, though there was
                            the cross on the blade."
"And where did you see the other?"
"Some day I will tell you. It is not right to do so now."
"Not convenient to you, I suppose you mean."
"I have also shown you that the lock of hair found in your poor mother's
                            hand is much finer and more silky than mine; and you know that I cannot
                            draw on my foot a boot so small as the one whose impression you have.
                            But I am ashamed of myself for having stooped to such proofs as these.
                            Dare you to look at me and suppose that I with my own hand could have
                            stabbed my brother, a brother so kind and good to me, and for whose sake
                            alone I have borne so long with you?"
He tried to look me down. I have met but one whose gaze could master
                            mine; and he was not that one.
"So, you doubt me still? Are your things packed?'
"Yes, and my mother's."
"Then if your mother is well enough, and will not let you leave her, you
                            had better go next week."
"No," I replied, "we will go to-morrow."
"Wilful to the last. So be it. Take this; you cannot refuse it in duty to
                            your mother."
He put in my hand an order for a large sum of money. I threw it into the
                            fire.
"There have been criminals," I exclaimed, "who have suffered from a
                            life-long fear, lest the widow and orphans, starved through their crime,
                            should compass their dying bed. Though we starve in a garret, we touch
                            no bread of yours."
"Bravo, Miss Melodrame. You need never starve in the present state of the
                            stage."
"That I don't understand; but this I do. It is perhaps the last time I
                            shall ever see you living. Whether you did that deed or not is known to
                            God, and you, and possibly one other. But whether you did it or not, I
                            know it is on your soul. Your days are wretched, your nights are
                            troubled. You shall die as your brother died, but not so prepared for
                            death."
"Good bye, Clara. My lunch is coming up."
God has much to forgive me, but nothing worse than the dark thought of
                            that speech. In my fury at weakness in such a cause, I had dared
                            sometimes to imagine that my mother knew him to be the murderer, but
                            concealed it for the sake of the family honour!
