
CHAPTER VII.
At last we got through our parting with the best of people (far worthier
                            than myself to interest any reader), and after it the dark ride over the
                            moors, and the farmer's vain attempt at talking to relieve both himself
                            and us. The honest eyes were bright with tears, tears of pity for my
                            weakness, which now he scarcely cared to hide, but would not show by
                            wiping away; and how many times he begged for frequent tidings of us,
                            which Sally could now interpret, if written in large round hand. How
                            many times he consulted, commanded, and threatened the coachman, and
                            promised him a goose at Michaelmas, if he took good care of us and our
                            luggage! These great kindnesses, and all the trifling cares which strew
                            the gap of long farewells, were more to think of than to tell. But I
                            ought to mention, that much against the farmer's will, I insisted on
                            paying him half the sum, which he had lent me in a manner never to be
                            forgotten. Moreover, with the same presentiment which he had always
                            felt, he made me promise once more to send for him, if I fell into any
                            dreadful strait.
It was late at night when our cabman, the most polite, and (if his word
                            may be trusted) the most honourable of mankind, rang the bell of Mrs.
                            Shelfer's house. The house was in a by-street near a large unfinished
                            square, in the northern part of London. Mrs. Shelfer came out at once,
                            sharp and quick and short, and wonderfully queer. At first she took no
                            notice at all of either of as, but began pulling with all her strength
                            at the straps of the heaviest boxes, which, by means known to herself
                            alone, she contrived to drag through the narrow passage, and down three
                            low steps into the little kitchen. Then she hurried back, talking all
                            the time to herself, re-opened the door of the fly, jumped in, and felt
                            under both the seats, and round the lining. Finding nothing there, she
                            climbed upon the driver's box, and thoroughly examined both that and the
                            roof. Being satisfied now that none of our chattels were left in the
                            vehicle, she shook her little fist at two or three boys, who stood at
                            the corner near the mews, and setting both hands to the farmer's great
                            hamper or "maun" (as he called it), she dragged it inside the front
                            door, and turned point blanc upon me.
"Pray, my good friend, how many is there?"
"I'm sure I don't know, Mrs. Shelfer, your cousin knows best."
"Ah, they're terrible fellows them cabbies, terrible!" The cabman stood
                            by all the time, beating his hands together. "'Twas only last time I
                            went to Barbican, one of 'em come up to me, 'Mrs. Shelfer,' says he,
                            'Mrs. Shelfer!' says I, 'pray my good friend, how do you know my name?'
                            'Ho, I knows Charley well enough,' says he, 'and there ain't a better
                            fellow living.' 'A deal too good for you,' says I, 'and now pray what's
                            your business with me?' 'Why, old lady,' he says, as impudent as the man
                            with the wooden leg, 'you've been and left your second best umbrella
                            under the seat of the Botany Bay Bus.' 'Catch me!' says I. 'It's Bible
                            truth,' says he, 'and my old woman's got it now.' 'If you never get
                            drunk,' says I, 'till that umbrella runs in your shoes, your old woman
                            needn't steal her lights,' and with that I ran between the legs of a
                            sheep, hanging up with my Tuscan bonnet on trimmed with white—nothing
                            like it, my good friend, the same as I've had these two and twenty
                            years."
"What for, Mrs. Shelfer?" I asked in great surprise.
"Why, for the butcher to see me, to be sure, Miss. You see he wanted to
                            get me down the mews, and murder me with my little wash-leather bag, as
                            I was going to pay the interest on Shelfer's double-barrel gun. Ah yes,"
                            with a short sigh, "and there'll be four and ninepence again, next
                            Tuesday."
Talking at this rate, and stopping for no reply, she led us into her
                            kitchen, saying that she would not light a fire upstairs, it was so
                            bootiful, the trimmings of the grate, because she wasn't certain that we
                            would come, but she had got supper for us, excuse me, my good friend, in
                            her own snug little room, and bootiful they was sure enough, the wind
                            last week had made them so fat.
She pointed in triumph to a large dish on the table piled up with blue
                            shells.
"Why, Mrs. Shelfer, they are muscles," I exclaimed with some disgust.
"Ah I see you knows 'em, that they are, Miss, and as bootiful as ever you
                            ate. Charley and me sits down to a peck of them. But the man as comes
                            round with the catsmeat's brother the man with the truck and his eyes
                            crossed, he told me there was such a demand for them in Grosvenor
                            Square, and they was so cunning this weather when they gets fat, he
                            hadn't more than half a peck left, but they was the best of the lot. Now
                            I'll have them all bootiful hot, bootiful, boiling my good friend, if
                            you'll just run upstairs, and a teaspoon and a half of salt, and Cousin
                            Ann knows the way, and the apartments is splendid, splendid, Miss
                            Vaughan!"
She drew herself up, at the end of the sentence, with an air of the
                            greatest dignity; then suddenly dropped it again, and began bustling in
                            and out. Now for the first time, I had leisure to examine her, for while
                            she spoke, the short jumps of her ideas unsettled my observation.
She was a little body, rather thin, with a face not strongly peculiar,
                            but odd enough to second the oddities of her mind. No doubt she had once
                            been pretty, and her expression was pleasant now, especially when a
                            glimpse was afforded of her quick grey eyes, which generally avoided the
                            gaze, and dropped beneath a fringe of close-set lashes. But the loss of
                            the front teeth, and the sharpening and wrinkling of the face, with the
                            straggling neglect of the thick black hair fraying out from the black
                            cap, and the habit she had of shutting her mouth with a snap, all these
                            interfered with her credit for pristine good looks. Like Mrs. Huxtable,
                            she was generally in a bustle, but a bustle of words more often than of
                            deeds. She had no deception about her, yet she never knew the difference
                            between the truth and a lie, and could not understand that any one else
                            should do so. Therefore she suspected everything and everybody, till one
                            of her veins of opinion was touched, and then she would swallow
                            anything.
Tired out with the long day's travel, the dazing of railway speed, and
                            the many scenes and faces which had flashed across me, I could not
                            appreciate the beauty of Mrs. Shelfer's furniture; but leaving Ann
                            Maples to eat the muscles, if she could, and to gossip with her cousin,
                            I was not slow to revisit the old farmhouse, and even the home of my
                            childhood, in the winged cradle of sleep.
