
CHAPTER XIV.
From Sally's eager description of the coat and buttons, I concluded
                            easily that a servant from Vaughan St. Mary had been sent in quest of
                            me. My father hated showy liveries and loathed hair-powder, but Mr.
                            Edgar Vaughan returned to the family usages, or rather allowed them to
                            re-establish themselves; for on such questions he was wholly
                            indifferent. Now what could be his motive for sending so expressly to
                            discover me? I knew not, neither cared very greatly, but wrote at once
                            to Tossil's Barton, first to return their loving contribution, which
                            consisted mainly of ancestral relics prized for generations, secondly,
                            to set free the secret of my address.
Into my own self I returned once more. Somehow I seem to expand whenever
                            I come in contact with the yeoman's family, and their lowly greatness. I
                            am like a worm when it rains, after the drought of summer. Surely the
                            God, who leaves us to stifle ourselves with the dust of fashion and
                            convention, has His own gracious times to breathe upon and scatter it.
                            At intervals we may see through the reek of our own exuding, and inhale
                            a more bracing air than sleeps in mausoleums. But instead of being
                            exalted and fed by the open breeze, we shudder at the draught and
                            replace our respirators.
I returned into myself, and found little comfort there. I do not live
                            inside myself, as most people live in theirs. True, I am apt to resent
                            any slight to it offered from the outside. True, I seek its keep and
                            comfort in a mechanical sort of way. But as for crusting in its bottle,
                            ripening in its husk, rusting in its watch-case, I have been too long
                            the toy of wind and weather not to be turned inside out. Never can I
                            moulder into the fungoid nucleus the British taste admires. And yet
                            there is about me, if I must not say within me, a stanch cleaving, a
                            cohesion, a concrete will, which is of genuine Anglo-Saxon fibre. So I
                            thrust aside all dreams of Tossil's Barton and Vaughan Park, and certain
                            wilder sweeter dreams which have begun to flutter and thrill through me,
                            and in earnest I return to my task of money-making.
Giudice still is faithful, and comforts much my solitude. He has never
                            asked his master's leave or mine, he has never received any formal
                            invitation, yet here he looks all at home, sleek and unblushing, though
                            long since quite convalescent and equal to livery stable diet. Once
                            indeed, as we passed the entrance, he pretended to me that his
                            conscience pricked him. To ease it, he sniffed about, and halted just
                            for a moment, then turned his nose up, recocked his tail, and trotted
                            jauntily on. Since then he has always avoided that left side of the
                            street. He is affable still to Isola, but clearly regards her as no more
                            than a pleasant acquaintance. Whenever she enters the room, he walks
                            from his corner with a stretch and a yawn, sniffs all round her dress,
                            to learn where she has been, and what dogs she has spoken to; then, in
                            the absence of any striking discovery, he looks into her face with a
                            grave complacence, and brings me his conclusion. Tom, and the birds, the
                            squirrel, and the little marmoset (Mrs. Shelfer's newest and dearest
                            pet), he gazes upon from a lofty standing as so many specimens of
                            natural history, interesting so far, but otherwise contemptible. He is
                            now allowed free run of the house, understands all the locks, and
                            presents himself in every room at the proper meal-time. Even the little
                            dress-maker is then honoured with his attentions. Everybody loves him,
                            he is so gentle and clever and true. Back he comes to me, with his mouth
                            rather greasy I must admit, gives me one kiss (as a form, I am afraid),
                            and exclaiming, "Dear me! What a life this is!' sits down on his rug to
                            think.
No one can tempt him further than the corner of our street, except his
                            master or myself. Miss Flounce, with my permission, granted not without
                            jealousy, once aspired to the escort of Giudice. Although she carried a
                            bag of his favourite biscuits (made perhaps of bone-dust), and kept one
                            of them in her hand, Judy flattered her only to the corner; then he
                            turned abruptly, and trotted firmly (rudely she called it) home, with
                            his eyes upon my balcony. I gave him more of his biscuits than he would
                            have got from her.
All this was very delightful. But there were two sad drawbacks. In the
                            first place, Giudice expected me to forego every other line of art, and
                            devote all my time to portraiture of himself. This was unreasonable, and
                            I could not do it. Apart from other considerations, Mr. Oxgall, after
                            buying three studies of him, declined to take any more until those three
                            should be sold. To Giudice himself I had based my refusal upon more
                            delicate grounds. I had quoted to him,

"Although, lest I profane your hallowed part,
Queen Nature chills the blood around my heart;
Sweet dog, permit me to indulge my dream
Of country valleys, and the mazy stream."

But he took no heed, and never would permit me
                            so to do, without the keenest jealousy.
The other drawback was still more serious. Either by maintaining the dog,
                            I placed his owner under an obligation; or by engrossing the dog's
                            society, I laid myself under obligation to his owner. Either view of the
                            case was unpleasant; the latter, which I adopted, soon became
                            intolerable. So I spoke about it to Isola, for I could not well explain
                            myself to her brother, who ought indeed to have perceived my
                            dilemma.
"Oh Donna," she cried, "what nonsense you do talk! Obliged to us indeed!
                            I am sure we are all greatly obliged to you; and many a stir it saves us
                            at home, for the dog detests papa so; and when Conrad comes to see us,
                            he can't bear to have Judy shut out like a thief, and he the most
                            honourable dog that ever wagged a tail."
"To be sure he is. You know you are, don't you, oh combination of Bayard
                            and Aristides?"
That union of justice and chivalry wagged his tail to me, and nodded
                            gravely to Isola.
"But I have said all along that Conny should pay for his board, and he
                            feels it too: but we could not tell how to propose it to you, dear
                            Donna, you are so very outrageous."
"I should hope so indeed."
"And then I am sure it would break poor Judy's heart to go. Wouldn't it
                            now, Judy?"
Giudice did not answer her, but came and laid his great head on my lap,
                            and looked up at me as only a dog can look. In that wistful look he said
                            as plainly as possible—
"You know I am only a dog. But you, Clara, happen to be a human being;
                            and so you know all we dogs know, and ever so much besides. Only you
                            can't smell. You can talk, as fast as you like, both to each other and
                            to us, but we can talk to none except our fellow dogs. Now don't take a
                            mean advantage of me. I know that I was made only to be your servant,
                            and I love you with all my heart, that I do. I can't tell at all where I
                            shall go when I die, or if I shall go anywhere; and I am sure I shall
                            die, if you cast me away like this."
So I kissed his dotty whiskers, and promised not to desert him, though I
                            should go all the way to the stables twice a day to see him.
"And another thing, Clara dear," resumed his master's sister, "I consider
                            him now more my dog than Conny's. You know he was given between us"—this
                            was the first time I heard of it—"and I only lent Conrad my half as long
                            as he liked to pay for him."
Lovely Isola, like most other lovely girls, was keen about money-matters.
                            Not that she was ungenerous. That impulsive little mortal would give
                            away all her substance, the moment her heart was touched, and it was not
                            hard to touch, despite all the quick suspicions which her London life
                            and native shrewdness had now begun to produce. But as regards small
                            dealings, she was thoroughly qualified to keep a meat-pie shop, or go
                            upon board wages, or even to take furnished lodging: by which climax I
                            mean no disrespect to Mrs. Shelfer, who (considering her temptations) is
                            the very pink of honesty, especially since Giudice can.
As to these small matters, and as to many large ones, I was dear Isola's
                            cardinal opposite. She would make, for most men, a far better wife than
                            I should; although she will never love with a tenth part of the
                            intensity. She can't even hate like me. When I hate, I loathe and abhor.
                            I never hate any one lightly, and hardly ever am reconciled, or suppress
                            it. Isola talks about hating, but has never learned what it means. Spite
                            she can carry, and nurse like a doll, and count it a minor virtue,
                            albeit she cannot be sulky; hate is too heavy a burden. Scorn, which is
                            with women the hate of things beneath them, Isola hardly knows. Perhaps
                            she will learn it when her knowledge of the world narrows and condenses,
                            as with most women it does.
Another great difference there is between Isola and me. Although she
                            never would think of deceiving any one seriously, and would on no
                            account tell a downright malicious lie, yet she is not so particular
                            about telling little fibs, or at any rate colouring matters so highly
                            that others are misled. This she can justify to herself in a charming
                            warm-hearted way. And yet she rarely makes mischief. Her departures are
                            half unconscious, and always arise from good will.
"And so now, Clara dear," concluded the senior sophist, "as Conrad has
                            owned all the dog so long, it is my turn to own every bit of him for an
                            equal period, and I must pay you half a crown a week for his keep, and
                            half a guinea for doctoring him so well."
I was much inclined to take her at her word, it would have been such a
                            surprise. But what a disgrace to Giudice and to me!
"Oh Donna," she continued, "you have no idea how fond dear Conny is of
                            you. I am getting so jealous. He thinks much more of you than he does of
                            me."
I bent over my drawing with more carmine on my cheeks than was on the
                            palette. What folly to be sure! And Isola would come round in front.
"Why don't you answer me, Clara? Did you ever know such a shame? Well, I
                            do believe you like being admired every bit as much as I do, in spite of
                            all your sublimity. Why there comes Conny himself;" and to my great
                            relief she stepped into the balcony. "I thought so. I knew the ring of
                            his heel. He will wear such clumsy boots, though his foot is as pretty
                            as mine. I always know his step, and so does Judy."
Alas! and so do I. How weak and paltry of me, with a life like mine
                            before me!
"I will go and open the door," cries his sister; "how rude he is to come
                            when you are so busy, Clara."
Away she runs, then ushers him grandly in, and away again to nurse the
                            marmoset. I know that I look slightly discomposed. There is a glow upon
                            me as if I had stepped into sunlight. Conrad fails to notice it, or
                            conceals the perception. He stands before my easel. How I long for his
                            approbation! That of course is only from his knowledge of art and his
                            native taste. Yet I fear to look at his face, but wait for him to speak.
                            With a stretch like a windlass, and a cavernous yawn, up comes Giudice,
                            and pokes himself right in front of my work. Could I have foreseen that
                            effrontery and execrable taste, less bread and milk would he have had
                            for breakfast. Conrad perceives my vexation, and despite his good
                            breeding is too natural not to smile. The smile is infectious, and I
                            obtain no more than a look of commendation. But that is enough for me. I
                            resolve to keep the drawing: Mr. Oxgall may bid what he likes.
As our eyes meet, Conrad's and mine, I see that he is not in his usual
                            spirits. Something has happened to vex him. Oh that I dared to ask what
                            it is. I also am heavy at heart, and ill at ease with myself. Is it any
                            wonder? My nature is true and straight-forward as well as proud and
                            passionate. But here have I been, for weeks and weeks, stooping below
                            its level. I have even been deceitful. Perhaps there was no dishonour in
                            my change of name, with such an object in view. Perhaps there was good
                            excuse for maintaining disguise with Conrad, when first we met in
                            London. But was it right and honourable to persist in my alias, when I
                            could not help suspecting his growing attachment to me? Peradventure my
                            conscience alone would not account for all the misery I felt about this.
                            Had I no selfish misgivings as well? Now as I stood before him, my
                            breast began to flutter with fear, not so acute, but deeper than my
                            alarm in the dark, when I crouched from the conspirators.
"Miss Valence," at last he began, "I am grieved in my heart by hearing
                            that you were not treated at all politely last night." He was greatly
                            moved, and began to lose his command of colloquial English. I had spent
                            an evening at the Professor's house in Lucas Street, the second time
                            only of my being there. Now I came to recollect it, Dr. Ross had
                            certainly been a little overbearing, but I did not feel hurt thereby,
                            because I cared not for him, and knew it to be his manner. Isola had
                            told her brother, but without meaning any harm. Her father no doubt had
                            been vexed, because I could not sell him my gordit.
"Oh, Mr. Ross," I replied, "I think nothing at all of that. A learned man
                            like your father cannot be expected to bear with every ignorant girl's
                            curiosity."
"To a lady's love of knowledge every gentleman should administer and be
                            gratified. All men of lofty science enjoy to meet with a gentle mind
                            inquiring."
It was not the first time Master Conrad had disparaged, by implication,
                            his father's great acquirements. To me it seemed scarcely graceful, and
                            very far from dutiful, but many of my sentiments are dreadfully
                            old-fashioned. An awkward pause ensued; how could I answer without
                            condemning one or the other? Though I could not quite acquit Conrad, my
                            heart was entirely with him, for I had long been aware that he was not
                            happy at home. There he stood, with an angry countenance, having
                            declined the chair I had offered him. Suddenly he took both my hands and
                            looked me full in the face, though his eyes were glistening. I gazed
                            full at him, with vague apprehensions rising. How or why, I know not,
                            but at that very moment my hair, which is always a trouble to me, fell
                            in a mass down my cheeks and neck. He started back, but still held my
                            hands.
"I am made certain that I have seen you long ago. I will think, I will
                            think."
I saw at once how it was, the fear on my face reminded him. I meant to
                            tell him some day, but I never meant him to find out. Scorning myself
                            for a hypocrite, I looked stedfastly at him and smiled.
"You will forgive me, Miss Valence, you know that I would not use a
                            freedom."
He saw in my eyes that I knew it, and dropped my hands, and went on.
"You will think me the weakest in mind and most wicked, but I am most
                            unhappy."
I started in turn, and how I longed to console him. What use is pride if
                            it cannot even command one's eyes?
"It is to me a disgrace to come to you with my troubles. But I do it from
                            no unmanly temper. I do it alone for the sake of my precious sister
                            Isola. I have no longer any one whom I dare to love but her, and now I
                            am compelled to abandon her at the last."
"Do you mean to be long away?" This I managed to ask pretty well, though
                            it was sore work.
"I shall not be away from London, but I shall be departed from Isola. The
                            house where she lives I am no more to visit. A long time I have gone
                            there only a little, and alone to see her. She is ordered now to come no
                            more to me. This day I spoke very violently. But I will not detain you
                            with that. I will confess I did wrong; but I was richly provoked. My
                            object in burdening you is double:—First to implore you, if I may
                            without using liberty, to endure well with the Professor, lest she
                            should be interdicted from coming to visit you, and then she would have
                            no one remaining to love her. Second to ask, a thing that I hesitate
                            because I cannot narrate to you all things, whether you would indulge
                            me, if there is no wrong, to come now and then to see my own and my only
                            sister."
"Of course you do not mean without her father's knowledge."
"I would never insult you, Miss Valence, by asking a thing like that. I
                            desire nothing of what you call clandestine. You are so free and open,
                            you would never have to do with any sort of concealment. Neither am I in
                            the habit to do anything like that. It has only been commanded that I
                            may not go there, or invite her to come to my house. The Professor has
                            great power in the present, but he does not pretend to interdict me from
                            my sister."
His eyes flashed, as he spoke, with an expression quite unfilial.
                            Remembering how differently I had loved my own dear father, I felt
                            disappointed and grieved, but had no right to show it.
"Only one more thing I will entreat of you, Miss Valence; poor Isola has
                            never learned what means any grief. If she is vexed by this, I pray you
                            to sustain and comfort her; for I shall never make a wrong advantage of
                            your most kind permission, so as to see her very often."
He raised my hand to his lips in gratitude for what he called a kindness
                            beyond all value to him, and his voice was trembling as he turned away.
                            But I had done no kindness, I had given no permission; for I was not
                            calm enough to distinguish right from wrong. Strange indeed it seemed to
                            me that I, for the most part so decided, could not now determine, but
                            was all perplexity. My great iceberg self-reliance, built in bleak and
                            lonesome years, was now adrift and melting in the bright sun of
                            friendship and the warm sea-depths of love.
