
CHAPTER XXIX. AT LAST.

 “I bid thee hail, not as in former days, 
 Not as my chosen only, but my bride, 
 My very bride, coming to make my house 
 A glorious temple.” 
 A. H. HALLAM.

 “Timber End,
 Littleworthy,
 September 10th.
“Dear Miss Williams,—I must begin by entreating your forgiveness for addressing you in a
      manner for which perhaps you may be unprepared; but I trust you have always been aware, that
      any objections that I may have offered to my brother Colin’s attachment to yourself have never
      been personal, or owing to anything but an unfortunate complication of circumstances. These
      difficulties are, as no doubt he will explain to you, in great measure removed by the present
      condition of my family, which will enable me to make such settlements as I could wish in the
      ease of one so nearly connected with me; so that I am enabled to entreat of you at length to
      reward the persevering constancy so well deserved. I have a further, and a personal cause for
      wishing that the event should not be deferred, as regard for my feelings might have led you to
      propose. You are aware of the present state of my health, and that it has become expedient to
      make immediate arrangements for the future guardianship of my little boy. His uncles are of
      course his natural guardians, and I have unbounded confidence in both; but Alexander Keith’s
      profession renders it probable that he may not always be at hand, and I am therefore desirous
      of being able to nominate yourself, together with my brother, among the personal guardians.
      Indeed, I understand from Alexander Keith, that such was the express wish of his sister. I
      mention this as an additional motive to induce you to consent. For my own part, even without
      so stringent a cause, all that I have ever seen or known of yourself would inspire me with the
      desire that you should take a mother’s place towards my son. But you must be aware that such
      an appointment could only be made when you are already one of the family, and this it is that
      leads me to entreat you to overlook any appearance of precipitancy on my brother’s part, and
      return a favourable reply to the request, which with my complete sanction, he is about to
      address to you.
“Yes, Ermine Williams, forgive all that is past, and feel for an old, it may be, a dying
      man, and for a motherless infant. There is much to forget, but I trust to your overcoming any
      scruples, and giving me all the comfort in your power, in thinking of the poor child who has
      come into the world under such melancholy circumstances.
 “Yours most truly, 
 “Keith of Gowanbrae” 

“Poor Keith, he has given me his letter open, his real anxiety has been too much at last for
      his dignity; and now, my Ermine, what do you say to his entreaty? The state of the case is
      this. How soon this abscess may be ready for the operation is still uncertain, the surgeons
      think it will be in about three weeks, and in this interval he wishes to complete all his
      arrangements. In plain English, his strongest desire is to secure the poor little boy from
      falling into Menteith’s hands. Now, mine is a precarious life, and Alick and Rachel may of
      course be at the ends of the earth, so the point is that you shall be ‘one of the family,’
      before the will is signed. Alick’s leave has been extended to the 1st of October, no more is
      possible, and he undertakes to nurse poor Keith for a fortnight from to-morrow, if you will
      consent to fulfil this same request within that time. After the 1st, I should have to leave
      you, but as soon as Keith is well enough to bear the journey, he wishes to return to
      Edinburgh, where he would be kindly attended to by Alick and Rachel all the winter. There,
      Ermine, your victory is come, your consent has been entreated at last by my brother, not for
      my sake, but as a personal favour to himself, because there is no woman in the world of whom
      he thinks so highly. For myself I say little. I grieve that you should be thus hurried and
      fluttered, and if Ailie thinks it would harm you, she must telegraph back to me not to come
      down, and I will try to teach myself patience by preaching it to Keith, but otherwise you will
      see me by four o’clock to-morrow. Every time I hear Rachel’s name, I think it ought to have
      been yours, and surely in this fourteenth year, lesser objections may give way. But
      persuasions are out of the question, you must be entirely led by your own feeling. If I could
      have seen you in July, this should not have come so suddenly at last. “Yours, more than ever,
      decide as you may,
 “Colin A Keith. 
“P. S.—I am afraid Rose would hardly answer this purpose equally well.”
Colonel Keith followed his letter at four o’clock, and entering his own study, found it in a
     cloud of smoke, in the midst of which he dimly discerned a long beard and thin visage absorbed
     in calculation.
“Edward! How is Ermine?”
“Oh?” (inquiringly) “Keith!” (as taken by surprise) “ah! you were to come home to-day. How
     are you?”
“How is she? Has she had my letter?”
“What letter? You write every day, I thought.”
“The letter of yesterday. Have you heard nothing of it?”
“Not that I know of. Look here, Keith, I told you I was sure the platinum—”
“Your brain is becoming platinum. I must go,” and the chemist remained with merely a general
     impression of having been interrupted.
Next the Colonel met Rose, watching at his own gate, and this time his answer was more
     explicit.
“Yes, Aunt Ermine said you were coming, and that I might meet you, but that I must let you
     come in alone, for she had not seen you so long, that she wanted you all to herself.”
“And how is she; how has she been?”
“She is well now,” said Rose, in the grave, grown-up way she always assumed when speaking of
     her aunt’s health; “but she has been having a good deal of her nervous headache this summer,
     and Lady Temple wanted her to see Mr. Frampton, but Aunt Ailie said it was only excitement and
     wear of spirits. Oh, I am glad you have come back! We have so wearied after you.”
Nevertheless Rose duteously loosed the hand to which she had been clinging till they came to
     the door; and as Colin Keith opened it, again he was met by the welcoming glances of the bright
     eyes. This time he did not pause till he was close to her, and kneeling on one knee beside her,
     he put his arm round her, and held her hands in his.
The first words that passed were, “You had the letters?”
“Colin, Colin, my one prayer has been, ‘Make Thy way plain before my face.’”
“And now it is?”
“The suspicion is gone; the displeasure is gone; the doubts are gone; and now there is
     nothing—nothing but the lameness and the poverty; and if you like the old cinder, Colin, that
     is your concern;” and she hid her face, with a sort of sobbing laugh.
“And even the haste; you consent to that?”
“I don’t feel it like haste,” she said, looking up with a smile, and then crimsoning.
“And Ailie gives leave, and thinks the hurry will not harm you?”
“Ailie! O Colin, did you think I could tell any one of your letter, before you had had your
     answer?”
“Then Edward is not so moonstruck as I thought him! And when shall it be, dearest? Give me as
     much time as you can. I must go back this day fortnight.”
“I suppose your expectations are not high in the matter of finery,” said Ermine, with a
     certain archness of voice.
“Those eyes are all the finery I ever see.”
“Then if you will not be scandalized at my natural Sunday dress, I don’t see why this day
     week should not do as well as any other time.”
“Ermine, you are the only woman I ever met totally free from nonsense.”
“Take care, it is very unfeminine and disagreeable to be devoid of nonsense.”
“Very, and therefore you are talking it now! Ermine, how shall I thank you? Not only for the
     sake of the ease of mind to my poor brother; but in the scenes we are going through, a drop of
     happiness is wanted as a stimulant. When I looked at the young couple at Bishopsworthy, I often
     felt as if another half-year of suspense was more than I could bear, and that I must ask you to
     help me through with at least a definite hope.”
“Ah! you have gone through a great deal I am sure it has been a time of great trouble.”
“Indeed it has. The suffering has become unceasing and often most severe, and there is
     grievous depression of spirits; I could not have left him even for a day, if he had not been so
     fervently bent on this.”
“Is he feeling his loss more acutely than at first?”
“Not so much that, as for the poor little boy, who is a heavy burthen on his mind. He has
     lived in such a state of shrewd distrust that he has no power of confidence, and his
     complications for making all the boy’s guardians check one another till we come to a dead lock,
     and to make provision for Isabel out of Menteith’s reach, are enough to distract the brain of a
     man in health.”
“Is he fond of the child?”
“It is an oppressive care to him, and he only once has made up his mind to see it, though it
     is never off his mind, and it is very curious how from the first he has been resolved on your
     taking charge of it. It is the most real testimony he could give you.”
“It is very comfortable not to be brought in like an enemy in spite of him, as even a year
     ago I could have been proud to do.”
“And I to have brought you,” he answered, “but it is far better as it is. He is very cordial,
     and wants to give up the Auchinvar estate to me; indeed, he told me that he always meant me to
     have it as soon as I had washed my hands of you—you wicked syren—but I think you will agree
     with me that he had better leave it to his daughter Mary, who has nothing. We never reckoned on
     it.”
“Nor on anything else,” said Ermine, smiling.
“You have never heard my ways and means,” he said, “and as a prudent woman you ought, you
     know. See,” taking out his tablets, “here is my calculation.”
“All that!”
“On the staff in India there were good opportunities of saving; then out of that sum I bought
     the house, and with my half-pay, our income will be very fair, and there would be a pension
     afterwards for you. This seems to me all we can reasonably want.”
“Unless I became like ‘die Ilsebill’ in the German tale. After four years of living from hand
     to mouth, this will be like untold gold. To wish to be above strict economy in wheeled chairs
     has seemed like perilous discontent in Rose and me.”
“I have ventured on the extravagance of taking the ponies and little carriage off my
     brother’s hands, it is low enough for you, and I shall teach Rose to ride one of the ponies
     with me.”
“The dear little Rose! But, Colin, there is a dreadful whisper about her going with her
     father, and Ailie too! You see now his character is cleared, he has been offered a really
     lucrative post, so that he could have them with him.”
“Does he wish it?”
“I dare not ask. I must be passive or I shall be selfish. You are all my world, and Edward
     has no one. Make them settle it without me. Talk of something else! Tell me how your brother is
     to be taken care of.”
“There cannot be a better nurse than Alick Keith; and Ferguson, the agent, is there, getting
     directions from Keith whenever he can bear it. I am best out of the way of all that. I have
     said once for all that I will do anything for them except live at Gowanbrae, and I am sick of
     demonstrating that the poor child’s existence is the greatest possible relief to me; and I hope
     now not to go back till the whole is settled and done with.”
“You look regularly worn out with the discussions!”
“It was an endless business! The only refreshment was in now and then getting over to
     Bishopsworthy.”
“What? to Rachel?” said Ermine archly.
“Rachel is showing to great advantage. I did not think it was in her to be so devoted to the
     child, and it is beautiful to see her and Mr. Clare together.”
“There’s a triumph,” said Ermine, smiling. “Do you grant that the happy medium is reached,
     that Alick should learn to open his eyes and Rachel to shut hers?”
“Well! Her eyes are better, but he, poor lad, has been in no spirits to open his very wide.
     The loss of his sister went very deep, and those aguish attacks, though they become much
     slighter, make him look wretchedly ill. I should have doubted about leaving him in charge in
     his present state, but that he was urgent on me, and he is spared all the night nursing. Any
     way, I must not leave him longer than I can help. I may have one week with you at home—at our
     home, Ermine.”
“And let us make the most of that,” said Ermine, quickly.
Meanwhile Alison, sore and sick at heart, wandered on the esplanade, foreboding that the blow
     was coming that she ought to rejoice at, if her love could only be more unselfish. At last the
     Colonel joined her, and, as usual, his tone of consideration cheered and supported her when in
     actual conference with him, and as he explained his plans, he added that he hoped there would
     be scarcely any interruption to her intercourse with her sister.
“You know,” she said abruptly, “that we could go to Ekaterinburg.”
“And what is your feeling about it? Remember, Ailie, that I am your brother too.” And as she
     hesitated, “your feelings—no doubt you are in many minds!”
“Ah, yes; I never settled anything without Ermine, and she will not help me now. And she has
     been so worn with the excitement and anxiety of all this long detention of yours, that I don’t
     dare to say a word that could prey on her.”
“In fact, you would chiefly be decided by Edward’s own wishes.”
“If I were sure of them,” sighed poor Alison; “but he lives on experiments, and can hardly
     detach himself from them even to attend to Ermine herself. I don’t know whether we should be a
     comfort or a burthen, and he would be afraid to hurt our feelings by telling the truth. I have
     been longing to consult you who have seen him at that place in Russia.”
“And indeed, Ailie, he is so wedded to smoke and calculations, and so averse to this
     sublunary world, that though your being with him might be beneficial, still I greatly question
     whether the risk of carrying poor little Rose to so remote a place in such a climate, would be
     desirable. If he were pining to have a home made for him, it would be worth doing; as it is,
     the sacrifice would be disproportioned.”
“It would be no sacrifice if he only wanted us.”
“Where you are wanted is here. Ermine wants you. I want you. The Temples want you.”
“Now, Colin, tell me truly. Edward feels as I do, and Dr. Long spoke seriously of it. Will
     not my present position do you and Ermine harm among your friends?”
“With no friend we wish to make or keep!”
“If I do remain,” continued Alison, “it must be as I am. I would not live upon you, even if
     you asked me, which you have too much sense to do; and though dear Lady Temple is everything to
     me, and wants me to forget that I am her governess, that would be a mere shuffle, but if it is
     best for you that I should give it up, and go out, say so at once.”
“Best for me to have eight Temples thrown on my hands, all in despair! To have you at
     Myrtlewood is an infinite relief to me, both on their account and Ermine’s. You should not
     suspect a penniless Scotsman of such airs, Ailie.”
“Not you, Colin, but your family.”
“Isabel Menteith thinks a glass-blower was your father, and Mauleverer your brother, so yours
     is by far the most respectable profession. No, indeed, my family might be thankful to have any
     one in it who could do as you have done.”
Alison’s scruples were thus disposed of, and when Edward’s brain cleared itself from
     platinum, he showed himself satisfied with the decision, though he insisted on henceforth
     sending home a sum sufficient for his daughter’s expenses, and once said something that could
     be construed into a hope of spending a quiet old age with her and his sister; but at present he
     was manifestly out of his element, and was bent on returning to Ekaterinburg immediately after
     the marriage.
His presence was but a qualified pleasure. Naturally shy and absent, his broken spirits and
     removal from domestic life, and from society, had exaggerated his peculiarities; and under the
     pressure of misfortune, caused in a great measure by his own negligence, he had completely
     given way, without a particle of his sister’s patience or buoyancy, and had merely striven to
     drown his troubles in engrossing problems of his favourite pursuit, till the habit of
     abstraction had become too confirmed to be shaken off. When the blot on his name was removed,
     he was indeed sensible that he was no longer an exile, but he could not resume his old
     standing, friendships rudely severed could not be re-united; his absorption had grown by
     indulgence; old interests had passed away; needful conformity to social habits was irksome, and
     even his foreign manner and appearance testified to his entire unfitness for English life.
Tibbie was in constant dread of his burning the house down, so incalculable and preposterous
     were his hours, and the Colonel, longing to render the house a perfect shrine for his bride,
     found it hard to tolerate the fumes with which her brother saturated it. If he had been sure
     that opium formed no portion of Edward’s solace, his counsel to Alison would have been less
     decisive. To poor little Rose, her father was an abiding perplexity and distress; she wanted to
     love him, and felt it absolute naughtiness to be constantly disappointed by his insensibility
     to her approaches, or else repelled and disgusted by that vice of the Russian sheep. And a
     vague hint of being transported to the Ural mountains, away from Aunt Ermine, had haunted her
     of late more dreadfully than even the lions of old; so that the relief was ineffable when her
     dear Colonel confided to her that she was to be his niece and Aunt Ermine’s handmaid, sent her
     to consult with Tibbie on her new apartment, and invited Augustus to the most eligible hole in
     the garden. The grotto that Rose, Conrade, and Francis proceeded to erect with pebbles and
     shells, was likely to prove as alarming to that respectable reptile as a model cottage to an
     Irish peasant.
Ermine had dropped all scruples about Rose’s intercourse with other children, and the feeling
     that she might associate with them on equal terms, perhaps, was the most complete assurance of
     Edward’s restoration. She was glad that companionship should render the little maiden more
     active and childlike, for Edward’s abstraction had made her believe that there might be danger
     in indulging the dreaminess of the imaginative child.
No one welcomed the removal of these restraints more warmly than Lady Temple. She was perhaps
     the happiest of the happy, for with her there was no drawback, no sorrow, no parting to fear.
     Her first impulse, when Colonel Keith came to tell her his plans, was to seize on hat and
     shawl, and rush down to Mackarel Lane to kiss Ermine with all her heart, and tell her that “it
     was the most delightful thing of her to have consented at last, for nobody deserved so well to
     be happy as that dear Colonel;” and then she clung to Alison, declaring that now she should
     have her all to herself, and if she would only come to Myrtlewood, she would do her very best
     to make her comfortable there, and it should be her home—her home always.
“In fact,” said Ermine, afterwards to the Colonel, “when you go to Avoncester, I think you
     may as well get a licence for the wedding of Alison Williams and Fanny Temple at the same time.
     There has been quite a courtship on the lady’s part.”
The courtship had been the more ardent from Fanny’s alarm lest the brother should deprive her
     of Alison; and when she found her fears groundless, she thanked him with such fervour, and
     talked so eagerly of his sister’s excellences that she roused him into a lucid interval, in
     which he told Colonel Keith that Lady Temple might give him an idea of the style of woman that
     Lucy had been. Indeed, Colin began to think that it was as well that he was so well wrapped up
     in smoke and chemistry, otherwise another might have been added to the list of Lady Temple’s
     hopeless adorers. The person least satisfied was Tibbie, who could not get over the speediness
     of the marriage, nor forgive the injury to Miss Williams, “of bringing her hame like any
     pleughman’s wife, wantin’ a honeymoon trip, forbye providin’ hersel’ with weddin’ braws
     conformable. Gin folk tak’ sic daft notions aff the English, they’d be mair wise like to bide
     at hame, an’ that’s my way o’ thinkin’.”
Crusty as she was, there was no danger of her not giving her warmest welcome, and thus the
     morning came. Tibbie had donned her cap, with white satin ribbons, and made of lace once
     belonging to the only heiress who had ever brought wealth to the Keiths. Edward Williams, all
     his goods packed up, had gone to join his sisters, and the Colonel, only perceptibly differing
     from his daily aspect in having a hat free from crape, was opening all the windows in hopes
     that a thorough draft would remove the last of the tobacco, when the letters were brought in,
     and among them one of the black bordered bulletins from Littleworthy, which ordinarily arrived
     by the second post. It was a hurried note, evidently dashed off to catch the morning mail.

 My Dear Colonel,—Alick tells me to write in haste to catch the morning post, and beg you to
      telegraph the instant your wedding is over. The doctors see cause to hasten their measures,
      but your brother will have nothing done till the will is signed. He and Alick both desire you
      will not come, but it is getting to be far too much for Alick. I would tell you more if there
      were time before the post goes. Love to dear Ermine. 
 Very sincerely yours, 
 R. KEITH. 
There was so shocked and startled a look on Colin’s face, that Tibbie believed that his
     brother must be dead, and when in a few almost inaudible words he told her that he must start
     for Bishopsworthy by the afternoon train, she fairly began to scold, partly by way of working
     off the irritation left by her alarm. “The lad’s clean demented! Heard ye ever the like, to rin
     awa’ frae his new-made wife afore the blessin’s been weel spoke; an’ a’ for the whimsie of that
     daft English lassie that made siccan a piece of work wi’ her cantrips.”
“I am afraid she is right now,” said the Colonel, “and my brother must not be left any
     longer.”
“Hout awa, Maister Colin, his lordship has come between you and your luve oft enough already,
     without partin’ ye at the very church door. Ye would na have the English cast up to us, that
     one of your name did na ken better what was fittin by his bride!”
“My bride must be the judge, Tibbie. You shall see whether she bids me stay,” said Colin, a
     little restored by his amusement at her anxiety for his honour among the English. “Now desire
     Smith to meet me at the church door, and ride at once from thence to Avoncester; and get your
     face ready to give a cheerful welcome, Tibbie. Let her have that, at least, whatever may come
     after.”
Tibbie looked after him, and shook her head, understanding from her ain laddie’s pallid
     check, and resolute lip, nay, in the very sound of his footfall, how sore was his trial, and
     with one-sided compassion she muttered, “Telegrafted awa on his vera weddin’ day. His
     Lordship’ll be the death o’ them baith before he’s done.”
As it was in every way desirable that the wedding should be unexpected by Avonmonth in
     general, it was to take place at the close of the ordinary morning service, and Ermine in her
     usual seat within the vestry, was screened from knowing how late was Colin’s entrance, or
     seeing the determined composure that would to her eyes have betrayed how much shaken he was. He
     was completely himself again by the time the congregation dispersed, leaving only Grace Curtis,
     Lady Temple, and the little best man, Conrade, a goodly sight in his grey suit and scarlet
     hose. Then came the slow movement from the vestry, the only really bridal-looking figure being
     Rose in white muslin and white ribbons; walking timidly and somewhat in awe beside her younger
     aunt; while her father upheld and guided the elder. Both were in quiet, soft, dark dresses, and
     straw bonnets, but over hers Ermine wore the small though exquisite Brussels lace veil that had
     first appeared at her mother’s wedding; and thankful joy and peaceful awe looked so lovely on
     her noble brow, deep, soft dark eyes, and the more finely moulded, because somewhat worn,
     features; and so beauteously deepened was the carnation on her cheek, that Mr. Mitchell ever
     after maintained that he had never married any one to compare with that thirty-three years’ old
     bride upon crutches, and, as he reported to his wife, in no dress at all.
Her brother, who supported her all the time she stood, was infinitely more nervous than she
     was. Her native grace and dignity, and absence of all false shame entirely covered her
     helplessness, and in her earnestness, she had no room for confusion; her only quivering of
     voice was caught for one moment from the tremulous intensity of feeling that Colin Keith could
     not wholly keep from thrilling in his tones, as he at last proclaimed his right to love and to
     cherish her for whom he had so long persevered.
Unobserved, he filled up the half-written despatch with the same pen with which he signed the
     register, and sent Conrade to the door with it to his already mounted messenger. Then assuming
     Edward’s place as Ermine’s supporter, he led her to the door, seated her in her wheeled chair,
     and silently handing Rachel’s note as his explanation to Alison, he turned away, and walked
     alone by Ermine’s side to his own house. Still silent, he took her into the bright drawing-room
     he had so long planned for her, and seated her in her own peculiar chair. Then his first words
     were, “Thank God for this!”
She knew his face. “Colin, your brother is worse?” He bent his head, he could not speak.
“And you have to go to him! This very day?”
“Ermine, you must decide. You are at last my first duty!”
“That means that you know you ought to go. Tell me what it is.”
He told the substance of the note, ending with, “If you could come with me!”
“I would if I should not be a tie and hindrance. No, I must not do that; but here I am,
     Colin, here I am. And it is all true—it has all come right at last! All we waited for. Nothing
     has ever been like this.”
She was the stronger. Tears, as much of loving thankfulness as of overflowing disappointment,
     rushed into his eyes at such a fulfilment of the purpose that he had carried with him by sea
     and land, in battle and sickness, through all the years of his manhood. And withal her one
     thought was to infuse in its strongest measure the drop of happiness that was to sustain him
     through the scenes that awaited him, to make him feel her indeed his wife, and to brighten him
     with the sunbeam face that she knew had power to cheer him. Rallying her playfulness, she took
     off her bonnet, and said as she settled her hair, “There, that is being at home! Take my shawl,
     yes, and these white gloves, and put them out of sight, that I may not feel like a visitor, and
     that you may see how I shall look when you come back. Do you know, I think your being out of
     the way will be rather a gain, for there will be a tremendous feminine bustle with the fitting
     of our possessions.”
Her smile awoke a responsive look, and she began to gaze round and admire, feeling it safest
     to skim on the surface; and he could not but be gratified by her appreciation of the pains
     spent upon this, her especial home. He had recovered himself again by the time these few
     sentences had passed; they discussed the few needful arrangements required by his departure,
     and Tibbie presently found them so cheerful that she was quite scandalized, and when Ermine
     held out her hands, saying, “What Tibbie, won’t you come and kiss me, and wish me joy?” she
     exclaimed—
“Wish ye joy! It’s like me to wish ye joy an yer lad hurled awa frae yer side i’ the blink o’
     an ee, by thae wild telegrams. I dinna see what joy’s to come o’t; it’s clean again the
     Scripture!”
“I told you I had left it to her to decide, Tibbie,” said the Colonel.
“Weel, an what wad ye hae the puir leddy say? She kens what sorts ye, when the head of yer
     name is sick an lyin’ among thae English loons that hae brocht him to siccan a pass.”
“Right, Tibbie,” exclaimed Ermine, greatly amused at the unexpected turn, purely for the sake
     of putting Maister Colin in the wrong. “If a gentleman won’t be content without a bride who
     can’t walk, he must take the consequence, and take his wedding trip by himself! It is my
     belief, Tibbie, as I have just been telling him, that you and I shall get the house in all the
     better order for having him off our hands, just at first,” she added, with a look of
     intelligence.
“Deed, an maybe we shall,” responded Tibbie, with profound satisfaction. “He was aye a
     camsteary child when there was any wark on hand.”
Colin could not help laughing, and when once this had been effected, Ermine felt that his
     depression had been sufficiently met, and that she might venture on deeper, and more serious
     sympathy, befitting the chastened, thankful feelings with which they hailed the crowning of
     their youthful love, the fulfilment of the hopes and prayers that the one had persisted in
     through doubt and change, the other had striven to resign into the All-wise Hands.
They had an early meal together, chiefly for the sake of his wheeling her to the head of his
     table, and “seeing how she looked there,” and then the inexorable hour was come, and he left
     her, with the echo of her last words in his ear, “Goodbye, Colin, stay as long as you ought. It
     will make the meeting all the sweeter, and you have your wife to some back to now. Give a
     sister’s love to your brother, and thanks for having spared you,” and his last look at the door
     was answered with her sunshiny smile.
But when, a few minutes after, Edward came up with Alison for his farewell, they found her
     lying back in her chair, half fainting, and her startled look told almost too plainly that she
     had not thought of her brother. “Never mind,” said Edward, affectionately, as much to console
     Alison as Ermine for this oblivion; “of course it must be so, and I don’t deserve otherwise.
     Nothing brought me home but Colin Keith’s telling me that he saw you would not have him till my
     character was cleared up; and now he has repaired so much of the evil I did you, all I can do
     is to work to make it up to you in other ways. Goodbye, Ermine, I leave you all in much better
     hands than mine ever were, you are right enough in feeling that a week of his absence outweighs
     a year of mine. Bless you for all that you and he have done for my child. She, at least, is a
     comfort to you.”
Ermine’s powers were absolutely exhausted; she could only answer him by embraces and tears;
     and all the rest of the day she was, to use her own expression, “good for nothing but to be let
     alone.” Nor, though she exerted herself that she might with truth write that she was well and
     happy, was she good for much more on the next, and her jealous guardians allowed her to see no
     one but soft, fondling Lady Temple, who insisted on a relationship (through Rachel), and whose
     tender pensive quietness could not fail to be refreshment to the strained spirits, and wearied
     physical powers, and who better than anybody could talk of the Colonel, nay, who could
     understand, and even help Ermine herself to understand, that these ever-welling tears came from
     a source by no means akin to grief or repining.
The whole aspect of the rooms was full of tokens of his love and thought for her. The
     ground-floor had been altered for her accommodation, the furniture chosen in accordance with
     her known tastes or with old memories, all undemonstratively prepared while yet she had not
     decided on her consent. And what touched her above all, was the collection of treasures that he
     had year by year gathered together for her throughout the weary waiting, purchases at which
     Lady Temple remembered her mother’s banter, with his quiet evasions of explanation. No wonder
     Ermine laid her head on her hand, and could not retain her tears, as she recalled the white,
     dismayed face of the youth, who had printed that one sad earliest kiss on her brow, as she lay
     fire-scathed and apparently dying; and who had cherished the dream unbroken and unwaveringly,
     had denied himself consistently, had garnered up those choice tokens when ignorant over whether
     she still lived; had relied on her trust, and come back, heart-whole, to claim and win her,
     undaunted by her crippled state, her poverty, and her brother’s blotted name. “How can such
     love ever be met? Why am I favoured beyond all I could have dared to image to myself?” she
     thought, and wept again; because, as she murmured to Fanny, “I do thank God for it with all my
     heart, and I do long to tell him all. I don’t think my married life ought to begin by being
     sillier than ever I was before, but I can’t help it.”
“And I do love you so much the better for it,” said Fanny; a better companion to-day than the
     grave, strong Alison, who would have been kind, but would have had to suppress some marvel at
     the break-down, and some resentment that Edward had no greater share in it.
The morning’s post brought her the first letter from her husband, and in the midst of all her
     anxiety as to the contents, she could not but linger a moment on the aspect of the Honourable
     Mrs. Colin Keith in his handwriting; there was a carefulness in the penmanship that assured her
     that, let him have to tell her what he would, the very inditing of that address had been
     enjoyment to him. That the border was black told nothing, but the intelligence was such as she
     had been fully prepared for. Colin had arrived to find the surgeon’s work over, but the patient
     fast sinking. Even his recognition of his brother had been uncertain, and within twenty-four
     hours of the morning that had given Colin a home of his own, the last remnant of the home
     circle of his childhood had passed from him.
Still Ermine had to continue a widowed bride for full a fortnight, whilst the funeral and
     subsequent arrangements necessitated Colin’s presence in Scotland. It was on a crisp, beautiful
     October evening that Rose, her chestnut hair flying about her brow, stood, lighted up by the
     sunbeams in the porch, with upraised face and outstretched hands, and as the Colonel bent down
     to receive her joyous embrace, said, “Aunt Ermine gave me leave to bring you to the door. Then
     I am going to Myrtlewood till bed-time. And after that I shall always have you.”
The open door showed Ermine, too tremulous to trust to her crutch, but leaning forward, her
     eyes liquid with tears of thankfulness. The patient spirits had reached their home and haven,
     the earthly haven of loving hearts, the likeness of the heavenly haven, and as her head leant,
     at last, upon his shoulder, and his guardian arm encircled her, there was such a sense of rest
     and calm that even the utterance of their inward thanksgiving, or of a word of tenderness would
     have jarred upon them. It was not till a knock and message at the door interrupted them, that
     they could break the blessed stillness.
“And there you are, my Ermine!” said Colin, standing on the hearth-rug, and surveying her
     with satisfied eyes. “You are a queenly looking dame in your black draperies, and you look
     really well, much better than Rachel led me to expect.”
“Ah! when she was here I had no fixed day to look forward to. And receiving our poor little
     orphan baby was not exactly like receiving his uncle, though Rachel seemed to think it ought to
     make up for anything.”
“She was thoroughly softened by that child! It was a spirited thing her bringing him down
     here on the Monday when we started for Scotland, and then coming all the way alone with her
     maid. I did not think Alick would have consented, but he said she would always be the happier
     for having deposited her charge in your hands.”
“It was a great wrench to her. I felt it like robbery when she put the little fellow down on
     my lap and knelt over him, not able to get herself away, but saying that she was not fit to
     have him; she could not bear it if she made him hate her as Conrade did! I am glad she has had
     his first smile, she deserves it.”
“Is Tibbie in charity with him?”
“Oh, more than in charity! She did not take the first announcement of his coming very
     amiably; but when I told her she was to reign in the nursery, and take care the poor little
     chief know the sound of a Scots’ tongue, she began to thaw; and when he came into the house,
     pity or loyalty, or both, flamed up hotly, and have quite relieved me; for at first she made a
     baby of me, and was a perfect dragon of jealousy at poor Ailie’s doing anything for me. It was
     a rich scene when Rachel began giving her directions out of ‘Hints for the Management of
     Infants,’ just in the old voice, and Tibbie swept round indignantly, ‘His Lordship, Lord Keith
     of Gowanbrae, suld hae the best tendance she could gie him. She did na lippen to thae English
     buiks, as though she couldna rear a wean without bulk learning.’ Poor Rachel nearly cried, and
     was not half comforted by my promising to study the book as much as she pleased.”
“It will never do to interfere with Tibbie, and I own I am much of her opinion, I had rather
     trust to her than to Rachel, or the book!”
“Well, the more Rachel talked book, the more amiable surprise passed between her mother and
     Lady Temple that the poor little follow should have lived at all, and I believe they were very
     angry with me for thinking her views very sensible. Lady Temple is so happy with him. She says
     it is so melancholy to have a house without a baby, that she comes in twice or three times a
     day to console herself with this one.”
“Did you not tell me that she and the Curtises spent the evening with you?”
“Yes, it was rather shocking to receive them without you, but it was the only way of being
     altogether on Rachel’s one evening here; and it was very amusing, Mrs. Curtis so happy with her
     daughter looking well and bright, and Rachel with so much to tell about Bishopsworthy, till at
     last Grace, in her sly odd way, said she thought dear Alexander had even taught Rachel
     curatolatry; whereupon Rachel fired up at such an idea being named in connexion with Mr. Clare,
     then came suddenly, and very prettily, down, and added, ‘Living with Alick and Mr. Clare has
     taught me what nonsense I talked in those days.’”
“Well done, Rachel! It proves what Alick always said, that her great characteristic is
     candour!”
“I hope she was not knocked up by the long night journey all at one stretch. Mrs. Curtis was
     very uneasy about it, but nothing would move her; she owned that Alick did not expect her, for
     she had taken care he should not object, by saying nothing of her intention, but she was sure
     he would be ill on Wednesday morning, and then Mrs. Curtis not only gave in directly, but all
     we married women turned upon poor Grace for hinting that Alick might prefer a day’s solitary
     illness to her being over-tired.”
“She was extremely welcome! Alick was quite done for by all he had gone through; he was
     miserably ill, and I hardly knew what to do with him, and he mended from the moment his face
     lightened up at the sight of her.”
“There’s the use of strength of mind! How is Alick?”
“Getting better under M’Vicar and Edinburgh winds. It was hard on him to have borne the brunt
     of all the nursing that terrible last week, and in fact I never knew how much he was going
     through rather than summon me. His sauntering manner always conceals how much he is doing, and
     poor Keith was so fond of him, and liked his care so much that almost the whole fell upon him
     at last. And I believe he said more that was good for Keith, and brought in Mr. Clare more than
     perhaps I should ever have been able to do. So though I must regret having been away, it may
     have been the best thing.”
“And it was by your brother’s earnest wish,” said Ermine; “it was not as if you had stayed
     away for your own pleasure.”
“No! Poor Keith repeatedly said he could not die in peace till he had secured our having the
     sole charge of his son. It was a strong instinct that conquered inveterate prejudice! Did I
     tell you about the will?”
“You said I should hear particulars when you came.”
“The personal guardianship is left to us first, then to Alick and Rachel, with £300 a year
     for the expenses. Then we have Auchinvar. The estate is charged with an equivalent settlement
     upon Mary, a better plan, which I durst not propose, but with so long a minority the estate
     will bear it. Alick has his sister’s fortune back again, and the Menteith children a few
     hundreds; but Menteith is rabid about the guardianship, and would hardly speak to Alick.”
“And you?”
“They always keep the peace with me. Isabel even made us a wedding present—a pair of
     miniatures of my father and mother, that I am very glad to rescue, though, as she politely told
     me, I was welcome to them, for they were hideously dressed, and she wanted the frames for two
     sweet photographs of Garibaldi and the Queen of Naples.”
Then looking up as if to find a place for them—
“Why, Ermine, what have you done to the room? It is the old parsonage drawing-room!”
“Did not you mean it, when you took the very proportions of the bay window, and chose just
     such a carpet?”
“But what have you done to it?”
“Ailie and Rose, and Lady Temple and her boys, have done it. I have sat looking on, and
     suggesting. Old things that we kept packed up have seen the light, and your beautiful Indian
     curiosities have found their corners.”
“And the room has exactly the old geranium scent!”
“I think the Curtises must have brought half their greenhouse down. Do you remember the old
     oak-leaf geranium that you used to gather a leaf of whenever you passed our old
     conservatory?”
“I have been wondering where the fragrance came from that made the likeness complete. I have
     smelt nothing like it since!”
“I said that I wished for one, and Grace got off without a word, and searched everywhere at
     Avoncester till she found one in a corner of the Dean’s greenhouse. There, now you have a leaf
     in your fingers, I think you do feel at home.”
“Not quite, Ermine. It still has the dizziness of a dream. I have so often conjured up all
     this as a vision, that now there is nothing to take me away from it, I can hardly feel it a
     reality.”
“Then I shall ring. Tibbie and the poor little Lord upstairs are substantial witnesses to the
     cares and troubles of real life.”
