
CHAPTER XXXIII.

Mischief, thou art afoot.
Julius Cæsar.

Felix could not go home again immediately after quitting Esther. He got out of the
      town, skirted it a little while, looking across the December stillness of the fields, and then
      re-entered it by the main road into the market-place, thinking that, after all, it would be
      better for him to look at the busy doings of men than to listen in solitude to the voices
      within him; and he wished to know how things were going on.
It was now nearly half-past one, and Felix perceived that the street was filling with more
      than the previous crowd. By the time he got in front of the booths, he was himself so
      surrounded by men who were being thrust hither and thither that retreat would have been
      impossible; and he went where he was obliged to go, although his height and strength were
      above the average even in a crowd where there
       were so many heavy-armed workmen used to the pick-axe. Almost all shabby-coated
      Trebians must have been there, but the entries and back-streets of the town did not supply the
      mass of the crowd; and besides the rural incomers, both of the more decent and the rougher
      sort, Felix, as he was pushed along, thought he discerned here and there men of that keener
      aspect which is only common in manufacturing towns.
But at present there was no evidence of any distinctly mischievous design. There was only
      evidence that the majority of the crowd were excited with drink, and that their action could
      hardly be calculated on more than those of oxen and pigs congregated amidst hootings and
      pushings. The confused deafening shouts, the incidental, fighting, the knocking over, pulling
      and scuffling, seemed to increase every moment. Such of the constables as were mixed with the
      crowd were quite helpless; and if an official staff was seen above the heads, it moved about
      fitfully, showing as little sign of a guiding hand as the summit of a buoy on the waves.
      Doubtless many hurts and bruises had been received, but no one could know the amount of
      injuries that were widely scattered.
It was clear that no more voting could be done,
       and the poll had been adjourned. The probabilities of serious mischief had grown
      strong enough to prevail over the Rector's objection to getting military aid within reach; and
      when Felix re-entered the town, a galloping messenger had already been despatched to Duffield.
      The Rector wished to ride out again, and read the Riot Act from a point where he could be
      better heard than from the window of the Marquis; but Mr Crow, the high constable, who had
      returned from closer observation, insisted that the risk would be too great. New special
      constables had been sworn in, but Mr Crow said prophetically that if once mischief began, the
      mob was past caring for constables.
But the Rector's voice was ringing and penetrating, and when he appeared on the narrow
      balcony and read the formula, commanding all men to go to their homes or about their lawful
      business, there was a strong transient effect. Every one within hearing listened, and for a
      few moments after the final words, "God save the King!" the comparative silence continued.
      Then the people began to move, the buzz rose again, and grew, and grew, till it turned to
      shouts and roaring as before. The movement was that of a flood hemmed in; it carried nobody
      away. Whether the crowd would obey the
       order to disperse themselves within an hour, was a doubt that approached nearer
      and nearer to a negative certainty.
Presently Mr Crow, who held himself a tactician, took a well-intentioned step, which went
      far to fulfil his own prophecy. He had arrived with the magistrates by a back way at the Seven
      Stars, and here again the Riot Act was read from a window, with much the same result as
      before. The Rector had returned by the same way to the Marquis, as the headquarters most
      suited for administration, but Mr Crowe remained at the other extremity of King Street, where
      some awe-striking presence was certainly needed. Seeing that the time was passing, and all
      effect from the voice of law had disappeared, he showed himself at an upper window, and
      addressed the crowd, telling them that the soldiers had been sent for, and that if they did
      not disperse they would have cavalry upon them instead of constables.
Mr Crow, like some other high constables more celebrated in history, "enjoyed a bad
      reputation;" that is to say, he enjoyed many things which caused his reputation to be bad, and
      he was anything but popular in Treby. It is probable that a pleasant message would have lost
      something from his lips,
       and what he actually said was so unpleasant, that, instead of persuading the
      crowd, it appeared to enrage them. Some one, snatching a raw potato from a sack in the
      greengrocer's shop behind him, threw it at the constable, and hit him on the mouth.
      Straightway raw potatoes and turnips were flying by twenties at the windows of the Seven
      Stars, and the panes were smashed. Felix, who was half-way up the street, heard the voices
      turning to a savage roar, and saw a rush towards the hardware shop, which furnished more
      effective weapons and missiles than turnips and potatoes. Then a cry ran along that the Tories
      had sent for the soldiers, and if those among the mob who called themselves Tories as
      willingly as anything else were disposed to take whatever called itself the Tory side, they
      only helped the main result of reckless disorder.
But there were proofs that the predominant will of the crowd was against "Debarry's men,"
      and in favour of Transome. Several shops were invaded, and they were all of them "Tory shops."
      The tradesmen who could do so, now locked their doors and barricaded their windows within.
      There was a panic among the householders of this hitherto peaceful town, and a general anxiety
      for the military to arrive. The Rector was in painful anxiety
       on this head: he had sent out two messengers as secretly as he could towards
      Hathercote, to order the soldiers to ride straight to the town; but he feared that these
      messengers had been somehow intercepted.
It was three o'clock: more than an hour had elapsed since the reading of the Riot Act. The
      Rector of Treby Magna wrote an indignant message and sent it to the Ram, to Mr Lingon, the
      Rector of Little Treby, saying that there was evidently a Radical animus in the mob, and that
      Mr Transome's party should hold themselves peculiarly responsible. Where was Mr Jermyn?
Mr Lingon replied that he was going himself out towards Duffield to see after the soldiers.
      As for Jermyn, he was not that attorney's sponsor: he believed that Jermyn was gone away
      somewhere on business—to fetch voters.
A serious effort was now being made by all the civil force at command. The December day
      would soon be passing into evening, and all disorder would be aggravated by obscurity. The
      horrors of fire were as likely to happen as any minor evil. The constables, as many of them as
      could do so, armed themselves with carbines and sabres: all the respectable inhabitants who
      had any courage, prepared
       themselves to struggle for order; and many felt with Mr Wace and Mr Tiliot that
      the nearest duty was to defend the breweries and the spirit and wine vaults, where the
      property was of a sort at once most likely to be threatened and most dangerous in its effects.
      The Rector, with fine determination, got on horseback again, as the best mode of leading the
      constables, who could only act efficiently in a close body. By his direction the column of
      armed men avoided the main street, and made their way along a back road, that they might
      occupy the two chief lanes leading to the wine-vaults and the brewery; and bear down on the
      crowd from these openings, which it was especially desirable to guard.
Meanwhile Felix Holt had been hotly occupied in King Street. After the first window-smashing
      at the Seven Stars, there was a sufficient reason for damaging that inn to the utmost. The
      destructive spirit tends towards completeness; and any object once maimed or otherwise
      injured, is as readily doomed by unreasoning men as by unreasoning boys. Also the Seven Stars
      sheltered Spratt; and to some Sproxton men in front of that inn it was exasperating that
      Spratt should be safe and sound on a day when blows were going, and justice might be rendered.
       And again, there was the general desirableness of being inside a
      public-house.
Felix had at last been willingly urged on to this spot. Hitherto swayed by the crowd, he had
      been able to do nothing but defend himself and keep on his legs; but he foresaw that the
      people would burst into the inn; he heard cries of "Spratt!" "Fetch him out!" "We'll pitch him
      out!" "Pummel him!" It was not unlikely that lives might be sacrificed; and it was intolerable
      to Felix to be witnessing the blind outrages of this mad crowd, and yet be doing nothing to
      counteract them. Even some vain effort would satisfy him better than mere gazing. Within the
      walls of the inn he might save some one. He went in with a miscellaneous set, who dispersed
      themselves with different objects—some to the taproom, and to search for the cellar; some
      up-stairs to search in all rooms for Spratt, or any one else perhaps, as a temporary scapegoat
      for Spratt. Guided by the screams of women, Felix at last got to a high upstairs passage,
      where the landlady and some of her servants were running away in helpless terror from two or
      three half-tipsy men, who had been emptying a spirit-decanter in the bar. Assuming the tone of
      a mob-leader, he cried out, "Here, boys, here's better fun this way—come with me!" and drew
      the men
       back with him along the passage. They reaclied the lower staircase in time to
      see the unhappy Spratt being dragged, coatless and screaming, down the steps. No one at
      present was striking or kicking him; it seemed as if he were being reserved for punishment on
      some wider area, where the satisfaction might be more generally shared. Felix followed close,
      determined, if he could, to rescue both assailers and assaulted from the worst consequences.
      His mind was busy with possible devices.
Down the stairs, out along the stones through the gateway, Spratt was dragged as a mere heap
      of linen and cloth rags. When he was got outside the gateway, there was an immense hooting and
      roaring, though many there had no grudge against him, and only guessed that others had the
      grudge. But this was the narrower part of the street; it widened as it went onwards, and
      Spratt was dragged on, his enemies crying, "We'll make a ring—we'll see how frightened he
      looks!"
"Kick him, and have done with him," Felix heard another say. "Let's go to Tiliot's
      vaults—there's more gin there!"
Here were two hideous threats. In dragging Spratt onward the people were getting very near
      to the lane leading up to Tiliot's. Felix kept as close as
       he could to the threatened victim. He had thrown away his own stick, and carried
      a bludgeon which had escaped from the hands of an invader at the Seven Stars; his head was
      bare; he looked, to undiscerning eyes, like a leading spirit of the mob. In this condition he
      was observed by several persons looking anxiously from their upper windows, and finally
      observed to push himself, by violent efforts, close behind the dragged man.
Meanwhile the foremost among the constables, who, coming by the back way, had now reached
      the opening of Tiliot's Lane, discerned that the crowd had a victim amongst them. One spirited
      fellow, named Tucker, who was a regular constable, feeling that no time was to be lost in
      meditation, called on his neighbour to follow him, and with the sabre that happened to be his
      weapon got a way for himself where he was not expected, by dint of quick resolution. At this
      moment Spratt had been let go—had been dropped, in fact, almost lifeless with terror, on the
      street stones, and the men round him had retreated for a little space, as if to amuse
      themselves with looking at him. Felix had taken his opportunity; and seeing the first step
      towards a plan he was bent on, he sprang forward close to the cowering Spratt. As he did this,
      Tucker had cut his way
       to the spot, and imagining Felix to be the destined executioner of Spratt—for
      any discrimination of Tucker's lay in his muscles rather than his eyes—he rushed up to Felix,
      meaning to collar him and throw him down. But Felix had rapid senses and quick thoughts; he
      discrened the situation; he chose between two evils. Quick as lightning he frustrated the
      constable, fell upon him, and tried to master his weapon. In the struggle, which was watched
      without interference, the constable fell undermost, and Felix got his weapon. He started up
      with the bare sabre in his hand. The crowd round him cried "Hurray!" with a sense that he was
      on their side against the constable. Tucker did not rise immediately; but Felix did not
      imagine that he was much hurt.
"Don't touch him!" said Felix. "Let him go. Here, bring Spratt, and follow me."
Felix was perfectly conscious that he was in the midst of a tangled business. But he had
      chiefly before his imagination the horrors that might come if the mass of wild chaotic desires
      and impulses around him were not diverted from any further attack on places where they would
      get in the midst of intoxicating and inflammable materials. It was not a moment in which a
      spirit like his could calculate
       the effect of misunderstanding as to himself: nature never makes men who are at
      once energetically sympathetic and minutely calculating. He believed he had the power, and he
      was resolved to try, to carry the dangerous mass out of mischief till the military came to awe
      them—which he supposed, from Mr Crowe's announcement long ago, must be a near event.
He was followed the more willingly, because Tiliot's Lane was seen by the hindmost to be now
      defended by constables, some of whom had firearms; and where there is no strong
      counter-movement, any proposition to do something unspecified stimulates stupid curiosity. To
      many of the Sproxton men who were within sight of him, Felix was known personally, and vaguely
      believed to be a man who meant many queer things, not at all of an everyday kind. Pressing
      along like a leader, with the sabre in his hand, and inviting them to bring on Spratt, there
      seemed a better reason for following him than for doing anything else. A man with a definite
      will and an energetic personality acts as a sort of flag to draw and bind together the foolish
      units of a mob. It was on this sort of influence over men whose mental state was a mere medley
      of appetites and confused impressions, that Felix had
       dared to count. He hurried them along with words of invitation, telling them to
      hold up Spratt and not drag him; and those behind followed him, with a growing belief that he
      had some design worth knowing, while those in front were urged along partly by the same
      notion, partly by the sense that there was a motive in those behind them, not knowing what the
      motive was. It was that mixture of pushing forward and being pushed forward, which is a brief
      history of most human things.
What Felix really intended to do, was to get the crowd by the nearest way out of the town,
      and induce them to skirt it on the north side with him, keeping up in them the idea that he
      was leading them to execute some stratagem by which they would surprise something worth
      attacking, and circumvent the constables who were defending the lanes. In the mean time he
      trusted that the soldiers would have arrived, and with this sort of mob, which was animated by
      no real political passion or fury against social distinctions, it was in the highest degree
      unlikely that there would be any resistance to a military force. The presence of fifty
      soldiers would probably be enough to scatter the rioting hundreds. How numerous the mob was,
      no one ever knew: many inhabitants afterwards were ready
       to swear that there must have been at least two thousand rioters. Felix knew he
      was incurring great risks; but "his blood was up:" we hardly allow enough in common life for
      the results of that enkindled passionate enthusiasm which, under other conditions, makes
      world-famous deeds.
He was making for a point where the street branched off on one side towards a speedy opening
      between hedgerows, on the other towards the shabby wideness of Pollard's End. At this forking
      of the street there was a large space, in the centre of which there was a small stone
      platform, mounting by three steps, with an old green finger-post upon it. Felix went straight
      to this platform and stepped upon it, crying "Halt!" in a loud voice to the men behind and
      before him, and calling to those who held Spratt to bring him there. All came to a stand with
      faces towards the finger-post, and perhaps for the first time the extremities of the crowd got
      a definite idea that a man with a sabre in his hand was taking the command.
"Now!" said Felix, when Spratt had been brought on to the stone platform, faint and
      trembling, "has anybody got cord? if not, handkerchiefs knotted fast; give them to me."
He drew out his own handkerchief, and two or
       three others were mustered and handed to him. He ordered them to be knotted
      together, while curious eyes were fixed on him. Was he going to have Spratt hanged? Felix kept
      fast hold of his weapon, and ordered others to act.
"Now, put it round his waist, wind his arms in, draw them a little backward—so! and tie it
      fast on the other side of the post."
When that was done, Felix said, imperatively,
"Leave him there—we shall come back to him; let us make haste; march along, lads! Up. Park
      Street and down Hobb's Lane."
It was the best chance he could think of for saving Spratt's life. And he succeeded. The
      pleasure of seeing the helpless man tied up sufficed for the moment, if there were any who had
      ferocity enough to count much on coming back to him. Nobody's imagination represented the
      certainty that some one out of the houses at hand would soon come and untie him when he was
      left alone.
And the rioters pushed up Park Street, a noisy stream, with Felix still in the midst of
      them, though he was labouring hard to get his way to the front. He wished to determine the
      course of the crowd along a by-road called Hobb's Lane, which would have taken them to the
      other—the Duffield end of
       the town. He urged several of the men round him, one of whom was no less a
      person than the big Dredge, our old Sproxton acquaintance, to get forward, and be sure that
      all the fellows would go down the lane, else they would spoil sport. Hitherto Felix had been
      successful, and he had gone along with an unbroken impulse. But soon something occurred which
      brought with a terrible shock the sense that his plan might turn out to be as mad as all bold
      projects are seen to be when they have failed.
Mingled with the more headlong and half-drunken crowd there were some sharp-visaged men who
      loved the irrationality of riots for something else than its own sake, and who at present were
      not so much the richer as they desired to be, for the pains they had taken in coming to the
      Treby election, induced by certain prognostics gathered at Duffield on the nomination-day that
      there might be the conditions favourable to that confusion which was always a harvest-time. It
      was known to some of these sharp men that Park Street led out towards the grand house of Treby
      Manor, which was as good—nay, better for their purpose than the bank. While Felix was
      entertaining his ardent purpose, these other sons of Adam were entertaining another
       ardent purpose of their peculiar sort, and the moment was come when they were to
      have their triumph.
From the front ranks backward towards Felix there ran a new summons—a new invitation.
"Let us go to Treby Manor!"
From that moment Felix was powerless; a new definite suggestion overrode his vaguer
      influence. There was a determined rush past Hobb's Lane, and not down it. Felix was carried
      along too. He did not know whether to wish the contrary. Once on the road, out of the town,
      with openings into fields and with the wide park at hand, it would have been easy for him to
      liberate himself from the crowd. At first it seemed to him the better part to do this, and to
      get back to the town as fast as he could, in the hope of finding the military and getting a
      detachment to come and save the Manor. But he reflected that the course of the mob had been
      sufficiently seen, and that there were plenty of people in Park Street to carry the
      information faster than he could. It seemed more necessary that he should secure the presence
      of some help for the family at the Manor by going there himself. The Debarrys were not of the
      class he was wont to be anxious about; but Felix Holt's conscience was alive to the
       accusation that any danger they might be in now was brought on by a deed of his.
      In these moments of bitter vexation and disappointment, it did occur to him that very
      unpleasant consequences might be hanging over him of a kind quite different from inward
      dissatisfaction; but it was useless now to think of averting such consequences. As he was
      pressed along with the multitude into Treby Park, his very movement seemed to him only an
      image of the day's fatalities, in which the multitudinous small wickednesses of small selfish
      ends, really undirected towards any larger result, had issued in widely-shared mischief that
      might yet be hideous.
The light was declining: already the candles shone through many windows of the Manor.
      Already the foremost part of the crowd had burst into the offices, and adroit men were busy in
      the right places to find plate, after setting others to force the butler into unlocking the
      cellars; and Felix had only just been able to force his way on to the front terrace, with the
      hope of getting to the rooms where he would find the ladies of the household and comfort them
      with the assurance that rescue must soon come, when the sound of horses' feet convinced him
      that the rescue was nearer than he had expected. Just as he heard the horses, he had
      approached the large
       window of a room, where a brilliant light suspended from the ceiling showed him
      a group of women clinging together in terror. Others of the crowd were pushing their way up
      the terrace-steps and gravel-slopes at various points. Hearing the horses, he kept his post in
      front of the window, and, motioning with his sabre, cried out to the on-comers, "Keep back! I
      hear the soldiers coming." Some scrambled back, some paused automatically.
The louder and louder sound of the hoofs changed its pace and distribution. "Halt! Fire!"
      Bang! bang! bang!—came deafening the ears of the men on the terrace.
Before they had time or nerve to move, there was a rushing sound closer to them—again
      "Fire!" a bullet whizzed, and passed through Felix Holt's shoulder—the shoulder of the arm
      that held the naked weapon which shone in the light from the window.
Felix fell. The rioters ran confusedly, like terrified sheep. Some of the soldiers, turning,
      drove them along with the flat of their swords. The greater difficulty was to clear the
      invaded offices.
The Rector, who with another magistrate and several other gentlemen on horseback had
      accompanied
       the soldiers, now jumped on to the terrace, and hurried to the ladies of the
      family.
Presently there was a group round Felix, who had fainted, and, reviving, had fainted again.
      He had had little food during the day, and had been overwrought. Two of the group were
      civilians, but only one of them knew Felix, the other being a magistrate not resident in
      Treby. The one who knew Felix was Mr John Johnson, whose zeal for the public peace had brought
      him from Duffield when he heard that the soldiers were summoned.
"I know this man very well," said Mr Johnson. "He is a dangerous character—quite
      revolutionary."
It was a weary night; and the next day, Felix, whose wound was declared trivial, was lodged
      in Loamford Jail. He was committed on three counts—for having assaulted a constable, for
      having committed manslaughter (Tucker was dead from spinal concussion), and for having led a
      riotous onslaught on a dwelling-house.
Four other men were committed: one of them for possessing himself of a gold cup with the
      Debarry arms on it; the three others, one of whom was the collier Dredge, for riot and
      assault.
That morning Treby town was no longer in terror;
       but it was in much sadness. Other men, more innocent than the hated Spratt, were
      groaning under severe bodily injuries. And poor Tucker's corpse was not the only one that had
      been lifted from the pavement. It is true that none grieved much for the other dead man,
      unless it be grief to say, "Poor old fellow!" He had been trampled upon, doubtless where he
      fell drunkenly, near the entrance of the Seven Stars. This second corpse was old Tommy
      Trounsem, the bill-sticker—otherwise Thomas Transome, the last of a very old family-line.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

