
Chapter XLIX
Mr Ashburton, it may be supposed, had but little time to think on that eventful evening; and
     yet he was thinking all the way home, as he drove back in the chilly spring night to his own
     house. If his further course of action had been made in any way to depend upon the events of
     this day, it was now settled beyond all further uncertainty; and though he was not a man in his
     first youth, nor a likely subject for a romantic passion, still he was a little excited by the
     position in which he found himself. Miss Marjoribanks had been his inspiring genius, and had
     interested herself in his success in the warmest and fullest way; and if ever a woman was made
     for a certain position, Lucilla was made to be the wife of the Member for Carlingford. Long,
     long ago, at the very beginning of her career, when it was of Mr Cavendish that everybody was
     thinking, the ideal fitness of this position had struck everybody. Circumstances had changed
     since then, and Mr Cavendish had fallen, and a worthier hero had been placed in his stead; but
     though the person was changed, the circumstances remained unaltered. Natural fitness was indeed
     so apparent, that many people would have been disposed to say that it was Lucilla's duty to
     accept Mr Ashburton, even independent of the fact that he was perfectly eligible in every other
     respect.
But with all this the new Member for Carlingford was not able to assure himself that there
     had been anything particular in Lucilla's manner to himself. With her as with Carlingford, it
     was pure optimism. He was the best man, and her quick intelligence had divined it sooner than
     anybody else had done. Whether there was anything more in it, Mr Ashburton could not tell. His
     own impression was that she would accept him; but if she did not, he would have no right to
     complain of "encouragement," or to think himself jilted. This was what he was thinking as he
     drove home; but at the same time he was very far from being in a desponding state of mind. He
     felt very nearly as sure that Lucilla would be his wife, as if they were already standing
     before the Rector in Carlingford Church. He had just won one victory, which naturally made him
     feel more confident of winning another; and even without entertaining any over-exalted opinion
     of himself, it was evident that, under all the circumstances, a woman of thirty, with two
     hundred a year, would be a fool to reject such an offer. And Lucilla was the very furthest in
     the world from being a fool. It was in every respect the beginning of a new world to Mr
     Ashburton, and it would have been out of nature had he not been a little excited. After the
     quiet life he had led at the Firs, biding his time, he had now to look forward to a busy and
     important existence, half of it spent amid the commotion and ceaseless stir of town. A new
     career, a wife, a new position, the most important in his district—it was not much wonder if Mr
     Ashburton felt a little excited. He was fatigued at the same time, too much fatigued to be
     disposed for sleep; and all these united influences swayed him to a state of mind very much
     unlike his ordinary sensible calm. All his excitement culminated so in thoughts of Lucilla,
     that the new Member felt himself truly a lover; and late as the hour was, he took up a candle
     and once more made a survey all alone of his solitary house.
Nothing could look more dismal than the dark rooms, where there was neither light nor
     fire—the great desert drawing-room, for example, which stood unchanged as it had been in the
     days of his grand-aunts, the good old ladies who had bequeathed the Firs to Mr Ashburton. He
     had made no change in it, and scarcely ever used it, keeping to his library and dining-room,
     with the possibility, no doubt, always before him of preparing it in due course of time for his
     wife. That moment had now arrived, and in his excitement he went into the desolate room with
     his candle, which just made the darkness visible, and tried to see the dusky curtains and faded
     carpet, and the indescribable fossil air which everything had. There were the odd little
     spider-legged stands, upon which the Miss Penrhyns had placed their work-boxes, and the old
     sofas on which they had sat, and the floods of old tapestry-work with which they had decorated
     their favourite sitting-room. The sight of it chilled the Member for Carlingford, and made him
     sad. He tried to turn his thoughts to the time when this same room should be fitted up to suit
     Lucilla's complexion, and should be gay with light and with her presence. He did all he could
     to realise the moment when, with a mistress so active and energetic, the whole place would
     change its aspect, and glow forth resplendent into the twilight of the county, a central point
     for all. Perhaps it was his fatigue which gained upon him just at this moment, and repulsed all
     livelier thoughts; but the fact is, that however willing Lucilla might turn out to be, her
     image was coy, and would not come. The more Mr Ashburton tried to think of her as in possession
     here, the more the grim images of the two old Miss Penrhyns walked out of the darkness and
     asserted their prior claims. They even seemed to have got into the library before him when he
     went back, though there his fire was burning, and his lamp. After that there was nothing left
     for a man to do, even though he had been that day elected Member for Carlingford, but to yield
     to the weakness of an ordinary mortal, and go to bed.
Thoughts very different, but even more disturbing, were going on at the same time in Grange
     Lane. Poor Mr Cavendish, for one thing,—upbraided by everybody's looks, and even by some
     people's words—feeling himself condemned, censured, and despised on all sides—smarting under
     his sister's wild reproaches and her husband's blunt commentary thereupon,—had slunk away from
     their society after dinner, not seeing now why he should bear it any longer. "By Jove!
     if it had only been for her sake, you might have left over your philandering for
     another night," Mr Woodburn had said, in his coarse way; and it was all Mr Cavendish could do
     to refrain from saying that one time and another he had done quite enough for her
     sake, but he did not see any reason why he should put up with it any longer. He strolled out of
     doors, though the town was still in commotion, and could not but think of the sympathetic
     countenance which had paled to-day at sight of the numbers of the poll. She, by Heaven! might
     have had reason to find fault with him, and she had never done so; she had never
     perceived that he was stout, or changed from old times. As he entertained these thoughts, his
     steps going down Grange Lane gradually quickened, but he did not say to himself where he was
     going. He went a very roundabout way, as if he did not mean it, as far as St Roque's, and then
     up by the lane to the far-off desert extremity of Grove Street. It was simply to walk off his
     excitement and disappointment, and free himself from criticism for that evening at least; but
     as he walked he could not help thinking that Barbara, if she were well dressed, would still be
     a fine woman, that her voice was magnificent in its way, and that about Naples, perhaps, or the
     baths of Lucca, or in Germany, or the south of France, a man might be able to get on well
     enough with such a companion, where society was not so exacting or stiff-starched as in
     England. And the end was, that the feet of the defeated candidate carried him, ere ever he was
     aware, with some kind of independent volition of their own, to Mr Lake's door—and it may be
     here said, once for all, that this visit was decisive of Mr Cavendish's fate.
This will not be regarded as anything but a digression by such of Lucilla's friends as may be
     solicitous to know what she was making up her mind to under the circumstances; but the truth is
     that Lucilla's historian cannot, any more than Miss Marjoribanks herself could, refrain from a
     certain regret over Mr Cavendish. That was what he came to, poor man! after all his
     experiences; a man who was capable of so much better things—a man even who, if he had made a
     right use of his opportunities, might once have had as good a chance as any other of marrying
     Lucilla herself. If there ever was an instance of chances thrown away and lost opportunities,
     surely here was that lamentable example. And thus, poor man! all his hopes and all his chances
     came to an end.
As for Miss Marjoribanks herself, it would be vain to say that this was not a very exciting
     moment for her. If there ever could be said to be a time when she temporarily lost the entire
     sway and control of herself and her feelings, it would be at this crisis. She went about all
     that evening like a woman in a dream. For the first time in her life she not only did not know
     what she would do, but she did not know what she wanted to do. There could now be no mistaking
     what Mr Ashburton's intentions were. Up to a very recent time Lucilla had been able to take
     refuge in her mourning, and conclude that she had no present occasion to disturb herself. But
     now that calm was over. She could not conceal from herself that it was in her power by a word
     to reap all the advantages of the election, and to step at once into the only position which
     she had ever felt might be superior to her own in Carlingford. At last this great testimonial
     of female merit was to be laid at her feet. A man thoroughly eligible in every way—moderately
     rich, well connected, able to restore to her all, and more than all, the advantages which she
     had lost at her father's death—a man, above all, who was Member for Carlingford, was going to
     offer himself to her acceptance, and put his happiness in her hands; and while she was so well
     aware of this, she was not at all so well aware what answer she would make him. Lucilla's mind
     was in such a commotion as she sat over her embroidery, that she thought it strange indeed that
     it did not show, and could not understand how Aunt Jemima could sit there so quietly opposite
     her, as if nothing was the matter. But, to tell the truth, there was a good deal the matter
     with Aunt Jemima too, which was perhaps the reason why she saw no signs of her companion's
     agitation. Mrs John Marjoribanks had not been able any more than her niece to shut her eyes to
     Mr Ashburton's evident meaning, and now that matters were visibly coming to a crisis, a sudden
     panic and horror had seized her. What would Tom say? If she stood by and saw the prize snapped
     up under her very eyes, what account could she give to her son of her stewardship? how could
     she explain her silence as to all his wishes and intentions, her absolute avoidance of
     his name in all her conversations with Lucilla? While Miss Marjoribanks marvelled that the
     emotion in her breast could be invisible, and at Aunt Jemima's insensibility, the bosom of that
     good woman was throbbing with equal excitement. Sometimes each made an indifferent remark, and
     panted after it, as if she had given utterance to the most exhausting emotions; but so great
     was the preoccupation of both that neither observed how it was faring with the other.
But perhaps, on the whole, it was Aunt Jemima that suffered the most; for her there was
     nothing flattering, nothing gratifying, no prospect of change or increased happiness, or any of
     the splendours of imagination involved. All that could happen to her would be the displeasure
     of her son and his disappointment; and it might be her fault, she who could have consented to
     be chopped up in little pieces, if that would have done Tom any good; but who, notwithstanding,
     was not anxious for him to marry his cousin, now that her father's fortune was all lost and she
     had but two hundred a year. They had a silent cup of tea together at eight o'clock, after that
     noisy exciting one at five, which had been shared by half Carlingford, as Aunt Jemima thought.
     The buzz of that impromptu assembly, in which everybody talked at the same moment, and nobody
     listened, except perhaps Lucilla, had all died away into utter stillness; but the excitement
     had not died away; that had only risen to a white heat, silent and consuming, as the
     two ladies sat over their tea.
"Do you expect Mr Ashburton to-morrow, Lucilla?" Aunt Jemima said, after a long pause.
"Mr Ashburton?" said Lucilla, with a slight start; and, to tell the truth, she was glad to
     employ that childish expedient to gain a little time, and consider what she should say. "Indeed
     I don't know if he will have time to come. Most likely there will be a great deal to do."
"If he does come," said Mrs John, with a sigh—"or when he does come, I ought to say,
     for you know very well he will come, Lucilla—I suppose there is no doubt that he will
     have something very particular to say."
"I am sure I don't know, Aunt Jemima," said Miss Marjoribanks; but she never raised her eyes
     from her work, as she would have done in any other case. "Now that the election is over, you
     know——"
"I hope, my dear, I have been long enough in the world to know all about that," Aunt Jemima
     said severely, "and what it means when young ladies take such interest in elections;" and then
     some such feeling as the dog had in the manger—a jealousy of those who sought the gift though
     she herself did not want it—came over Mrs John, and at the same time a sudden desire to clear
     her conscience and make a stand for Tom. She did it suddenly, and went further than she meant
     to go; but then she never dreamt it would have the least effect. "I would not say anything to
     disturb your mind, Lucilla, if you have made up your mind; but when you receive your new
     friends, you might think of other people who perhaps have been fond of you before you ever saw
     them, or heard their very name."
She was frightened at it herself before the words were out of her mouth, and the effect it
     had upon Miss Marjoribanks was wonderful. She threw her embroidery away, and looked Tom's
     mother keenly in the face. "I don't think you know anybody who is fond of me, Aunt Jemima," she
     said; "I don't suppose anybody is fond of me. Do you?" said Lucilla. But by that time Aunt
     Jemima had got thoroughly frightened, both at herself and her companion, and had nothing more
     to say.
"I am sure all these people to-day have been too much for you," she said. "I wonder what they
     could all be thinking of, for my part, flocking in upon you like that, so soon after——I thought
     it was very indelicate of Lady Richmond. And Lucilla, my dear, your nerves are quite affected,
     and I am sure you ought to go to bed."
Upon which Miss Marjoribanks recovered herself in a moment, and folded up her worsted-work.
     "I do feel tired," she said sweetly, "and perhaps it was too much. I think I will take
     your advice, Aunt Jemima. The excitement keeps one up for the moment, and then it tells after.
     I suppose the best thing is to go to bed."
"Much the best, my dear," Aunt Jemima said, giving Lucilla a kiss; but she did not take her
     own advice. She took a long time to think it all over, and sat up by the side of the decaying
     fire until it was midnight—an hour at which a female establishment like this should surely have
     been all shut up and at rest. And Lucilla did very much the same thing, wondering greatly what
     her aunt could tell her if she had a mind, and having the greatest inclination in the world to
     break into her chamber, and see, at any risk, what was in Tom's last letter. If she could have
     seen that, it might have thrown some light on the problem Lucilla was discussing, or given her
     some guidance through her difficulties. It was just then that Mr Ashburton was inviting her
     image into the fossil drawing-room, and finding nothing but the grim shades of the Miss
     Penrhyns answer to his call. Perhaps this was because Lucilla's image at that moment was called
     upon more potently from another quarter in a more familiar voice.
But after this exhausting day and late sitting-up, everybody was late in the morning, at
     least in Grange Lane. Miss Marjoribanks had slept little all night, and she was not in a more
     settled state of mind when the day returned which probably would bring the matter to a speedy
     decision. Her mind was like a country held by two armies, one of which by turns swept the other
     into a corner, but only to be driven back in its turn. After the unaccountable stupidity of the
     general public—after all the Cavendishes, Beverleys, and Riders who had once had it in their
     power to distinguish themselves by at least making her an offer, and who had not done it—here
     at last, in all good faith, honesty, and promptitude, had appeared a man superior to them all—a
     man whom she would have no reason to be ashamed of in any particular, sensible like herself,
     public-spirited like herself—a man whose pursuits she could enter into fully, who had a
     perfectly ideal position to offer her, and in whose person, indeed, all sorts of desirable
     qualities seemed to meet. Miss Marjoribanks, when she considered all this, and thought over all
     their recent intercourse, and the terms of friendship into which the election had brought them,
     felt, as any other sensible person would have felt, that there was only one answer which could
     be given to such a man. If she neglected or played with his devotion, then certainly she never
     would deserve to have another such possibility afforded to her, and merited nothing better than
     to live and die a single woman on two hundred a year. But then, on the other hand, there would
     rush forth a crowd of quick-coming and fantastic suggestions which took away Lucilla's breath,
     and made her heart beat loud. What if there might be "other people" who had been fond of her
     before she ever heard of Mr Ashburton's name? What if there might be some one in the world who
     was ready, not to offer her his hand and fortune in a reasonable way, as Mr Ashburton no doubt
     would, but to throw himself all in a heap at her feet, and make the greatest fool of himself
     possible for her sake? Miss Marjoribanks had been the very soul of good sense all her days, but
     now her ruling quality seemed to forsake her. And yet she could not consent to yield herself up
     to pure unreason without a struggle. She fought manfully, womanfully against the weakness which
     hitherto must have been lying hidden in some out-of-the-way corner in her heart. Probably if Mr
     Ashburton had asked her all at once amid the excitement of the election, or at any other
     unpremeditated moment, Lucilla would have been saved all this self-torment; but it is hard upon
     a woman to have a proposal hanging over her head by a hair, as it were, and to look forward to
     it without any uncertainty or mystery, and have full time to make up her mind. And there was no
     accounting for the curious force and vividness with which that strange idea about "other
     people," upon which Aunt Jemima would throw no light, had come into Lucilla's head.
She was still in the same frightful chaos of uncertainty when Mr Ashburton was shown into the
     drawing-room. She had not even heard him ring, and was thus deprived of the one possible moment
     of coming to a decision before she faced and confronted her fate. Miss Marjoribanks's heart
     gave a great jump, and then she recovered herself, and rose up without faltering, and shook
     hands with him. She was all alone, for Aunt Jemima had not found herself equal to facing the
     emergency; and there was not the least possibility of evading or postponing, or in any way
     running away from it now. Lucilla sat down again upon her sofa where she had been sitting, and
     composed herself with a certain despairing tranquillity, and trusted in Providence. She had
     thrown herself on other occasions, though never at an equally important crisis, upon the
     inspiration of the moment, and she felt it would not forsake her now.
"I should be sorry the election was over," said Mr Ashburton, who was naturally a little
     agitated too, "if I thought its privileges were over, and you would not let me come——I shall
     always think I owe my success to you; and I would thank you for being so kind—so very kind to
     me, if——"
"Oh, dear, no; pray don't say so," cried Lucilla. "I only felt sure that you were the best
     man—the only man—for Carlingford."
"I wish I might but prove the best man for something else," said the candidate nervously; and
     then he cleared his throat. "I would say you had been kind if I did not hope—if I was not so
     very anxious that you should be something more than kind. It may be vain of me, but I think we
     could get on together. I think I could understand you, and do you justice——Lucilla! what is the
     matter? Good heavens! is it possible that I have taken you quite by surprise?"
What caused this question was that Miss Marjoribanks had all at once changed colour, and
     given a great start, and put her hand to her breast, where her heart had taken such a leap that
     she felt it in her throat. But it was not because of what Mr Ashburton was saying; it was
     because of one of the very commonest sounds of everyday existence—a cab driving down Grange
     Lane; but then it was a cab driving in such a way that you could have sworn there was somebody
     in it in a terrible hurry, and who had just arrived by the twelve o'clock train.
"Oh, no, no," said Miss Marjoribanks; "I know you have always done me more than justice, Mr
     Ashburton, and so have all my friends; and I am sure we always will get on well together. I
     wish you joy with all my heart, and I wish you every happiness; and I always thought, up to
     this very last moment——"
Lucilla stopped again, and once more put her hand to her breast. Her heart gave another jump,
     and, if such a thing were possible to a heart, went off from its mistress altogether, and
     rushed downstairs bodily to see who was coming. Yet, with all her agitation, she had still
     enough self-control to lift an appealing look—a look which threw herself upon his mercy, and
     implored his forbearance—to Mr Ashburton's face.
As for the Member for Carlingford, he was confounded, and could not tell what to make of it.
     What was it she had thought up to the very last moment? Was this a refusal, or was she only
     putting off his claim, or was it something altogether independent of him and his intentions
     that agitated Lucilla to such an unusual extent? While he sat in his confusion trying to make
     it out, the most startling sound interrupted the interview. The old disused bell that had so
     often called Dr Marjoribanks up at night, and which hung near the door of the old Doctor's
     room, just over the drawing-room, began to peal through the silence, as if rung by a hand too
     impatient to notice what it was with which it made its summons.
"Papa's bell!" Miss Marjoribanks cried, with a little shriek; and she got up trembling, and
     then dropped upon her seat again, and in her agitated state burst into tears. And Mr Ashburton
     felt that, under these most extraordinary circumstances, even so sensible a woman as Lucilla
     might be justified in fainting, embarrassing and uncomfortable as that would be.
"I will go and see what it means," he said, with still half the air of a man who had a right
     to go and see, and was, as it were, almost in his own house. As he turned round, the door bell
     pealed wildly below in correction of the mistake. It was evident that somebody wanted admission
     who had not a moment to lose, and who was in the habit of pulling wildly at whatever came in
     his way. Mr Ashburton went out of the room to see who it was, a little amused and a little
     alarmed, but much annoyed at bottom, as was only natural, at such an interruption. He did not
     very well know whether he was accepted or rejected; but it was equally his duty in either case
     to put a stop to the ringing of that ghostly bell. He went away, meaning to return immediately
     and have it out and know his fate. And Lucilla, whose heart had come back, having fully
     ascertained who it was, and was now choking her with its beating, was left to await the new
     event and the new-comer alone.
