
VI.—Parochial Benevolence—and another translation.
The authorities of St. Bartimeus did not take kindly to the charge imposed upon them by
            the Queen's Bench. Some of the Guardians privately hinted to the master that it was
            unnecessary to overfeed the infant. They did not burthen him with much clothing, and
            what he had was shared with many lively companions. When you, good matron, look at your
            little pink-cheeked daughter, so clean and so cosy in her pretty cot, waking to see the
            well-faced nurse, or you, still sweeter to her eyes, watching above her dreams, perhaps
            you ought to stop a moment to contrast the scene with the sad tableaux you may get sight
            of not far away.
Ginx's Baby was not an ill-favored child. He had inherited his father's frame and
            strength: these helped him through the changes we are relating. What if these capacities
            had, by simple nourishing food, cleanly care-taking, and brighter, kindlier
            associations, been trained into full working order? Left alone or ill-tended they were
            daily dwindling, and the depreciation was going on not solely at the expense of little
            Ginx, but of the whole community. To reduce his strength one-half was to reduce one-half
            his chances of independence, and to multiply the prospects of his continuous application
            for STATE AID.
The money spent in stopping a hole in a Dutch dyke is doubtless better invested than if
            it were to be retained until a vast breach had laid half a kingdom under water. Surely
            your Hollander would agree to be mulcted in one-third of his fortune rather than run the
            hazard!
Every day through this wealthy country there are men and women busy marring the little
            images of God, that are by-and-by to be part of its public-shadowing young spirits,
            repressing their energy, sapping their vigor or failing to make it up, corrupting their
            nature by foul associations, moral and physical. Some are doing it by special license of
            the devil, others by Act of Parliament, others by negligence or niggardliness. Could you
            teach or force these people—many unconsciously engaged in the vile work—to run together,
            as men alarmed by sudden danger, and throw around a helpless generation influences and a
            care more akin to your own home ideal, would you not transfigure the next epoch—would
            not your labor and sacrifice be a GOD-WORK, reaching out weighty, fruit-laden branches
            far into the grateful future? 'Tis by feeling and enjoining everywhere the need of such
            a movement as this that you, O all-powerful woman! can carry your will into the play of
            a great economic and social reform. Society that recognizes not a root-truth like that
            is sowing the wind—God knows what it will reap.
So the Guardians, keeping carefully within the law, neglected nothing that could sap
            little Ginx's vitality, deaden his happiest instincts, derange moral action, cause hope
            to die within his infant breast almost as soon as it were born. Good God!
The items the Board were really entitled to charge the rate-payers as supplied to our
            hero were—
Dirt,
Fleas,
Foul air,
Chances of catching skin diseases, fevers, etc.,
Vile company,
Neglect,
Occasional cruelty, and
A small supply of bad food and clothing.
Every pauper was to them an obnoxious charge by any and every means to be reduced to a
            minimum or nil. Ginx's Baby was reduced to a minimum. His constitution enabled him to
            protest against reduction to nil. But, just after the bills of costs had been taxed,
            mulcting the rate-payers of St. Bartimeus in a sum of more than L 1,600, the Guardians
            were made aware of the name and origin of their charge. One of the persons who had
            deserted him was arrested for theft, and among other articles in her possession were
            some of the Baby's clothes. She confessed the whole story, and declared that the child
            left in Nether Place was no other than the Protestant Baby, son of Ginx, about whom so
            much stir had been made two years before. The Guardians were not long in tracing Ginx,
            and, at his quarters in Rosemary Street, the hapless changeling was one day delivered by
            a deputy relieving-officer, with the benediction, by me sadly recorded—
“There he is, d—n him!”
I am sure if the Guardians had been there they would have said:
“Amen.”
