
XI.—The Unity of the Spirit and the Bond of Peace.
When the committee met, every one discovered his incongruity with the rest. Each was
            disposed to treat Ginx's Baby in a different way—in other words, each wished to reflect
            the views of his particular sect on the object of their charity. They were a new
            “Evangelical Alliance,” agreed only in hatred to Popery.
Finding at their first meeting that the discussion needed to be brought into a focus,
            the committee appointed three of their number to draw up a minute of the matters to be
            argued. This committee reported that there arose, respecting the child, the following
            questions:—
 “I. As touching the body: a. Wherewithal he should be fed and clothed? b. In
              what manner and fashion that should be done? II. As touching the mind and spirit: a.
              Whether he should be educated? If so, b. What were to be the subjects of instruction?
              c. What creed, if any, should be primarily taught? d. Should he be further baptized?
              If so, 1. Into what communion? 2. By what ceremonial?” 
This programme, it appeared to its concoctors, embraced everything that concerned
            Ginx's Baby except his death by the act of God or the Queen's enemies. No sooner was the
            report made than adopted. Then a member, eager for the fray, moved the postponement of
            the first division of questions until the others had been determined. Why should
            apostles of truth trouble themselves to serve tables? These were very subordinate
            questions to them—though, I think, of first importance to Ginx's Baby. It was decided to
            discuss little Ginx's future before considering his present.
The ball was opened by the Venerable Archdeacon Hotten, who, amid much excitement,
            contended that from the earliest buddings of thought in an infant mind religion should
            be engrafted upon it; there could be no education worth the name that was not religious.
            That with the A should be taught the origin, and with the Z the final destiny and
            destruction, of evil. To separate education from religion was to clip the wings of the
            heavenly dove. He asserted that the committee ought at once to have the child baptized
            in Westminster Abbey, though he was rather of opinion that the previous baptism was
            canonically valid; that he should be taught the truths of our most holy faith, and since
            there could be no faith without a creed, and the only national creed was that of the
            Church of England, the baby should be handed over to the care of a clergyman, and then
            be sent to a proper religious school. He need not say that he excluded Rugby under its
            then profane management.
The Church was, however, divided against itself, for the Dean of Triston said he would
            give more latitude than his very reverend brother. You ought not to define in an infant
            mind a rigid outline of creed. In fact, he did not acknowledge any creed, he was not
            obliged to by law and was disinclined to by his reason. He would rather allow the inner
            seeds of natural light—the glorious all-pervading efflorescence of the Deity in all
            men's hearts, to grow within the young spirit. The Dean was assuredly vague and far less
            earnest than his brother cleric.
The “Rev.” Mr. Bumpus, Unitarian, met the suggestions of the Archdeacon with the scorn
            they merited. It was impossible to apply to a representative child of an enlightened age
            theories so long exploded. The Dean had certainly come nearer the truth with that broad
            sympathy for which he was noted. He himself proposed that the child should be made a
            model nursling of the liberalism of a new era. Old things were passing away;—all things
            had become new. Creeds were the discarded banners of a mediaeval past, fit only to be
            hung up in the churches, and looked at as historic monuments; never more to be flaunted
            in the front of battle! The education of the day was that which taught a man the
            introspection whereby he recognized the Divine within himself—under any aspect, under
            any tuition, whether of Brahma, Confucius, or Christ. Truth was kaleidoscopic, and
            varied with the media through which it was viewed. As for the child, every aspect of
            truth and error should be allowed to play upon his mind. Let him acquire ordinary school
            learning for fifteen years, and then send him to the London University.
Here the Chairman, and half-a-dozen members of the committee, protested that the said
            University was a school of the devil, and several interchanges of discourtesy took
            place.
Mr. Shortt, M. P., begged to suggest, as a matter of business, that for the present the
            child was not capable of receiving any ideas whatever, and might die, or prove to be
            dumb, or an idiot, and so require no education. Ought they not to postpone this
            discussion until the subject was old enough to be worth consideration?
It was Mr. Shortt's habit to show his practical vein by business-like obstructions of
            this kind. He had been able a score of times to demonstrate to the House of Commons how
            silly it was to consider probabilities. In fact, he was opposed heart and soul to
            prophetic legislation; he would live, legislatively, from hand to mouth.
But the committee would not allow Mr. Shortt to run away with the bone of
            contention.
The Rev. Dr. M'Gregor Lucas, of the National Caledonian Believers, had been silent too
            long to contain himself further. This man needs some particular description whenever his
            name is made public. Nay, for this he lives, and by it, some think. At all events, he
            appears to be equally eager for rebuke and applause; they both involve notoriety, and
            notoriety is sure to pay. Few absurdities had been overlooked by his shallow ingenuity.
            Simply to have invested his limited mental endowments in trying to make the world
            believe him a genius, would have been only so like what many thousands are doing as to
            have absolved him from too harsh a judgment; but he traded in perilous stuff. Cheap
            prophecy was his staple. It was his wont to give out about once in five years, that the
            world would shortly come to an end, and, like Mr. Zadkiel, he found people who thought
            their inevitable disappointment a proof of his inspiration. Had you heard the honeyed
            words dropping from his lips, you would have taken him for a Scotch angel, and,
            consequently, a rarity. Could such lips utter harsh sayings, or distil vanities? Show
            him a priest, and you would hear! The Pope was his particular born foe; Popery his
            enemies' country—so he said. It was safe for him to stand and throw his darts. No one
            could say whether they hit or did not; while most spectators had the good will to hope
            that they did. How he would have lived if Daniel and St. John had dreamed no dreams, one
            cannot conjecture. As it was, they provided the doctor with endless openings for his
            fancy. Since no one could solve the riddle of their prophecies, it was certain that no
            one could disprove his solutions. Yet these came so often to their own disproof by lapse
            of time, that I can only think that the good doctor hoped to die before his critical
            periods came, or was so clever as to trust the infallibility of human weakness.
I describe Dr. Lucas at so great a length, because it will be easier and more edifying
            to the reader to conceive what he said, than for me to recount it. He showed the Baby to
            be one of seven mysteries. He was in favor of teaching him at once to hate idolatry,
            music, crosses, masses, nuns, priests, bishops, and cardinals. The “humanities,” the
            Shorter Catechism, the Confession of Faith, and “The whole Duty of Man,” would, in his
            opinion, be the books to lay the groundwork in the child's mind of a Christian character
            of the highest type.
Mr. Ogle, M. P., here vigorously intervened. Said he:—
“I can't, with all deference, agree to any of these suggestions. They involve
            hand-to-hand fighting over this baby's body. No one of us is entitled to take charge of
            him. Else why did we all unite to rescue him from the nunnery? He will be torn to pieces
            among contending divines! I think a purely secular education is all that as a committee
            we should aim at. We have, but just withdrawn the child from the shadow of a single
            ecclesiastical influence—would you transfer it to another? Every Protestant denomination
            is contributing to his support, how can you devote their gifts to rearing him for one?
            You would have no peace; better at once treat him as the man of Benjamin treated his
            wife, cut him up into enough pieces to send to all the tribes of Israel, summoning them
            to the fight. I say we have nothing to do with this just now; let him be educated in a
            secular academy, and let each sect be free to send its agents to instruct him out of
            school hours as they please.”
The Rev. Theodoret Verity, M.A., rose in anger.
“Surely, sir, you cannot seriously propound such a scheme! Would you leave this
            precious waif to be buffeted between the contending waves of truth and error, in the
            vague hope that by some lucky wind he might finally be cast upon a rock of safety? I
            protest against all these educational heresies—they are redolent of brimstone. Truth is
            truth, or there is none at all. If there be any, it is our duty to impart it to this
            immortal at the outset of his existence. Secular education! What do you mean by it? Who
            shall sever one question from another, and call one secular and the other religious? Is
            not every relation and every truth in some way or other connected with religion?”
            etc. etc. Mr. Verity has been saying the same thing any time these forty
            years.
“Forgive me,” replied Mr. Ogle, “if I say that this is very vague talking. I have not
            proposed to sever one question from another. I only propose to do in a different way
            that which is being done now by the most rigid of Mr. Verity's friends. It is impossible
            to comprehend what is meant by such a statement as that every truth is somehow connected
            with religion. It may be that the notion—if it really is not, as I suspect it to be,
            mere verbiage and clap-trap, used by certain fools to mislead others—means that there is
            some such coherency between all truths as there is, for instance, between the elements
            of the body. I would admit that, but is not blood a different and perfectly severable
            thing from bone? Each has its place, office, relation. But who would say that one could
            not be regarded by a physicist in the largest variety of its aspects apart from the
            other? Yet the physicist comes back again to consider with respect to each its relations
            to all the rest! The separate study has rather prepared him for more profound insight
            into those relations. Thus it is with the body of truth. In spite of Mr. Verity I affirm
            that there are truths that have not in themselves any element of religion whatever. The
            forty-seventh proposition of Euclid will be taught by a Jesuit precisely as it is taught
            in the London University; geography will affirm certain principles and designate places,
            rivers, mountains—that no faith can remove and cast into unknown seas. These subjects
            and others are taught in our most bigoted schools in separate hours and relations from
            religion. What then do you mean by affirming that there can be no secular education of
            this child—apart from religious teaching? We are not likely to agree, if I may judge
            from what I have seen, on any one method of religious instruction for it, therefore I
            wish first to fix common bounds within which our common benevolence may work. Well, we
            all go to the Bible. We agree that between its covers lies religious truth somewhere. If
            you like let him have that—and let him have some kindly and holy influences about him in
            the way of practice and example, such as many of our sects can supply many instances of.
            Give him no catechism—let him read a creed in our daily life. The articles of faith
            strongest in his soul will be those which have crystallized there from the combined
            action of truth and experience, and not as it were been pasted on its walls by
            ecclesiastical bill-posters. 'What is truth?' he must ask and answer for himself, as we
            all must do before God. Don't mistake me; I hope I am not more indifferent to religion
            than any here present—but I differ from them on the best method of imbuing the mind and
            heart with it. Surely we need not, we cannot—it would be an exquisite absurdity—pass a
            resolution in this committee that the child is to be a Calvinist! Who then would agree
            to secure him from any taint of Arminian heresy in years to come? Dare you even resolve
            that he shall be a Christian and a Protestant! I would not insure the risk. But, with so
            many of Christ's followers about me, surely, surely without providing any ecclesiastical
            mechanism, there will be testified to him simply how he may be saved. Your prayers, your
            visits, your kindly moral influence and talk, your living example of a goodness derived
            not from dogmas but from affectionate following of a holy pattern and trust in revealed
            mercies, your pointing to that pattern and showing the daily passage of these mercies
            will prompt his search after the truth that has made you what you are. Let some good
            woman do for him a mother's part, but choose her for her general goodness and not for
            the dogmas of her church. The simpler her piety the better for him I should say!”
This straightforward speech fell like a new apple of discord in the midst of the
            committee. Angry knots were formed, and the noble chairman found that he could not
            restore order. An adjournment was agreed to. Luckily for the body of Ginx's Baby, he had
            been meanwhile sent to a home where Protestant money secured to him for the time good
            living, while his benefactors were discussing what to do with his soul.
Surely, it were no impertinence to interrupt this history and advert to the fact, that,
            in the discussion just related, every one was to some extent right and to some extent
            agreed.
That religious teaching was due to an immortal spirit—some notion and evidence of the
            Divine and the Great Hereafter to be conveyed to it—scarce was disputed. Nor was there
            collision over the necessity of what is called intellectual cultivation. The boy must be
            taught something of the world in which he was to live; nay, this latter knowledge seemed
            to be most immediately practical. As each disputant fixed his eye on one or the other
            aim that end appeared to him to be the most important. Hence, by a natural lapse, they
            came to treat subjects as antagonistic which were, in fact, parallel and quite
            consistent. The one called the others godless—the others threw back the aspersion of
            bigotry. Then came complication. What was “religion?” Intellectual culture they could
            agree about—it embraced well-known areas; but this religion divided itself into many
            disputable fields. These brother Protestants were like country neighbors who must
            encounter each other at fairs, markets, meets, and balls, and smile and greet, though
            each, at heart, is looking savagely at the other's landmarks, and most are very likely
            fighting bitter lawsuits all the while. It was because religion meant CREED to most
            members of the committee, and because it so implies to the vast bodies they represented,
            that they could not come to terms about Ginx's Baby or any other infantile immortal. Not
            always, perhaps, but often, they fought for futile distinctions. Had Mahomet's creed
            consisted of but one article, There is one God, the blood of many nations might never
            have given testimony against the creed they resented when to it he tacked and Mahomet is
            His prophet. Could Protestants but consent to agree in their agreement and peacefully
            differ in their petty differences, how would the aggregated impulse of a simple faith
            roll down before it all the impediments of error!
When Ginx's Baby had grown to a discretionary age, and was at all able to know truth
            from error—supposing that to be knowable—there were in the country fifty thousand
            reverend gentlemen of every tincture of religious opinion who might ply him with their
            various theories, yet few of these would be contented unless they could seize him while
            his young nature was plastic, and try to imprint on immortal clay the trade-mark of some
            human invention.
