

CHAPTER X.
THIS was Joshua's first introduction into a wealthy house of the upper classes; and
     from the retinue of servants in their gorgeous liveries thronging the hall, to the little
     lapdog on its velvet cushion, the luxury and lavishness he saw everywhere almost stupified him.
     To a man earning, say some twenty-five shillings a week, and living on less than half—sharing
     with those poorer than himself, and content to go short that others might be satisfied—the
     revelation of Lord X.'s house was a sharp and positive pain. The starvation he, the nobleman,
     had seen in his
      wanderings—starvation in all probability relieved for
     to-day; but to-morrow and the day after and for all future time, till the pauper's grave closed
     over all?—and then had come back to an abundance, a fastidiousness, of which the very refuse
     would have been salvation to hundreds; the miserable dwellings he visited, mere styes of filth,
     immodesty, and vice, where the seeds of physical disease and moral corruption are sown
     broadcast and from earliest infancy—and then returned to a dwelling like a fairy palace, where
     every nook and corner was perfect, redolent of all kinds of sweetness and loveliness—to a man
     of the people like Joshua, fairly oppressive in its richness and grandeur; the gaunt and
     famine-wasted men and women and children that he had so often met, the little ones brutally treated,
      half starved, sworn at, and knocked about, swarming through
     reeking courts and alleys where the very air of heaven was poisonous—and the lady's lap-dog,
     with its dainty food, its tender care, well washed, combed, curled, scented, adorned, on a
     velvet footstool, a toy bought for it to play with: and that man and that woman—this lord and
     lady—-were professing Christians, went regularly to church, believed that Christ was very God,
     and that every word of the Bible was inspired! It was habit; but at first sight it looked
     incomprehensible to one who lived among the poor, and was of them.
Lady X. soon came into the room where Joshua and Lord X. were. She was a tall, fair, languid
     woman, kindly natured but selfish, dissatisfied with her life as it was yet unable to devise
     anything better for herself;
      having no interest anywhere, without children, and evidently
     not as much in love with her husband as model wives usually are: a woman whose intelligence and
     physique clashed, the one being restless and the other indolent. Every now and then she took up
     her husband's “cases,” partly out of complaisance to him, partly, from profound weariness with
     her life, and also from the natural kind-heartedness which made her like to do good-natured
     things and to give pleasure to others. But she soon abandoned then and set them adrift. She was
     a woman with great curiosity but no tenacity; full of a soft sensual kind of passion that led
     her into danger as much from idleness as from vice; she loved out of idleness, and worked out
     of idleness. It was a gain to her to be interested in anything—whether it
      was the fashion of the day or the salvation of a human soul;
     but there was no spirit of self-sacrifice in her, and she would have considered it an
     impertinence if she had been asked to do a hair's-breadth more than she desired of her own
     free-will. Had she been born poor, she might have been a grand woman; as she was, she was just
     a fine lady whose nobler nature was stifled under the weight of idleness and luxury.
But she liked Joshua, and took to him kindly.
She gave him at that first interview a really handsome sum of money for his poorer friends;
     she promised clothes and soup-tickets, books for his school, toys for his children, good food
     for his sick. The simple yet so grand earnestness of the man interested her, and she too felt
     as every
      one else did, that here was a master-spirit which had a
     claim to all men's reverence and admiration. She was not satisfied with his first visit, but
     Joshua must go to see her again; and after he had been there twice, she of herself offered to
     come and see him in his lodgings, over the little sweet-stuff shop which Mary Prinsep kept. And
     Joshua did not forbid her.
Was there ever such an incongruity? The street—East-street—in which we lived, was too narrow
     for her carriage to come down, so she had to walk the distance to Joshua's rooms. And I shall
     never forget the sight. Her dainty feet were clothed in satin on which glittered buckles that
     looked like diamonds; her dress was of apple-blossom-coloured silk that trailed behind her; her
     bonnet seemed to be just a feather and a
      veil; she wore some light lace thing about her that looked
     like a cloud more than a fabric; and her arms and neck were covered with chains and lockets and
     bracelets. She was like a fairy queen among the gnomes and blackamoors of an underground mine,
     like a sweet-scented rose-bush in the midst of a refuse heap as she came picking her way with
     courage, but with exaggerated delicacy, her footman in his blue and silver at her back, and the
     mob of the street staring, too much astonished at such an apparition to jeer.
When she came into the little shop and asked for Joshua, I was standing in the doorway (it
     was on a Sunday) between the shop and back room; and for the first time I saw Mary in an ugly
     light. She turned quite white as the lady came in, and
      instead of answering, looked round to me with an agony in
     her face that was indescribable.
“Yes, madam,” I said coming forward; “he is up-stairs.”
“Do you want him, ma'am?” then asked Mary, the look of pain still in her large fixed eyes;
     and I thought that the lady, looking at her—for Mary was young and very pretty, as I have
     said—looked uneasy too. At all events, she looked haughty.
“Yes,” she said; but she turned and spoke to me, not to Mary. “Have the goodness to tell him
     that Lady X. wants to speak to him.”
I ran upstairs and told him; and Joshua, without changing his countenance one whit, as if
     lords and ladies in gorgeous array were our natural visitors and what we were used
      to every day, came down and greeted the lady as he would
     have greeted the baker's wife—neither more nor less respectfully; which means, that he was
     respectful to every one.
Lady X. made a step forward when he came into the shop, and the blood flew over her face as
     she gave him her hand.
“Now, you must let me see where you live, and how you do such wonders,” she said, with the
     most undefinable but unmistakable accent of coaxing in the voice.
And Joshua saying quietly; “Are you not too fine to come up our stairs, Lady X.?—we do our
     best to keep them clean, Mary, don't we? but they are not used to such-like feet on them;” gave
     her his hand smiling.
“They will be used to mine, I hope, often,”
      said my lady kindly. “You know I have taken a great interest
     in your work, Mr. Davidson, and I am going to help when I can.”
“If you will come this way then, my lady, I will show you all I have on hand at the present
     moment,” said Joshua moving towards the stairs.
And again the lady blushed; and her long silk skirts trailed behind her with a curious
     rustling noise; and we heard her light bootheels go tap, tap, up the stairs, and her chains and
     trinkets jingle.
Then Mary turned to me, and said with a wild kind of look; “John! John! she is here for no
     good! She will harm more than she helps. What call has she to come here? who wants her? She
     will only do us all a mischief!”

She turned her face to the window and burst into tears.
“Mary! what ails you?” I said, vaguely; for I was shocked, and did not rightly understand
     her. I seemed to feel something I could not give a name to—a pain and a queer kind of doubt;
     but indeed it was all chaotic, and all I knew was that I was sorry. “You know,” I went on
     trying to comfort her, “that money and worldly influence at Joshua's back would give him all he
     wants. His hands are so weak now for want of both these things. Why should we be sorry, dear,
     that he has the chance of them?”
“She has come for no good!” was all that Mary would say; and I could only wonder at an
     outburst unlike anything I had ever seen before.

My lady stayed a long time upstairs, and poor Mary's agony during her visit never relaxed. At
     last she came down, flushed and radiant. Her eyes were softer and darker, her face looked
     younger and more tender; she even glanced kindly at me as she passed me, saying to Joshua in a
     voice as sweet as a silver bell; “And this the John you have been telling me about? He looks a
     good fellow!—and is this Mary?” but she was not quite so tender to Mary; and she added, in
     rather a displeased tone of voice; “Girl! you look very young to keep house by yourself, and
     have young, men lodgers!”
“Ah, my lady, you forget that our girls have not the care taken of them that yours have,”
     said Joshua gently. “So soon as a girl of ours can get her living, she does.”

“Well, I hope that Mary will be a good girl, and do you credit,” said my lady coldly.
She shook hands then with Joshua, but, with her hand still in his, turned to him and, with
     the sweetest smile I have ever seen on woman's face, said in the same strange caressing way; “I
     must ask you to be kind enough to take me to my carriage, Mr. Davidson. I think my footman must
     have gone to keep the coachman company; and I should scarcely like to go down the street
     alone.”
“Certainly not,” said Joshua, and led her, still holding her hand, out from the shop and into
     the little street to where her carriage was waiting for her.
“Mind the shop for me, John,” said Mary; and with a great sob she ran
      away and shut herself up in her own room,
She would have been ashamed I know, to let Joshua see that she was crying, and all for
     nothing, too; only because a fine lady, smelling of sweet scents and wearing a rich silk gown,
     had passed through the shop.
As for him, he came back without a ruffle on his quiet, mild face. There was no flush of
     gratified vanity on it; nothing but just that inward, absorbed look, that look of peace and
     love which beautified him at all times. As he passed through, he looked round for Mary; but I
     told him she was bad with her head; and as this had the effect of sending him into her room to
     look after her, poor Mary's attempt at concealment came to nothing. But I don't think Joshua
     found out why she was crying.

Many a day after this my lady's carriage came to the entrance of our wretched street, and my
     lady herself, like a radiant vision, picked her way among garbage and ruffianism down to the
     little sweet-stuff shop where ha'pennyworths of “bulls'-eyes” were sold to young children by a
     girl who had once been a street-walker, and where the upstairs rooms were tenanted by two
     journeymen carpenters. It was an anomaly that could not last; but the very sharpness of the
     contrast gave it interest in her eyes; and while the novelty continued it was like a scene out
     of a play in which she was the heroine. So, at least, I judged her; and the more I think of the
     whole affair, the more sure I feel that I am right.
And then Joshua's handsome face and
      dignity of look and manner might count for something.
She (the lady) was truly good and helpful to Joshua all the time this fad of hers lasted; for
     that it was only a fad, without stability or roots, the sequel proved. She brought him clothes
     and money, and seemed ready to do all she could for him. He had only to tell her that he wanted
     such and such help, and she gave it, aye, like a princess!
What took place between them neither I nor any one can say. Joshua never opened his lips on
     the subject; and after that day, by tacit consent all round, the name of Lord and Lady X. was a
     dead letter among us. All I know is, that one day, when she had come down to our place as so
     often now, my lady, flushed, haughty, trembling too, but changed
      somehow, with a sad, disordered face instead of the
     half-sleepy sweetness usual to it, came downstairs—not this time holding Joshua's hand; he
     following her, pale and troubled-looking; that she passed through the little shop quickly and
     impatiently, with never a glance towards Mary or me; that at the door she turned round, and
     said sharp “You need not give yourself the trouble, Mr. Davidson, to come with me—I can find my
     way alone;” and this Joshua answered with more tenderness and humility of tone and manner than
     I have ever seen or heard in him before; “My lady, I must disobey you: I cannot let you go
     through the street alone.” And that he followed her out, bareheaded, but at a little distance
     from her—not beside her.
This was the last time we saw her; nor
      did Lord X. keep up any association with my friend. And I
     heard afterwards, quite accidentally, that he, had said soon after this, he really “could not
     countenance that man Davidson: he was too offensively radical in his opinions, and a presuming,
     fellow besides.”
But word came to us both that my lady had found out all about Mary, and that she had
     expressed herself insulted and revolted at Joshua's allowing her to enter a house kept by such
     a creature.
“It was all very well to be compassionate and helpful,” she had said; “but no amount of
     charity justified that man Davidson in his proceedings with such a woman. Or, if he chose to
     associate with her himself, he ought to have warned her (her ladyship), that she
     should not have made the mistake
      take of speaking to her as to a proper person.”
So this first and last attempt at aristocratic co-operation fell to the ground; and Society
     peremptorily refused to endorse a man who had set himself to live the life after Christ.
If Joshua was sorry for the loss he had so mysteriously sustained, poor Mary was not. All
     during the lady's visits she had drooped and pined, till I thought she was in a bad way, and
     going to be worse. Ah! this was a bitter time to me, for I loved her like my own; and I loved
     Joshua and his work and his life better than my own life; and I was perplexed, and in a manner
     torn to pieces, among so many feelings. But she revived after the day when the lady passed
     through the shop with her sad, proud, disordered
      face, and when Joshua came back from seeing her to her
     carriage, like a man who has had a blow and is still dazed by it. She waited on him after this,
     more assiduously than ever. She seemed to live only to please him. The plate was the very
     perfection of cleanliness. Even my lady's palace could not have been more wholesome or more
     pure. The squalor of the shell, so to speak, and the poverty of the inside, was concealed or
     made to be forgotten by the exquisite neatness and cleanliness with which it was all kept; and
     when Joshua's countenance came back again, as it did after awhile, to its usual sweet serenity,
     Mary's also came to its peace, and the cloud that had hung over it like a distemper passed
     away.
“It will not do, John!” he said to me one
      day, some time after: “for the aristocracy to come down to
     the poor is a mistake. They are different creatures altogether, with different laws of honour
     and morality among themselves from what we know anything about. And the gulf is too wide to be
     bridged over by just one here, and another there, coming like the old Israelitish spies among
     us, to see the nakedness of the land. They do a little good for the time, but it is good that
     bears no blessing with it, and is not lasting. We must work up by ourselves into a state nearer
     to them in material good; but not,” he added, as if by an after-thought, “in looseness of
     principle. That, however, has come only from idleness; and if great people had imperative
     duties and the absolute need of exertion, we should hear of fewer divorce scandals, fewer turf catastrophes
      trophes, and the like, than we do now. However, that is not
     our affair. We are here to work on our own account, not to judge of others.”
“It is an old saying, Joshua, but a true one, ‘extremes meet,’” said I. “The very poor have
     no taste for refined pleasure, and indeed no power of indulging it if they had; and the very
     rich, sated with all that is given to them by their position, devise new excitements of an
     ignoble kind. I suppose that is something like it?”
“I suppose so,” he answered. “At all events, there can be no such thing as levelling down. It
     would be no righteousness to bring the rich, the refined, the well educated down to the level
     of the poor; but to raise up the masses, and to impose on the upper classes positive duties,
     this is the only way
      in which the difference between high and low can be
     lessened. And if this can be can free of national revolt and bloodshed, it will be a godlike
     work, and the blessed solution of the greatest difficulty the world has seen yet. It cannot be
     a good thing that some men have to work till all the strength of intellect is worked out of
     them, while others are lapped in such idleness that all theirs is either bemused and stagnated,
     or turned to evil issues for want of being wholesomely used. Come how it may, it has to
     come—this more equal distribution of the better things of life. I do not mean that the duchess
     will have to share her velvet cushions with the seamstress; but it has to be that, either by
     education or improved machinery, or both, there will not be the enormous difference there is
     now between the
      duchess and the seamstress. We have made a great parade
     lately of our sympathy with the North, on the ground of emancipation; but Society here in
     London holds slaves as arbitrarily and as cruelly is ever the Southern planters did ; and its
     vested interests, however demoralising, are as sacred to us as were the vested interests of the
     planter to him. I will never again try a fraternal union with a rich house. When the workingmen
     have their political and social rights, and have utilised their leisure to refine and elevate,
     to beautify and adorn their lives, then, when we are radically equal, we can meet as men and
     brothers. As we are now, we are experiments to some, mere temporary amusements to others,
     inferiors to all; and we pin our faith to a straw—hang our golden hopes on gossamer—
      when we look for vital co-operation from them.”
“I thought Joshua would find her out in time,” was Mary's comment. “I took stock of her from
     the first, and saw she was no good.”
