

CHAPTER V.
THESE then were the stages through which Joshua's mind had passed; first, literal
     acceptance of the Word, which as he went on he found to be against the laws of nature, and
     which therefore he relegated to the ignorance and exaggeration of the time in which it was
     written; next, the authority of the Church with its increment of symbolism and tradition, by
     which the Humanity of Jesus is resolved into a mystical Appearance of Divinity, and his Life
     made no longer an example for men to follow but a dogma to
      be worshipped under emblems; and now the frank acceptance of
     that Humanity alone, of the Man as a teacher, and of the Life as an example to be faithfully
     followed; more especially in its tenderness to sinners and its brotherhood with the poor and
     outcast. It was an abandonment of the dead mystical for the living real; but I doubt if any
     single sect among all the hundreds into which the Christianity of Jesus is shredded, would have
     recognised him as a brother Christian, or have believed that Christ would do aught else to him
     in the Last Day but deny him as a “thief and a robber.”
And now Joshua began to carry out his programme of life with more fixed lines. He disdained
     nothing that could advance him in knowledge and intellectual strength: and I have often heard
     him say that the
      great marvels of science, such as were shown us in the
     lectures to working men that we attended, stirred his soul to religious feeling just like the
     passion of prayer. And what he knew and valued for himself, that he was eager to impart to
     others. And it was this which made him begin his “night school,” where he got together all who
     would come, and tried to interest them in some of the more taking “fairy tales of science,” as
     well as to teach them a few homely truths in the way of cleanliness, health, good cooking, and
     the like; with interludes, so to speak, of lessons in morality; winding up with a few simple
     prayers and an attempt to make his hearers feel the Presence and the Power of God. All came to
     this meeting who would; thieves and drunkards, lost women and gutter-children—no matter who:
     there was a
      kindly welcome for all; no preaching at them for their sins;
     no expression of spiritual or moral superiority, but just the great loving equality which does
     the degraded so much good, and gives them, if only for a moment, a flash of natural
     self-respect and the glorious sense of inclusion and brotherhood. So that you see his life was
     not a meagre one; and while he blessed others so far as his power went, he grew daily riper in
     his own thoughts, and fuller of knowledge, and more clear as to what he meant.
We were very poor all this time: that of course we understood we must be. We were accustomed
     to it, and would have been more embarrassed with a lot of surplus money to spend, if we had had
     to spend it on ourselves, than we were to make the best of the little we
      possessed. But we did look to live like decent men, and not
     like savages. And we desired the same for our order. Yet how was that possible in the
     conditions in which we found ourselves? And we were only two out of thousands.
We lodged in a stifling court, Church-court, where every room was filled as if cubic inches
     were gold, as indeed they are to London house-owners, if human life is but dross. Children
     swarmed like rabbits in every house, and died like sheep with the rot. It was sore to see them,
     poor little, pale, stunted, half-naked creatures, playing about the foul uncleansed pavement of
     the court, from the reeking gutter of which they picked up apple-parings, potato-peelings,
     fish-heads, and the like, which I have seen them many a time wipe on their rags
      and eat. “The bronchitis” it was called that sent so many of
     them to the hospital and the graveyard, but the real word was poverty: poverty in everything;
     in food, in clothing, in care, in lodging. It made one's heart ache to see them—them and their
     parents too: the hopeless misery of their lives and the moral degradation following. And it
     made one think with deep amazement of what the wisdom of that nation could be which leaves its
     riches to rot in the gutter for want of looking after and tending; not to speak of the
     religion, which contents itself with building churches, and endowing foreign and colonial
     bishoprics, while its own immortal souls perish for lack of the Bread of Life squandered in
     baskets full on the altars to Baal! Where to find the issue? How to fill up the great chasm
     between the
      rich and the poor, the virtuous and the vicious, the learned
     and the ignorant, the civilised and the brutish?
“There is only one way out of it,” said a noted M.P. to Joshua one day, a great political
     economist and a strict Malthusian: “abstinence; if you wish to see the poor raised you must
     lighten the labour market by bringing fewer labourers into it. That is the first necessity.
     Leave off having children, live frugally, and put by money, and as many of you can,
     emigrate.”
“Is this not omitting one important factor from your calculations, sir?” said Joshua.
“What do you mean?” asked Mr. —
“Merely the human nature there is in humanity,” said Joshua. “Do you think the poor have no
     instincts? Is not a wife
      or a husband, a home where there are little children,
     sometimes a day's pleasure, and the old family ties of father and mother and brothers and
     sisters—are not all these as dear to them as to the rich? Why should they be required to forego
     these that the rich not be called upon to share?”
“Would you destroy the existing order of society?” said the M.P. sternly.
“Destroy it? aye! root and branch, if need be! In no civilised community—not to speak of a
     Christian one, if Christianity meant anything—ought there to be such places as Belgrave-square
     and Church-court. Keep your Belgrave-square by all means, but let the Church-courts be made at
     least wholesome and decent.”
“You have the remedy in your own hands,” said the M.P. “So long as you
      will marry on nothing, spend all you get, and breed paupers,
     paupers you must remain, wallowing in filth and wretchedness. The whole question is as much a
     matter of exact science as any other mathematical problem; and you are to blame, Davidson, that
     you do not abandon your foolish rant about Christian charity and human rights, and apply
     yourself to the only way out of the difficulty—the science of Political Economy.”
Joshua smiled sadly. “Political Economy is not quite human enough for us, sir,” he said. “It
     rests too on the basis of these very existing conditions of society that I do not care for; I
     would rather see something more radical, going straight to the root of the evil.”
“You are an enthusiast,” said the M.P. coldly. “I tell you again, Political Economy
      does go to the root of the evil; and the only thing that
     does.”
“Then Christianity is wrong,” said Joshua.
And the M.P. was silent. He had never confessed himself on the subject of religion, and never
     would. Not his most intimate friends knew what he believed or what he did not believe. All that
     the world saw was that he went to church, made the orthodox bow at the Name in the Creed, and
     wrote books and pamphlets full of anti-Christian, hard-headed doctrines, without ever once
     alluding to religious dogma. When he was called an infidel by his foes he hit out savagely, and
     said, “Prove it.” And no man could: only every man felt that his whole teaching, from first to
     last, was absolutely devoid of all Christian feeling; that pity, charity, warmth, and love
      were as far from him as heaven is from the earth; and that he
     squared the accounts of humanity with the most sublime unconsciousness that such disturbing
     elements as passions or the sentiment of rights existed to upset his sums and prove his
     sociology for the present at least imperfect.
And the result of the conversation was, that Mr. —, the M.P., who is a worthy man, upright
     and honourable, but practically one-sided because so utterly undisturbed by weakness or
     passions of any kind, and therefore unable to allow for them in another, denounced Joshua as a
     mischievous agitator and an ignorant fanatic, and warned those of us whom he knew to beware of
     him. Yet Mr. — was as hearty as Joshua himself in his desire to see the regeneration of the
     working class: but as Joshua said, and I
      thought said well too; “He advocates our making ourselves so
     slender that we can slip through our bands and fetters, while I hold that we should make
     ourselves strong enough to force those who hold the fastenings to loosen them. We both mean the
     same thing in the end, liberty and social advancement; but we differ as to the means.”
Our court was one of just ordinary moral character, neither strictly respectable nor the
     reverse. We had all sorts; from the man who would harbour a pal in trouble and stow away swag
     not honestly come by till the police scent grew cold, to the decent workman doing his best to
     be respectable, and to keep his girls pure and his boys honest; from the hard working-woman
     slaving night and day to make her two poor ends meet, to the idle slattern who was drunk
      half her time, and begged in the streets the other half; from
     the fond mother with her pretty pride in Sunday frocks or bits of coloured bows, to the
     husbandless wench whose half-starved children, as naked as crows and nearly as black, were
     knocked about as if they were street dogs, and on the highway to the gallows through neglect;
     from the virtuous spinster proud of her character and intolerant of looseness, to the poor
     flaunting girl who got her living in the streets, leastwise eked out her scanty wages from
     slopwork and the like by prostitution, more or less avowed.
One of these girls lived just opposite to us. Her name was Mary Prinsep. He had seen her at a
     music-hall we went to by times: for Joshua was not one of those prudes who are afraid of appearances
      pearances, and as he wanted to learn the world on all sides
     he went to all sorts of places and talked to all sorts of people—to these poor girls, as well
     as to any one else, and just as he would to any one else; seeking to know the causes of things,
     and why they went on to the streets, and if they would keep out of them if they could, and so
     on.
Any one who knows anything about us working men as we are and not by fancy portraits, knows
     the profound contempt, and more, in which as a class we hold the professed prostitute, or the
     woman of our own homes who lets herself be seduced by a gentleman. A base child—nay, more than
     one, and by different fathers too—if by men of our own class is not so unpardonable an offence.
     We think it a pity, of course and
      we would rather not have it happen to our daughters and
     sisters; but we get over it; and the women not unfrequently marry, and marry well, when the
     thing has blown by a little. But the poor, painted, bedizened wreck of womanhood who goes about
     the streets at the West-end, and sells herself to club-gentlemen and the like, is of all things
     that of which we have the most abhorrence. I don't pretend to explain it, and very likely it is
     only a matter of class jealousy when all is said and done; but I mention it as a kind of
     introduction to what I have to say of Mary Prinsep. I want it to be seen that it was no
     indifferentism to her trade which actuated Joshua; but, on the contrary, that it was the large
     and generous humanity in him which made him able to accept even a streetwalker as his sister
     and his friend.

Mary was very young and very ignorant. She had been brought up any how, and had been
     neglected and untaught from the beginning. There was no romantic history attached to her. She
     was no “soiled dove” whose feathers had once been white and shining; she was the daughter of a
     dram-drinking charwoman, sent out to mind children when quite a child herself, brought up to no
     trade, and knowing nothing now but the streets and the music-halls. But she had so much to the
     good, that she did not drink—at least not much—they all drink some; and she had never been in
     trouble or locked up. She was merely one of the abandoned—abandoned by society from her birth,
     and left to sink or swim in the foul streams of the metropolis as she best could. She had been
     picked up by a gentleman a
      few years ago when she was about fifteen; and he had taught
     her a good deal both of refinement and womanly ways. She had been grateful to him at the time,
     but she scarcely loved him. He was older than herself; in fact, an old man comparatively;
     married, with grown-up daughters and sons, a churchwarden, and a fine Christian gentleman
     living out at Bayswater in the very odour of class respectability. But he had an eye for pretty
     girls; and he had placed Mary in a little house at Bow, where, as I said, she had learned some
     things that were useful to her, being a girl of great natural quickness, and, if she had had
     fair play, of refined taste and good disposition. In time he got tired of her. Such men always
     do: for what was there in an ignorant girl like to keep him when he had had enough of
      her beauty? So, making her a handsome present—oh! he behaved
     to her quite handsomely!—he parted with her, and Mary had to turn out into the streets with a
     ruined character and a taste for good living. She had learned however, during her two or three
     years of “protection,” to keep herself and her place tidy, and to do needlework after a
     fashion, but not sufficiently well to keep her. Twelve hours a day of slop-work would not feed,
     clothe, and lodge her; flower-selling would not; but her youth and good looks would. So she
     sold them, as all she had to sell; and got bread of the devil's baking because she could not
     get it any way else.
It was a bad life; and she felt it was. And it was a hard life too. Those who see these girls
     only in their show-hours, dressed in the height of the fashion and queening it
      at night-houses and the like, have no idea of the
     wretchedness of the reality for the poorer kind; for there are classes even here. No wonder
     they take to drink, poor souls, suffering as they do—merciful Heaven, how they do suffer! And
     how some of them loathe their lives as they go on, and go down, and wish they had died before
     they took up the trade! Not that I say for an instant they go moaning about in eternal agonies
     of remorse or horror—human nature does not live at such high pressure; but a lot of them do
     hate their business nevertheless, when the drink is not in them and their vanity is not
     flattered.
But—virtuous women will start at this—they look on themselves, like all the poor, as martyrs
     to society. They think that, as men and things are, they must be; that they
      make the virtuous wife, the chaste maiden, possible. In
     their blind way they are vaguely conscious that the root of this fine flower of western
     civilisation, the rich monogamous Christian home, is planted in the filth of prostitution, and
     that to them is owing the “self-restraint,” so much admired in gentlemen who do not marry until
     they can afford to have a family, and so often offered as an example to us working men who love
     honestly one of our own sort, and do not as a rule go among these girls. And the more
     thoughtful of them, conscious of their economic uses, resent the opprobrium dealt out to them,
     and pity themselves angrily as victims rather than criminals, the scapegoats not the polluters
     of society.
To be sure, they do not fret at the scorn of the great ladies whom they help to keep
      virtuous, for they have their compensations. Fine ladies
     think that because they would not brush skirts with a prostitute, therefore no one will, and
     that all life shows them the same aspect of repulsion and horror. It is nothing of the kind.
     Decent women of the poorer class, consort with them, if not cordially yet humanely; then they
     have friends of their own sort, and many of them; and we know that a multitude of evil doers
     makes the evil done seem light to each. The gentlemen who go with them are often kind and
     playful, and no more brutal than most men are to most woman outside the artificial restraints
     of society. Sometimes, of course, they are vile enough; but these are the men who would be
     brutal to their own lady-wives and daughters. So that the poor Girls, as they call themselves,
     are not
      quite shut out from all human sympathy like the lepers of
     old—though indeed the circle is terribly narrowed! And though many of them have fits of
     self-loathing and regret, others take matters more coolly, and look on their profession as a
     legitimate trade, as lawful as a publican's who sells the gin that robs a man's family of
     bread, and makes him perhaps a murderer as well as a madman.
Mary Prinsep was what the world calls lost—a bad girl—a castaway—but she might have been a
     saint for the natural virtue that was in her. I have reason to speak well of her, for to her we
     owe the life of Joshua.
Soon after we came to know her, Joshua fell ill in our wretched lodgings where we lived and
     did for ourselves. He did not like to go to the hospital, nor did I like it for
      him. We both had a strong feeling against accepting the
     charity of society; so I said he should not go, and that I would work harder for him and myself
     too. But by my harder work—overtime, and the like—I was obliged to leave him for twelve hours
     and more at a stretch; and Mary Prinsep, whose “friend” had just left her to go into a west-end
     “dress-house,” poor wench! came over and nursed him, and kept him alive.
She it was who made up the fire, cooked his broths and messes, gave him his medicine, washed
     his clothes, and kept him clean and comfortable. And when I came home from work, and found her
     there, with everything arranged so nicely and as only a woman can—Joshua's bed made and him
     settled for the night, and my own supper ready, and hot water for cleaning
      myself—for we had but one room between us—as one of the
     great family of the frail, the suffering, I could not feel anything like virtuous horror of
     her. She was our sister—our sister of sorrow, of poverty, of affliction.
Gladly would Joshua have lifted her out of her life into something purer and nobler. He was
     so poor himself with all he did and gave away, he had much ado to live on the leavings; and as
     for marrying, that was as unlikely as murder! So that he could neither put her into any way of
     business independently, nor give her a home that the world would not misjudge. We did what we
     could, however. I say we intentionally, as it makes the whole thing clear to those
     who are candid enough not to wilfully misunderstand. We helped her all we could, and she helped
     us. We worked for her
      food, while she gave us her time and did our chores. And so
     in this way we made it unnecessary for her to continue her sad trade.
This got us the name of associating with bad women; for it was said that we lived partly on
     her earnings; and made us to be shyly looked on by our shopmates. But Joshua's mind was set to
     do the thing that is right; and what men said against him, not understanding facts or motives,
     hurt him no more than that dogs should bark at shadows. That which is, not that which seems,
     nor what folks choose to say, was what he lived for; and Mary Prinsep was only a text and an
     occasion, like others.
And even when, one day, the men fairly hooted him down and hustled him into the street, and
     me along with him, because
      when he was chaffed savagely about “his girl” he answered
     them mildly enough; “Mates, did our great Master receive Mary Magdalene and all sinners, or did
     He not? And if He did—as you may find for yourselves—am I too pure to help
     them?”—He only said to me, wiping the mud from his torn coat; “You are not afraid, John? You'll
     go on the right way, whatever comes of it?”—and not a word even of impatience against those who
     had misused us, calling us “canters,” “white-livered hypocrites,” and worse words still. No, I
     was not afraid, I said. I would stand shoulder to shoulder with him through it all; and where
     he led, there would I follow, if we sunk up to our very necks in the slough of the world's
     reproach. And we were not far off.
