

CHAPTER XIII.
WE found times hard on our return. As for work, it was simply impossible to be had
     where we were known. If Joshua was shunned as a consorter with bad characters when he took
     vicious humanity by the hand, and sought to cleanse the foul and raise the degraded by the
     practical application of Christian precepts unsupported by sectarian organisation, what was he
     now, when besmirched with the Communistic doctrines of liberty, equality, and fraternity?
     Ordinary men thinking ordinary thoughts shrank from him in moral horror. He stood before them
      as the embodiment of murder and rapine, the representative
     of social destruction and the godless license of anarchy. He was a Communist: and that to most
     men and women of the day, means one wilfully and willingly guilty of every crime under
     heaven.
“They must be told the truth, John,” he said to me one day; “whether they will accept it or
     not rests with themselves. But the work has to be done, and I have to do it, let what will be
     the result.”
“It will be a bad one for you, Joshua,” I said.
“So be it, my son. Preaching the Gospel brought most of the apostles to a bad end—as the
     world counts endings; and I am only following in their steps. I have got my Gospel to preach:
     the same our Master
      taught, if we could but get the world to see it!”
But that was just what neither he nor any one else has yet got the world to do, and I doubt
     it will be long before they will.
Work at the bench being impossible, being indeed scarcely the thing he wanted at this moment,
     Joshua took up again the hungry trade of political lecturer to working men, and went about the
     country explaining the Communistic doctrines, and showing their apostolic origin. His position
     was this. He did not justify all the actions of all the men at the head of affairs during the
     short reign of the Commune in Paris; but he warmly defended the cardinal points of their creed,
     as the logical outcome of Christianity in politics. The abolition of priestly supremacy
      macy in a man's social and daily life; the rights of labour
     as equal with those of capital; the dignity of humanity, including the doctrine of human
     equality; fraternal care for the poor, and the obligation laid on the strong to help the weak;
     the merely experimental nature of society, whence follows the righteousness of radical changes
     which shall break down the strongholds of tyranny and injustice, and help on general
     amelioration; the iniquity of maintaining the vested rights of wrong; and the right of the
     people to self-government. These were the doctrines he preached; but which he failed to induce
     the world to accept. They called him—as he called himself—a Communist; and the name offended,
     so that they would not listen to any kind of statement.
“You burnt Paris,” said one. “You murdered
      dered innocent men,” said another. “You insulted God and
     religion,” said a third. A fourth—“You outraged morality, and lived in the most hideous
     licentiousness.” “You would take our hard-earned savings from us, and reduce all men to one
     level—the idle with the industrious, and the ignorant with the educated,” said a fifth. “You
     would rob the capitalist, and by so doing destroy the very labour you uphold,” said a
     sixth.
And when he answered—“You mistake; I give up the blunders of the Commune, and the wrong-doing
     of which some of its members were guilty, only suggesting that they did not do all that was
     said of them; as neither did the early Christians slaughter children for their Eucharist, nor
     indulge in gross sin in their love feasts, as the Jews
      said of them; but I maintain the doctrine. Let me set that
     clearly before you, and I will leave the rest to time and God”—as often as not they turned
     against him, and hounded him out of their towns.
“We want none of your French atheism here,” they said, when they were religiously
     inclined;—“None of your Red-republicanism” when they were conservative.
But where parties were anything like even enough to get him a handful of sympathizers, there
     was generally a fight; and then the magistrates ordered him out of the place, with insult from
     the bench; and in many towns they refused him permission to speak at all. The very name of the
     Commune is the red rag to English thought; and all reason is lost when it is the question of
     telling the truth about men who tried to get
      the working classes equal rights and recognition with the
     moneyed ones.
At last we came to a place called Lowbridge, where a friend of ours lived—a member of the
     International; and here Joshua announced himself to give a lecture on Communism, in the Town
     Hall. His programme stated the usual thing, that he, Joshua Davidson, would show how Christ and
     his apostles were Communists, and how they preached the same doctrines which the Commune of
     Paris strove to embody; allowing for the differences of method inherent to the differences of
     social arrangements that have grown up during a lapse of nearly two thousand years.
The evening came, and Joshua prepared to go to the meeting he had called; and I along with
     him. Our friend had warned
      him to expect an unfriendly audience; but Joshua was not a
     man to be daunted by a few stern faces; and I do not think I ever saw him so possessed with the
     spirit of what he had set out to teach as he was this evening. Yet also I noticed something in
     him that was not exactly like himself. Grave as he always was, to-night he was grave to
     sadness; a solemn kind of sadness; like a martyr going to his death, steadfast, testifying
     always, but—knowing that he was to die.
He shook hands with me at the side door cordially before going up, saying, “God bless you,
     John, you have been a true friend to me;” then smiled at me; and, the moment having come,
     stepped on to the platform.
In the first row, right in front of him, was the former clergyman of Trevalga; him
      we lads used to call behind his back, “Mr. Grand,” because
     of his pomposity and haughtiness. He had lately been given the rich living of Lowbridge, and
     one or two stately appointments connected with the Cathedral and such like. I do not know what
     they were exactly, but they had made him a man of supreme importance, not only in Lowbridge
     itself, but in all the neighbourhood round about.
I saw Joshua's face change as he caught the clergyman's eye. It did not change to cowardice,
     but to a kind of eager look, like a man taking hold of an enemy; and then it passed away into
     his usual abstracted unconsciousness of self, as he came quietly to the front and prepared to
     speak. But at the first word there broke out such a tumult as I had never heard in any public
      meeting, and I have been at a few rough and rowdy ones too.
     The yells, hisses, catcalls, whoopings were indescribable. It was impossible to be heard. I
     believe the roar of a lion would have been overpowered. Joshua stood there quiet and dignified
     as ever, looking straight in among them, waiting for the tumult to cease. It only ceased when
     Mr. Grand rose, and standing up on the chair on which he had been sitting, waved his hand for
     silence.
“Friends,” he said, “I am glad that by your honest English love of law and God, you have
     shown what you think of the poison this demagogue would have poured into your ears. I know that
     man well,” pointing to Joshua; “I have known him from a boy; and I can bear my testimony to the
     fact that he has been an ill-conditioned,
      presumptuous, insolent fellow from the first. I know that he
     has led an infamous life in London; and that he kept such a disorderly house the police were
     obliged to interfere; and he was imprisoned for the offence. Loose women, thieves, burglars—all
     the scum of the earth have been his chosen companions and, to crown all, he went over to Paris
     at that awful time of the Commune, when, if ever hell was let loose on earth it was then, and
     joined himself to that band of miscreants who disgraced the very name of humanity. And now he
     has the audacity to come before you, honest and sober men of Lowbridge, loving your queen and
     country, abiding by the laws, and fearing Good as I hope you all do. And what for?—to praise
     that pandemonium of vice and crime—the Paris Commune—and blasphemously to
      liken those fiends in human shape to our Lord and the holy
     apostles; to incite you to a rebellion as bloody as that; and more than all this—to pick your
     pockets of your honest wages, that he, an idle vagabond, who won't work, may wander about the
     country, sowing his poison everywhere, while living on the fat of the land. Give him your
     minds, my men; and let him understand that Lowbridge is not the place for a godless rascal like
     him at any time—and by no means the place for an atheist and a Communist!”
Then he got down, and the men cheered him as lustily as they had hissed Joshua.
I will do Mr. Grand the justice to say that I do not think he intended his words should have
     the effect they did have. Gentlefolks do not often incite to riot; and a clergyman does not
     like to be the wirepuller for a murder
      der. But, maddened by their own misconceptions to begin
     with, and excited still more by their parson's abuse and encouragement to violence as it were,
     the audience lost all self-control. A dozen men leaped on the platform, and in a moment I saw
     Joshua under their feet. It was in vain then for Mr. Grand to cry “Order”—for the two policemen
     at the doors to be sent for—for me to lay about me as hard as I was handled. The men had it all
     their own way. They were the representatives of law and order in their own minds, the champions
     of God and religion, and they regarded it as a sacred duty to take it out of this godless
     anarchist. Beaten, kicked, held back by a dozen or more, I could not help him. They beat me
     first; and then the police beat me, and knocked me about savagely with their truncheons
      cheons, because I struggled to get free, and to get to
     Joshua. He was lying on the ground, pale and senseless, with a stream of blood slowly flowing
     from his lips; while the men trampled on him and kicked him, and one, with a fearful oath,
     kicked him twice on the head. Suddenly a whisper ran round them, and they all drew a little way
     off; when, at a sign from one of them, the gas was turned down, and the place cleared as if by
     magic. When the lights were up again, and I went to lift him—he was dead.
I know no more—no more than this, that the man who had lived the life after Christ more
     exactly than any human being ever known to me, who had given himself to humanity and poured out
     his strength like water for the sacred cause, who had been loving, tolerant, pitiful to all—that
      man was killed by the Christian Party of Order; his memory
     denounced on the one hand as that of a blood-thirsty revolutionist who was justly punished for
     his crimes; on the other, as that of a presumptuous and heretical enthusiast who had insulted
     God and dishonoured the true faith. But the same things were said of the early Christians as
     have been said of him, of the Communists, and of all reformers of all times.
The world has ever disowned its Best when they came; and every truth has been planted in
     blood, and its first efforts sought to be checked by lies. So let them rest, our martyrs whom
     men do not yet know; as neither did they know eighteen hundred years ago the crucified
     Communist of Galilee—he who dwelt with lepers, made his
      friends of sinners, and preached against all the
     conventional respectabilities which society then held in honour.
The death of my friend has left me not only desolate, but uncertain. For I have come round to
     the old starting-point again: Is the Christian world all wrong, or is practical Christianity
     impossible? I see men simply and sincerely devoted to the cause of Humanity, and I hear the
     world's verdict on them. I hear others, earnest for the dogma of Christianity, rabid against
     its acted doctrines. They do not care to destroy the causes of misery by any change in social
     relations; they only attack the sinners for whose sin society is originally responsible. They
     maintain the unrighteous distinctions of caste as a
      religion; and they denounce as delusion, or impiety, the
     doctrine of universal brotherhood which Christ and His apostles preached and died for. I hear a
     great deal about faith, and the infidel being an accursed thing; but then I see the practical
     Christian, like Joshua, held accursed too. What does it all mean? Let us have something
     definite. If the doctrines of Political Economy are true, if the law of the struggle for
     existence and the survival of the fittest applies absolutely to human society as well as to
     plants and fishes, let us then be frank, and candidly admit that Christianity, in its help to
     the poor and weak and in its patience with the sinner, is a craze; and let us abolish the
     pretence of a faith which influences neither our political institutions nor our social
     arrangements; and
      which ought not to influence them. If Christ was right,
     modern Christianity is wrong; but if sociology is a scientific truth, then Jesus of Nazareth
     preached and practised not only in vain, but against unchangeable Law.
Like Joshua in early days, my heart burns within me and my mind is unpiloted and unanchored.
     I cannot, being a Christian, accept the inhumanity of political economy and the obliteration of
     the individual in averages; yet I cannot reconcile modern science with Christ. Everywhere I see
     the sifting of competition, and nowhere Christian protection of weakness; everywhere dogma
     adored, and nowhere Christ realised. And again I ask, Which is true—modern society in its class
     strife and consequent elimination of its weaker elements,
      or the brotherhood and communism taught by the Jewish
     carpenter of Nazareth? Who will answer me?—who will make the dark thing clear?
