
CHAPTER I.
Graham Vane had heard nothing for months from M. Renard, when one morning he received the
      letter I translate:
“MONSIEUR,—I am happy to inform you that I have at last obtained one piece of information
      which may lead to a more important discovery. When we parted after our fruitless research in
      Vienna, we had both concurred in the persuasion that, for some reason known only to the two
      ladies themselves, Madame Marigny and Madame Duval had exchanged names—that it was Madame
      Marigny who had deceased in the name of Madame Duval, and Madame Duval who had survived in
      that of Marigny.
“It was clear to me that the beau Monsieur who had visited the false Duval must have been
      cognisant of this exchange of name, and that, if his name and whereabouts could be
      ascertained, he, in all probability, would know what had become of the lady who is the object
      of our research; and after the lapse of so many years he would probably have very slight
      motive to preserve the concealment of facts which might, no doubt, have been convenient at the
      time. The lover of the soi-disant Mademoiselle Duval was by such accounts as we could gain a
      man of some rank—very possibly a married man; and the liaison, in short, was one of those
      which, while they last, necessitate precautions and secrecy.
“Therefore, dismissing all attempts at further trace of the missing lady, I resolved to
      return to Vienna as soon as the business that recalled me to Paris was concluded, and devote
      myself exclusively to the search after the amorous and mysterious Monsieur.
“I did not state this determination to you, because, possibly, I might be in error—or, if
      not in error, at least too sanguine in my expectations—and it is best to avoid disappointing
      an honourable client.
“One thing was clear, that, at the time of the soi-disant Duval’s decease, the beau Monsieur
      was at Vienna.
“It appeared also tolerably clear that when the lady friend of the deceased quitted Munich
      so privately, it was to Vienna she repaired, and from Vienna comes the letter demanding the
      certificates of Madame Duval’s death. Pardon me, if I remind you of all these circumstances no
      doubt fresh in your recollection. I repeat them in order to justify the conclusions to which
      they led me.
“I could not, however, get permission to absent myself from Paris for the time I might
      require till the end of last April. I had meanwhile sought all private means of ascertaining
      what Frenchmen of rank and station were in that capital in the autumn of 1849. Among the list
      of the very few such Messieurs I fixed upon one as the most likely to be the mysterious
      Achille—Achille was, indeed, his nom de bapteme.
“A man of intrigue—a bonnes fortunes—of lavish expenditure withal; very tenacious of his
      dignity, and avoiding any petty scandals by which it might be lowered; just the man who, in
      some passing affair of gallantry with a lady of doubtful repute, would never have signed his
      titular designation to a letter, and would have kept himself as much incognito as he could.
      But this man was dead—had been dead some years. He had not died at Vienna—never visited that
      capital for some years before his death. He was then, and had long been, the ami de la maison
      of one of those grandes dames of whose intimacy grands seigneurs are not ashamed. They parade
      there the bonnes fortunes they conceal elsewhere. Monsieur and the grande dame were at Baden
      when the former died. Now, Monsieur, a Don Juan of that stamp is pretty sure always to have a
      confidential Leporello. If I could find Leporello alive I might learn the secrets not to be
      extracted from a Don Juan defunct. I ascertained, in truth, both at Vienna, to which I first
      repaired in order to verify the renseignements I had obtained at Paris, and at Baden, to which
      I then bent my way, that this brilliant noble had a favourite valet who had lived with him
      from his youth—an Italian, who had contrived in the course of his service to lay by savings
      enough to set up a hotel somewhere in Italy, supposed to be Pisa. To Pisa I repaired, but the
      man had left some years; his hotel had not prospered—he had left in debt. No one could say
      what had become of him. At last, after a long and tedious research, I found him installed as
      manager of a small hotel at Genoa—a pleasant fellow enough; and after friendly intercourse
      with him (of course I lodged at his hotel), I easily led him to talk of his earlier life and
      adventures, and especially of his former master, of whose splendid career in the army of ‘La
      Belle Deesse’ he was not a little proud. It was not very easy to get him to the particular
      subject in question. In fact, the affair with the poor false Duval had been so brief and
      undistinguished an episode in his master’s life, that it was not without a strain of memory
      that he reached it.
“By little and little, however, in the course of two or three evenings, and by the aid of
      many flasks of Orviette or bottles of Lacrima (wines, Monsieur, that I do not commend to any
      one who desires to keep his stomach sound and his secrets safe), I gathered these
      particulars.
“Our Don Juan, since the loss of a wife in the first year of marriage, had rarely visited
      Paris where he had a domicile—his ancestral hotel there he had sold.
“But happening to visit that capital of Europe a few months before we come to our dates at
      Aix-la-Chapelle, he made acquaintance with Madame Marigny, a natural daughter of high-placed
      parents, by whom, of course, she had never been acknowledged, but who had contrived that she
      should receive a good education at a convent; and on leaving it also contrived that an old
      soldier of fortune—which means an officer without fortune—who had served in Algiers with some
      distinction, should offer her his hand, and add the modest dot they assigned her to his yet
      more modest income. They contrived also that she should understand the offer must be accepted.
      Thus Mademoiselle ‘Quelque Chose’ became Madame Marigny, and she, on her part, contrived that
      a year or so later she should be left a widow. After a marriage, of course the parents washed
      their hands of her—they had done their duty. At the time Don Juan made this lady’s
      acquaintance nothing could be said against her character; but the milliners and butchers had
      begun to imply that they would rather have her money than trust to her character. Don Juan
      fell in love with her, satisfied the immediate claims of milliner and butcher, and when they
      quitted Paris it was agreed that they should meet later at Aix-la-Chapelle. But when he
      resorted to that sultry and, to my mind, unalluring spa, he was surprised by a line from her
      saying that she had changed her name of Marigny for that of Duval.
“‘I recollect,’ said Leporello, ‘that two days afterwards my master said to me, ‘Caution and
      secrecy. Don’t mention my name at the house to which I may send you with any note for Madame
      Duval. I don’t announce my name when I call. La petite Marigny has exchanged her name for that
      of Louise Duval; and I find that there is a Louise Duval here, her friend, who is niece to a
      relation of my own, and a terrible relation to quarrel with—a dead shot and unrivalled
      swordsman—Victor de Mauleon. My master was brave enough, but he enjoyed life, and he did not
      think la petite Marigny worth being killed for.’
“Leporello remembered very little of what followed. All he did remember is that Don Juan,
      when at Vienna, said to him one morning, looking less gay than usual, ‘It is finished with ca
      petite Marigny-she is no more.’ Then he ordered his bath, wrote a note, and said with tears in
      his eyes, ‘Take this to Mademoiselle Celeste; not to be compared to la petite Marigny; but la
      petite Celeste is still alive.’ Ah, Monsieur! if only any man in France could be as proud of
      his ruler as that Italian was of my countrymen! Alas! we Frenchmen are all made to command—or
      at least we think ourselves so—and we are insulted by one who says to us, ‘Serve and obey.’
      Nowadays, in France, we find all Don Juans and no Leporellos.
“After strenuous exertions upon my part to recall to Leporello’s mind the important question
      whether he had ever seen the true Duval, passing under the name of Marigny—whether she had not
      presented herself to his master at Vienna or elsewhere—he rubbed his forehead, and drew from
      it these reminiscences.
“‘On the day that his Excellency,’—Leporello generally so styled his master—‘Excellency,’ as
      you are aware, is the title an Italian would give to Satan if taking his wages, told me that
      la petite Marigny was no more, he had received previously a lady veiled and mantled, whom I
      did not recognise as any one I had seen before, but I noticed her way of carrying
      herself—haughtily—her head thrown back; and I thought to myself, that lady is one of his
      grandes dames. She did call again two or three times, never announcing her name; then she did
      not reappear. She might be Madame Duval—I can’t say.’
“‘But did you never hear his Excellency speak of the real Duval after that time?’
“‘No—non mi ricordo—I don’t remember.’
“‘Nor of some living Madame Marigny, though the real one was dead?’
“‘Stop, I do recollect; not that he ever named such a person to me, but that I have posted
      letters for him to a Madame Marigny—oh, yes! even years after the said petite Marigny was
      dead; and once I did venture to say, ‘Pardon me, Eccellenza, but may I ask if that poor lady
      is really dead, since I have to prepay this letter to her?’”
“‘Oh,’ said he, ‘Madame Marigny! Of course the one you know is dead, but there are others of
      the same name; this lady is of my family. Indeed, her house, though noble in itself,
      recognises the representative of mine as its head, and I am too bon prince not to acknowledge
      and serve any one who branches out of my own tree.’”
“A day after this last conversation on the subject, Leporello said to me: ‘My friend, you
      certainly have some interest in ascertaining what became of the lady who took the name of
      Marigny (I state this frankly, Monsieur, to show how difficult even for one so prudent as I am
      to beat about a bush long but what you let people know the sort of bird you are in search
      of).
“‘Well,’ said I, ‘she does interest me. I knew something of that Victor de Mauleon, whom his
      Excellency did not wish to quarrel with; and it would be a kindly act to her relation if one
      could learn what became of Louise Duval.’
“‘I can put you on the way of learning all that his Excellency was likely to have known of
      her through correspondence. I have often heard him quote, with praise, a saying so clever that
      it might have been Italian, “Never write, never burn;” that is, never commit yourself by a
      letter—keep all letters that could put others in your power. All the letters he received were
      carefully kept and labelled. I sent them to his son in four large trunks. His son, no doubt,
      has them still.’
“Now, however, I have exhausted my budget. I arrived at Paris last night. I strongly advise
      you to come hither at once, if you still desire to prosecute your search.
“You, Monsieur, can do what I could not venture to do; you can ask the son of Don Juan if,
      amid the correspondence of his father, which he may have preserved, there be any signed
      Marigny or Duval—any, in short, which can throw light on this very obscure complication of
      circumstances. A grand seigneur would naturally be more complaisant to a man of your station
      than he would be to an agent of police. Don Juan’s son, inheriting his father’s title, is
      Monsieur le Marquis de Rochebriant; and permit me to add, that at this moment, as the journals
      doubtless inform you, all Paris resounds with the rumour of the coming war; and Monsieur de
      Rochebriant—who is, as I have ascertained, now in Paris—it may be difficult to find anywhere
      on earth a month or two hence.—I have the honour, with profound consideration, etc.,
      etc., RENARD.”
The day after the receipt of this letter Graham Vane was in Paris.
