
CHAPTER VI.
Graham had scarcely quitted Alain, and the young Marquis was about to saunter forth to his
      club, when Duplessis was announced.
These two men had naturally seen much of each other since Duplessis had returned from
      Bretagne and delivered Alain from the gripe of Louvier. Scarcely a day had passed but what
      Alain had been summoned to enter into the financier’s plans for the aggrandisement of the
      Rochebriant estates, and delicately made to feel that he had become a partner in speculations,
      which, thanks to the capital and the abilities Duplessis brought to bear, seemed likely to
      result in the ultimate freedom of his property from all burdens, and the restoration of his
      inheritance to a splendour correspondent with the dignity of his rank.
On the plea that his mornings were chiefly devoted to professional business, Duplessis
      arranged that these consultations should take place in the evenings. From those consultations
      Valerie was not banished; Duplessis took her into the council as a matter of course.
      “Valerie,” said the financier to Alain, “though so young, has a very clear head for business,
      and she is so interested in all that interests myself, that even where I do not take her
      opinion, I at least feel my own made livelier and brighter by her sympathy.”
So the girl was in the habit of taking her work or her book into the cabinet de travail, and
      never obtruding a suggestion unasked, still, when appealed to, speaking with a modest good
      sense which justified her father’s confidence and praise; and a propos of her book, she had
      taken Chateaubriand into peculiar favour. Alain had respectfully presented to her beautifully
      bound copies of Atala and Ls Genie du Christianisme; it is astonishing, indeed, how he had
      already contrived to regulate her tastes in literature. The charms of those quiet family
      evenings had stolen into the young Breton’s heart.
He yearned for none of the gayer reunions in which he had before sought for a pleasure that
      his nature had not found; for, amidst the amusements of Paris, Alain remained intensely
      Breton—viz., formed eminently for the simple joys of domestic life, associating the sacred
      hearthstone with the antique religion of his fathers; gathering round it all the images of
      pure and noble affections which the romance of a poetic temperament had evoked from the
      solitude which had surrounded a melancholy boyhood-an uncontaminated youth.
Duplessis entered abruptly, and with a countenance much disturbed from its wonted saturnine
      composure.
“Marquis, what is this I have just heard from the Duchesse de Tarascon? Can it be? You ask
      military service in this ill-omened war?—you?”
“My dear and best friend,” said Alain, very much startled, “I should have thought that you,
      of all men in the world, would have most approved of my request—you, so devoted an
      Imperialist—you, indignant that the representative of one of these families, which the First
      Napoleon so eagerly and so vainly courted, should ask for the grade of sous-lieutenant in the
      armies of Napoleon the Third—you, who of all men know how ruined are the fortunes of a
      Rochebriant—you, feel surprised that he clings to the noblest heritage his ancestors have left
      to him—their sword! I do not understand you.”
“Marquis,” said Duplessis, seating himself, and regarding Alain with a look in which were
      blended the sort of admiration and the sort of contempt with which a practical man of the
      world, who, having himself gone through certain credulous follies, has learned to despise the
      follies, but retains a reminiscence of sympathy with the fools they bewitch, “Marquis, pardon
      me; you talk finely, but you do not talk common sense. I should be extremely pleased if your
      Legitimist scruples had allowed you to solicit, or rather to accept, a civil appointment not
      unsuited to your rank, under the ablest sovereign, as a civilian, to whom France can look for
      rational liberty combined with established order. Such openings to a suitable career you have
      rejected; but who on earth could expect you, never trained to military service, to draw a
      sword hitherto sacred to the Bourbons, on behalf of a cause which the madness, I do not say of
      France but of Paris, has enforced on a sovereign against whom you would fight to-morrow if you
      had a chance of placing the descendant of Henry IV. on his throne.”
“I am not about to fight for any sovereign, but for my country against the foreigner.”
“An excellent answer if the foreigner had invaded your country; but it seems that your
      country is going to invade the foreigner—a very different thing. Chut! all this discussion is
      most painful to me. I feel for the Emperor a personal loyalty, and for the hazards he is about
      to encounter a prophetic dread, as an ancestor of yours might have felt for Francis I. could
      he have foreseen Pavia. Let us talk of ourselves and the effect the war should have upon our
      individual action. You are aware, of course, that, though M. Louvier has had notice of our
      intention to pay off his mortgage, that intention cannot be carried into effect for six
      months; if the money be not then forthcoming his hold on Rochebriant remains unshaken—the sum
      is large.”
“Alas! yes.”
“The war must greatly disturb the money-market, affect many speculative adventures and
      operations when at the very moment credit may be most needed. It is absolutely necessary that
      I should be daily at my post on the Bourse, and hourly watch the ebb and flow of events. Under
      these circumstances I had counted, permit me to count still, on your presence in Bretagne. We
      have already begun negotiations on a somewhat extensive scale, whether as regards the
      improvement of forests and orchards, or the plans for building allotments, as soon as the
      lands are free for disposal—for all these the eye of a master is required. I entreat you,
      then, to take up your residence at Rochebriant.”
“My dear friend, this is but a kindly and delicate mode of relieving me from the dangers of
      war. I have, as you must be conscious, no practical knowledge of business. Hebert can be
      implicitly trusted, and will carry out your views with a zeal equal to mine, and with
      infinitely more ability.”
“Marquis, pray neither to Hercules nor to Hebert; if you wish to get your own cart out of
      the ruts, put your own shoulder to the wheel.”
Alain coloured high, unaccustomed to be so bluntly addressed, but he replied with a kind of
      dignified meekness: “I shall ever remain grateful for what you have done, and wish to do for
      me. But, assuming that you suppose rightly, the estates of Rochebriant would, in your hands,
      become a profitable investment, and more than redeem the mortgage, and the sum you have paid
      Louvier on my account, let it pass to you irrespectively of me. I shall console myself in the
      knowledge that the old place will be restored, and those who honoured its old owners prosper
      in hands so strong, guided by a heart so generous.”
Duplessis was deeply affected by these simple words; they seized him on the tenderest side
      of his character—for his heart was generous, and no one, except his lost wife and his loving
      child, had ever before discovered it to be so. Has it ever happened to you, reader, to be
      appreciated on the one point of the good or the great that is in you—on which secretly you
      value yourself most—but for which nobody, not admitted into your heart of hearts, has given
      you credit? If that has happened to you, judge what Duplessis felt when the fittest
      representative of that divine chivalry which, if sometimes deficient in head, owes all that
      exalts it to riches of heart, spoke thus to the professional moneymaker, whose qualities of
      head were so acknowledged that a compliment to them would be a hollow impertinence, and whose
      qualities of heart had never yet received a compliment!
Duplessis started from his seat and embraced Alain, murmuring, “Listen to me, I love you—I
      never had a son—be mine—Rochebriant shall be my daughter’s dot.”
Alain returned the embrace, and then recoiling, said: “Father, your first desire must be
      honour for your son. You have guessed my secret—I have learned to love Valerie. Seeing her out
      in the world, she seemed like other girls, fair and commonplace—seeing her—at your house, I
      have said to myself, ‘There is the one girl fairer than all others in my eyes, and the one
      individual to whom all other girls are commonplace.’”
“Is that true?—is it?”
“True! does a gentilhomme ever lie? And out of that love for her has grown this immovable
      desire to be something worthy of her—something that may lift me from the vulgar platform of
      men who owe all to ancestors, nothing to themselves. Do you suppose for one moment that I,
      saved from ruin and penury by Valerie’s father, could be base enough to say to her, ‘In return
      be Madame la Marquise de Rochebriant’? Do you suppose that I, whom you would love and respect
      as son, could come to you and say: ‘I am oppressed by your favours—I am crippled with
      debts—give me your millions and we are quits.’ No, Duplessis! You, so well descended
      yourself—so superior as man amongst men that you would have won name and position had you been
      born the son of a shoeblack,—you would eternally despise the noble who, in days when all that
      we Bretons deem holy in noblesse are subjected to ridicule and contempt, should so vilely
      forget the only motto which the scutcheons of all gentilhommes have in common, ‘Noblesse
      oblige.’ War, with all its perils and all its grandeur,—war lifts on high the banners of
      France,—war, in which every ancestor of mine whom I care to recall aggrandised the name that
      descends to me. Let me then do as those before me have done; let me prove that I am worth
      something in myself, and then you and I are equals; and I can say with no humbled crest, ‘Your
      benefits are accepted:’ the man who has fought not ignobly for France may aspire to the hand
      of her daughter. Give me Valerie; as to her dot,—be it so, Rochebriant,—it will pass to her
      children.”
“Alain! Alain! my friend! my son!—but if you fall.”
“Valerie will give you a nobler son.”
Duplessis moved away, sighing heavily; but he said no more in deprecation of Alain’s martial
      resolves.
A Frenchman, however practical, however worldly, however philosophical he may be, who does
      not sympathise with the follies of honour—who does not concede indulgence to the hot blood of
      youth when he says, “My country is insulted and her banner is unfurled,” may certainly be a
      man of excellent common sense; but if such men had been in the majority, Gaul would never have
      been France—Gaul would have been a province of Germany.
And as Duplessis walked homeward—he the calmest and most far-seeing of all authorities on
      the Bourse—the man who, excepting only De Mauleon, most decidedly deemed the cause of the war
      a blunder, and most forebodingly anticipated its issues, caught the prevalent enthusiasm.
      Everywhere he was stopped by cordial hands, everywhere met by congratulating smiles. “How
      right you have been, Duplessis, when you have laughed at those who have said, ‘The Emperor is
      ill, decrepit, done up.’”
“Vive l’Empereur! at least we shall be face to face with those insolent Prussians!”
Before he arrived at his home, passing along the Boulevards, greeted by all the groups
      enjoying the cool night air before the cafes, Duplessis had caught the war epidemic.
Entering his hotel, he went at once to Valerie’s chamber. “Sleep well to-night, child; Alain
      has told me that he adores thee, and if he will go to the war, it is that he may lay his
      laurels at thy feet. Bless thee, my child, thou couldst not have made a nobler choice.”
Whether, after these words, Valerie slept well or not ‘tis not for me to say; but if she did
      sleep, I venture to guess that her dreams were rose-coloured.
