
CHAPTER VII.
When, a little before noon, Gustave was admitted by the servant into Isaura’s salon, its
      desolate condition, stripped of all its pretty feminine elegancies, struck him with a sense of
      discomfort to himself which superseded any more remorseful sentiment. The day was intensely
      cold: the single log on the hearth did not burn; there were only two or three chairs in the
      room; even the carpet, which had been of gaily coloured Aubusson, was gone. His teeth
      chattered; and he only replied by a dreary nod to the servant who informed him that Madame
      Venosta was gone out, and Mademoiselle had not yet quitted her own room.
If there be a thing which a true Parisian of Rameau’s stamp associates with love of woman,
      it is a certain sort of elegant surroundings, a pretty boudoir, a cheery hearth, an easy
      fauteuil. In the absence of such attributes, “fuyit retro Venus.” If the Englishman invented
      the word comfort, it is the Parisian who most thoroughly comprehends the thing. And he resents
      the loss of it in any house where he has been accustomed to look for it, as a personal wrong
      to his feelings.
Left for some minutes alone, Gustave occupied himself with kindling the log, and muttering,
      “Par tous les diables, quel chien de rhume je vais attraper?” He turned as he heard the rustle
      of a robe and a light slow step. Isaura stood before him. Her aspect startled him. He had come
      prepared to expect grave displeasure and a frigid reception. But the expression of Isaura’s
      face was more kindly, more gentle, more tender, than he had seen it since the day she had
      accepted his suit.
Knowing from his mother what his father had said to his prejudice, he thought within
      himself, “After all, the poor girl loves me better than I thought. She is sensible and
      enlightened; she cannot pretend to dictate an opinion to a man like me.”
He approached with a complacent self-assured mien, and took her hand, which she yielded to
      him quietly, leading her to one of the few remaining chairs, and seating himself beside
      her.
“Dear Isaura,” he said, talking rapidly all the while he performed this ceremony, “I need
      not assure you of my utter ignorance of the state to which the imbecility of our Government,
      and the cowardice, or rather the treachery, of our generals, has reduced you. I only heard of
      it late last night from my mother. I hasten to claim my right to share with you the humble
      resources which I have saved by the intellectual labours that have absorbed all such moments
      as my military drudgeries left to the talents which, even at such a moment, paralysing minds
      less energetic, have sustained me:”—and therewith he poured several pieces of gold and silver
      on the table beside her chair.
“Gustave,” then said Isaura, “I am well pleased that you thus prove that I was not mistaken
      when I thought and said that, despite all appearances, all errors, your heart was good. Oh, do
      but follow its true impulses, and—”
“Its impulses lead me ever to thy feet,” interrupted Gustave, with a fervour which sounded
      somewhat theatrical and hollow.
The girl smiled, not bitterly, not mockingly; but Gustave did not like the smile.
“Poor Gustave,” she said, with a melancholy pathos in her soft voice, “do you not understand
      that the time has come when such commonplace compliments ill suit our altered positions to
      each other? Nay, listen to me patiently; and let not my words in this last interview pain you
      to recall. If either of us be to blame in the engagement hastily contracted, it is I. Gustave,
      when you, exaggerating in your imagination the nature of your sentiments for me, said with
      such earnestness that on my consent to our union depended your health, your life, your career;
      that if I withheld that consent you were lost, and in despair would seek distraction from
      thought in all from which your friends, your mother, the duties imposed upon Genius for the
      good of Man to the ends of God, should withhold and save you—when you said all this, and I
      believed it, I felt as if Heaven commanded me not to desert the soul which appealed to me in
      the crisis of its struggle and peril. Gustave, I repent; I was to blame.”
“How to blame?”
“I overrated my power over your heart: I overrated still more, perhaps, my power over my
      own.”
“Ah, your own! I understand now. You did not love me?”
“I never said that I loved you in the sense in which you use the word. I told you that the
      love which you have described in your verse, and which,” she added, falteringly, with
      heightened colour and with hands tightly clasped, “I have conceived possible in my dreams, it
      was not mine to give. You declared you were satisfied with such affection as I could bestow.
      Hush! let me go on. You said that affection would increase, would become love, in proportion
      as I knew you more. It has not done so. Nay, it passed away; even before this time of trial
      and of grief, I became aware how different from the love you professed was the neglect which
      needs no excuse, for it did not pain me.”
“You are cruel indeed, Mademoiselle.”
“No, indeed, I am kind. I wish you to feel no pang at our parting. Truly I had resolved,
      when the siege terminated, and the time to speak frankly of our engagement came, to tell you
      that I shrank from the thought of a union between us; and that it was for the happiness of
      both that our promises should be mutually cancelled. The moment has come sooner than I
      thought. Even had I loved you, Gustave, as deeply as—as well as the beings of Romance love, I
      would not dare to wed one who calls upon mortals to deny God, demolish His altars, treat His
      worship as a crime. No; I would sooner die of a broken heart, that I might the sooner be one
      of those souls privileged to pray the Divine Intercessor for merciful light on those beloved
      and left dark on earth.”
“Isaura!” exclaimed Gustave, his mobile temperament impressed, not by the words of Isaura,
      but by the passionate earnestness with which they were uttered, and by the exquisite spiritual
      beauty which her face took from the combined sweetness and fervour of its devout
      expression,—“Isaura, I merit your censure, your sentence of condemnation; but do not ask me to
      give back your plighted troth. I have not the strength to do so. More than ever, more than
      when first pledged to me, I need the aid, the companionship, of my guardian angel. You were
      that to me once; abandon me not now. In these terrible times of revolution, excitable natures
      catch madness from each other. A writer in the heat of his passion says much that he does not
      mean to be literally taken, which in cooler moments he repents and retracts. Consider, too,
      the pressure of want, of hunger. It is the opinions that you so condemn which alone at this
      moment supply bread to the writer. But say you will yet pardon me,—yet give me trial if I
      offend no more—if I withdraw my aid to any attacks on your views, your religion—if I say, ‘Thy
      God shall be my God, and thy people shall be my people.’”
“Alas!” said Isaura, softly, “ask thyself if those be words which I can believe again.
      Hush!” she continued, checking his answer with a more kindling countenance and more
      impassioned voice. “Are they, after all, the words that man should address to woman? Is it on
      the strength of Woman that Man should rely? Is it to her that he should say, ‘Dictate my
      opinions on all that belongs to the Mind of man; change the doctrines that I have thoughtfully
      formed and honestly advocate; teach me how to act on earth, clear all my doubts as to my hopes
      of heaven’? No, Gustave; in this task man never should repose on woman. Thou are honest at
      this moment, my poor friend; but could I believe thee to-day, thou wouldst laugh tomorrow at
      what woman can be made to believe.”
Stung to the quick by the truth of Isaura’s accusation, Gustave exclaimed with vehemence:
      “All that thou sayest is false, and thou knowest it. The influence of woman on man for good or
      for evil defies reasoning. It does mould his deeds on earth; it does either make or mar all
      that future which lies between his life and his gravestone, and of whatsoever may lie beyond
      the grave. Give me up now, and thou art responsible for me, for all I do, it may be against
      all that thou deemest holy. Keep thy troth yet awhile, and test me. If I come to thee showing
      how I could have injured, and how for thy dear sake I have spared, nay, aided, all that thou
      dost believe and reverence, then wilt thou dare to say, ‘Go thy ways alone—I forsake
      thee!’”
Isaura turned aside her face, but she held out her hand—it was as cold as death. He knew
      that she had so far yielded, and his vanity exulted: he smiled in secret triumph as he pressed
      his kiss on that icy hand and was gone.
“This is duty—it must be duty,” said Isaura to herself. “But where is the buoyant delight
      that belongs to a duty achieved?—where? oh where?” And then she stole with drooping head and
      heavy step into her own room, fell on her knees, and prayed.
