
CHAPTER I.
The next day the guests at the Morleys’ had assembled when Vane entered. His apology for
      unpunctuality was cut short by the lively hostess. “Your pardon is granted without the
      humiliation of asking for it; we know that the characteristic of the English is always to be a
      little behindhand.”
She then proceeded to introduce him to the American Minister, to a distinguished American
      poet, with a countenance striking for mingled sweetness and power, and one or two other of her
      countrymen sojourning at Paris; and this ceremony over, dinner was announced, and she bade
      Graham offer his arm to Mademoiselle Cicogna.
“Have you ever visited the United States, Mademoiselle?” asked Vane, as they seated
      themselves at the table.
“No.”
“It is a voyage you are sure to make soon.”
“Why so?”
“Because report says you will create a great sensation at the very commencement of your
      career; and the New World is ever eager to welcome each celebrity that is achieved in the
      Old,—more especially that which belongs to your enchanting art.”
“True, sir,” said an American senator, solemnly striking into the conversation; “we are an
      appreciative people; and if that lady be as fine a singer as I am told, she might command any
      amount of dollars.”
Isaura coloured, and turning to Graham, asked him in a low voice if he were fond of
      music.
“I ought of course to say ‘yes,’” answered Graham, in the same tone; “but I doubt if that
      ‘yes’ would be an honest one. In some moods, music—if a kind of music I like—affects me very
      deeply; in other moods, not at all. And I cannot bear much at a time. A concert wearies me
      shamefully; even an opera always seems to me a great deal too long. But I ought to add that I
      am no judge of music; that music was never admitted into my education; and, between ourselves,
      I doubt if there be one Englishman in five hundred who would care for opera or concert if it
      were not the fashion to say he did. Does my frankness revolt you?”
“On the contrary, I sometimes doubt, especially of late, if I am fond of music myself.”
“Signorina,—pardon me,—it is impossible that you should not be. Genius can never be untrue
      to itself, and must love that in which it excels, that by which it communicates joy, and,” he
      added, with a half-suppressed sigh, “attains to glory.”
“Genius is a divine word, and not to be applied to a singer,” said Isaura, with a humility
      in which there was an earnest sadness.
Graham was touched and startled; but before he could answer, the American Minister appealed
      to him across the table, asking if he had quoted accurately a passage in a speech by Graham’s
      distinguished father, in regard to the share which England ought to take in the political
      affairs of Europe.
The conversation now became general, very political and very serious. Graham was drawn into
      it, and grew animated and eloquent.
Isaura listened to him with admiration. She was struck by what seemed to her a nobleness of
      sentiment which elevated his theme above the level of commonplace polemics. She was pleased to
      notice, in the attentive silence of his intelligent listeners, that they shared the effect
      produced on herself. In fact, Graham Vane was a born orator, and his studies had been those of
      a political thinker. In common talk he was but the accomplished man of the world, easy and
      frank and genial, with a touch of good-natured sarcasm; but when the subject started drew him
      upward to those heights in which politics become the science of humanity, he seemed a changed
      being. His cheek glowed, his eye brightened, his voice mellowed into richer tones, his
      language be came unconsciously adorned. In such moments there might scarcely be an audience,
      even differing from him in opinion, which would not have acknowledged his spell.
When the party adjourned to the salon, Isaura said softly to Graham, “I understand why you
      did not cultivate music; and I think, too, that I can now understand what effects the human
      voice can produce on human minds without recurring to the art of song.”
“Ah,” said Graham, with a pleased smile, “do not make me ashamed of my former rudeness by
      the revenge of compliment; and, above all, do not disparage your own art by supposing that any
      prose effect of voice in its utterance of mind can interpret that which music alone can
      express, even to listeners so uncultured as myself. Am I not told truly by musical composers,
      when I ask them to explain in words what they say in their music, that such explanation is
      impossible, that music has a language of its own untranslatable by words?”
“Yes,” said Isaura, with thoughtful brow but brightening eyes, “you are told truly. It was
      only the other day that I was pondering over that truth.”
“But what recesses of mind, of heart, of soul, this untranslatable language penetrates and
      brightens up! How incomplete the grand nature of man—though man the grandest—would be, if you
      struck out of his reason the comprehension of poetry, music, and religion! In each are reached
      and are sounded deeps in his reason otherwise concealed from himself. History, knowledge,
      science, stop at the point in which mystery begins. There they meet with the world of shadow.
      Not an inch of that world can they penetrate without the aid of poetry and religion, two
      necessities of intellectual man much more nearly allied than the votaries of the practical and
      the positive suppose. To the aid and elevation of both those necessities comes in music, and
      there has never existed a religion in the world which has not demanded music as its ally. If,
      as I said frankly, it is only in certain moods of my mind that I enjoy music, it is only
      because in certain moods of my mind I am capable of quitting the guidance of prosaic reason
      for the world of shadow; that I am so susceptible as at every hour, were my nature perfect, I
      should be to the mysterious influences of poetry and religion. Do you understand what I wish
      to express?”
“Yes, I do, and clearly.”
“Then, Signorina, you are forbidden to undervalue the gift of song. You must feel its power
      over the heart, when you enter the opera-house; over the soul, when you kneel in a
      cathedral.”
“Oh,” cried Isaura, with enthusiasm, a rich glow mantling over her lovely face, “how I thank
      you! Is it you who say you do not love music? How much better you understand it than I did
      till this moment!”
Here Mrs. Morley, joined by the American poet, came to the corner in which the Englishman
      and the singer had niched themselves. The poet began to talk, the other guests gathered round,
      and every one listened reverentially till the party broke up. Colonel Morley handed Isaura to
      her carriage; the she-mountebank again fell to the lot of Graham.
“Signor,” said she, as he respectfully placed her shawl round her scarlet-and-gilt jacket,
      “are we so far from Paris that you cannot spare the time to call? My child does not sing in
      public, but at home you can hear her. It is not every woman’s voice that is sweetest at
      home.”
Graham bowed, and said he would call on the morrow. Isaura mused in silent delight over the
      words which had so extolled the art of the singer. Alas, poor child! she could not guess that
      in those words, reconciling her to the profession of the stage, the speaker was pleading
      against his own heart.
There was in Graham’s nature, as I think it commonly is in that of most true orators, a
      wonderful degree of intellectual conscience which impelled him to acknowledge the benignant
      influences of song, and to set before the young singer the noblest incentives to the
      profession to which he deemed her assuredly destined; but in so doing he must have felt that
      he was widening the gulf between her life and his own. Perhaps he wished to widen it in
      proportion as he dreaded to listen to any voice in his heart which asked if the gulf might not
      be overleapt.
