
CHAPTER II.
On leaving De Mauleon and regaining his coupe, Rameau felt at once bewildered and humbled,
      for he was not prepared for the tone of careless superiority which the Vicomte assumed over
      him. He had expected to be much complimented, and he comprehended vaguely that he had been
      somewhat snubbed. He was not only irritated—he was bewildered; for De Mauleon’s political
      disquisitions did not leave any clear or definite idea on his mind as to the principles which
      as editor of the Sens Commun he was to see adequately represented and carried out. In truth,
      Rameau was one of those numerous Parisian politicians who have read little and reflected less
      on the government of men and States. Envy is said by a great French writer to be the vice of
      Democracies. Envy certainly had made Rameau a democrat. He could talk and write glibly enough
      upon the themes of equality and fraternity, and was so far an ultra-democrat that he thought
      moderation the sign of a mediocre understanding.
De Mauleon’s talk, therefore, terribly perplexed him. It was unlike anything he had heard
      before. Its revolutionary professions, accompanied with so much scorn for the multitude, and
      the things the multitude desired, were Greek to him. He was not shocked by the cynicism which
      placed wisdom in using the passions of mankind as tools for the interests of an individual;
      but he did not understand the frankness of its avowal.
Nevertheless the man had dominated over and subdued him. He recognized the power of his
      contributor without clearly analysing its nature—a power made up of large experience of life,
      of cold examination of doctrines that heated others—of patrician calm—of intellectual sneer—of
      collected confidence in self.
Besides, Rameau felt, with a nervous misgiving, that in this man, who so boldly proclaimed
      his contempt for the instruments he used, he had found a master. De Mauleon, then, was sole
      proprietor of the journal from which Rameau drew his resources; might at any time dismiss him;
      might at any time involve the journal in penalties which, even if Rameau could escape in his
      official capacity as editor, still might stop the Sens Commun, and with it Rameau’s luxurious
      subsistence.
Altogether the visit to De Mauleon had been anything but a pleasant one. He sought, as the
      carriage rolled on, to turn his thoughts to more agreeable subjects, and the image of Isaura
      rose before him. To do him justice he had learned to love this girl as well as his nature
      would permit: he loved her with the whole strength of his imagination, and though his heart
      was somewhat cold, his imagination was very ardent. He loved her also with the whole strength
      of his vanity, and vanity was even a more preponderant organ of his system than imagination.
      To carry off as his prize one who had already achieved celebrity, whose beauty and fascination
      of manner were yet more acknowledged than her genius, would certainly be a glorious
      triumph.
Every Parisian of Rameau’s stamp looks forward in marriage to a brilliant salon. What salon
      more brilliant than that which he and Isaura united could command? He had long conquered his
      early impulse of envy at Isaura’s success,—in fact that success had become associated with his
      own, and had contributed greatly to his enrichment. So that to other motives of love he might
      add the prudential one of interest. Rameau well knew that his own vein of composition, however
      lauded by the cliques, and however unrivalled in his own eyes, was not one that brings much
      profit in the market. He compared himself to those poets who are too far in advance of their
      time to be quite as sure of bread and cheese as they are of immortal fame.
But he regarded Isaura’s genius as of a lower order, and a thing in itself very marketable.
      Marry her, and the bread and cheese were so certain that he might elaborate as slowly as he
      pleased the verses destined to immortal fame. Then he should be independent of inferior
      creatures like Victor de Mauleon. But while Rameau convinced himself that he was passionately
      in love with Isaura, he could not satisfy himself that she was in love with him.
Though during the past year they had seen each other constantly, and their literary
      occupations had produced many sympathies between them—though he had intimated that many of his
      most eloquent love-poems were inspired by her—though he had asserted in prose, very pretty
      prose too, that she was all that youthful poets dream of,—yet she had hitherto treated such
      declarations with a playful laugh, accepting them as elegant compliments inspired by Parisian
      gallantry; and he felt an angry and sore foreboding that if he were to insist too seriously on
      the earnestness of their import and ask her plainly to be his wife, her refusal would be
      certain, and his visits to her house might be interdicted.
Still Isaura was unmarried, still she had refused offers of marriage from men higher placed
      than himself,—still he divined no one whom she could prefer. And as he now leaned back in his
      coupe he muttered to himself, “Oh, if I could but get rid of that little demon Julie, I would
      devote myself so completely to winning Isaura’s heart that I must succeed!—but how to get rid
      of Julie? She so adores me, and is so headstrong! She is capable of going to Isaura—showing my
      letters—making such a scene!”
Here he checked the carriage at a cafe on the Boulevard—descended, imbibed two glasses of
      absinthe,—and then feeling much emboldened, remounted his coupe and directed the driver to
      Isaura’s apartment.
