
CHAPTER XVI
It was a very tedious journey, and it took the whole day to accomplish a distance which a
      rapid express train now can achieve in an hour. The coach carried six inside passengers, and
      they had to dine on the road. All the passengers were strangers to Mr. Ferrars, and he was by
      them unknown; one of them purchased, though with difficulty, a second edition of the “Times”
      as they approached London, and favoured his fellow-travellers with the news of the change of
      ministry. There was much excitement, and the purchaser of the paper gave it as his opinion,
      “that it was an intrigue of the Court and the Tories, and would never do.” Another modestly
      intimated that he thought there was a decided reaction. A third announced that England would
      never submit to be governed by O’Connell.
As the gloom of evening descended, Mr. Ferrars felt depressed. Though his life at Hurstley
      had been pensive and melancholy, he felt now the charm and the want of that sweet domestic
      distraction which had often prevented his mind from over-brooding, and had softened life by
      sympathy in little things. Nor was it without emotion that he found himself again in London,
      that proud city where once he had himself been so proud. The streets were lighted, and seemed
      swarming with an infinite population, and the coach finally stopped at a great inn in the
      Strand, where Mr. Ferrars thought it prudent to secure accommodation for the night. It was too
      late to look after the Rodneys, but in deference to the strict injunction of Mrs. Ferrars, he
      paid them a visit next morning on his way to his political chief.
In the days of the great modistes, when an English lady might absolutely be dressed in
      London, the most celebrated mantua-maker in that city was Madame Euphrosyne. She was as
      fascinating as she was fashionable. She was so graceful, her manners were so pretty, so
      natural, and so insinuating! She took so lively an interest in her clients—her very heart was
      in their good looks. She was a great favourite of Mrs. Ferrars, and that lady of Madame
      Euphrosyne. She assured Mrs. Ferrars that she was prouder of dressing Mrs. Ferrars than all
      the other fine ladies in London together, and Mrs. Ferrars believed her. Unfortunately, while
      in the way of making a large fortune, Madame Euphrosyne, who was romantic, fell in love with,
      and married, a very handsome and worthless husband, whose good looks had obtained for him a
      position in the company of Drury Lane Theatre, then a place of refined resort, which his
      abilities did not justify. After pillaging and plundering his wife for many years, he finally
      involved her in such engagements, that she had to take refuge in the Bankruptcy Court. Her
      business was ruined, and her spirit was broken, and she died shortly after of adversity and
      chagrin. Her daughter Sylvia was then eighteen, and had inherited with the grace of her mother
      the beauty of her less reputable parent. Her figure was slight and undulating, and she was
      always exquisitely dressed. A brilliant complexion set off to advantage her delicate features,
      which, though serene, were not devoid of a certain expression of archness. Her white hands
      were delicate, her light eyes inclined to merriment, and her nose quite a gem, though a little
      turned up.
After their ruin, her profligate father told her that her face was her fortune, and that she
      must provide for herself, in which she would find no difficulty. But Sylvia, though she had
      never enjoyed the advantage of any training, moral or religious, had no bad impulses even if
      she had no good ones, was of a rather cold character, and extremely prudent. She recoiled from
      the life of riot, and disorder, and irregularity, in which she had unwittingly passed her
      days, and which had terminated so tragically, and she resolved to make an effort to secure for
      herself a different career. She had heard that Mrs. Ferrars was in want of an attendant, and
      she determined to apply for the post. As one of the chief customers of her mother, Sylvia had
      been in the frequent habit of waiting on that lady, with whom she had become a favourite. She
      was so pretty, and the only person who could fit Mrs. Ferrars. Her appeal, therefore, was not
      in vain; it was more than successful. Mrs. Ferrars was attracted by Sylvia. Mrs. Ferrars was
      magnificent, generous, and she liked to be a patroness and surrounded by favourites. She
      determined that Sylvia should not sink into a menial position; she adopted her as a humble
      friend, and one who every day became more regarded by her. Sylvia arranged her invitations to
      her receptions, a task which required finish and precision; sometimes wrote her notes. She
      spoke and wrote French too, and that was useful, was a musician, and had a pretty voice. Above
      all, she was a first-rate counsellor in costume; and so, looking also after Mrs. Ferrars’ dogs
      and birds, she became almost one of the family; dined with them often when they were alone,
      and was frequently Mrs. Ferrars’ companion in her carriage.
Sylvia, though not by nature impulsive, really adored her patroness. She governed her
      manners and she modelled her dress on that great original, and, next to Mrs. Ferrars, Sylvia
      in time became nearly the finest lady in London. There was, indeed, much in Mrs. Ferrars to
      captivate a person like Sylvia. Mrs. Ferrars was beautiful, fashionable, gorgeous, wonderfully
      expensive, and, where her taste was pleased, profusely generous. Her winning manner was not
      less irresistible because it was sometimes uncertain, and she had the art of being intimate
      without being familiar.
When the crash came, Sylvia was really broken-hearted, or believed she was, and implored
      that she might attend the deposed sovereigns into exile; but that was impossible, however
      anxious they might be as to the future of their favourite. Her destiny was sooner decided than
      they could have anticipated. There was a member of the household, or rather family, in Hill
      Street, who bore almost the same relation to Mr. Ferrars as Sylvia to his wife. This was Mr.
      Rodney, a remarkably good-looking person, by nature really a little resembling his principal,
      and completing the resemblance by consummate art. The courtiers of Alexander of Macedonia
      could not study their chief with more devotion, or more sedulously imitate his mien and
      carriage, than did Mr. Rodney that distinguished individual of whom he was the humble friend,
      and who he was convinced was destined to be Prime Minister of England. Mr. Rodney was the son
      of the office-keeper of old Mr. Ferrars, and it was the ambition of the father that his son,
      for whom he had secured a sound education, should become a member of the civil service. It had
      become an apothegm in the Ferrars family that something must be done for Rodney, and whenever
      the apparent occasion failed, which was not unfrequent, old Mr. Ferrars used always to add,
      “Never mind; so long as I live, Rodney shall never want a home.” The object of all this
      kindness, however, was little distressed by their failures in his preferment. He had implicit
      faith in the career of his friend and master, and looked forward to the time when it might not
      be impossible that he himself might find a haven in a commissionership. Recently Mr. Ferrars
      had been able to confer on him a small post with duties not too engrossing, and which did not
      prevent his regular presence in Hill Street, where he made himself generally useful.
If there were anything confidential to be accomplished in their domestic life, everything
      might be trusted to his discretion and entire devotion. He supervised the establishment
      without injudiciously interfering with the house-steward, copied secret papers for Mr.
      Ferrars, and when that gentleman was out of office acted as his private secretary. Mr. Rodney
      was the most official person in the ministerial circle. He considered human nature only with
      reference to office. No one was so intimately acquainted with all the details of the lesser
      patronage as himself, and his hours of study were passed in the pages of the “Peerage” and in
      penetrating the mysteries of the “Royal Calendar.”
The events of 1832, therefore, to this gentleman were scarcely a less severe blow than to
      the Ferrars family itself. Indeed, like his chief, he looked upon himself as the victim of a
      revolution. Mr. Rodney had always been an admirer of Sylvia, but no more. He had accompanied
      her to the theatre, and had attended her to the park, but this was quite understood on both
      sides only to be gallantry; both, perhaps, in their prosperity, with respect to the serious
      step of life, had indulged in higher dreams. But the sympathy of sorrow is stronger than the
      sympathy of prosperity. In the darkness of their lives, each required comfort: he murmured
      some accents of tender solace, and Sylvia agreed to become Mrs. Rodney.
When they considered their position, the prospect was not free from anxiety. To marry and
      then separate is, where there is affection, trying. His income would secure them little more
      than a roof, but how to live under that roof was a mystery. For her to become a governess, and
      for him to become a secretary, and to meet only on an occasional Sunday, was a sorry lot. And
      yet both possessed accomplishments or acquirements which ought in some degree to be
      productive. Rodney had a friend, and he determined to consult him.
That friend was no common person; he was Mr. Vigo, by birth a Yorkshireman, and gifted with
      all the attributes, physical and intellectual, of that celebrated race. At present he was the
      most fashionable tailor in London, and one whom many persons consulted. Besides being
      consummate in his art, Mr. Vigo had the reputation of being a man of singularly good judgment.
      He was one who obtained influence over all with whom he came in contact, and as his business
      placed him in contact with various classes, but especially with the class socially most
      distinguished, his influence was great. The golden youth who repaired to his counters came
      there not merely to obtain raiment of the best material and the most perfect cut, but to see
      and talk with Mr. Vigo, and to ask his opinion on various points. There was a spacious room
      where, if they liked, they might smoke a cigar, and “Vigo’s cigars” were something which no
      one could rival. If they liked to take a glass of hock with their tobacco, there was a bottle
      ready from the cellars of Johannisberg. Mr. Vigo’s stable was almost as famous as its master;
      he drove the finest horses in London, and rode the best hunters in the Vale of Aylesbury. With
      all this, his manners were exactly what they should be. He was neither pretentious nor
      servile, but simple, and with becoming respect for others and for himself. He never took a
      liberty with any one, and such treatment, as is generally the case, was reciprocal.
Mr. Vigo was much attached to Mr. Rodney, and was proud of his intimate acquaintance with
      him. He wanted a friend not of his own order, for that would not increase or improve his
      ideas, but one conversant with the habits and feelings of a superior class, and yet he did not
      want a fine gentleman for an intimate, who would have been either an insolent patron or a
      designing parasite. Rodney had relations with the aristocracy, with the political world, and
      could feel the pulse of public life. His appearance was engaging, his manners gentle if not
      gentlemanlike, and he had a temper never disturbed. This is a quality highly appreciated by
      men of energy and fire, who may happen not to have a complete self-control.
When Rodney detailed to his friend the catastrophe that had occurred and all its sad
      consequences, Mr. Vigo heard him in silence, occasionally nodding his head in sympathy or
      approbation, or scrutinising a statement with his keen hazel eye. When his visitor had
      finished, he said—
“When there has been a crash, there is nothing like a change of scene. I propose that you
      and Mrs. Rodney should come and stay with me a week at my house at Barnes, and there a good
      many things may occur to us.”
And so, towards the end of the week, when the Rodneys had exhausted their whole programme of
      projects, against every one of which there seemed some invincible objection, their host said,
      “You know I rather speculate in houses. I bought one last year in Warwick Street. It is a
      large roomy house in a quiet situation, though in a bustling quarter, just where members of
      parliament would like to lodge. I have put it in thorough repair. What I propose is that you
      should live there, let the first and second floors—they are equally good—and live on the
      ground floor yourselves, which is amply convenient. We will not talk about rent till the year
      is over and we see how it answers. The house is unfurnished, but that is nothing. I will
      introduce you to a friend of mine who will furnish it for you solidly and handsomely, you
      paying a percentage on the amount expended. He will want a guarantee, but of course I will be
      that. It is an experiment, but try it. Try it for a year; at any rate you will be a
      householder, and you will have the opportunity of thinking of something else.”
Hitherto the Rodneys had been successful in their enterprise, and the soundness of Mr.
      Vigo’s advice had been proved. Their house was full, and of the best tenants. Their first
      floor was taken by a distinguished M.P., a county member of repute whom Mr. Rodney had known
      before the “revolution,” and who was so pleased with his quarters, and the comfort and
      refinement of all about him, that to ensure their constant enjoyment he became a yearly
      tenant. Their second floor, which was nearly as good as their first, was inhabited by a young
      gentleman of fashion, who took them originally only by the week, and who was always going to
      give them up, but never did. The weekly lodger went to Paris, and he went to German baths, and
      he went to country houses, and he was frequently a long time away, but he never gave up his
      lodgings. When therefore Mr. Ferrars called in Warwick Street, the truth is the house was full
      and there was no vacant room for him. But this the Rodneys would not admit. Though they were
      worldly people, and it seemed impossible that anything more could be gained from the ruined
      house of Hurstley, they had, like many other people, a superstition, and their superstition
      was an adoration of the family of Ferrars. The sight of their former master, who, had it not
      been for the revolution, might have been Prime Minister of England, and the recollection of
      their former mistress and all her splendour, and all the rich dresses which she used to give
      so profusely to her dependent, quite overwhelmed them. Without consultation this sympathising
      couple leapt to the same conclusion. They assured Mr. Ferrars they could accommodate him, and
      that he should find everything prepared for him when he called again, and they resigned to
      him, without acknowledging it, their own commodious and well-furnished chamber, which Mrs.
      Rodney prepared for him with the utmost solicitude, arranging his writing-table and materials
      as he used to have them in Hill Street, and showing by a variety of modes she remembered all
      his ways.
