
CHAPTER XV
All the high expectations of December at Princedown were doomed to disappointment; they were
      a further illustration of Lord Roehampton’s saying, that there was no gambling like politics.
      The leader of the opposition came up to town, but he found nothing but difficulties, and a few
      days before Christmas he had resigned the proffered trust. The protectionist ministry were to
      remain in office, and to repeal the corn laws. The individual who was most baulked by this
      unexpected result was perhaps Lord Roehampton. He was a man who really cared for nothing but
      office and affairs, and being advanced in life, he naturally regretted a lost opportunity. But
      he never showed his annoyance. Always playful, and even taking refuge in a bantering spirit,
      the world seemed to go light with him when everything was dark and everybody despondent.
The discontent or indignation which the contemplated revolution in policy was calculated to
      excite in the Conservative party generally were to a certain degree neutralised for the moment
      by mysterious and confidential communications, circulated by Mr. Tadpole and the managers of
      the party, that the change was to be accompanied by “immense compensations.” As parliament was
      to meet as soon as convenient after Christmas, and the statement of the regenerated ministry
      was then to be made immediately, every one held his hand, as they all felt the blow must be
      more efficient when the scheme of the government was known.
The Montforts were obliged to go to their castle, a visit the sad necessity of which the
      formation of a new government, at one time, they had hoped might have prevented. The
      Roehamptons passed their Christmas with Mr. Sidney Wilton at Gaydene, where Endymion also and
      many of the opposition were guests. Waldershare took refuge with his friends the Beaumaris’,
      full of revenge and unceasing combinations. He took down St. Barbe with him, whose services in
      the session might be useful. There had been a little misunderstanding between these two
      eminent personages during the late season. St. Barbe was not satisfied with his position in
      the new journal which Waldershare had established. He affected to have been ill-treated and
      deceived, and this with a mysterious shake of the head which seemed to intimate state secrets
      that might hereafter be revealed. The fact is, St. Barbe’s political articles were so absurd
      that it was impossible to print them; but as his name stood high as a clever writer on matters
      with which he was acquainted, they permitted him, particularly as they were bound to pay him a
      high salary, to contribute essays on the social habits and opinions of the day, which he
      treated in a happy and taking manner. St. Barbe himself had such quick perception of
      peculiarities, so fine a power of observation, and so keen a sense of the absurd, that when he
      revealed in confidence the causes of his discontent, it was almost impossible to believe that
      he was entirely serious. It seems that he expected this connection with the journal in
      question to have been, to use his own phrase, “a closet affair,” and that he was habitually to
      have been introduced by the backstairs of the palace to the presence of Royalty to receive
      encouragement and inspiration. “I do not complain of the pay,” he added, “though I could get
      more by writing for Shuffle and Screw, but I expected a decoration. However, I shall probably
      stand for next parliament on the principles of the Mountain, so perhaps it is just as
      well.”
Parliament soon met, and that session began which will long be memorable. The “immense
      compensations” were nowhere. Waldershare, who had only waited for this, resigned his office as
      Under-Secretary of State. This was a bad example and a blow, but nothing compared to the
      resignation of his great office in the Household by the Earl of Beaumaris. This involved
      unhappily the withdrawal of Lady Beaumaris, under whose bright, inspiring roof the Tory party
      had long assembled, sanguine and bold. Other considerable peers followed the precedent of Lord
      Beaumaris, and withdrew their support from the ministry. Waldershare moved the amendment to
      the first reading of the obnoxious bill; but although defeated by a considerable majority, the
      majority was mainly formed by members of the opposition. Among these was Mr. Ferrars, who it
      was observed never opened his lips during the whole session.
This was not the case with Mr. Bertie Tremaine and the school of Pythagoras. The opportunity
      long waited for had at length arrived. There was a great parliamentary connection deserted by
      their leaders. This distinguished rank and file required officers. The cabinet of Mr. Bertie
      Tremaine was ready, and at their service. Mr. Bertie Tremaine seconded the amendment of
      Waldershare, and took the occasion of expounding the new philosophy, which seemed to combine
      the principles of Bentham with the practice of Lord Liverpool. “I offered to you this,” he
      said reproachfully to Endymion; “you might have been my secretary of state. Mr. Tremaine
      Bertie will now take it. He would rather have had an embassy, but he must make the
      sacrifice.”
The debates during the session were much carried on by the Pythagoreans, who never ceased
      chattering. They had men ready for every branch of the subject, and the debate was often
      closed by their chief in mystical sentences, which they cheered like awestruck zealots.
The great bill was carried, but the dark hour of retribution at length arrived. The
      ministry, though sanguine to the last of success, and not without cause, were completely and
      ignominiously defeated. The new government, long prepared, was at once formed. Lord Roehampton
      again became secretary of state, and he appointed Endymion to the post under him. “I shall not
      press you unfairly,” said Mr. Bertie Tremaine to Endymion, with encouraging condescension. “I
      wish my men for a season to comprehend what is a responsible opposition. I am sorry Hortensius
      is your solicitor-general, for I had intended him always for my chancellor.”
