
CHAPTER LII
Simon, Earl of Montfort, with whom Endymion was so unexpectedly going to dine, may be said
      to have been a minor in his cradle. Under ordinary circumstances, his inheritance would have
      been one of the most considerable in England. His castle in the north was one of the glories
      of the land, and becomingly crowned his vast domain. Under the old parliamentary system, he
      had the greatest number of nomination boroughs possessed by any Whig noble. The character and
      conduct of an individual so qualified were naturally much speculated on and finely scanned.
      Nothing very decided transpired about them in his boyhood, but certainly nothing adverse. He
      was good-looking and athletic, and was said to be generous and good-natured, and when he went
      to Harrow, he became popular. In his eighteenth year, while he was in correspondence with his
      guardians about going to Christ Church, he suddenly left his country without giving any one
      notice of his intentions, and entered into, and fulfilled, a vast scheme of adventurous
      travel. He visited countries then rarely reached, and some of which were almost unknown. His
      flag had floated in the Indian Ocean, and he had penetrated the dazzling mysteries of
      Brazilian forests. When he was of age, he returned, and communicated with his guardians, as if
      nothing remarkable had happened in his life. Lord Montfort had inherited a celebrated stud,
      which the family had maintained for more than a century, and the sporting world remarked with
      satisfaction that their present representative appeared to take much interest in it. He had an
      establishment at Newmarket, and his horses were entered for all the great races of the
      kingdom. He appeared also at Melton, and conducted the campaign in a style becoming such a
      hero. His hunters and his cooks were both first-rate. Although he affected to take little
      interest in politics, the events of the time forced him to consider them and to act. Lord Grey
      wanted to carry his Reform Bill, and the sacrifice of Lord Montfort’s numerous boroughs was a
      necessary ingredient in the spell. He was appealed to as the head of one of the greatest Whig
      houses, and he was offered a dukedom. He relinquished his boroughs without hesitation, but he
      preferred to remain with one of the oldest earldoms of England for his chief title. All
      honours, however, clustered about him, though he never sought them, and in the same year he
      tumbled into the Lord Lieutenancy of his county, unexpectedly vacant, and became the youngest
      Knight of the Garter.
Society was looking forward with the keenest interest to the impending season, when Lord
      Montfort would formally enter its spell-bound ranks, and multiform were the speculations on
      his destiny. He attended an early levee, in order that he might be presented—a needful
      ceremony which had not yet taken place—and then again quitted his country, and for years. He
      was heard of in every capital except his own. Wonderful exploits at St. Petersburg, and Paris,
      and Madrid, deeds of mark at Vienna, and eccentric adventures at Rome; but poor Melton, alas!
      expecting him to return every season, at last embalmed him, and his cooks, and his hunters,
      and his daring saddle, as a tradition,—jealous a little of Newmarket, whither, though absent,
      he was frequently transmitting foreign blood, and where his horses still ran, and were often
      victorious.
At last it would appear that the restless Lord Montfort had found his place, and that place
      was Paris. There he dwelt for years in Sybaritic seclusion. He built himself a palace, which
      he called a villa, and which was the most fanciful of structures, and full of every beautiful
      object which rare taste and boundless wealth could procure, from undoubted Raffaelles to
      jewelled toys. It was said that Lord Montfort saw no one; he certainly did not court or
      receive his own countrymen, and this perhaps gave rise to, or at least caused to be
      exaggerated, the tales that were rife of his profusion, and even his profligacy. But it was
      not true that he was entirely isolated. He lived much with the old families of France in their
      haughty faubourg, and was highly considered by them. It was truly a circle for which he was
      adapted. Lord Montfort was the only living Englishman who gave one an idea of the nobleman of
      the eighteenth century. He was totally devoid of the sense of responsibility, and he looked
      what he resembled. His manner, though simple and natural, was finished and refined, and, free
      from forbidding reserve, was yet characterised by an air of serious grace.
With the exception of the memorable year when he sacrificed his nomination boroughs to the
      cause for which Hampden died on the field and Sidney on the scaffold—that is to say, the Whig
      government of England—Lord Montfort had been absent for his country for ten years, and one
      day, in his statued garden at the Belvedere, he asked himself what he had gained by it. There
      was no subject, divine or human, in which he took the slightest interest. He entertained for
      human nature generally, and without any exception, the most cynical appreciation. He had a
      sincere and profound conviction, that no man or woman ever acted except from selfish and
      interested motives. Society was intolerable to him; that of his own sex and station wearisome
      beyond expression; their conversation consisted only of two subjects, horses and women, and he
      had long exhausted both. As for female society, if they were ladies, it was expected that, in
      some form or other, he should make love to them, and he had no sentiment. If he took refuge in
      the demi-monde, he encountered vulgarity, and that, to Lord Montfort, was
      insufferable. He had tried them in every capital, and vulgarity was the badge of all their
      tribe. He had attempted to read; a woman had told him to read French novels, but he found them
      only a clumsy representation of the life which, for years, he had practically been leading. An
      accident made him acquainted with Rabelais and Montaigne; and he had relished them, for he had
      a fine sense of humour. He might have pursued these studies, and perhaps have found in them a
      slight and occasional distraction, but a clever man he met at a guingette at Passy, whither he
      had gone to try to dissipate his weariness in disguise, had convinced him, that if there were
      a worthy human pursuit, an assumption which was doubtful, it was that of science, as it
      impressed upon man his utter insignificance.
No one could say Lord Montfort was a bad-hearted man, for he had no heart. He was
      good-natured, provided it brought him no inconvenience; and as for temper, his was never
      disturbed, but this not from sweetness of disposition, rather from a contemptuous fine taste,
      which assured him, that a gentleman should never be deprived of tranquillity in a world where
      nothing was of the slightest consequence.
The result of these reflections was, that he was utterly wearied with Belvedere and Paris,
      and as his mind was now rather upon science, he fancied he should like to return to a country
      where it flourished, and where he indulged in plans of erecting colossal telescopes, and of
      promoting inquiry into the origin of things. He thought that with science and with fishing,
      the only sport to which he still really clung, for he liked the lulling influence of running
      streams, and a pastime he could pursue in loneliness, existence might perhaps be endured.
Society was really surprised when they heard of the return of Lord Montfort to England. He
      came back in the autumn, so that there should be no season to encounter, and his flag was soon
      flying at his castle. There had been continuous attacks for years on the government for having
      made an absentee lord lieutenant of his country, and conferring the high distinction of the
      garter on so profligate a character. All this made his return more interesting and
      exciting.
A worthy nobleman of high rank and of the same county, who for the last five years
      everybody, shaking everybody’s head, had been saying ought to have been lord lieutenant, had a
      great county function in his immediate neighbourhood in the late autumn, and had invited a
      large party to assist him in its celebration. It seemed right also to invite the lord
      lieutenant, but no one expected that he would make his appearance. On the contrary, the
      invitation was accepted, and the sensation was great. What would he be like, and what would he
      do, and was he so very wicked as the county newspaper said? He came, this wicked man, with his
      graceful presence and his diamond star, and everybody’s heart palpitated with a due mixture of
      terror and admiration. The only exception to these feelings was the daughter of the house, the
      Lady Berengaria. She was then in her second season, but still unparagoned, for she was a
      fastidious, not to say disdainful lady. The highest had been at her feet, and sued in vain.
      She was a stirring spirit, with great ambition and a daring will; never content except in
      society, and influencing it—for which she was qualified by her grace and lively fancy, her
      ready though capricious sympathy, and her passion for admiration.
The function was successful, and the county full of enthusiasm for their lord lieutenant,
      whose manner quite cleared his character. The party did not break up, in fact the function was
      only an excuse for the party. There was sport of all kinds, and in the evenings a carnival—for
      Lady Berengaria required everybody about her to be gay and diverting—games and dances, and
      infinite frolic. Lord Montfort, who, to the surprise of every one, did not depart, spoke to
      her a little, and perhaps would not have spoken at all, had they not met in the hunting-field.
      Lady Berengaria was a first-rate horsewoman, and really in the saddle looked irresistible.
The night before the party, which had lasted a week, broke up, Lord Montfort came and sat by
      Lady Berengaria. He spoke about the run of the morning, and she replied in the same vein. “I
      have got a horse, Lady Berengaria, which I should like you to ride. Would you do so?”
“Certainly, and what sort of horse is it?”
“You shall see to-morrow. It is not far off. I like to have some horses always near,” and
      then he walked away.
It was a dark chestnut of matchless beauty. Lady Berengaria, who was of an emphatic nature,
      was loud in her admiration of its beauty and its hunting qualities.
“I agree with you,” said Lord Montfort, “that it will spoil you for any other horse, and
      therefore I shall ask permission to leave it here for your use.”
The party broke up, but, strange to say, Lord Montfort did not depart. It was a large
      family. Lady Berengaria had several sisters; her eldest brother was master of the hounds, and
      her younger brothers were asserting their rights as cadets, and killing their father’s
      pheasants. There was also a number of cousins, who were about the same age, and were always
      laughing, though it was never quite clear what it was about. An affectation of gaiety may be
      sometimes detected in youth.
As Lord Montfort always had the duty of ushering the lady of the house to dinner, he never
      had the opportunity of conversing with Lady Berengaria, even had he wished it; but it was not
      all clear that he did wish it, and it seemed that he talked as much to her sisters and the
      laughing cousins as to herself, but still he did not go away, which was most strange, and
      commenced to be embarrassing.
At last one evening, both her parents slumbering, one over the newspaper and the other over
      her work, and the rest of the party in a distant room playing at some new game amid occasional
      peals of laughter, Lord Montfort, who had been sitting for some time by Lady Berengaria’s
      side, and only asking now and then a question, though often a searching one, in order to
      secure her talking to him, rather abruptly said, “I wonder if anything would ever induce you
      to marry me?”
This was the most startling social event of the generation. Society immediately set
      a-wondering how it would turn out, and proved very clearly that it must turn out badly. Men
      who knew Montfort well at Paris looked knowing, and said they would give it six months.
But the lady was as remarkable a woman as the bridegroom was in his sex. Lady Berengaria was
      determined to be the Queen of Society, and had confidence in her unlimited influence over man.
      It is, however, rather difficult to work on the feelings of a man who has no heart. This she
      soon found out, and to her dismay, but she kept it a profound secret. By endless ingenuity on
      her part, affairs went on very well much longer than the world expected, and long enough to
      fulfil the object of Lady Berengaria’s life. Lord Montfort launched his wife well, and seemed
      even content to be occasionally her companion until she had mounted the social throne. He was
      proud of her as he would be of one of his beautiful horses; but when all the world had
      acknowledged the influence of Berengaria, he fell into one of his old moods, and broke to her
      that he could bear it no longer, and that he must retire from society. Lady Montfort looked
      distressed, but, resolved under no circumstances to be separated from her husband, whom she
      greatly admired, and to whom, had he wished it, she could have become even passionately
      attached, signified her readiness to share his solitude. But she then found out that this was
      not what he wanted. It was not only retirement from society, but retirement from Lady
      Montfort, that was indispensable. In short, at no time of his perverse career had Lord
      Montfort been more wilful.
During the last years of his residence in Paris, when he was shut up in his delicious
      Belvedere, he had complained much of the state of his health, and one of his principal
      pursuits was consulting the faculty on this interesting subject. The faculty were unanimous in
      their opinion that the disorder from which their patient was suffering was Ennui.
      This persistent opinion irritated him, and was one of the elements of his decision to leave
      the country. The unexpected distraction that followed his return to his native land had made
      him neglect or forget his sad indisposition, but it appears that it had now returned, and in
      an aggravated form. Unhappily the English physicians took much the same view of the case as
      their French brethren. They could find nothing organically wrong in the constitution or
      condition of Lord Montfort, and recommended occupation and society. At present he shrank with
      some disgust at the prospect of returning to France, and he had taken it into his head that
      the climate of Montfort did not agree with him. He was convinced that he must live in the
      south of England. One of the most beautiful and considerable estates in that favoured part of
      our country was virtually in the market, and Lord Montfort, at the cost of half a million,
      became the proprietor of Princedown. And here he announced that he should dwell and die.
This state of affairs was a bitter trial to the proudest woman in England, but Lady Montfort
      was also one of the most able. She resisted nothing, sympathised with all his projects, and
      watched her opportunity when she could extract from his unconscious good-nature some
      reasonable modification of them. And she ultimately succeeded in establishing a modus
       vivendi. He was to live and die at Princedown; that was settled; but if he ever came to
      town, to consult his physicians, for example, he was always to inhabit Montfort House, and if
      she occasionally required a whiff of southern air, she was to have her rooms always ready for
      her at Princedown. She would not interfere with him in the least; he need not even see her, if
      he were too unwell. Then as to the general principle of his life, it was quite clear that he
      was not interested in anything, and never would be interested in anything; but there was no
      reason that he should not be amused. This distinction between interest and amusement rather
      pleased, and seemed to satisfy Lord Montfort—but then it was difficult to amuse him. The only
      thing that ever amused him, he said, were his wife’s letters, and as he was the most selfish
      as well as the most polite of men, he requested her to write to him every day. Great
      personages, who are selfish and whimsical, are generally surrounded by parasites and buffoons,
      but this would not suit Lord Montfort; he sincerely detested flattery, and he wearied in
      eight-and-forty hours of the most successful mountebank in society. What he seemed inclined to
      was the society of men of science, of travellers in rare parts, and of clever artists; in
      short, of all persons who had what he called “idiosyncrasy.” Civil engineering was then
      beginning to attract general attention, and Lord Montfort liked the society of civil
      engineers; but what he liked most were self-formed men, and to learn the secret of their
      success, and how they made their fortune. After the first fit of Princedown was over, Lord
      Montfort found that it was impossible, even with all its fascination, to secure a constant, or
      sufficient, presence of civil engineers in such distant parts, and so he got into the habit of
      coming up to Montfort House, that he might find companions and be amused. Lady Montfort took
      great pains that he should not be disappointed, and catered for him with all the skill of an
      accomplished chef. Then, when the occasion served, she went down to Princedown
      herself with welcome guests—and so it turned out, that circumstances, which treated by an
      ordinary mind must have led to a social scandal, were so adroitly manipulated, that the world
      little apprehended the real and somewhat mortifying state of affairs. With the utmost license
      of ill-nature, they could not suppose that Lord and Lady Montfort, living under the same roof,
      might scarcely see each other for weeks, and that his communications with her, and indeed
      generally, were always made in writing.
Lady Monfort never could agree with her husband in the cardinal assumption of his
      philosophy. One of his reasons for never doing anything was, that there was nothing for him to
      attain. He had got everything. Here they at once separated in their conclusions. Lady Montfort
      maintained they had got nothing. “What,” she would say, “are rank and wealth to us? We were
      born to them. We want something that we were not born to. You reason like a parvenu. Of
      course, if you had created your rank and your riches, you might rest on your oars, and find
      excitement in the recollection of what you had achieved. A man of your position ought to
      govern the country, and it always was so in the old days. Your family were prime ministers;
      why not you, with as much talent, and much more knowledge?”
“You would make a very good prime minister, Berengaria.”
“Ah! you always jest, I am serious.”
“And so am I. If I ever am to work, I would sooner be a civil engineer than a prime
      minister.”
Nothing but the indomitable spirit of Lady Montfort could fight successfully against such
      obstacles to her schemes of power as were presented by the peculiar disposition of her lord.
      Her receptions every Saturday night during the season were the most important of social
      gatherings, but she held them alone. It was by consummate skill that she had prevailed upon
      her lord occasionally appearing at the preceding banquets, and when they were over, he flitted
      for an instant and disappeared. At first, he altogether refused, but then Lady Montfort would
      introduce Royalty, always kind, to condescend to express a wish to dine at Montfort House, and
      that was a gracious intimation it was impossible not to act upon, and then, as Lady Montfort
      would say, “I trust much to the periodical visits of that dear Queen of Mesopotamia. He must
      entertain her, for his father was her lover.”
In this wonderful mystification, by which Lord Montfort was made to appear as living in a
      society which he scarcely ever entered, his wife was a little assisted by his visits to
      Newmarket, which he even frequently attended. He never made a bet or a new acquaintance, but
      he seemed to like meeting men with whom he had been at school. There is certainly a magic in
      the memory of school-boy friendships; it softens the heart, and even affects the nervous
      system of those who have no hearts. Lord Montfort at Newmarket would ask half a dozen men who
      had been at school with him, and were now members of the Jockey Club, to be his guests, and
      the next day all over the heath, and after the heath, all over Mayfair and Belgravia, you
      heard only one speech, “I dined yesterday,” or “the other day,” as the case might be, “with
      Montfort; out and out the best dinner I ever had, and such an agreeable fellow; the wittiest,
      the most amusing, certainly the most charming fellow that ever lived; out and out! It is a
      pity he does not show a little more.” And society thought the same; they thought it a pity,
      and a great one, that this fascinating being of whom they rarely caught a glimpse, and who to
      them took the form of a wasted and unsympathising phantom, should not show a little more and
      delight them. But the most curious thing was, that however rapturous were his guests, the
      feelings of their host after they had left him, were by no means reciprocal. On the contrary,
      he would remark to himself, “Have I heard a single thing worth remembering? Not one.”
