
CHAPTER VI.

"Lieb' Liebchen, leg's Händchen auf's Herze mein;
Ach, hörst du wie's pochet in's Kämmerlein?
Da hauset ein Zimmermann schlimm und arg,
Der zimmert mir einen Todtensarg.
"Er hämmert und klopfet bei Tag und bei Nacht,
Er hat mich schon längst um den Schlaf gebracht;
Ach, sputet euch, Meister Zimmermann,
Damit ich balde schlafen kann."
In other climes, a sunset of suave sublimity usually means that it will be followed
      by a sunrise as nobly fair. But in our free isle this is not the case. Even the weather will
      submit to no tyranny, but follows its own wild and freakish will. You may close your eyes upon
      a distant steady heaven of molten copper and speckless blue; and open them
       upon a soaked-blanket sky, half an inch above your head.
During the many wakeful patches that vary the sameness of her night, Belinda has full time
      to repent of her evening's doings; but not once does it occur to her that the weather may
      possibly intervene to prohibit the excursion. Among all her half-sincere plans for evading the
      expedition, the alternative of a wet day has not once suggested itself; and when the morn
      comes, dim and sad, the poignancy of her disappointment at sight of the dripping bushes and
      filled flower-cups shows her how much of veracity there was in her projects of abstinence.
       Now she will have to endure the pang of renunciation, without having enjoyed the
      merit of self-conquest. And yet it is a lovely rain, not harshly driving, nor rudely strewing
      the earth with a ravin of torn-off petals; but gently stealing down from the cloud-roof
      overhead, softly thrusting itself between the blossom-lips, feeding the juicy leaves,
      healthful, wealthful, beneficent, yet execrated by two young
       eyes that are morosely watching it. It is execrated by two old ones also. The
      Professor tentatively throws out an idea as to the advisability of telegraphing to the
      Archæological Society his inability to preside over its deliberations.
"But you are not sugar or salt!" cries Belinda impatiently, as she stands, a comforter
      thrown over her arm, and a mackintosh extended to receive her husband's meagre person; "you
      will be in cabs and trains all day."
"It is not always easy to secure a cab at a moment's notice on a wet day!" replies he,
      demurring. "As I have often explained to you, it is upon trifles that the laws of health
      depend; there may be delay enough to allow of my getting my feet thoroughly wet—a circumstance
      amply sufficient to throw a chill upon a liver already predisposed."
"But will not you be putting the Society to great inconvenience? will not its members be
      very much disappointed?" asks she, reddening consciously as she speaks.

What is she saying? What does she care whether they are disappointed or not? To what depths
      of disingenuousness has she—truthful as she has been hitherto counted her life long—already
      descended? But it may clear—it may clear!
"I might obviate the difficulty by taking an extra pair of socks in my pocket to change at
      the Club," he says thoughtfully; and then her spirits rise, for he extends his arms, not to
      take a parting embrace, but to insert them in the waterproof-sleeves which she, with wifely
      alacrity, holds ready to receive them.
He is gone. That one main obstacle to her pleasure is at all events removed. If only it
      would clear! She is no longer half-sincere with herself. No longer does she feign a desire to
      extricate herself from the entanglement into which she has plunged, nor a gratitude to Mother
      Nature for having come to her aid. Without asking why she wishes it, she has
      concentrated all her being upon the one mastering desire to see that cloud-curtain raise its
       trailing corners, transpierced and put to flight by such a sun as
      yesterday's.
"It does not look in the least like lifting!" she says, in a tone which she in vain tries to
      make sound careless, to Sarah, as they enter the drawing-room after breakfast. "Do you think
      that there is any chance of its lifting?"
"Not the slightest!" replies Sarah placidly.
With that adaptability to circumstances which makes life to her one long feast, Miss
      Churchill has arranged herself for a wet day. A small fire—not unwelcome in the rain-chilled
      atmosphere—brightens the hearth; and to it she has—for to her nothing is sacred—pulled up the
      Professor's chair: that one of Mudie's novels which, by its large type, wide margins, and
      plenitude of titled names, seems to promise the least strain upon the intellect, in her
      hand.
"Who would have thought it yesterday?" says Mrs. Forth, in a tone of mournful irritation,
      totally unable to follow her
       philosophic sister's example, and fidgeting uneasily about the room.
"Who indeed?" rejoins Sarah equably.
There is something in the indifferent content of her voice that jars upon Belinda's mood.
      The dogs have taken their cue from Miss Churchill—Punch has got inside the fender as if it
      were winter; the cat lies lazily stretched just outside the parrot's cage; and Polly,
      exasperated by her air of calm security, is walking stealthily, head downwards, along the side
      of his cage, and when he has got, as he thinks, within reach of her, is stretching out first a
      vicious hooked nose, and then a long crooked grey hand, to make a grab at her whiskers.
Sarah laughs.
"You were so anxious for it yesterday," says Belinda, with an irrationally aggrieved
      accent.
"Was I?" answers Sarah, yawning. "I am not the least anxious for it now; I am thoroughly
      comfortable, thank God! Why do not you come near the fire? I have a hundred questions to ask
      you; we
       have the house all to ourselves—excuse" (parenthetically) "my reckoning that
      among our advantages—and I have scores of good things to tell you about Cannes and granny; you
      used to be fond of grannyana !"
"I am not cold," replies Belinda, avoiding compliance by seating herself where she can at
      once command the window, and evade her sister's eyes. "Tell them me here."
"Well, you must know," begins Sarah, prudently ignoring this ruse, and launching into her
      narrative, "that some Poles had the apartment above ours at the hotel, their salon was over
      granny's bedroom, and every night, at about ten o'clock, they began to dance sarabands, and
      cancans, and Highland schottisches, and the Lord knows what in it! You know how fond granny is
      of having her old head danced over when she is courting her beauty sleep."
She pauses to see whether her hearer is listening; it is obvious that she is not, as
       for a moment or two she makes no comment, and then, becoming aware of the
      silence, breaks into a factitious laugh. "Ha! ha!"
"What are you laughing at?" asks Sarah sharply.
"I had not come to the point yet."
The other stops, embarrassed.
"It—it was very good even so far as you had gone," she answers in confusion.
"The end was better still," replies Miss Churchill shortly, taking up her book again; "but
      you shall never hear it!"
"How ill-natured!" cries Mrs. Forth, advancing eagerly towards the hearth, roused into alarm
      at her own self-betrayal; "and I—I was so much interested in it, I should like you to begin it
      all over again."
But Sarah is inexorable. Presently Belinda desists from her importunities, and not daring to
      return to the window, also takes up a book, occasionally from behind its shelter throwing a
      desperate eye on the weather.

It is a hopeless wet day. Once or twice, indeed, there has been a tantalizing thinning of,
      and movement among, the vapours; but it has ended only in a more resolute, inflexible
      fastening upon the earth. Eleven —that hour of clearing—has come and gone, and brought no
      clearing with it. After all, she might as well have done her plain duty, and sent him away. In
      that case she would at least have had the throbs of an approving conscience to keep her up.
      And what, pray, has she now?
The forenoon is gone; luncheon is over; they are again in the drawing-room. The novel has
      long ago dropped from Sarah's fingers, and she has slidden into a warm, infantile slumber. The
      door-bell, loudly jangling, wakes her with a jump.
"It is those hateful boys!" she cries petulantly, starting up. "Am I never to have any peace
      from them? and I was in such a beautiful sleep!"
One glance at her sister's face—that sister who has obviously not shared her slumbers; whose
      watch has been at length
       rewarded, though by no brightening of the material sky—tells her who is among
      "those hateful boys." Perhaps this fact adds a new tinge of ill-humour to her tone, as she
      advances, childishly rubbing her drowsy eyes with her knuckles, to meet her admirers.
"You woke me!" she says, pouting. "I was in such a beautiful sleep!"
This speech is not calculated to reassure three timid young gentlemen, who have already been
      questioning the wisdom of their own procedure, and doubtfully discussing among themselves the
      probabilities as to the mood, whether of summer warmth or December ice, that they will find
      their hostess in. Upon Sarah, at least, they had counted to stand by them. But aid from an
      unexpected quarter comes to them.
"Never mind her!" says Belinda, with a young and radiant smile of welcome and re-assurance.
      "What business has she to be asleep? A wet day? Yes, it is a wet day; but what delicious warm
      rain! how
       much good it will do to the country! the farmers are crying out for rain!"
This is the way in which she now regards the lately-execrated downpour. Is he not
      here? and whether in sunny boat on flashing river, gathering fritillaries in the
      water-meadows, or in little rain-darkened early-English drawing-room, is not it now all one to
      her?
"I hope you will forgive our calling so early," says Bellairs, a little relieved, but still
      not very comfortable in his spirits; "we—we wanted to know what you thought about the
      river."
" About the river !" cries Sarah, still cross and sleepy, casting a sarcastic
      glance, first at the weather, and then at the young man; "are we frogs, or young ducks?"
He looks so silly, that Miss Churchill laughs, her good-humour at once restored.
"Now that you are here, you may as
       well stay," she says, in a thoroughly wide-awake voice; "may not they, Belinda?
      If we depend upon the charms of conversation, I shall be asleep again in ten minutes; why
      should not we play games?"
"Why not?" responds Belinda readily.
Her cheeks are pink, and her eyes dancing. There is no pastime, however wildly, childishly
      hilarious, for which she is not in tune.
"Shouting Proverbs!" suggests Sarah joyously. "Not know Shouting Proverbs?" (with a
      reproving look at Staveley, who has murmured this objection). "Why, everybody shouts, and one
      guesses!" (in lucid explanation). "It makes a tremendous noise; I do not know that it has any
      other merit."
"The neighbours would indict us for a nuisance," says Belinda gaily, shaking her head.
      "Russian Scandal?"
"It does not make noise enough," says Sarah; "it is nothing but whispering; we will have no
      whispering" (rather curtly, and with an almost imperceptible glance
       towards Rivers, in application of the warning).
"Hare and Hounds is not a bad game in a house," says Mr. De Lisle, in a small, shy voice.
      "We played Hare and Hounds at a house I was staying at the other day; we ran all through every
      room, from attic to cellar; it was great fun!"
"Your friend evidently did not keep a mother-in-law out of repair upstairs," replies Sarah,
      dismissing at once, though with leniency, this not very bright suggestion; " we do.
      What does the company say to Post, eh?"
The company, who are one and all in the mood for riotous jollity in any form, hail the
      proposal with one-voiced effusion; and it is on the point of being carried into execution,
      when Miss Churchill suggests an improvement upon it.
"Why not dance? dancing is better than any games! Surely some one can play, or even whistle
      a tune, or set the musical-box tinkling out its one waltz. Room? Plenty of room! too much
      room!
       Wheel all the furniture out into the passage!"
No sooner said than done. Away trundles the early English suite of rush-bottomed chairs;
      away the Professor's sacred fauteuil ! away Belinda's work-table! everything but the
      piano and the music-stool, to which little De Lisle, having weakly admitted that he can play a
      little dance music, is at once ruthlessly nailed.
The rain patters, snow-soft outside. The valse strikes up. There is a moment's hesitation.
      Bellairs and Staveley, generously unwilling to steal a march upon each other, hang back; but
      Sarah settles the point by frisking up to the one nearest to her—it is all one to her with
      which she dances; it happens to be Bellairs—and swoops away with him smooth and sure as a
      swallow darting down upon a moth. Without a word exchanged between them, Belinda finds herself
      in Rivers' arms. The rain plash-plashes upon the open window's sill. How long it is since she
      has danced! How madly exhilarating are
       motion and measure! Is it in heaven or upon earth that that lame waltz is being
      strummed? After a turn or two he feels her light and buoyant body grow heavy in his
      embrace.
"Stop!" she says dizzily; "the room goes round."
He obeys at once; and fearing lest she may fall, keeps for one moment his arm around
      her.
"It is so long since I danced," she says, lifting one white hand to her giddy eyes; "so
      long! so long! not since—"
She breaks off.
"Not since your—"
He also breaks off. But she is none the less firmly and irrevocably wed, because of his
      inability to say "your marriage."
"Not since long before then," rejoins she, hurriedly interrupting, with a nervous dread lest
      he may complete the phrase; "not since—Dresden."
"But we never danced in—Dresden," he says, making the same slight pause as
       she had done before the name of the, to them, sacred city.
" You did not, perhaps," she answers with a charming saucy smile—for under the
      unwonted joyous excitement her spirits are towering perilously high—"but I did. Some
      Gardereiters came in one evening, and I took a turn with two of them; it was before your
      day."
Distant as is the epoch alluded to, and satisfactorily as he had been persuaded at the time
      by ocular evidence of the reciprocal indifference of Belinda and the Saxon officers, he cannot
      avoid a feeling of biting jealousy and offence against those innocent and both in time and
      space far off German valseurs.
"At least it is my day now," he says with emphasis; and she offering no
      contradiction, away they float into their trance again.
The valse ends; the patient De Lisle begins to hammer out a galop. They must part; for
      Bellairs, emboldened thereto by Sarah's warm approbation, is inviting
       Belinda, and she dare not refuse. Rivers dances with Miss Churchill. Why need
      he? Why need he dance at all? Why, above all, need he throw such spirit and animation into his
      dancing? He looks as if he were enjoying himself as much as Sarah. Staveley, after having
      vainly endeavoured to educate Slutty into a partner (Slutty, on unwilling hind-legs, and with
      tail abjectly tucked in, perhaps in the laudable intention of giving herself a more human
      air), galops bravely by himself. The galop ends. The musician, bringing out of his treasures
      things new and old, treats them to a venerable polka.
Once more he and she are together; and in what a different spirit her light feet now move!
      Bellairs had found her but a disappointing partner; inert, and often begging to be allowed to
      stop and take breath. In Rivers' arms, her life's tides are running at their highest. It is
      Staveley's turn to be Sarah's danseur , and Bellairs, emulating his friend's former
      example, polks alone. But not altogether
       with his friend's success. For Punch, inspired by a scientific curiosity to
      investigate the strange phenomena that have appeared on his horizon, unhappily runs between
      his legs, and brings him to the earth with some clamour. The player stops: the dancers
      pause.
"We have had enough of this," says Sarah, drawing her sister into the window for an aside,
      and speaking with some brusqueness; "it is not fair upon that poor boy" (indicating De Lisle);
      "he is getting cross, though he tries not to show it. As I have not three legs and arms like
      the Isle of Man, I cannot dance with them all at once, and you are not much help! Let
      us try something else."
"By all means," answers Belinda hurriedly, shrinking away from the reproach that her
      conscience tells her she so richly deserves; "anything! whatever you please!"
"The ball is ended," says Sarah authoritatively, returning to the young men, and clapping
      her hands to enforce silence;
       "but if the company pleases it will be immediately followed by some athletic
      sports. What does everyone say to a game of Blind Man's Buff?"
This second proposal is received with an enthusiasm as much hotter than the former as may be
      expected from the universal loosening of the bonds of shyness and conventionality which has
      taken place since that former one was first made.
Sarah at once volunteers to be blind-folded; and in two minutes she is established in the
      middle of the little room, a Liberty silk handkerchief tied over her jovial eyes, and her
      hands outstretched in futile blind groping and grabbing.
The rest of the party, in the most approved fashion, pull her gown, tweak her hair, nip her
      sleeve; but not for long. With one well-directed lunge—so well directed as to rouse an instant
      loud cry of dishonesty—she has pounced upon Bellairs, who in his turn is blind-folded—is in
      his turn tweaked and nipped—and in his turn catches Rivers; Rivers catches Belinda.

The fun waxes fast and furious. They have raised every grain of dust latent in the carpet;
      Punch is cheering them on by volleys of delighted short barks, while Slutty sits wretchedly in
      a corner with her face to the wall.
Most madly mirthful of all—most intemperately gay, out-Heroding Herod, out-doing Sarah in
      her wildest mood, with splendid poppy-cheeks and lightening eyes —is Mrs. Forth. She has been
      old so long —so long! She is making up the arrears of her lost youth.
The clamour is at its loudest. Scarcely less blowzed—bawling scarcely less noisily than were
      the Primrose family in neighbour Flamborough's kitchen, when annihilated by the entrance of
      Lady Blarney and Miss Caroline Wilhelmina Amelia Skeggs—is the society gathered on that wet
      May afternoon in Professor Forth's decent drawing-room.
Belinda, caught for the second time, stands blind-folded in the middle of the room, while
      shouts of uproarious laughter
       greet her vain efforts to gain hold of any of the assailants who lustily beset
      her. All of a sudden, in one instant there is silence. The pushing, and jostling, and nipping
      have altogether ceased. Without any attempt at resistance some one is in her clasp.
"I have got you!" cries she, in a voice of jubilant triumph; "who are you?" and so tears the
      bandage from her eyes.
It is indeed true that she is grasping Rivers' coat-sleeve in indisputable conquest: but, at
      the moment that she verifies this fact, the cause of his having fallen so easy a prey, the
      cause of the instantaneous and entire muteness that has fallen upon the so boisterous little
      assemblage, breaks in horror upon her stunned eyes.
The door is half open, and through it Professor Forth is looking, with an expression hard to
      qualify upon his face, at the entertainment got up with such spirit and success in his
      absence. Not for long, however. In a moment he has softly closed the door again and withdrawn.
      For several
       moments they stand staring at each other speechless and aghast.
Belinda's look wanders in consternation from one to other of the faces round her. Disordered
      hair, red-hot cheeks, panting breath, rampagious eyes! Bedlam might easily turn out a
      saner-looking party. In comparison of them Cornus' crew were an orderly Philistine band.
The men are bad enough, but Sarah— but herself! Bacchante and romp mixed in just and fine
      proportions as her sister looks, her stricken conscience tells her that she herself far
      outdoes her, though she dares not ask the looking-glass for confirmation of this conviction;
      but during the past mad hour has not Sarah been tame and mild when compared with her?
"Had not we better be going?" says Bellairs at last, in a lamb's voice, in which no one
      would recognise the hilarious bellow of five minutes ago.
"I think that there can be no two opinions on that head," replies Sarah drily. As she speaks
      she turns to her dazed elder,
       and lowers her voice. "Had not you better go and ask him whether he feels
      inclined to join us?"
Belinda turns in stupid compliance towards the door. As she makes her difficult way through
      the little passage, blocked with articles of furniture piled one atop of another, her
      consternation deepens. He must have had to climb like a cat over his own armchair in order to
      gain ingress into his own drawing-room! It is impossible! It would be adding insult to injury
      to present herself before him in her present dishevelment. She must needs repair to her own
      room; must needs, with intense repugnance, snatch a glance at her own disordered image in the
      toilet-glass. The case is even worse than she had feared. There is even more of the Moenad
      than she had apprehended in her reflection. But there is no time to be lost. Each moment that
      passes, leaving her offence unacknowledged, lends it a deeper dye. A brush snatched up and
      hastily applied to her revolted hair; two hand-palms, but
       they are hot too, held for a moment to her blazing cheeks in the vain effort to
      cool them, and she is off again.
Outside his door she hesitates an instant, listening in scared heart-sinking; but there is
      no sound audible within, so, plucking up what courage she may, she enters. He is seated at his
      writing-table, in the leathern chair in which she has passed such count-less hours of
       ennui and fatigue, slaving in his service. The thought emboldens her a little, and
      she advances up the room and stands beside him.
"May I take your place?" she asks in a rather faltering voice. "I am quite ready."
It is a whole minute before he answers. There is no plainer mode of showing resentment than
      by letting sixty seconds elapse between a question addressed to you and your answer. Then:
"I am obliged to you," he answers woodenly, still writing; "but I think that, in its present
      condition, your mind is scarcely capable of serious employment!"

There is something so galling in the implication that her spirit rises.
"Do you think that I am drunk ?" she asks violently; then, recollecting how gravely
      in the wrong she has been, she masters herself, and says apologetically: "I am very sorry; it
      was very foolish; but—but—I did not expect you home by so early a train."
He gives a little odious, though perhaps pardonable, laugh.
"That fact was sufficiently obvious."
"I am very sorry," she repeats again, with uneasy iteration, shifting wretchedly from one
      foot to the other, as she stands in her culpritship before him; "but—but it was so wet, and we
      could not get out, and —and it was so long since I had danced or played at any games!"
There is a wistful accent audible even to herself in her voice, and she looks at him with a
      sort of forlorn hope that he may be touched by it. If he is, he masters it admirably.
"Indeed!" he answers cuttingly. "Well,
       next time that such an impulse seizes you, I should be obliged by your choosing
      some other spot than my house to turn into a bear-garden!"
She had thought that her cheeks were already as hot as cheeks could be, but the sudden
      influx of blood that his words send pulsing into them shows her her mistake. Hitherto, shame
      at and repentance of her frolic, joined with a sincere desire to make amends for it, have been
      her predominant emotions; now at once they vanish, and give place to a biting sense of
      injustice and aversion.
"After all, it was no such great crime," she says in a hard voice, in which is no trace of
      the gentle, humble key of her earlier utterance; "it was silly, perhaps," with a burning
      blush, "but it was an innocent enough wet-day amusement!"
"It is an innocent wet-day amusement against the recurrence of which I shall take measures
      to secure myself," he replies resentfully.
There is something, or she fancies so, of
       menacing in his tone, at which her gorge rises.
"You forget," she says, in a low but extremely distinct voice, "that I am young. If you had
      married a wife of your own age, it would have been different; but you must remember that I am
      at the beginning of life, and you at the end!" Having delivered herself of this amiable
      reminder, she walks towards the door, not giving one glance to see how far her shaft has gone
      home. On reaching her own room she breaks into hysterical sobbing. "If he had taken it
      differently, he might have made a friend for life of me!" she cries.
This is, perhaps, putting it a little strongly.
