
CHAPTER IV.
THE time has come for him to break with the old school, thought Anne; consoling
      herself for a certain childish petulance, perhaps not quite new to her, in Hamlin’s
      manner.
But Anne proved mistaken. Whether the critics became less rabid on the following day, or
      whether Hamlin was suddenly smitten with the truth of their criticism, she could not say. He
      was very snappish at first towards Chough, and absolutely refused to speak to Dennistoun for
      nearly twenty‐four hours. Chough, who loved Hamlin like the apple of his eye, would not,
      however, be spurned; he followed Hamlin about, he soothed him, he flattered him, he assured
      him that he was much the greatest poet of his generation; but he repeated, almost
       with tears in his eyes, Dennistoun’s criticism.
“Such a poem will never, never do,” he cried; “it is impossible, intolerable,
      and it will just put some fellow like Dennistoun into your place.”
“Thank you for your advice, Chough,” answered Hamlin, angrily; “I think I told you before
      that I didn’t want it.”
Anne did not revive the subject of the unlucky poem. It was useless provoking quarrels
      between Hamlin and his friends; quarrels in which she was forced to own to herself that he
      showed himself too easily mortified and put out of temper. If he had been taught to mistrust
      their judgment, if he had been alienated from their school by their absurd criticism, why, so
      much the better. This business drew Anne’s attention to the poetry of the school; she re‐read
      a number of poems by Chough, Dennistoun, and several gods, demigods, and heroes of the
      movement. Whether it was that she had read
       them fragmentarily before, or that she had not understood
      their full meaning, or whether her attention was now called to their bad points rather than to
      their good ones, she scarcely knew; but it seemed to her that she had never before
      comprehended this style of poetry: its beauty had ceased to please her, it seemed to her
      false, emasculate, diseased. Hamlin alone had not gone to its worst lengths; he had sinned,
      but comparatively little. He was evidently intended for something better. And Anne thought
      with pride of that “Ballad of the Fens” which they had all fallen upon, and which was to be
      the signal for a new era in poetry. Soon it would be out; and she the only person to have
      appreciated it. It seemed to Anne that at last, in her humble way, she might be beginning to
      repay the debt of gratitude which she owed Hamlin (not that she wished that the debt should
      ever be less, God knows, or dreamed that it could be); but at last Hamlin might reap some
      advantage from his generosity. He
       had stooped to make her, to turn the Perrys’ servant into a
      lady; in her turn, perhaps she, the woman of the lower classes, might encourage the delicately
      nurtured poet to attempt things bolder, simpler, and more healthy than he had done before.
The proof‐sheets of the new volume began to come in. Anne had read nearly all its contents
      at one time or other, yet Hamlin, in his grave, ceremoniously adoring way, handed on the
      proofs to her. One day a fresh bundle came by post. After breakfast, Hamlin took Anne
      aside.
“I want you to read these sonnets,” he said. “I don’t think you have read them all. There
      are rather more than I care to print in this volume, so I should like you to select those
      which you think the best or the least bad: divide them into two packets, and tell me which you
      prefer.”
Anne was quite taken aback for joy, and at the same time for fear.
“Don’t say that,” she said; “I could never,
       never take the responsibility of deciding about your poems.
      Let me read them, and let me tell you what I like best, but don’t ask me to choose. What am I,
      that I should decide in such matters?”
“You are the person whom I trust and respect, and—will you let me say so?—whom I love most
      in all the world,” said Hamlin, solemnly. “For whom should my poetry be written except for
      you? Whom else should I care to please? Are you not the best and worthiest thing in my life,
      and is it not my highest ambition to do anything worthy of you?”
Hamlin had never spoken so passionately and earnestly before.
Anne did not answer, but she squeezed his hand, and the gesture, and the look accompanying
      it, meant “I love you.”
“Listen,” said Hamlin, detaining her as she was leaving—“I want to say one word more. These
      sonnets are not merely my verses; they are myself—and many of them, you will see, are about
      you. Perhaps you
       would rather that some of these were not published; perhaps
      your permitting them to be published might mean more than you should wish. Tell me your
      opinion frankly, and put aside everything that you don’t like.”
“I will,” answered Anne. “What you wish me to do, I must do.”
She went up into her room, shut the door, and seating herself at the table, unrolled the
      little bundle of proof‐sheets. But at first she could not read, or could read only the
      titles—her heart beat so, and the blood boomed so in her temples. That he should love her so
      much, believe in her so much—that it should really be he, just he and she, and not some one
      else; it seemed too strange to be true. She slowly began to read the sonnets. Some of them she
      knew already; others were expansions in verse of things which Hamlin had said or written to
      her; many were about herself, passionate, with a sort of delicate, subdued, respectful
      passion, played, like some exquisite instrument, in various keys and rhythms of subdued pain
      or
       gladness. She felt so proud and glad, and at the same time
      so moved and saddened, that she almost cried over them. There were a lot of other sonnets,
      descriptive of places and of moods. Some of these she did not at all relish. They were not
      fleshly nor exactly improper; but they contained allusions which Anne could not help
      following, allusions which she did not quite understand, but which she did not like. She felt
      half ashamed of herself, wondering whether all the impure poetry which she had lately been
      reading, whether her prejudice against the school to which these decidedly belonged, might not
      be making her imagine things which were not meant; and Anne blushed at the thought—blushed at
      her knowing so many things, having learned so many things, in her half education as an Italian
      servant, in her culture as an æsthetic personage, which perhaps other girls of her age would
      not dream of. It was probably only her own morbid fancy. But then she came upon a set of
      sonnets—
       no fewer than twelve connected together by similarity of
      title—which put an end to her doubts. She felt giddy and sick as she read them; mysterious and
      mystical hankerings, mysterious half‐longing repentance, and half‐repentant longings after
      untold shameful things. Anne pushed aside the proof‐sheets, and leaned her head on her hands.
      She seemed to be smothering for want of air; she went to the window, and leaned against its
      rails. It was raining—a steady, clear fine rain. She looked at it mechanically as it filled
      the air like a thin veil, and crevassed the sand outside with yellow trickles of water. She
      did not for one instant believe that Hamlin had ever felt the things about which he was
      writing; but he had written about them. She knew, from an unerring instinct, as well as from
      her own deep love, that Hamlin was as pure a man as could be found; had he not been towards
      her—was he not, at that very moment—the very personification of chivalrous and spiritual
      lovingness? Then she
       remembered the allusions which, without understanding them,
      used to frighten her in his letters—the allusions to vague evil which beckoned to him, which
      surrounded him; and she remembered also his constant references in conversation to his being
      unlike what she imagined, to his baseness and unworthiness. Two years earlier she would have
      been seized with an agonising terror; a week before she might have been overcome with pitying
      admiration at his self‐tormenting moral purity, taking umbrage at every thought of evil which
      passed across and seemed to soil his mind. But somehow, now, she did neither. She did not for
      one second believe that Hamlin was in any way a bad man. She repeated to herself that he was
      morbidly introspective, self‐scrutinising, morbidly imaginative; but she could not realise
      that these hateful sonnets had been written in any great agony of imagined self‐debasement;
      they were so artistic, so evidently written with enjoyment, so self‐conscious; they were so
      clearly not the
       doubts of a troubled mind, but the work of a poet—and, what
      was much worse, so clearly the work of a poet of a definite school, of the school of Chough
      and Dennistoun and all the others, whom she was beginning to loathe. Anne looked at them over
      and over again. There was no reality in them; mere revolting pose. Gradually her
      mind settled about them. They were doubtless things written long ago, when, without knowing
      what it all meant, he had been carried away by the wave of imitation of one or two shameless
      or foolish writers. He had alluded to sonnets which he had expected her to dislike, he had
      insisted so on a certain number being put aside; if he had made her think that it was the
      sonnets about herself which provoked his doubts, that came from a sort of shame, an
      unwillingness to point out to her what she might perhaps overlook: it was not quite
      straightforward, but everybody, Anne had learned by this time, did not do right in a quite
      straightforward way. The only thing which perplexed her was, why he
       had submitted these poems to her at all? Why had he not torn
      them up? why shown them to her? A little she could not help, as a woman, resenting his having
      done so at all. But perhaps he had done so to show her the difference between what he had been
      and what he was going to be,—perhaps—perhaps he had got a little callous, living among poets
      of this school. Anyhow, they were things of the past, and Anne did not distress herself any
      longer about them, so foreign did they seem to Hamlin, so impossible was it to bring them into
      connection with the thought of him. She put the proofs into her pocket, and waited for an
      opportunity of giving them back. Before dinner, when the guests were safe out of the way, she
      called Hamlin into the library.
“Here are the proofs,” she said, laying them on the table.
“Have you read them already?” cried Hamlin; “how sweet of you! Now tell me what you think
      about them.”
He looked so cheerful, so utterly unconscious
       of the possibility of Anne’s having anything to say
      disagreeable to himself and herself, that she began to feel nervous.
“I think they are most of them very beautiful,” she answered slowly—“indeed, quite some of
      the best things you have ever done—and especially those about me; I am very grateful to you
      for them. But”—she resumed, after a moment’s silence—“there are some which I dislike
      extremely, and which are utterly unworthy of you. I have put them into the smaller roll by
      themselves.” She spoke rapidly, decidedly, but when she had done she felt that she was
      crimson.
Hamlin seemed quite speechless for astonishment. He quickly unrolled the smaller parcel, and
      glanced at its contents. A look of surprised ill‐humour crossed his face.
“I am quite astonished at your choice,” he said with affected coolness; “for these are the
      very sonnets which Chough and Dennistoun and all my other friends picked out as among my
      best.”

So he had already provided himself with a stock of criticisms.
“I am no judge of their technical merits,” answered Anne, trying to feel as if she had
      expected this news. “It seemed to me that they were very excellent in workmanship, and there
      is beautiful imagery in them. But I think the subject and tone of them horrible.” she spoke
      resolutely and unflinchingly, because she saw Hamlin’s eyes fixed incredulously on her. “You
      asked me to give you my frank opinion; and even had you not asked me, I should have felt bound
      to tell you that I think those sonnets ought not to be published. Perhaps you think it strange
      of me to speak so openly; but, of course, I understand what those sonnets allude to, and, of
      course, so will every grown‐up reader.”
Hamlin bit his moustache.
“There is not a single word to which any one can take objection in these sonnets,” and he
      turned over the proofs.
“What do the words matter? It is the
       meaning. I think,” and Anne vainly tried to soften down her
      expressions,—“I think that those sonnets are things you should be ashamed of.”
Hamlin’s eyes flashed, but he kept his temper.
“Everything is legitimate for the sake of an artistic effect,” he said, echoing the worn‐out
      aphorism of his school.
“Even to do a disgraceful thing?”
“I can see nothing disgraceful in a man attempting to describe what has passed through his
      mind.”
Hamlin spoke sullenly and doggedly.
“You have shifted your position,” cried Anne. “You intimated just now that a man may pretend
      to anything for the sake of an artistic effect. And now you are trying to make me believe that
      you really have felt and thought those horrible things. It is of no use. You have not—”
“How do you know?” exclaimed Hamlin, angrily. “Do you think I tell you everything that I
      have ever done, or thought, or felt?”

Anne was silent for a moment: that he should prefer to make her believe in his own baseness!
      It was horrible, loathsome, and, at the same time, pitiable and childish.
“I know you have not,” she repeated, “because I know you to be a gentleman. And I know that
      all that is affectation—school affectation—learned from creatures like Dennistoun and Chough;
      they have all done it, or something of the sort, and you have learned what comes naturally to
      their dirty minds. Oh, Mr Hamlin, do not commit this abomination—this baseness of pretending
      to shameful things which you have not felt or thought; do not be so mean, so base, so lying,
      as to slander yourself for the sake of an artistic effect.” Anne had seized his arm; he was
      shaken by her unexpected vehemence and passion; he had never thought that Anne could become so
      passionate about anything; he looked on, taken by surprise, not knowing what to think.
“Do not slander yourself,” repeated Anne—“do not blacken your real self, which does not
       belong to yourself alone, which belongs also to your
      friends, to your honour, which belongs in part to me. Do not lie to me about yourself!”
“As you choose,” answered Hamlin; “perhaps you are right; though, heaven knows, I thought
      myself, when writing those sonnets, but too bitterly in earnest.”
Anne’s look—a look of incredulous contempt—smote him like a rod.
“I suppose I am apt to be morbid,” he said, sadly; “that is the wretchedness of my life,
      that I never know where the truth about myself really lies—it seems to me that I ought to
      speak out, and yet . . .”
“And yet it is mere nonsense.”
Hamlin smiled a forced smile.
“Perhaps it is. Since you are determined, I suppose it must be.”
“You won’t publish those sonnets?” asked Anne, anxiously.
“I will not, since they offend you so much. But it is curious, that of all the people to
       whom I have shown them, you are the only one who has taken
      the slightest exception to them.”
For a moment Hamlin had been overcome, had been delighted by this sudden burst of
      impetuosity, by this passionate belief in him and vindication of himself. But now, as he again
      glanced at the sonnets, he was once more annoyed and resentful.
“Such things must be judged from a purely artistic standpoint,” he said with some
      irritation.
“I am willing to judge art from an artistic standpoint; but I cannot judge from an artistic
      standpoint an honourable man trying to defame himself.”
Hamlin sighed.
“Well, after all, I bade you select, and the principal thing is that you should be
      satisfied. But it is a pity, because those were just the best sonnets in the
      book; and the book will be very small without the ‘Ballad of the Fens.’”
“The ‘Ballad of the Fens’?—aren’t you going to print that? What do you mean?”

Could Hamlin be merely worrying her, to vent his annoyance at the loss of the sonnets?
“The ‘Ballad of the Fens’ has been torn up,” answered Hamlin, with a kind of dogged
      satisfaction.
“Oh, Mr Hamlin! How could you—the finest thing you have ever written.”
The ballad torn up!
“I know you thought it good, and so did I myself. But, on reflection, I saw that my friends
      were right, and that such a thing would not do.”
He spoke sharply, brutally, as if to bring home to Anne the unreliableness of her judgment:
      she had induced him to write it; she had praised it; and she wanted him to tear up those
      sonnets.
“It is a bad plan to keep things about which one is doubtful,” he went on; “so I tore it up.
      I think it was wiser; don’t you?”
“No,” said Anne, in a husky voice which burst out in a way that almost frightened him; “no,
      no—it was . . .” but she said no more.
