
CHAPTER III.
BY the middle of the summer a perfect colony from æsthetic London had settled
      itself, to the amazed terror of the vicar and his parishioners, in Wotton Hall and the inn of
      the adjacent village. The Spencers came, with a perfect shipload of babies, and accompanied by
      Mrs Spencer’s father and mother; Cosmo Chough came, bringing scarcely any luggage except MS.
      poems and old music; Thaddy O’Reilly came, and half‐a‐dozen young poets and painters, to name
      whom would be perfectly superfluous, and who were all the humble worshippers of Walter Hamlin.
      All these people had pictures to paint, poems to compose, articles to write; but the exciting
      question for the whole household was the approaching publication of Hamlin’s new book.

Hamlin’s acquaintance with Anne Brown had not been without a decided influence on his art.
      He had written a number of sonnets about her ever since the moment of their first meeting,
      recording various moods, real and fictitious, in connection with her, and of which he had sent
      or read her the greater number. Perhaps he would have written much the same sort of thing
      about any other woman; but Anne had influenced him at once more directly and more indirectly.
      The æsthetic school of poetry, of which Hamlin and Chough were the most brilliant exponents of
      the younger generation, was evidently running to seed. It was beginning to be obvious, to
      every one who was not an æsthete, that the reign of the mysterious evil passions, of the
      half‐antique, half‐medieval ladies of saturnine beauty and bloodthirsty voluptuousness of the
      demigods and heroes treated like the figures in a piece of tapestry, must be coming to a
      close; and that a return to nature must be preparing. Anne had felt it, and had vaguely
      determined
       that the man who was to revolutionise poetry was Hamlin.
      Indeed, who else could it be? The elder poets were safe in their ruts; the majority of the
      younger ones who had already come forward were mere imitators and caricaturists, not excepting
      the great Chough himself. Hamlin alone was a man of genius; he alone was capable of turning
      over a new leaf; and one or two new departures, attempts at a new way of describing things, if
      not actually an attempt at describing new things, persuaded Anne that the change was
      beginning. She did not like telling him that she perceived it coming; for she thought that
      Hamlin might, did he perceive it, consider it as an apostasy from his original school, and
      draw back. But she encouraged him by showing a marked preference for the pieces which savoured
      of this new style; and she even suggested to him to write a tale, in which he should
      substitute, for the conventional background copied by æsthetic poetry from the borders of
      missals, the pictures of old masters and of their French gods, Gautier
       and Baudelaire, the scenery of his own home, the wide
      commons, the beech‐woods on the downs, the solemn horizons of the fenny country which spread
      from Wotton to the sea. He had written it, and read it to her during that fortnight of
      solitude; and Anne’s heart had beat at the thought of the change which was to be wrought by
      Hamlin’s new book—of the unknown youths hitherto fumbling vainly for a new style, who were to
      recognise in Hamlin the leader of a new school, the prophet of a new art. When the colony of
      London æsthetes arrived at Wotton, the new poem was solemnly read to them. They were all
      seated in the old‐fashioned library, the rows and rows of old novels and books of standard
      literature, the busts of ancient philosophers looking down upon them,—a quaint little assembly
      of ladies in peacock‐blue and dull sage and Japanese dragoned and medieval brocaded gowns,
      with slashed sleeves and limp tails—of men got up to look like Frenchmen or Germans, or
      Renaissance creatures, in wondrous velveteens
      , colonred almost like the bindings of their own books. They
      listened with considerable attention, and obvious impatience to interrupt. The first who did
      so was Mrs Spencer.
“Why, Walter!” she exclaimed indignantly, “what possesses you? are you crazy? Why, you are
      going in for realism; do you know that?”
“I don’t see any particular realism, Edith,” answered Hamlin, testily.
“Come, now, it isn’t Zola, my dear,” said her father, a good‐natured man, who never carried
      his belief in himself to the length which it was carried to by his family.
“No, it isn’t Zola,” cried Miss Spencer; “but it’s worse than Zola. . . .”
(“It’s just the decentest thing I’ve heard for many a long year,” murmured the old
      painter.)
“It’s worse than Zola, because it’s poetry and not prose, because it’s English poetry,
      because it’s poetry by Walter Hamlin, who has hitherto been an apostle of beauty, and is now
      basely turning apostate and going over to ugliness.”
There was a slight laugh at Mrs Spencer’s
       vehemence, in which Hamlin alone did not join.
“I don’t think there’s anything actually ugly in it,” put in Chough, blandly. “Hamlin could
      never write anything ugly. But it is certain that there’s a want of idealism in it, a want of
      that exotic perfume which constitutes the essence of poetry. I think it’s an unfortunately
      chosen subject. . . .”
“I think it’ s perfectly disgusting,” gobbled out Dennistoun, the little rickety poet, who
      had to be carried up and down stairs, and who wrote, while slowly sinking inch by inch into
      the grave, about carrying off lovely girls, and throttling them in the fierceness of his love.
      “Did you notice about the heroine washing the children? I call that beastly, beastly. And
      then, I don’t know how any man can write a poem about people who are in love and get
      married.”
This seemed an unanswerable piece of criticism. Anne alone leaned across the table; she was
      very indignant. “I think,” she
       said, “that there is much more poetry in people who love
      each other respectably, and respectably get married, than in all the nasty situations which
      modern poets write about.”
Cosmo Chough looked at Dennistoun, and Dennistoun looked at Mrs Spencer’s father.
“My dear young lady,” cried the old painter in his broad Scotch, “d’ye ever know any of
      these gentlemen write a poem about people who did any single respectable thing?”
“I wonder you can talk like that, papa,” silenced his daughter, whose zeal for him and his
      school included timely snubbings for himself.
“Well, my dear, I privately think with Miss Brown that there’s nothing more poetic than a
      gude, bonnie lass of a wife, and I don’t wonder a bit at Walter being of that opinion. But
      then, of course, I’m not a poet.”
“It’s that washing of the children which troubles me,” reflected Chough, “and their being
      married. Don’t you think, now, Hamlin, that you might just alter a little, and make it appear
      that they weren’t married?”

“Only put a husband of the lady in the distance,” suggested O’Reilly, laughing.
“Thank you,” said Hamlin, affecting to laugh, “your suggestion is most happy, and most
      characteristic. You are always full of original ideas—all of you,” and he looked bitterly
      round. Chough felt the rebuke and was silent. But Dennistoun, who was gasping, propped up in
      his chair, was furious.
“It’s not a question of an alteration here or there,” he gobbled out; “it’s the whole tone
      of the poem which is pestilent. It’s Wordsworth pure and simple, that’s what it is.”
Hamlin rolled up his MS. He was very white. The others he did not mind, but this little
      rickety Dennistoun, whose poems were the most limited and the most hopelessly morbid of the
      whole set, annoyed him; for in Dennistoun, for all his limitations and repetitions, Hamlin
      recognised the most genuine poet of his circle, his most real rival. Those words, “It’s
      Wordsworth, that’s what it is,” were like
       a blow. He could have knocked down Dennistoun, had he not
      been a cripple.
The conversation was changed; and soon the first dinner‐bell dispersed the company. When
      Anne came down she heard some one stirring in the study next door. She went in. Hamlin was
      seated before the table, his head on his hands; the MS., all crumpled up, lay in front of
      him.
Anne came silently to his side. Her heart was bursting with indignation.
“What’s the matter?” asked Hamlin, crossly.
“Nothing. I only came—because I wanted to see you—because I wanted to tell you how I despise
      those people and their disgusting, unmanly school of poetry—how I hate their stupid
      criticism,—how completely I believe in you and in your poem.”
Anne had spoken with vehemence and almost anger. She took one of his hands, which was
      dog’s‐earing the MS.
“Oh, why,” she asked, “why do you read
       them what you write? Don’t you know them sufficiently to
      know what they will say?”
“I never thought—” and Hamlin stopped. “I never thought that that fellow Dennistoun would
      ever dare to speak like that about a poem of mine.” His tone was angry and tearful, like that
      of a punished child.
“Nor did I. I never thought any one would dare to speak like that. But what does it
      matter—what can the words of such a man matter to you?”
He did not answer.
“Surely,” went on Anne, “you can’t mind what they say? You believe in your poem, as I
      believe in it?”
It seemed so impossible to her how any one could not believe in that poem, which seemed to
      her so strong, and noble, and beautiful.
“I know you believe in it,” answered Hamlin, brusquely; “you made me write it—so of course
      you must—”
“And—and—are you sorry to have written it?”

“I don’t know; I can’t judge. There’s O’Reilly outside.”
“The disconsolate poet being consoled by his beautiful fiancée for having written about people who were united in legitimate wedlock,”
      whispered O’Reilly to Mrs Spencer as they entered the room.
“Well, Hamlin, old fellow, do you repent you of that sinful marriage between your hero and
      heroine?” asked O’Reilly.
“I repent me of nothing at all, except of having read my poem to a parcel of damned
      meretricious rhymesters,” answered Hamlin, angrily.
“Walter!” cried Mrs Spencer, “how can you talk like that!”
But, despite this bravado, Anne felt, and her spirit sank within her, that Hamlin had been
      disgusted with his poem. He was rather cantankerous throughout dinner; and Anne, watching him,
      felt a strange mixture of indignation—towards his critics for their criticism, and towards
      Hamlin for minding it.
