
CHAPTER IX.
PERRY could not at first understand his friend’s sudden decision, and violently
      combated it. But after a little while he said to himself that it must have been fearfully dull
      for Hamlin at the Villa Arnolfini, and that to have stayed so long was already much more than
      a miserable being like himself could expect. So that when his wife nearly went into hysterics
      at the notion of Hamlin—their poet‐painter, as she called him—suddenly departing, he
      represented to her, with more emphasis than was his wont, that Hamlin had bored himself to
      death, and must be bored no longer.
“And where are you going?” asked the limp and Sapphic lady, as they sat at lunch.

“I have no notion,” answered Hamlin. “I know nothing beyond Florence for three days. I may
      go on to Rome, Naples, Egypt, America, Japan, or return to Hammersmith. I have no notion.”
“Ah, these poets!” cried Mrs Perry; “they never can tell whither their soul may waft their
      body.”
When they had finished, Hamlin asked whether he might say good‐bye to Anne Brown. “I have a
      little farewell gift to make her,” he explained.
Anne Brown was summoned into the studio; she evidently had only just heard the news.
“Are you going away, sir, really?” she asked.
“Yes,” answered Hamlin, drily; “I expect the gig must be waiting for me already.”
“And—are you not going to return, Mr Hamlin?”
“Oh no; I think I shall go to America this winter.”

She was silent, and stood by the table in the attitude of a servant waiting for further
      orders.
“Before I go away,” said Hamlin, “I want to thank you, Miss Brown, for your kindness and
      patience, which have enabled me to make a sketch which will be very valuable for one of my
      next pictures, and,” he added, as she merely nodded her head, “I want to beg you to accept a
      little gift in remembrance of all the trouble I have given you.”
Anne Brown flushed, and her face suddenly changed, as if a whip‐cord had passed across
      it.
Hamlin took the little vellum‐bound volume from his pocket.
“You told me you had never read the ‘Vita Nuova,’ Miss Brown,” he said, “so I venture to ask
      you to accept this copy of it. I don’t know whether you like old books; I think them much
      prettier to look at. Good‐bye.”
The girl’s face cleared into a kind of radiance.

“Thank you so much,” she said; “I will read it often.”
“And think of me sometimes and the trouble I gave you?”
“It was my duty, since Mrs Perry wished it, sir. Good‐bye—a good journey to you.”
“Good‐bye, Miss Brown.”
