
CHAPTER XXIV.
IT is Sunday evening. Miss Craven has been to church for the first time since her
      bereavement, as people call it. She has displayed her crape in all its crisp funeral
     newness before the eyes of the Plas Berwyn congregation. Also, she has been made the subject of
     conversation, over their early dinner, between the imbecile rector and his vinegar-faced,
     bob-curled wife; the latter remarking how unfortunately unbecoming black was to poor Miss
     Craven—really impossible to tell where her bonnet ended and her hair began; and how lucky it
     was for her that people did not wear
      mourning for as long a time as they used—three months being
      ample nowadays, ample for a brother! Esther has sat in their pew for the
     first time alone: she has looked at Jack's prayer-book, at his vacant corner under the dusty
     cobwebbed window, with eyes dryly stoic; she has walked firmly after service down the
     church-path, past a grassless hillock, where he who was her brother lies, dumbly submitting to
     the one terrific, changeless law of decay—the law that not one of us can face, as applying to
     ourselves, without our brains reeling at the horror of it. Oh! thrifty, harsh Nature! that,
     without a pang of relenting, unmixes again those cunningest compounds that we call our bodies—
     making the freed elements that formed them pass into new forms of life—makes us, who erewhile
     walked upright, god- like, fronting the sun, communing with the high stars—makes us, I
     say, creep many-legged in the beetle, crawl blind in the worm!
It is evening now, and Esther sits, in her red armchair, beside the drawing-room fire,
      alone again. The wind comes banging every minute against the shuttered
     French window, as one that boisterously asks to be let in; the ivy leaves are dashed against
     the pane, as one that sighingly begs for admittance. Every now and then the young girl looks
     round timidly over her shoulder, in the chill expectation of seeing a death-pale spirit-face
     gazing at her from some corner of the room; every now and then she starts nervously, as a hot
     cinder drops from the grate, or as the small feet of some restless mouse make a hurry-skurrying
     noise behind the wainscot. As often as she can frame the smallest excuse, she rings the bell,
     in order to gather a little courage from the live human face, the live human voice, of the
     servant that answers it.
Around Plas Berwyn also the wind thunders—against Plas Berwyn windows also the ivy-leaves
     fling themselves
      plaintively; but there the resemblance ends. The steady
     light from the lamp outblazes the uncertain, fitful fire-gleams: at Plas Berwyn there are no
     ghost-faces of the lately dead to haunt the inmates of that cheerful room. They are all sitting
     round the table on straight-backed chairs—no lolling in armchairs, no stealing of furtive naps
     on the Sabbath—sitting rather primly, rather Puritanically, reading severely good books. To
     Bob's palate, the Hedley Vicarsian type of literature is as distasteful as to any
     other young man of sound head and good digestion, but he succumbs to it meekly, to please his
     mother; if Sunday came twice a week, I think he would be constrained to rebel. From
     the kitchen, the servants' voices sound faintly audible above the howling wind, singing psalms.
     The family are divided between prose and poetry. Miss Brandon is reading a sermon; her sister a
     hymn. Here it is:—

THE FIRM BANK.*
" I have a never-failing bank,
A more than golden store; 
No earthly bank is half so rich,
How can I then be poor?
"'Tis when my stock is spent and gone,
And I without a groat,
I'm glad to hasten to my bank,
And beg a little note.
" Sometimes my banker, smiling, says,
'Why don't you oftener come? 
And when you draw a little note,
Why not a larger sum?
" 'Why live so niggardly and poor?—
Your bank contains a plenty? 
Why come and take a one-pound note
When you might have a twenty?

"'Yea, twenty thousand, ten times told,
Is but a trifling sum
To what your Father hath laid up,
Secure in God his Son.'
"Since, then, my banker is so rich,
I have no cause to borrow: 
I'll live upon my cash to-day,
And draw again to-morrow.
"I've been a thousand times before,
And never was rejected ;
Sometimes my banker gives me more
Than asked for or expected.
"Sometimes I've felt a little proud,
I've managed things so clever :
But, ah! before the day was done
I've felt as poor as ever! 
" Sometimes with blushes on my face
Just at the door I stand;
I know if Moses kept me back,
I surely must be damned.
"I know my bank will never break—
No! it can never fall!
The Firm—Three Persons in one God I
Jehovah—Lord of All!" 

A charming mixture of the jocose and familiar, isn't it? 
"Mother," says Bob, rather abruptly, looking up from a civil-spoken, pleasant little work,
     entitled "Thou Fool!" which he is perusing (it is generally an understood thing that
     conversation is not to be included among the Sabbath evening diversions at Plas
     Berwyn)—"Mother, do you know I don't think I shall try for extension, after all?"
The gold-rimmed spectacles make a hasty descent from their elevation upon Mrs. Brandon's high
     thin nose.
 "Dear Bob! why not?" 
"Because I don't see why I should," he answers, frankly.
      "I'm perfectly well: why should I shirk work any more than
     any other fellow? I might say that I prefer a cool climate to a hot vapour-bath, English winds
     to oily calms, but I don't suppose that I am singular in that!" 
"My dear boy!" says the old woman, tremulously, stretching out her withered hand across the
     table to him,—"why did you ever go into that dreadful profession? Why did not you enter the
     ministry, like your dear father, as I so much wished you to do?"
"I'm very glad I didn't, mother!" replies the young man, bluntly; "I should have been a fish
     sadly out of water, and, after all, I hope that Heaven will not be quite so full of black coats
     that there will not be room for one or two of our colour."
"Have you told Essie?" inquires his eldest sister, joining in the conversation.
"Yes, she knows."
"Will she be ready to go with you on such short notice?"
"No."
"You'll leave her behind, then?" 
"Yes."
"I thought you always had such a horror of long engagements?"
"So I have, but—but" (involuntarily lowering his voice, and lifting "Thou Fool!" to be a
     partial shade for his face)—"there is no engagement between us now!"
Six startled eyes fix themselves upon his face. "What!" cry three simultaneously shrill
     female voices. "No engagement! Has she thrown you over?"
"No."
"Have you thrown her over?" (with an astonished emphasis on the
     pronouns).
"No."
"Have you quarrelled, then?" 

"No, we haven't," answers Bob, wincing. "Poor little child! one would hardly choose such a
     time as this to quarrel with her. Cannot you understand two people coming to the conclusion
     that they are better apart; better as friends than as—as anything else?"
His three comforters stare at one another in bewilderment; then his parent speaks, shaking
     her head oracularly:
"I'm afraid I see how it is, Bob; you have found out that this unfortunate girl is, in some
     way, unworthy of you, and you are too generous to confess it, even to us."
Bob dashes down "Thou Fool!" in a fury, and his blue eyes shine with quick fire.
"Mother, do you call that the 'charity that thinketh no evil?' I tell you, Essie is willing
     to marry me to-morrow, but I—"
"But you are not willing!" interrupts the domestic pack, bursting again into full
     cry.
"Tell us something a little more probable, Bob, and we'll try and believe it,"
     subjoins Bessy, with a small curling smile.
"It is a matter of perfect indifference to me whether you believe me or not," replies the
     young man, sternly; keeping under, with great difficulty, an unmanly longing to box Miss
     Bessy's ears. "I only tell you, upon my honour, that Essie is willing to marry me, and
     that I—solely for her own sake, solely because I know that an inferior being cannot make a
     superior one happy—am not willing."
"And a very good thing too," cries Bessy, viciously. "I always thought you were singularly
     ill-suited to one another; I always said so to mamma and Jane. Didn't I, mamma?—didn't I, Jane?
      'Can two walk together except they be agreed?' you know."
"Girls," says poor Bob, harried almost beyond endurance, and addressing his sisters by the
     conveniently broad appellative
      which covers everything virgin between the ages of six and a
     hundred—"Girls, would you mind going into the dining-room for a few minutes ? I want to speak
     to mother alone."
The "girls" look rebellious, but their rebellion does not break into open mutiny. Rising,
     they comply with his request.
"Of course, what most nearly concerns our only brother cannot be supposed
     to have any interest for us," says Bessy, leaving her sting behind, like a wasp, and
     shutting the door with as near an approach to a bang as her conscience will admit.
As soon as they are well out of the room, Bob comes and sits at his mother's feet, and lays
     his head on her lap, as he used to do when he was a very little boy. She passes her fingers
     fondly through his curly hair.
"This is a severe trial, my dear boy," she says, a little tritely; " but take an old woman's
     word for it; look for comfort in the right direction, and you'll surely, surely find
     it!"
" I don't want comfort," answers Bob, pluckily; he having by no means exiled his
     sisters in order to pule and whimper over his own woes. "I do very well."
"I thought you had come to your old mother for consolation," answers his parent, a little
     aggrievedly: naturally somewhat disappointed at being balked of the office of Paraclete, so
     dear to every woman's heart; "if not, what was it that you wanted to talk to me about that you
     did not wish your sisters to hear?"
"About her! " he answers, emphatically, lifting up his head, and reading her face
     earnestly. "I didn't wish her to be the mark for any more of Bessy's sneers. I wonder," he
     says, a little bitterly, "that she who is always talking about 'our Great Exemplar'
     does not recollect that He never sneered at any one."

"Did you say that it was Esther Craven that you wished to speak to me about?" inquires Mrs.
     Brandon, rather coldly.
"Mother," he says, passionately, "she has not a farthing in the world! What is to
     become of her?"
"Any one that my dear son takes an interest in will always be welcome to a home with me, for
     as long as they like to avail themselves of it," says the old lady, primly.
He shakes his head.
"She would not come," he says, despondently; "she is too proud: she hates to be beholden to
     any one; she is bent on working for her own living."
"And a very proper resolution, too," replies his mother, stoutly, her heart being steeled
     against Esther by a latent conviction that that fair false maid has dealt unhandsomely by her
     son. "Providence is always more willing to help those that help themselves."
"How can she help herself?" cries Esther's champion, indignantly. "What sort of work
     are those little weak hands, that little inexperienced head, fitted for?"
"Women with hands as weak and heads as inexperienced have toiled for their daily bread before
     now, I suppose," rejoins Mrs. Brandon, with a certain hardness, foreign to her nature, and
     arising from that spirit of contradiction, innate in us all, which makes us look coldly upon
     any object that some one else is making a fuss over.
Bob springs to his feet in great wrath, and speaks low and quick: "Mother! I'm sorry I ever
     broached this subject to you; one takes a long time, I see, to get acquainted with one's
     nearest relatives' characters. If you can see the child of one of your oldest friends working
     her poor little fingers to the bone for the bare necessaries of life without stretching out a
     finger to help her, I cannot!"
Speaking thus disrespectfully, he walks towards thle door.


"A spaniel, a woman, and a walnut tree,
The more you beat 'em, the better they be." says the rude old saw.
     Every woman, from a mother to a mistress, enjoys, rather than otherwise, being bullied.
The old woman half rises, and stretching out her hand to her son, says, "My boy! come back!
     let us talk rationally: don't quarrel with your old mother about a person that will never be so
     good a friend to you as she is."
He turns, half hesitating: anger's red ensign still aflame on his honest face.
"Shall I tell you, Bob, why I cannot feel common compassion for—for this girl?" 
"Why?"
"Because," says the old lady, with emotion, Mr. Brandon's image heaving up and down rather
     quicklier than usual upon her ample breast,—" because some instinct tells me that she has not
     had common compassion upon you."
"'An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth;' in fact," answers Bob, with a
     sarcasm unusual to him, "you are forgetting, mother, how often you have impressed upon me that
     we are no longer under the Mosaic dispensation! But why should she have compassion on me, may I
     ask? In what way do I stand in need for it? I'm not a woman, thank God!"
She looks at him, intently, with a steadiness that disconcerts him. "Bob, can you look me in
     the face and tell me that you have not been unhappier since you knew Esther Craven than ever
     you were before in all your life?" 
"I have," he answers, simply, "and happier too; so that makes it square."
Foiled in this direction, she varies her point of attack a little: "Can you look me in the
     face, and tell me that since your engagement she has behaved to you as a modest,
      honourable woman should behave to the man she has promised
     to marry?" ?"
He casts his eyes down troubled, and begins to fidget with a dilapidated little Chelsea Cupid
     on the mantelshelf, too truthful to say "Yes," too generous to say "No."
"She is ready to fulfil her promise," he answers, evasively. "She is willing to marry me
     whenever I like, as I told you before—to-morrow! to-night! this instant, if I wish!"
"For a home, of course; one can understand that, in her situation," says his mother, in a
     tone of slighting pity.
Bob perceives, and is stung by it.
"No, not for a home!" he answers, indignantly. "Poor soul! she may have that without paying
     such a heavy toll for it."
"To what motive, then, do you ascribe her willingness?"
"She told me that she liked me better than any one else in the world," he answers, with the
     reluctance of one who is making a statement that he believes will not be credited by the
     auditor to whom it is addressed.
"My poor simple boy I and you believed her?" (with a sort of compassionate scorn).
He hesitates. "I believe that she meant what she said at the moment," he replies,
     doubtfully.
"If there was such perfect harmony of opinion between you, why was the engagement broken, may
     I ask?" she inquires, a little sharply.
No answer, except quickened breathing, and a frown slightly contracting his climate-bronzed
     forehead.
"Was it—oh, my dear boy! if it was so, no one can respect your scruples more than I do—was it
     because you were not quite sure that she was one of the Lord's people?" 
"Oh, dear, no," answers the young man, quickly, with scarcely repressed impatience in his
     tone—"nothing of the kind. God forbid my being so presumptuously uncharitable!
      How am I to know who is, or who is not? All I know is that
     if she is not, neither am I; and I trust, mother, that you will find, by-and-bye, that they are
     not quite such a scanty nation as you seem to imagine."
"A higher authority than I am has expressly designated them 'a little flock,'
     "says the old woman, sententiously, pursing up her mouth; "but far be it from me to wish to
     judge, whatever you may imply. But I am still waiting to hear what your motive was for breaking
     your engagement, a motive which you seem to have such an unaccountable difficulty in telling
     me."
He looks down, for an instant or two, biting his lips, then speaks petulantly:
"Why should I tell you, mother?—why should I tell any one? A man's motives are his
     own concern, whatever his actions may be; if mine are strong enough to satisfy myself and her,
     surely that is enough."
"Oh, of course," answers his mother, rather nettled at what she considers a want of
     confidence; "only that, unless I am put in possession of the circumstances of the case, I
     really don't see how I can be expected to give advice—"
"I don't want advice," interrupts the young man, eagerly. "I want a much better
     thing—assistance."
"Assistance in what?"
"Why, in hindering that poor girl," he says, with warmth, "from being thrown upon the world
     penniless, helpless, and without a friend, as she will be after the sale at Glan-yr-Afon."
"Not without a friend, as long as you are alive, Bob; one can answer for that !" rejoins his
     mother, rather tartly.
"I count for nothing," says Bob, quietly. "A man's friendship can be of no service to a
     woman, unless he is in some authorised position of relationship or connection with her;
     otherwise he does her more harm than good. What
      she needs, and what I hoped she would have found in you,
     mother, is a woman-friend."
"If," replies his mother, drawing herself up and looking very stiff—"If she is, as you say,
      too proud to avail herself of the home that I am, for your sake, willing to
     offer her, she is likely to be too proud to consent to be befriended in any other
     way."
Brandon looks at her for a moment with something akin to indignant scorn in his face, dutiful
     son as he usually is; then, repenting, throws himself on his knees beside her, and clasping his
     arms about her withered neck, says, entreatingly: "Mother, why are you so hard upon her?—what
     has she done to you? Just think, how would you have liked Jane or Bessy, when they were her
     age, to have been driven out into the world to make their own way, without a single soul to say
     a kind word to them, or give them a helping hand; and," he continues, musingly, "they never
     could have been exposed to the temptations she will be—they never were beautiful, like
     her!"
He had never spoken truer words in all his life, but the truth is not always the best to be
     spoken.
"At all events," says the old lady, with emphasis, freeing herself from his arms, and getting
     rather red in the face face—"At all events, Bob, however disparagingly you may speak of them,
     they were and are good, modest, pious girls, that would not trifle with an honest man's
     affection for their own amusement, as handsomer ones have done before now."
"I never heard of any honest man having given them the chance," retorts Bob, sarcastically,
     quitting his caressing posture, with a revulsion of feeling as sudden as it was complete.
"The servants are assembled," says the youngest, best, modestest, piousest of the girls,
     opening the door, and putting in her little drab face. "Must I tell them to go
      back to the kitchen for a quarter of an hour, or has Bob
     nearly finished his private communication?" 
"Quite!" replies Bob, emphatically.
He is standing leaning against the chimneypiece, his colour heightened, and a sorely angered
     look on his open simple face.
"You need not wait for me, mother," he continues, seeing his parent look inquiringly towards
     him, as she moves with the slowness of age and portliness to the door; "I shall not come to
     prayers to-night. When one prays, one ought to be in charity with all the world, ought not one?
     And I am not."
