
CHAPTER XXXIII THE VALLEY OF PERPETUAL DREAM
The journey from London, which Rupert and Colonel Valence undertook next day, was
      melancholy. In spite of his indomitable vigour and iron frame, the Colonel looked tired, said
      but little, and appeared to be sunk in his own reflections, which could hardly be of a
      cheerful cast. There were moments when he seemed dispirited. A curious experience, which he
      knew not whether to call pain or pleasure, was that of Rupert, as he sat opposite the
      gray-haired man and traced in the lines of his weather-beaten countenance the far-off likeness
      of Hippolyta. At a word, sometimes, the mask would seem to change, the whole expression would
      be soft and gentle, like that of his daughter when a pleasant thought came into her mind; but
      again, it vanished and the stern lines were fixed as ever. The Colonel asked no questions; he
      had gathered the story last night from Rupert's confused narrative, all except the motive
       which could have brought to so sudden a conclusion the idyll they seemed to have
      begun. On the other hand, he spoke without prompting of Ivor Mardol, whose resolution to break
      their long friendship seemed to afflict rather than to anger him. 'Strange,' he said, 'that
      the old man should be so much more advanced than the young! Ivor is sentimental; he talked of
      Victor Hugo. I daresay he writes verses. While I have gone forward with the age, he is turning
      back to Utopia and the idealists. He does not see that the question between Governments and
      people is which shall make an end of the other. But he is very noble.'
The artist replied at random. He felt the old affection for his schoolboy friend reviving;
      but of the argument last night he remembered nothing distinctly. He was suffering almost as on
      the morning when Hippolyta left him, when he sat, a ruined man, in her boudoir. The mind was
      torturing the body. One fear hung upon him and from time to time shook him with a passionate
      thrill; what if she were not at Falside, or had never been there? The journey was a forlorn
      hope. All he could say was that she must, in any case, have written to her father. The old man
      was not dissembling, he thought; had Hippolyta gone from Forrest House with his approval, he
      would not be taking all these pains to convince Rupert that she was lost to him. He would be
      following her to the Continent. She had, then, fled of her own accord. But why? It was an
      impenetrable mystery.

They passed through the scenery which his frequent expeditions to and from Trelingham had
      made familiar; at a certain junction they changed for Toxenden, which was the station nearest
      Falside. They saw nobody of their acquaintance. When they alighted at the small country
      station, looking pretty even in the lap of winter, Colonel Valence ordered a vehicle,
      remarking, as they entered it, 'A fortunate thing that we are not obliged to go round by
      Trelingham! Although, during the last seven years, I have travelled constantly on this line,
      never once have I encountered the Earl or any of his people. They knew when I came or went;
      for it was idle to disguise my name in a place where everybody remembered it. Else I have not
      borne the name of Valence for thirty years and more.'
'The Duke of Adullam is acquainted with it,' said Rupert.
'Ah, has he told you so?' returned the other; 'but the Duke knows everything.'
'Even the parentage of Ivor Mardol,' observed the artist.
'I daresay,' was the careless reply, as Colonel Valence settled down in the carriage.
The evening was dark and cold. The way seemed long, although Glanville knew it from his
      frequent riding over the country in those happy days when he was learning more and more the
      worth of Hippolyta, to be, in fact, but a couple of miles. It went uphill towards the moor,
      then turned again
       rather abruptly, and kept on the bare hillside. And now the sky seemed a huge
      cloud resting on another, which was the dark sullen waste, heavy and dismal in the gloom. They
      turned in at the steep gate of Falside. The evergreens would have hidden the lights had any
      been shining in the library windows. But there were none. That side of the house was quite
      dark. When they reached the second gate they dismounted, and Rupert stood there all impatient
      while the Colonel paid and dismissed the driver. No one came at their approach, although the
      sounds of their wheels must surely, said Rupert to himself, have been audible on the
      gravel-path. He followed Colonel Valence round the cottage, where all seemed deadly still, to
      the housekeeper's room at the back. There was a light in the window. The Colonel tapped in a
      peculiar way; and Dolores, the aged nurse of Hippolyta, came at once to the door. On seeing
      her master she began to explain that Andres had gone to the village.
'Where is my daughter?' inquired the Colonel. She looked at Glanville, whom she had not
      before noticed, and seeing the expression on his face, screamed out some words in her own
      language. Colonel Valence, answering apparently in the same— for Rupert, though he could read
      Spanish, had no practice in hearing it—turned to the artist, and said, 'She has not been here.
      There must be a letter in my study.' And he took the light which Dolores offered. The two men
      ran down the steps, through
       the covered way, and into the house, each disquieted, but neither stopping to
      utter his thought. The library was in perfect order, but had that woebegone appearance which
      comes over a room where no one has dwelt for some time. Colonel Valence, setting down the
      light, began, with uneasy looks, to turn over the pile of miscellaneous correspondence that
      lay undisturbed on the table. There were many letters, which he tore open and flung from him,
      when he saw they had not the enclosure he was expecting. He came to the end of them, turned
      back, shook them out carefully again, and sat down, fixing his eyes on the floor and not
      uttering a word. Glanville was equally silent. At last Colonel Valence looked up, haggard,
      with the deep veins on his forehead swollen. 'Mr. Glanville,' he said, with curious formality,
      'I can find nothing. My daughter must have been murdered.'
Under that dreadful shock the artist reeled and had almost fallen, but recovering himself he
      went to the table; and, for the third time, the correspondence was turned and examined, in the
      vain hope of finding a trace of Hippolyta. She had not written; there was nothing there. The
      two men, when Rupert laid down the last of the papers, sank into a stillness that resembled
      apathy. Neither stirred nor spoke. The Colonel sat with his eyes on the ground; Rupert,
      grasping the table with one hand, stood like a man in a dream. The candle burnt to the socket,
      flickered, and went out. There was darkness
       in the room, and far down the valley a star or two seemed to twinkle. The sound
      of Andres returning on horseback struck upon their ears and woke Colonel Valence from his
      overwhelming grief. He rose and went to the door, calling out to Andres in Spanish. The old
      servant stopped. There was brief colloquy between them; the Colonel did not return; and by and
      by lights were brought into the room, and Dolores set down a tray with supper on it by the
      side of Glanville. Her husband, who brought the lights, said that Colonel Valence would not
      appear again that night, but the stranger's room would be made ready as soon as possible. Both
      the old servants were in great consternation and shedding tears; but Glanville hardly noticed
      them, and the supper remained untasted where it had been laid. He heard the sound of Colonel
      Valence's footstep as he paced up and down outside on the terrace. It was a slight thing, but
      intolerable. Seizing his hat he ran up the steps once more, and let himself out by the little
      postern-gate leading to the bridge. How well he remembered that afternoon when Hippolyta
      brought him through it for the first time, and he followed like her dog, or some poor thing
      she cherished! Gone, gone! She was dead, or worse than dead, to him.
He wandered on the edge of the moor, stumbling over the great stones, but, by some instinct,
      never going beyond the sound of the waterfall, which made a strange monotonous music in the
      night, like a
       sobbing ghost, he said to himself. When some hours were past Andres found him,
      and persuaded him to go in, speaking to the proud English gentleman with soothing words as to
      a child. He showed him the stranger's room. 'My first night at Falside, under her father's
      roof,' murmured Glanville, as he looked round him. 'This is the coming home, and the end of
      the honeymoon. Hippolyta is dead, and I am miserable.' He crept into bed and fell asleep. Next
      morning, when he woke, the fever was upon him, but he would take no heed of it. He came
      downstairs. Colonel Valence was gone,—to London, said the note which he had written and left
      for Glanville. He might be compelled to seek his daughter on the Continent. He would let the
      artist know if he heard anything.
A fire was blazing on the hearth, looking clear as in frosty weather. Dolores, when she had
      laid the table for breakfast, lingered until Rupert sat down, and then, with the tenderness of
      the kind old creature she was, induced him to eat. He made a hasty meal, and at its conclusion
      was setting out from the cottage, when she asked him at what hour he would come back. He
      echoed the words wonderingly. 'Come back?' he said, 'never.' She insisted, and begged him to
      say in what direction he was going. In the same absent way he replied, 'To Trelingham.' Upon
      hearing that she called Andres, and between them they made Glanville stay until the
      pony-chaise could be got ready. He waited by the garden wall; he
       would not enter the house, nor even look towards it, a second time. He seemed to
      have no interest in himself, no purpose save that of reaching Trelingham at the earliest. When
      Andres appeared with the carriage he mounted silently, drew his ulster about him, and sat
      upright, gazing straight on before him, but speaking not a syllable, and seeming not to remark
      the way they went. His thoughts, meanwhile, were busy enough with it, going over the dreams,
      the vanished illusions of that night on which he had been driven along these very paths, in
      the dark, but with Hippolyta's remembrance to light up all within. Now the darkness had
      entered his soul. He did not dare to whisper the name which, barely thought of, pierced him
      like a sword. He wanted to get away from it, to see no more of Falside, to be only the artist
      whose work was to be done at Trelingham. Plans for the future he had none. 'I shall be
      stronger,' he said, 'when I am in the Great Hall painting.' He tried to think of the frescoes,
      but the exertion sickened him. It seemed to him that he was neither living nor dead. He was
      stunned and yet suffering.
The well-known trees rose up to greet him as they came in view of Trelingham Chase. The
      winter- landscape, though bare in places, and taking in the wild moor with its belt of
      dark-blue sea, was soothing and gentle. The great house stretched its wings over the silent
      terrace, where no figure was to be seen. They passed the lodge, drove slowly up the
       winding walk by which Hippolyta had always come when she visited Lady May
      Davenant, and arrived at the chief entrance. The butler, who was at hand, observed Glanville's
      extraordinary pallor, but, with his usual discretion, said nothing except that Mr. Mardol had
      come the evening before, and was at the chalet. Rupert sent him a message, shook Andres by the
      hand, and let him go. It was a relief to see the pony-chaise depart; it had belonged to her.
      While he was taking off his wraps, Ivor, who had been walking near the house, came in and ran
      up, catching him by both hands, and, by a look, inquiring what news there might be. The artist
      bit his lip nervously and turned away. 'She is not there,' he whispered. That was all. They
      understood one another, and said no more.
It was a bad sign that Rupert would neither eat nor lie down. Capable, like all great
      artists, of working for many hours on end, he was also, like them, subject to fits of
      weariness during which he slept the day through. But now he was fatigued, and he wrought on.
      He made the Great Hall his abode, leaving it only to retire late in the evening to his own
      room, where he would throw himself on the bed, sometimes without undressing, and lie, not
      knowing how his thoughts went, in a state of semi- consciousness that left him more tired than
      the day before. His work, however, showed no trace of fatigue. Ivor looked on with grave
      misgivings, astonished that he would not unburden his heart,
       seeing the fever on his brow, but powerless to influence him. Rupert, silent for
      hours, kept his friend in the Great Hall, and seemed disquieted if he went away; which led to
      Ivor's giving up the chalet and sleeping in his old room at the Court, next to Glanville's. He
      received, a few days after his arrival, a most gracious letter from Lord Trelingham, who, with
      his daughter and the Countess Lutenieff, was staying in Paris at the house of a Legitimist
      noble, M. de Flamas. In his own epistle Ivor had said that Rupert had wanted him immediately,
      and he had ventured to anticipate the Earl's permission to spend the necessary time at
      Trelingham. The Earl, in reply, hoped that Mr. Glanville was in his usual health, regretting
      that he had not heard from him for more than a month. Rupert, in fact, could not have said
      when he last wrote to Lord Trelingham. He had forgotten the name of Lady May.
And so he continued to paint the Morte d'Arthur, working from his own designs as though they
      had been another's, not creating but remembering, and with the refrain of his sad thoughts for
      an accompaniment. One evening as he was coming down the ladder from his high scaffold a fit of
      giddiness seized him, and but for his friend, who caught him as he slipped, the accident might
      have proved serious. He walked occasionally on the terrace; but he would never visit any point
      from which the Hermitage was visible. When the letters came he inspected them
       eagerly. There was nothing from Colonel Valence Bernstein wrote several times,
      and Rupert did not answer. At last, when he had been working some ten days with despairing
      eagerness, he laid his brush down and said to Ivor, 'My brain does not seem right. I think it
      means fever. Take care of me when it comes, and let no one enter my room.'
Next day he was unable to rise. He slept a little, woke with a throbbing brow, and hardly
      knew who it was that sat by his bedside. Ivor sent for the physician that had attended Tom
      Davenant. When he came the patient was wandering in his mind, talking much but unintelligibly
      in a low tone, and stretching out his hands every moment for water. The attack, which had been
      delayed by Rupert's energy for so many days, now came in full force. His reason, his life were
      in danger. There could be no thought of moving him. Ivor telegraphed to Lord Trelingham, and
      the same evening received an answer from Lady May announcing that they were coming home, and
      recommending the utmost care of Rupert. Though it was an abrupt termination to a visit that
      the Earl had long resolved to pay and was now enjoying, the good man, who liked Glanville
      exceedingly, at once complied with his daughter's suggestion; and they crossed the Channel
      twenty-four hours after the telegram had acquainted them with Rupert's situation. The
      Countess, not so much interested as inquisitive, and just then at a loss what to do,
      accompanied them.

I shall say little of Lady May's feelings. They are easy to imagine; they would take long to
      describe. How had she lived since her father's illness had compelled her to quit Trelingham
      and Rupert Glanville? As we all do when despair of some pleasant prospect has fallen upon
      us,—from day to day, without hope, letting the hours creep on, and finding existence like sand
      in the mouth. Rupert had never so much as addressed a line to her, though occasions were not
      wanting. He had sent the usual unmeaning messages through Lord Trelingham; but, writing at
      length on subjects connected with painting, and diverging now and then to social topics, he
      did not wear his heart upon his sleeve. To guess at his inner life was impossible. He seemed
      happy; the tone in which he indited these pleasant nothings was a sign of it. Had the Earl's
      health been less uncertain, less dependent on clear skies and medicinal waters, she would have
      urged him to return home, to take up his residence in town, at any rate, during the season,
      where they must from time to time have had a visit from Glanville. But she was tired of
      devising schemes which brought her no nearer the goal. She lived a proud solitary life, making
      the most of her music as the channel of emotions she must otherwise conceal, and conscious
      every day that she was walking in a vain shadow. Of such an existence there is nothing to
      tell, except how long it lasted. For while there were endless changes of feeling, they bore no
      harvest.

And now Glanville was down with brain fever, how brought on she could not imagine. Who was
      to nurse him while it lasted? Any misfortune that left him helpless in her hands was welcome.
      They must hasten back, and keep him at Trelingham. the journey was accomplished slowly,
      because of the Earl; but it could last only a short time at the outside. Lady May kept down
      her trouble. Karina, always watching, saw nothing to lay hold of. And soon they were all once
      more at home.
The meeting between Lady May and Ivor was on both sides full of emotion. But the lady cared
      only for Rupert,—and his friend, at such a time, could not indulge in the self-torment of
      unrequited love. The patient's delirium had increased; he recognised no one, and he talked
      incessantly of the dreadful sights he had looked upon during his night-wanderings in London.
      Ivor thought himself bound by his injunction to let none pass the threshold of the sick-room,
      save the doctor and the nurse. He did not desire that Rupert's secret should get abroad; and
      his former suspicion that Lady May had some thought of marrying the artist, made him doubly
      unwilling that her presence should trouble him. But he had to deal with a determined woman.
      She satisfied Lord Trelingham by getting the physician to assure him that there was no risk of
      infection; she submitted to the jealous surveillance exercised by Mardol over every one that
      came near his friend; and she insisted on her right as hostess and a good Samaritan to see
       that all was as it should be about the invalid. She went and came, but Glanville
      did not look her way. Ivor gave him his medicine, contrived, with the nurse's aid, to pour
      liquid nourishment down his throat; and never left him day or night.
It was an extraordinary thing that, in all his raving, one name never crossed the patient's
      lips. It seemed to be erased from the folds of his brain, or to have sunk into the dim
      recesses whence fever could not pluck it forth. None but Ivor could have told how he came to
      be ill. He had overworked himself and undergone exposure to cold; he must have been sickening
      when he left London. That was all Ivor would say. And the name of Hippolyta was never
      pronounced. Rupert, living over again the scenes which had followed her disappearance,
      recurred continually to the vision of the gray-haired woman whose form he had beheld in the
      dead-house—wherever it was, for he did not know. And by and by another took its place. All day
      long he murmured the name of Annie Dauris; he described the wild look in her eyes with which
      she had started up in her bed at the hospital on seeing him. When the Jew acquainted him with
      her death he had made no remark; his own trouble absorbed his fancy. But now he did not speak
      of Hippolyta. The unknown girl of seventeen, with her fair hair and pallid eyes, seemed to be
      staring at him terrifying him with the thoughts of muddy death, recounting the horrors of the
      wicked river flowing to the sea. A stranger would have
       guessed some story from his words, and guessed all wrong. But Ivor took care
      that Lady May should not overhear them.
For weeks Rupert hung between life and death. His friend, on some pretext or other, twice
      drove to Toxenden,—the only occasions on which he quitted his bedside,—and walking by
      roundabout ways arrived at Falside. There was no news of Hippolyta. Colonel Valence had gone
      abroad. Ivor was thankful to have missed him.
·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
Such an one lives, says the Greek poet, that would be glad to die; and Rupert Glanville's
      story was not ended. Could he have chosen he would never have come back to a sense of misery.
      But neither of his life nor his death was he master. When the fever had brought him to the
      brink of the grave it left him. He awoke to a dull feeling of pain; he looked round, saw Ivor,
      and called him. The loving fellow wept tears of gratitude. Rupert stretched a white hand out
      of the bedclothes and asked, as men do on recovering from a swoon, 'How long have I been
      here?' He was told to keep still and to refrain from talking. He slept once more. Next day
      when he woke there was no pain, but extreme weakness, and in that state he lay for a long
      time. Lady May came frequently, as often as she dared. He showed no sign of displeasure; he
      hardly noticed. Later on, when he was convalescent, he saw that she looked worn and thin.
      'Have you
       had a fever too?' he asked, with the naïve manner which comes back at that
      stage, a reminiscence of childhood. She smiled rather sadly, and answered that it was gone.
      Lord Trelingham's presence gave him evident pleasure; but he did not talk much. He would fix
      his eyes on Lady May as long as she stayed in the room; and when she disappeared, he gazed
      after her. He did not ask who she was, but Ivor sometimes thought his memory must be affected;
      for he seemed not to recall her name, and when he spoke, it was either of their schooldays or
      of the unfinished frescoes which he was anxious to go on with. Had he forgotten Hippolyta? His
      friend, dreading a relapse, did not venture to come near the subject. But one day, before he
      could prevent himself, the name slipped out. Rupert gave no sign. His countenance did not
      change. He answered the question that had been put to him, but it was about the Hermitage, and
      he passed over the once-loved name as though it had been some foreign term, or he had not
      heard it.
During his long illness Ivor, who opened all the letters that came, read several from Mr.
      Bernstein, the last of which declared that he looked on Mrs. Malcolm's recovery as impossible,
      and declined to prosecute the search any longer. He enclosed a formidable account. Ivor went
      to Lord Trelingham, borrowed the money (for Rupert was still delirious), and sent it by return
      of post to Mr. Bernstein. Now he did not know what to do with the receipt.
       Money of his own would be shortly due, enough to repay Lord Trelingham, though
      leaving himself poor enough for the next twelve months. But if Rupert had forgotten, why
      recall this frightful business? He thrust the Jew's epistles into the fire; he locked away the
      receipt among his own papers; and the artist, who put no questions, did not hear from the
      private inquiry office again.
It was midsummer, and one of the pleasantest days of the year, when Rupert came down,
      recovered in health, but somewhat changed, it would appear, in disposition. He was no longer
      melancholy or fantastic, neither was there the same brightness about him. He seemed grateful
      to every one for a kind word. He sat and walked a great deal with Ivor in the course of the
      next few days; then he would stay longer in the drawing-room, and Lady May observed, with the
      most exquisite delight, that he seemed to depend on her for his comfort, and asked her often
      to improvise on the piano, while he sat and listened. The Countess had gone away at an early
      stage of his illness; she could not endure invalids. She said the thought of one in the house
      made her unwell. Tom Davenant, when he knew that Ivor was back again at Trelingham, wrote to
      him often, and in the most affectionate terms; but he was still smarting under his
      disappointment, and paid them no visit. So that Rupert and Lady May were almost as much alone
      as when they spent their mornings in the picture-gallery.
Ivor, looking on with kinder and sadder eyes than
       the Countess had done,—now nearly two years ago,— considered how these things
      might end. He spoke to Rupert casually of Falside. There was no tremor in return. He went so
      far, in his experiment, as to remark that Colonel Valence must be from home, and the artist
      replied, 'He went after meeting me in the churchyard.' Could it be possible that the episode
      of his affection for Hippolyta, with all its incidents, was blotted from his memory? Full of
      the idea, and ready to encourage it in Rupert's interest, Ivor did a bold thing. When Mr.
      Bernstein wrote to resign his commission, he added that Mrs. Malcolm's portrait had been
      returned to Mr. Glanville's house in Belgravia. Not long after, an epistle from his solicitor,
      which Ivor opened, apprised him of the place where Rupert and Hippolyta had lived during their
      brief union. The man of business required instructions as to Forrest House. Mr. and Mrs.
      Malcolm, it appeared, had left suddenly; the servants' wages were unpaid, and but for Mrs.
      Leeming, who had, been sent there originally by the solicitor, the red brick mansion must have
      been for several months at the mercy of any one that chose to come in. Ivor, in reply,
      informed the solicitor of Rupert's dangerous condition, sent money to pay the servants, and
      recommended that the house should be let as soon as possible. This was done, and there
      remained only the question of Hippolyta's portrait. Ivor now took the opportunity, while Lady
      May and the artist were so much together, of running up to London;
       called in at Clarence Gardens, opened the parcels he found there, and carried
      away the dangerous picture to Grafton Place. He consulted a distinguished physician, and after
      giving him the history of Glanville's brain fever, the events which had led to it, and the
      apparent loss of memory which it had caused, asked him what advice he could offer. Among other
      things he inquired, 'Would it be well for Rupert to marry?'
'Yes,' answered the physician, 'but not to live in the neighbourhood of his disaster. Let
      him marry and go abroad, practise his profession, and be kept from everything which would
      remind him of the lost Hippolyta.
From that moment Ivor resolved that the marriage should take place, cost what it might to
      himself or to any one else. He felt a choking sensation in his throat; it was surrendering his
      dearest illusions. But let them go, he said, provided Rupert were safe.
On his return he found matters unchanged, the lady devoted to the gentleman, and the
      gentleman strangely dependent on the lady. He took Rupert aside one bright afternoon, as they
      were walking on the terrace, when the air was full of sweetness, the moor glorious under
      floating clouds, the sea flashing upon the horizon. There was a party of lawn-tennis at
      Trelingham, and the laughing voices of young people and the sound of their playing came up
      where the friends paused. 'Rupert,' said Ivor, 'why don't you marry Lady May?' He waited
       with intense anxiety for the answer, but it was not long. 'I never thought of
      it,' replied his friend, in a calm voice; 'do you fancy she would accept me?' —'Go and ask
      her,' said the chivalrous young man; 'she is walking at the other end of the terrace.'
      Glanville raised his eyes. She was alone, pacing up and down thoughtfully. He quitted Ivor,
      went slowly along, looking neither to the right nor to the left, until he approached within a
      yard of her. She stopped and turned. 'Lady May,' he said, holding his hat in his hand, 'Ivor
      thinks you would marry me, if I asked you. Is it true?' Her heart gave a great leap. She put
      out her hand. 'Why did you not ask me before?' she said. And they walked back along the
      terrace together. Ivor was watching them and saw what had passed. 'God bless them,' he
      murmured in a half-groan as he turned away. But they were by his side. 'It is true, Ivor,'
      said his friend, with a subdued tenderness that had something marvellously strange in it to
      one who knew his fiery temperament. 'Lady May says she will marry me. Will you come to our
      wedding?' The promise was given. Rupert continuing said, 'I must have done with the frescoes,
      however. And, Lady May,'—she trembled as he addressed her,—'when we are married we will leave
      Trelingham. The air is not good for me.' She was surprised; but Ivor thought,'What good genius
      inspired him to say that at once?' It was a formal stipulation, so to speak. The lady cared
      nothing for Trelingham if Rupert were
       away; and with him she would have roamed the world.
Her father was visible in the library. She proposed that they should go to him without
      delay. The artist, apparently having no will but hers, consented; and as he looked up from his
      desk the Earl, to his astonishment, beheld his daughter leading Rupert towards him. It was
      bewildering, but Lady May laughed as she told him. 'Karina knew my secret long ago,' she said;
      'this gentleman has kept his till to-day.' Rupert, with a look of great clearness in eyes and
      countenance, interposed, 'I meant to ask you when I finished the Madonna of the Seraphim; but
      I went away.' 'Ah, yes,' she answered, smiling a rebuke at him, 'you went away. But you never
      shall again.' Lord Trelingham was still confused. 'Are you sure that you can make Mr.
      Glanville happy?' he said to his daughter; 'in a marriage like this so much depends on the
      wife.'—'I am sure that I love him,' she answered, and Rupert thanked her with his eyes. 'Very
      well,' said the Earl, 'you are your own mistress, my dear. You know I never wished you to
      marry your cousin, even when I thought you liked him.'—'Oh,' she said laughingly, 'because of
      the horoscope. But are you quite certain it was Tom's and not mine? Mistakes will happen, I
      suppose, even in astrology. But we believe in happy stars, don't we, Rupert?' It was the first
      time she had called him by his name, and her eyes sparkled. 'What was that about Tom
       Davenant's horoscope? he inquired, as they left the library. 'It is all
      nonsense,' she said; 'something about his being drowned. I will tell you another time, not
      now; the day is too beautiful for sad things.' They heard the tennis-players coming from their
      game, laughing merrily.
'What a light there is on the waters!' murmured Rupert, as they stood once more on the
      terrace, with the sea in front of them. May put her hand in his, and they continued gazing in
      silence, side by side.

