
CHAPTER VII.
FIVE minutes more, and three large brown parasols, a large black poke bonnet and two little
     dirt-coloured ones, are seen slowly pacing down the hill to the House of Prayer. The lovers
     have Plas Berwyn to themselves. Bob has gained his point, despite a parting fleer from Bessy as
     to the undesirability of neglecting the Creator for the creature.
"Tim Dowler! Tim Dowler! Tim Dowler!" cries Esther,
      joyously, jumping about the room like a child, and mimicking
     the one church bell which is heard clearly tinkling through the valley. "Listen, Bob! Does it
     not say 'Tim Dowler' just exactly as if it were speaking it? Oh! look here: I'll lose all their
     places for them in their good books, and I bet anything they'll never find them again." So
     saying, she proceeds to remove the paper-knife from the "Saturday Night of the World," and
     carefully closes "Stop the Leak."
"What spirits you are in to-day, Essie!" says Bob, balancing himself on the window-sill, with
     his long legs dangling lugubriously, and following her about the room with his eyes, as a child
     does a butterfly. "I believe it is because you are going to be rid of me for a fortnight."
"Partly, I think," replies Esther, nonchalantly. "It seems as if all my life I had seen and
     heard of nothing but Glan-yr-Afon and Plas Berwyn, Plas Berwyn and Glan-yr- Afon, and now I'm
     going to see and hear something fresh; it may be better and it may be worse; but, at all
     events, it will be something different. Perhaps I shall come back as the country mouse did,
     more in love than ever with my own cheeseparings and tallow-candle ends; perhaps"—swinging her
     Sunday bonnet by the strings and looking up maliciously —"perhaps I shall see some one I like
     better than you, and not come back at all."
"Hush!" he cries, hurriedly, putting up his hand before her mouth. "Don't say that; it is bad
     luck. I should not mind your saying it if it were not so horribly probable."
Esther subsides into gravity.
"I wish to Heaven you were not so fond of me!" she says, hastily; "please do try not to be:
     it makes me feel as if I were cheating all the time—having things and not paying for them."
"I could have given you up at first, if you had told me it
      must be so positively; I'm sure I could have made shift to do
     without you, as I have made shift to do without many a thing that other fellows consider
     necessaries of life; but now—"
He has seized her two hands, and now holds her standing there before him. To hold her hand is
     the one familiarity Robert is permitted; not once in all his life has he kissed his
     betrothed.
"It was a foolish, silly custom," she said one day, pettishly—"no sensibler than rubbing
     noses together, as the Feejee islanders did; for her part, she hated it, etc."
"But now, what? finish your sentence, please," says the little captive, gaily.
"Esther, I wish these people had not got a son."
"What people?"
"These Gerards."
"Why so? Do you think that they would have left you their money if they had not?"
"No, not that," smiling against his will. "But, Essie, you'll promise to write and tell me
     what he is like?"
"Yes."
"What sort of age?"
"Yes."
"Whether you see much of him?"
"Yes."
"What he says to you?"
"Come, I cannot promise that," says Esther, bursting out laughing. "Oh you dear old goose!
     are you jealous of a name, a shade, an imagination?"
"I am jealous," he answers, reddening. "I can no more help it than a man in the gout
     can help having twinges. I shall always be jealous until you are really mine past stealing or
     taking back again: after that I never shall."
"I should hope not," retorts she, with levity: "if you
      were, I should think it my duty to try and give you some
     cause."
The church bell has ceased; there is no sound in the quiet room but that of one fat-bodied
     bluebottle, labouring and buzzing up the pane, and then tumbling back again. Robert has
     abandoned the window-sill, finding it a painful and not luxurious seat: he is walking up and
     down, up and down; one stride and a half of his long legs taking him from end to end of the
     little room. Esther has thrown herself into an American rocking chair, and is rocking violently
     backwards and forwards, trying her best to tip herself over.
"Promise me, Essie," says the young man, coming to a sudden standstill beside her—"promise me
     that you'll talk seriously of—you know what—when you come home; I give you till then? Good
     heavens! what sort of stuff could Jacob have been made of to have held out all those fourteen
     years !" 
"'The little maid replied,
Some say a little sighed,
And what shall we have for to eat, eat, eat ?
Will the love that you're so rich in
Make a fire in the kitchen,
Or the little god of love turn the spit, spit, spit?'" answers
     Esther, evading her lover's urgency by a quotation.
"If I could get an Adjutancy of Volunteers," pursues he, resuming his walk, with his eyes
     bent on the ground, and frowning away in the intensity of his thinking, "or, better still, a
     Militia one, or a Chief Constableship, or the Governorship of a gaol: there are always some of
     those sort of things going about. Why should I not come in for one as well as another fellow?
     We want so little—"
"Want so little?" interrupts Esther, briskly. "Speak
      for yourself, please: I want a great deal; only, as far as I
     can see, want is likely to be my master."
"You are no fine lady," pursues he, talking more to himself than to her, "that requires to be
     waited on; you can make your own bonnets and gowns, cannot you? My sisters always do."
"So I should imagine," says Esther, drily.
"What do you mean? Are not they all right? is there anything the matter with them?" inquires
     he, stopping short and looking surprised, as if the idea of there being any deficiency in his
     sisters' costumes was an entirely new light to him. But Miss Craven purses up her pretty mouth
     in a silence more damnatory of the Misses Brandon's toilettes than any words could be.
"If we had not a large enough income to live by ourselves," says he, beginning again his
     tramp, tramp, "we might join housekeeping with mother and the girls; they would not object, I'm
     sure."
"But I should, strongly," cries Esther, springing up, and getting crimson with
     vexation. "Why, we should all be by the ears in a week. Robert, how many times will you make me
     tell you that I like you well enough to go sailing along beside you on the sea of life as long
     as it is nice and smooth, but I really do not love you enough to go bumping over rocks and into
     breakers with you? I would do it for Jack, and welcome, but for no other human being on the
     face of the earth."
"Will you never like me as well as you do Jack?" he inquires, sadly, looking at her with eyes
     so loving, that one would think her own must catch the infection. But, no; they remain coldly
     bright, with the cold brightness of friendship. 
"Never."
"Not after ten years?"

"No."
"Nor twenty?"
"No."
"Nor thirty?"
"No, nor a thousand. Cannot you see what a different thing it is? If one loses a lover one
     can get a hundred more just as good as, if not better than, the one lost; but if I were to lose
     Jack—oh, God! how can I suggest anything so awful—who could give me another brother?"
"So be it, then, since it must be that I am to play second fiddle all my life (sighing); but,
     Essie, you'll promise to write to me every day, won't you?"
"Certainly not."
"Every second day, then?"
"Certainly not."
"Twice a week, then?"
"Per—haps; if I have anything to say."
"And you'll be sure not to stay beyond the fortnight?"
"That depends. If they are fine, and inclined to 'country cousin' me, I shall
     probably be back the day after to-morrow: if they make a great fuss with me, and if Mr. Gerard
     is young and handsome and civil-spoken, I dare say you will not see me again under two
     months."
He looks so sincerely pained that her conscience smites her.
"There," she says, "I have teased you enough for one day; let us kiss and make friends,—that
     is, figuratively. Come," putting out her hand to draw him along with her, "let us go to the
     kitchen garden and see if the wasps have left us any apricots. If Bessy were here, she would
     tell us some pleasing anecdote of how some people went and picked apricots on the Sabbath, and
     got stung in the throat and swelled, and died in great agonies; but I'm willing to run the risk
     if you are."


Nine o'clock! The maid-servants are at evening church, combining the double advantage of
      making their souls and meeting their sweethearts. Esther, happily rid of hers, is
     sitting on the ground at the French window of the study, beside her brother. The rooks that
     blackened the meadow awhile ago have flapped heavily home to the mile-off rookery. It is such a
     great, still world; who would fancy that there were so many noisy men, barking dogs, snorting
     steam-engines in it? It seems a world of stars and flowers, as one would imagine it after
     reading one of Mrs. Heman's poems.
Jack is smoking; now and then Esther takes the pipe out of his mouth, gives a little puff,
     coughs and chokes, and puts it back again. Oh, blessed state of intimacy, when you may sit by a
     person for hours and never utter to them! Esther is thinking what a pretty, pleasant Idyllic
     life hers is; like an Arcadian shepherdess's in this lovely valley, far away from smoky towns
     and vulgar cares and sordid toils. Young and beautiful (what pretty woman is mock-modest to her
     own thoughts?), living with a brother who is to her what father, mother, brothers, sisters,
     husband, children, are to other women; a brother who is only three years older than herself,
     consequently not likely to die much before her. She is thinking, a little regretfully, that,
     fair and poetic as this life is, it is passing, and that as it passes she does not feel its
     beauty as acutely as she ought—does not suck out all its sweetness, as a man swallows a
     delicious draught hastily, carelessly, without tasting and dwelling upon its rare flavour. It
     is the same sort of thought (only much weaker) as those that torment us as we sit
     alone by the hearth mourning our dead, and reproach ourselves, with a yearning pain, that while
     they were yet with us we did not draw our chairs half close enough to theirs—did not take
      hold of their hands and kiss their faces half often
     enough—did not half often enough tell them, with eager lips, how preciouser than life they were
     to us.
"What will you be doing this time to-morrow, Essie?" asks Jack, breaking in upon her reverie;
     and has not he a right, for is not he king and hero of it?
"Wishing myself back again, to a dead certainty," answers Essie, emphatically. "Jack"
     (rubbing her cheek up and down softly against his shoulder—Jack is but a young, slight
     stripling), "I do believe that if I were in heaven, and saw you sitting all alone here smoking
     your pipe, I should have to throw away my harp and crown, and come down to keep you
     company."
"If you were in heaven," returns Jack, gravely, "I think you would be so surprised and
     pleased to find yourself there that you would be in no hurry to come out again for me or
     anybody else."
"Perhaps so, but I think not," she answers, sighing, and thrusting her arm gently through
     his.
"Have you got any money, Essie "
"Plenty."
"How much?"
"Plenty."
"But how much?"
"Never you mind."
"But I do mind."
"Enough to take me there and bring me back again, and I don't suppose they'll charge me for
     board and lodging."
"Servants at those sort of swell places expect such a lot of tipping," says Jack, pensively,
     knocking the ash out of his pipe.
"They may expect, then; a little disappointment is very wholesome for us all. They are much
     better able to tip me than I them."

"There are sure to be charity sermons, too," continues the boy, with a forethought worthy of
     riper years. "I don't know how it is, but I never went to a strange place in my life without
     there being a collection for the Kaffirs or the Jews or the Additional Curates or something the
     very first Sunday after I got there."
"I would pretend I had forgotten my purse."
Jack puts his pipe in his pocket, rises, retires into his sanctum, lights a candle, rummages
     in a drawer, and presently returns with a five-pound note. Bank notes grew but in scanty crops
     at Glan-yr-Afon.
"Here, Essie."
"No! no! No!" cries Essie, volubly, jumping up and clasping her hands behind her
     back.
"Yes! yes! YES!
"No! no! You won't have enough money to pay the men on Saturday night."
"Talk about what you understand," says Jack, gruffly. "Do you think I'm going to let my
     sister go about like a beggar and whine for halfpence?"
"Oh, Jack, Jack!" throwing herself about his neck, and burying her face in his sunburnt
     throat. "How bitter it is always to take, and never to give! Oh! if I had but something to give
     you; but you know I have got nothing in the world."
"You have got Bob."
"Ah! so I have" (making a little grimace); "and if he would do you any good, you might have
     him, and welcome, to make mincemeat of, if you liked."
