
CHAPTER XXIV
That same afternoon Robert started on a walk to a distant farm, where one of his
      Sunday-school boys lay recovering from rheumatic fever. The rector had his pocket full of
      articles—a story-book in one, a puzzle map in the other—destined for Master Carter's
      amusement. On the way he was to pick up Mr. Wendover at the park gates.
It was a delicious April morning. A soft west wind blew through leaf and grass—

'Driving sweet buds, like flocks, to feed in air.'

The spring was stirring everywhere, and Robert raced along, feeling in every vein a life, an
      ebullience akin to that of nature. As he neared the place of meeting it occurred to him that
      the squire had been unusually busy lately, unusually silent and absent too on their walks.
      What was he always at work on?
       Robert had often inquired of him as to the nature of those piles of proof and
      manuscript with which his table was littered. The squire had never given any but the most
      general answer, and had always changed the subject. There was an invincible personal
      reserve about him which, through all his walks and talks with Elsmere, had never as yet broken
      down. He would talk of other men and other men's labours by the hour, but not of his own.
      Elsmere reflected on the fact, mingling with the reflection a certain humorous scorn of his
      own constant openness and readiness to take counsel with the world.
'However, his book isn't a mere excuse, as Langham's is,' Elsmere inwardly
      remarked. 'Langham, in a certain sense, plays even with learning; Mr. Wendover plays at
      nothing.'
By the way, he had a letter from Langham in his pocket much more cheerful and human than
      usual. Let him look through it again.
Not a word, of course, of that National Gallery experience!—a circumstance, however, which
      threw no light on it either way.
'I find myself a good deal reconciled to life by this migration of mine,' wrote Langham.
      'Now that my enforced duties to them are all done with, my fellow-creatures seem to me much
      more decent fellows than before. The great stir of London, in which, unless I please, I have
      no part whatever, attracts me more than I could have thought possible. No one in these noisy
      streets has any rightful claim upon me. I have cut away at one stroke lectures, and Boards of
      Studies, and tutors' meetings, and all the rest of the wearisome Oxford make-believe, and the
      creature left behind feels lighter and nimbler than he has felt for years. I go to concerts
      and theatres; I look at the people in the streets; I even begin to take an outsider's interest
      in social questions, in the puny dykes which well-meaning people are trying to raise all round
      us against the encroaching, devastating labour-troubles of the future. By dint of running away
      from life, I may end by cutting a much more passable figure in it than before. Be consoled, my
      dear Elsmere; reconsider your remonstrances.'
There, under the great cedar by the gate, stood Mr. Wendover. Illumined as he was by the
      spring sunshine, he struck Elsmere as looking unusually shrunken and old. And yet under the
      look of physical exhaustion there was a new serenity, almost a peacefulness of expression,
      which gave the whole man a different aspect.
'Don't take me far,' he said abruptly, as they started. 'I have not got the energy for it. I
      have been over-working, and must go away.'
'I have been sure of it for some time,' said Elsmere warmly. 'You ought to have a long rest.
      But mayn't I know, Mr. Wendover, before you take it, what this great task is you have been
      toiling at? Remember, you have never told me a word of it.


And Elsmere's smile had in it a touch of most friendly reproach. Fatigue had left the
      scholar relaxed, comparatively defenceless. His sunk and wrinkled eyes lit up with a smile,
      faint indeed, but of unwonted softness.
'A task indeed,' he said with a sigh, 'the task of a lifetime. To-day I finished the second
      third of it. Probably before the last section is begun some interloping German will have
      stepped down before me; it is the way of the race! But for the moment there is the
      satisfaction of having come to an end of some sort—a natural halt, at any rate.'
Elsmere's eyes were still interrogative. 'Oh, well,' said the squire hastily, 'it is a book
      I planned just after I took my doctor's degree at Berlin. It struck me then as the great want
      of modern scholarship. It is a History of Evidence, or rather, more strictly, "A History of
       Testimony."'
Robert started. The library flashed into his mind, and Langham's figure in the long gray
      coat sitting on the stool.
'A great subject,' he said slowly, 'a magnificent subject. How have you conceived it, I
      wonder?'
'Simply from the standpoint of evolution, of development. The philosophical value of the
      subject is enormous. You must have considered it, of course; every historian must. But few
      people have any idea in detail of the amount of light which the history of human witness in
      the world, systematically carried through, throws on the history of the human mind; that is to
      say, on the history of ideas.'
The squire paused, his keen scrutinising look dwelling on the face beside him, as though to
      judge whether he were understood.
'Oh, true!' cried Elsmere; 'most true. Now I know what vague want it is that has been
      haunting me for months——'
He stopped short, his look, aglow with all the young thinker's ardour, fixed on the
      squire.
The squire received the outburst in silence—a somewhat ambiguous silence.
'But go on,' said Elsmere; 'please go on.'
'Well, you remember,' said the squire slowly, 'that when Tractarianism began I was for a
      time one of Newman's victims. Then, when Newman departed, I went over body and bones to the
      Liberal reaction which followed his going. In the first ardour of what seemed to me a release
      from slavery I migrated to Berlin, in search of knowledge which there was no getting in
      England, and there, with the taste of a dozen aimless theological controversies still in my
      mouth, this idea first took hold of me. It was simply this:—Could one through an exhaustive
      examination of human records, helped by modern physiological and mental science, get at the
      conditions, physical and mental, which govern the greater or lesser correspondence between
      human witness and the fact it reports?'
'A giant's task!' cried Robert: 'hardly conceivable!'
The squire smiled slightly—the smile of a man who looks
       back with indulgent half-melancholy satire on the rash ambitions of his youth.
'Naturally,' he resumed, 'I soon saw I must restrict myself to European testimony, and that
      only up to the Renaissance. To do that, of course, I had to dig into the East, to learn
      several Oriental languages—Sanskrit among them. Hebrew I already knew. Then, when I had got my
      languages, I began to work steadily through the whole mass of existing records, sifting and
      comparing. It is thirty years since I started. Fifteen years ago I finished the section
      dealing with classical antiquity—with India, Persia, Egypt, and Judæa. To-day I have put the
      last strokes to a History of Testimony from the Christian era down to the sixth century—from
      Livy to Gregory of Tours, from Augustus to Justinian.'
Elsmere turned to him with wonder, with a movement of irrepressible homage. Thirty years of
      unbroken solitary labour for one end, one cause! In our hurried fragmentary life, a purpose of
      this tenacity, this power of realising itself, strikes the imagination.
'And your two books?'
'Were a mere interlude,' replied the squire briefly. 'After the completion of the first part
      of my work, there were certain deposits left in me which it was a relief to get rid of,
      especially in connection with my renewed impressions of England,' he added drily.
Elsmere was silent, thinking this then was the explanation of the squire's minute and
      exhaustive knowledge of the early Christian centuries, a knowledge into which—apart from
      certain forbidden topics—he had himself dipped so freely. Suddenly, as he mused, there awoke
      in the young man a new hunger, a new unmanageable impulse towards frankness of speech. All his
      nascent intellectual powers were alive and clamorous. For the moment his past reticences and
      timidities looked to him absurd. The mind rebelled against the barriers it had been rearing
      against itself. It rushed on to sweep them away, crying out that all this shrinking from free
      discussion had been at bottom 'a mere treason to faith.'
'Naturally, Mr. Wendover,' he said at last, and his tone had a half-defiant, half-nervous
      energy, 'you have given your best attention all these years to the Christian problems.'
'Naturally,' said the squire drily. Then, as his companion still seemed to wait, keenly
      expectant, he resumed, with something cynical in the smile which accompanied the words,—
'But I have no wish to infringe our convention.'
'A convention was it?' replied Elsmere, flushing. 'I think I only wanted to make my own
      position clear and prevent misunderstanding. But it is impossible that I should be indifferent
      to the results of thirty years such work as you can give to so great a subject.'
The squire drew himself up a little under his cloak and
       seemed to consider. His tired eyes, fixed on the spring lane before them, saw in
      reality only the long retrospects of the past. Then a light broke in them, transformed them—a
      light of battle. He turned to the man beside him, and his sharp look swept over him from head
      to foot. Well, if he would have it, let him have it. He had been contemptuously content so far
      to let the subject be. But Mr. Wendover, in spite of his philosophy, had never been proof all
      his life against an anti-clerical instinct worthy almost of a Paris municipal councillor. In
      spite of his fatigue there woke in him a kind of cruel whimsical pleasure at the notion of
      speaking, once for all, what he conceived to be the whole bare truth to this clever attractive
      dreamer, to the young fellow who thought he could condescend to science from the standpoint of
      the Christian miracles!
'Results?' he said interrogatively. 'Well, as you will understand, it is tolerably difficult
      to summarise such a mass at a moment's notice. But I can give you the lines of my last
      volumes, if it would interest you to hear them.'
That walk prolonged itself far beyond Mr. Wendover's original intention. There was something
      in the situation, in Elsmere's comments, or arguments, or silences, which after a while
      banished the scholar's sense of exhaustion and made him oblivious of the country distances. No
      man feels another's soul quivering and struggling in his grasp without excitement, let his
      nerve and his self-restraint be what they may.
As for Elsmere, that hour and a half, little as he realised it at the time, represented the
      turning-point of life. He listened, he suggested, he put in an acute remark here, an argument
      there, such as the squire had often difficulty in meeting. Every now and then the inner
      protest of an attacked faith would break through in words so full of poignancy, in imagery so
      dramatic, that the squire's closely-knit sentences would be for the moment wholly disarranged.
      On the whole, he proved himself no mean guardian of all that was most sacred to himself and to
      Catherine, and the squire's intellectual respect for him rose considerably.
All the same, by the end of their conversation that first period of happy unclouded youth we
      have been considering was over for poor Elsmere. In obedience to certain inevitable laws and
      instincts of the mind, he had been for months tempting his fate, inviting catastrophe. None
      the less did the first sure approaches of that catastrophe fill him with a restless resistance
      which was in itself anguish.
As to the squire's talk, it was simply the outpouring of one of the richest, most sceptical,
      and most highly-trained of minds on the subject of Christian origins. At no previous period of
      his life would it have greatly affected Elsmere. But now at every step the ideas, impressions,
      arguments bred in him by his months of historical work and ordinary converse with the squire
      rushed in, as they had done once before, to
       cripple resistance, to check an emerging answer, to justify Mr. Wendover.
We may quote a few fragmentary utterances taken almost at random from the long wrestle of
      the two men, for the sake of indicating the main lines of a bitter after-struggle.

'Testimony like every other human product has developed. Man's power of
       apprehending and recording what he sees and hears has grown from less to more, from weaker to
       stronger, like any other of his faculties, just as the reasoning powers of the cave-dweller
       have developed into the reasoning powers of a Kant. What one wants is the ordered proof of
       this, and it can be got from history and experience.'


'To plunge into the Christian period without having first cleared the mind as to what is
       meant in history and literature by "the critical method," which in history may be defined as
       the "science of what is credible," and in literature as "the science of what is rational," is
       to invite fiasco. The theologian in such a state sees no obstacle to accepting an arbitrary
       list of documents with all the strange stuff they may contain, and declaring them to be sound
       historical material, while he applies to all the strange stuff of a similar kind surrounding
       them the most rigorous principles of modern science. Or he has to make believe that the
       reasoning processes exhibited in the speeches of the Acts, in certain passages of St. Paul's
       Epistles, or in the Old Testament quotations in the Gospels, have a validity for the mind of
       the nineteenth century, when in truth they are the imperfect, half-childish products of the
       mind of the first century, of quite insignificant or indirect value to the historian of fact,
       of enormous value to the historian of testimony and its varieties.'


'Suppose, for instance, before I begin to deal with the Christian story, and the earliest
       Christian development, I try to make out beforehand what are the moulds, the channels into
       which the testimony of the time must run. I look for these moulds, of course, in the dominant
       ideas, the intellectual preconceptions and preoccupations existing when the period
       begins.
'In the first place, I shall find present in the age which saw the birth of Christianity,
       as in so many other ages, a universal preconception in favour of miracle—that is to say, of
       deviations from the common norm of experience, governing the work of all men of
        all schools. Very well, allow for it then. Read the testimony of the period in the
       light of it. Be prepared for the inevitable differences between it and the testimony of your
       own day. The witness of the time is not true, nor, in the strict sense, false. It is merely
       incompetent, half-trained, pre-scientific, but all through perfectly natural. The wonder
       would
        have been to have had a life of Christ without miracles. The air teems with them.
       The East is full of Messiahs. Even a Tacitus is superstitious. Even a Vespasian works
       miracles. Even a Nero cannot die, but fifty years after his death is still looked for as the
       inaugurator of a millennium of horror. The Resurrection is partly invented, partly imagined,
       partly ideally true—in any case wholly intelligible and natural, as a product of the age,
       when once you have the key of that age.
'In the next place, look for the preconceptions that have a definite historical origin;
       those, for instance, flowing from the pre-Christian, apocalyptic literature of the Jews,
       taking the Maccabean legend of Daniel as the centre of inquiry—those flowing from Alexandrian
       Judaism and the school of Philo—those flowing from the Palestinian schools of exegesis.
       Examine your synoptic gospels, your Gospel of St. John, your Apocalypse, in the light of
       these. You have no other chance of understanding them. But so examined, they fall into place,
       become explicable and rational; such material as science can make full use of. The doctrine
       of the Divinity of Christ, Christian eschatology, and Christian views of prophecy will also
       have found their place in a sound historical scheme!'


'It is discreditable now for the man of intelligence to refuse to read his Livy in the
       light of his Mommsen. My object has been to help in making it discreditable to him to refuse
       to read his Christian documents in the light of a trained scientific criticism. We shall have
       made some positive advance in rationality when the man who is perfectly capable of dealing
       sanely with legend in one connection, and, in another, will insist on confounding it with
       history proper, cannot do so any longer without losing caste, without falling ipso
        facto out of court with men of education. It is enough for a man of letters if he has
       helped ever so little in the final staking out of the boundaries between reason and
       unreason!'

And so on. These are mere ragged gleanings from an ample store. The discussion in reality
      ranged over the whole field of history, plunged into philosophy, and into the subtlest
      problems of mind. At the end of it, after he had been conscious for many bitter moments of
      that same constriction of heart which had overtaken him once before at Mr. Wendover's hands,
      the religious passion in Elsmere once more rose with sudden stubborn energy against the iron
      negations pressed upon it.
'I will not fight you any more, Mr. Wendover,' he said, with his moved flashing look. 'I am
      perfectly conscious that my own mental experience of the last two years has made it necessary
      to re-examine some of these intellectual foundations of faith. But as to the faith itself,
      that is its own witness. It does not depend, after all, upon anything external, but upon the
      living voice of the Eternal in the soul of man!'


Involuntarily his pace quickened. The whole man was gathered into one great, useless,
      pitiful defiance, and the outer world was forgotten. The squire kept up with difficulty a
      while, a faint glimmer of sarcasm playing now and then round the straight thin-lipped mouth.
      Then suddenly he stopped.
'No, let it be. Forget me and my book, Elsmere. Everything can be got out of in this world.
      By the way, we seem to have reached the ends of the earth. Those are the new Mile End
      cottages, I believe. With your leave, I'll sit down in one of them, and send to the Hall for
      the carriage.'
Elsmere's repentant attention was drawn at once to his companion.
'I am a selfish idiot,' he said hotly, 'to have led you into over-walking and over-talking
      like this.'
The squire made some short reply and instantly turned the matter off. The momentary softness
      which had marked his meeting with Elsmere had entirely vanished, leaving only the Mr. Wendover
      of every day, who was merely made awkward and unapproachable by the slightest touch of
      personal sympathy. No living being, certainly not his foolish little sister, had any
       right to take care of the squire. And as the signs of age became more apparent, this
      one fact had often worked powerfully on the sympathies of Elsmere's chivalrous youth, though
      as yet he had been no more capable than any one else of breaking through the squire's haughty
      reserve.
As they turned down the newly-worn track to the cottages, whereof the weekly progress had
      been for some time the delight of Elsmere's heart, they met old Meyrick in his pony-carriage.
      He stopped his shambling steed at sight of the pair. The bleared spectacled eyes lit up, the
      prim mouth broke into a smile which matched the April sun.
'Well, Squire; well, Mr. Elsmere, are you going to have a look at those places? Never saw
      such palaces. I only hope I may end my days in anything so good. Will you give me a lease,
      Squire?'
Mr. Wendover's deep eyes took a momentary survey, half indulgent, half contemptuous, of the
      naïve, awkward-looking old creature in the pony-carriage. Then, without troubling to find an
      answer, he went his way.
Robert stayed chatting a moment or two, knowing perfectly well what Meyrick's gay garrulity
      meant. A sharp and bitter sense of the ironies of life swept across him. The squire humanised,
      influenced by him—he knew that was the image in Meyrick's mind; he remembered with a quiet
      scorn its presence in his own. And never, never had he felt his own weakness and the strength
      of that grim personality so much as at that instant.
That evening Catherine noticed an unusual silence and depression in Robert. She did her best
      to cheer it away, to get at the cause of it. In vain. At last, with her usual wise
       tenderness, she left him alone, conscious herself, as she closed the study door
      behind her, of a momentary dreariness of soul, coming she knew not whence, and only dispersed
      by the instinctive upward leap of prayer.
Robert was no sooner alone than he put down his pipe and sat brooding over the fire. All the
      long debate of the afternoon began to fight itself out again in the shrinking mind. Suddenly,
      in his restless pain, a thought occurred to him. He had been much struck in the squire's
      conversation by certain allusions to arguments drawn from the Book of Daniel. It was not a
      subject with which Robert had any great familiarity. He remembered his Pusey dimly, certain
      Divinity lectures, an article of Westcott's.
He raised his hand quickly and took down the monograph on The Use of the Old Testament
       in the New, which the squire had sent him in the earliest days of their acquaintance. A
      secret dread and repugnance had held him from it till now. Curiously enough it was not he but
      Catherine, as we shall see, who had opened it first. Now, however, he got it down and turned
      to the section on Daniel.
It was a change of conviction on the subject of the date and authorship of this strange
      product of Jewish patriotism in the second century before Christ that drove M. Renan out of
      the Church of Rome. 'For the Catholic Church to confess,' he says in his Souvenirs,
      'that Daniel is an apocryphal book of the time of the Maccabees, would be to confess that she
      had made a mistake; if she had made this mistake, she may have made others; she is no longer
      divinely inspired.'
The Protestant, who is in truth more bound to the Book of Daniel than M. Renan, has various
      ways of getting over the difficulties raised against the supposed authorship of the book by
      modern criticism. Robert found all these ways enumerated in the brilliant and vigorous pages
      of the book before him.
In the first place, like the orthodox Saint-Sulpicien, the Protestant meets the critic with
      a flat non possumus. 'Your arguments are useless and irrelevant,' he says in effect.
      'However plausible may be your objections, the Book of Daniel is what it professes to be,
       because our Lord quoted it in such a manner as to distinctly recognise its
      authority. The All-True and All-Knowing cannot have made a mistake, nor can He have expressly
      led His disciples to regard as genuine and Divine, prophecies which were in truth the
      inventions of an ingenious romancer.'
But the liberal Anglican—the man, that is to say, whose logical sense is inferior to his
      sense of literary probabilities—proceeds quite differently.
'Your arguments are perfectly just,' he says to the critic; 'the book is a patriotic fraud,
      of no value except to the historian of literature. But how do you know that our Lord quoted it
      as true in the strict sense? In fact He quoted it as literature, as
       a Greek might have quoted Homer, as an Englishman might quote Shakespeare.'
And many a harassed Churchman takes refuge forthwith in the new explanation. It is very
      difficult, no doubt, to make the passages in the Gospels agree with it, but at the bottom of
      his mind there is a saving silent scorn for the old theories of inspiration. He admits to
      himself that probably Christ was not correctly reported in the matter.
Then appears the critic, having no interests to serve, no parti pris to defend, and
      states the matter calmly, dispassionately, as it appears to him. 'No reasonable man,' says the
      ablest German exponent of the Book of Daniel, 'can doubt'—that this most interesting piece of
      writing belongs to the year 169 or 170 B.C. It was written to stir up the courage and
      patriotism of the Jews, weighed down by the persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes. It had
      enormous vogue. It inaugurated a new Apocalyptic literature. And clearly the youth of Jesus of
      Nazareth was vitally influenced by it. It entered into his thought, it helped to shape his
      career.
But Elsmere did not trouble himself much with the critic, as at any rate he was reported by
      the author of the book before him. Long before the critical case was reached, he had flung the
      book heavily from him. The mind accomplished its further task without help from outside. In
      the stillness of the night there rose up weirdly before him a whole new mental
      picture—effacing, pushing out, innumerable older images of thought. It was the image of a
      purely human Christ—a purely human, explicable, yet always wonderful Christianity. It broke
      his heart, but the spell of it was like some dream-country wherein we see all the familiar
      objects of life in new relations and perspectives. He gazed upon it fascinated, the wailing
      underneath checked a while by the strange beauty and order of the emerging spectacle. Only a
      little while! Then with a groan Elsmere looked up, his eyes worn, his lips white and set.
'I must face it—I must face it through! God help me!'
A slight sound overhead in Catherine's room sent a sudden spasm of feeling through the young
      face. He threw himself down, hiding from his own foresight of what was to be.
'My darling, my darling! But she shall know nothing of it—yet.'
