
CHAPTER XII.
Elizabeth's feeble tap at Byng's door is instantly answered by the nurse, who, opening it
      smilingly to admit her, the next moment, evidently in accordance with directions received,
      passes out herself and shuts it behind her. Elizabeth, deprived of the chaperonage of her cap
      and apron, and left stranded upon the threshold, has no resource but to cross the floor as
      steadily as a most trembling pair of legs will let her.
The room is a square one, two of its thick walls pierced by Moorish windows. Drawn up to one
      of those windows—the one through which Jim had caught his first glimpse of Elizabeth on the
      night of his arrival—is the sick man's sofa. At the side of that sofa his visitor has, all too
      soon, arrived. She had prepared a little set speech to deliver at once—a speech which will
      give the keynote to the after-interview; but, alas! every word of it has gone out of her head.
      Unable to articulate a syllable, she stands beside him, and if anyone is to give the keynote,
      it must be he.
"This is very, very good of you. It seems a shame to ask you to come here, with all
      this horrid paraphernalia of physic about; but I really could not wait until they let me be
      moved into another room."
She has not yet dared to lift her eyes to his face, in terror lest the sight of the change
      in it shall overset her most unsure composure. Already, indeed, she has greedily asked and
      obtained every detail of the alteration wrought in him. She knows that his head is shaved,
      that his features are sharp, and that his voice is faint; and when, as he ceases speaking, she
      at last wins resolution enough to look at him, she sees that she has been told the truth. His
      head is shaven, his nose is as sharp as a pen, and his voice is faint. She has been told all
      this; but what is there that she has not been told? What is his voice besides faint?
"Will not you sit down? It seems monstrous that I should be lying here letting you wait upon
      yourself. Will you try that one?" pointing to the chair which is figuring at the same moment
      so prominently in Jim's tormented fancy. "I am afraid you will not find it very comfortable. I
      have not tried it yet, but it looks as hard as a board."
She sits down meekly as he bids her, glad to be no longer obliged to depend upon her shaky
      limbs, and answers:
"Thank you; it is quite comfortable."
"Would not it be better if you had a cushion?"—looking all round the room for one.
His voice is courteous, tender almost, in its solicitude for her ease. But is she asleep or
      awake? Can this be the same voice that poured the frenzy of its heartrending adjurations into
      her ear scarce a month ago? Can this long, cool, white saint—he looks somehow like a young
      saint in his emaciation and his skull-cap—be the stammering maniac who, when last she saw him,
      crashed down nigh dead at her feet, slain by three words from her mouth?
At the stupefaction engendered by these questions, her own brain seems turning, but she
      feebly tries to recover herself.
"I—I am so glad you are better."
"Thank you so much. Yes, it is nice; nice to be

"'Not burnt with thirsting,
Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting.'

Do you remember Keats?"
After all, there is something of the original Byng left, and the ghost of his old spouting
      voice in which he recites the above couplet gives her back a greater measure of composure than
      could almost anything else.
"It is nice, only one would like to be able to jump, not 'the life to come'—ha! ha!—but the
      convalescence to come. My mother is even more impatient than I am. She has made up her mind
      that we are to be off in three days, even if I am carried on board on a shutter."
She can see now that he is very much embarrassed—that his fluency is but the uneasy cover of
      some emotion—and the discovery enables her yet further to regain possession of herself.
"I should think," she says in her gentle voice, "that you would be very glad to get out of
      this room, where—where you have suffered so much."
"Well, yes; one does grow a little tired of seeing

"'The casement slowly grow a glimmering square;'

but"—with a rather forced laugh—"at least, I have had cause to be thankful that there is no
      wall-paper to count the pattern of. I have blessed the white wall for its featureless
      face."
She moves a little in her chair, as if to assure herself that she is really awake. That
      stupefaction is beginning to numb her again—that hazy feeling that this is not Byng at all,
      this polite invalid, making such civil conversation for her; this is somebody else.
"But I must not tire myself out before I have said what I want to say to you," he continues,
      his embarrassment perceptibly deepening, while his transparent hand fidgets uneasily with the
      border of the coverlet thrown over him, "or"—laughing again—"I shall have that tyrant of a
      nurse down upon me, and—and I do wish—I have wished so much—so unspeakably—to see you, to
      speak to you."
She sits immovable, listening, while a ray of something—can it be hope? why should it be
      hope?—darts across her heart. After all, this may be Byng—her Byng; this strange new manner
      may be only the garment in which sickness has dressed his passion—a worn-out garment soon to
      drop away from him in rags and tatters, and in which cannot she already discern the first
      rent? After all, she may have need for her armour—that armour which, so far, has seemed so
      pitifully needless.
"I knew that it would be no use asking leave to send for you any sooner; they would have
      told me I was not up to it—would have put me off with some excuse; so I kept a 'still sough.'
      Do you know that I never mentioned your name until to-day? But it has been hard work, I can
      tell you; for the last two days I have scarcely been able to bear it, I have so
       hungered to see you."
Her eyelids tremble, and she instinctively puts up her hand to cover her tell-tale mouth.
      Surely this is the old language. Surely there is, at all events, a snatch of it in his last
      words; and again that prick of illogical joy quickens the beats of her fainting heart, though
      she tries to chide it away, asking herself why she should be in any measure glad that the love
      which she has come here for no other purpose than to renounce, still lives and stirs.
"You may think I am exaggerating, but in point of fact I cannot by any expression less
      strong than the gnaw of downright hunger convey the longing I have had to see you."
He pauses with a momentary failure of his still feeble powers.
She catches her breath. Now is the time for her to strike in, to arrest him before he has
      time to say anything more definite. Now is the time for her to fulfil her promise, her inhuman
      promise, which yet never for one instant strikes her as anything but irrevocably binding. Does
      he see her intention, that he plunges, in order to anticipate it, into so hurried a resumption
      of his interrupted sentence?
"To see you, in order to beg—to supplicate you to forgive me for my conduct to you."
She gives an almost imperceptible start. This ending is not what she had expected, not the
      one to defend herself against which she has been fastening on her buckler and grasping her
      shield. The words that it demands in answer are not those with which she has been furnishing
      herself, and it is a moment or two before she can supply herself with others. He must be
      referring, of course, to his last meeting with her—that one so violently broken off by the
      catastrophe of his collapse.
"I do not know what I am to forgive," she says, half bewildered. "You were not accountable
      for your actions. You were too ill to know what you were doing."
"Oh, you think I am alluding to that last time," cries he, precipitately correcting her.
      "No, no; you are right. I was not accountable then. You might as well have reasoned with a
      wild beast out of a menagerie. I was a perfect Bedlamite then. No"—going on very rapidly, as
      it in desperate anxiety to make her comprehend with the least possible delay—"what I am asking
      you—asking you on my knees—to forgive me for, is my whole conduct to you from the
      beginning."
The two white faces are looking breathlessly into each other, and though of late he has been
      tussling with death on a bed, and she has been walking about, and plying her embroidery, and
      dining at a public table, hers is far the whiter of the two. It must be the unwonted exertion
      of talking so much that makes him bring out his next speech in jerks and gasps.
"I forced my acquaintance upon you at the very beginning; I watched you like a detective; I
      beset you wherever you went; I pestered you with my visits. Jim always told me that it was not
      the conduct of a gentleman, but I would not believe him—not even when"—how difficult it is! he
      finds it almost as hard work as his mother had done upon the Mole—"not even when, by my
      importunities, I had driven you away—obliged you to rush away almost by night from a place you
      liked—a place you were happy in—to escape me. And I have no excuse to offer you—none; unless,
      indeed, as I sometimes think, my mind was off its balance even then. I express myself
      wretchedly!"—in a tone of deep distress—"but you will overlook that, will not you? You
      will—will understand what I mean?"
She makes an assenting motion with her head. At this moment she cannot speak: she will be
      able to do so again directly, but she must have just a minute or two. Yet she must not leave
      him for an instant in doubt that she understands him. Oh yes, she understands him—understands
      that he is apologizing for having ever loved her; that he is awkwardly trying to draw the
      mantle of insanity over even the Vallombrosan wood. It is true that he does it with every sign
      of discomfort and pain; and he looks away from her, as Mrs. Byng, too, had found it pleasanter
      to do.
"Do you remember what Schiller said when he was dying? 'Many things are growing clearer to
      me.' I thought a good deal of those words as I lay over there"—glancing towards the now
      neatly-arranged and empty bed. "One night they thought it was all up with me—I heard them say
      so. They did not think I was conscious, but I was; and it did strike me that I had made a poor
      thing of it, and that if ever I was given the chance I would make a new start."
Again that little assenting movement of her fair head. How perfectly comprehensible he still
      is! How well she understands that he is renouncing her among the other follies of his "salad
      days"—college bear-fights, music-halls, gambling clubs. Well, why should not he? Has not she
      come here on purpose to renounce him? Can she quarrel with him for having saved her the
      trouble?
"And I thought that I could not begin better than by falling on my knees to you. I wish I
      could fall on my real knees to you!"—with a momentary expression of extreme impatience at his
      own bodily weakness—"and ask you most humbly and tenderly and reverently to pardon me."
She looks at him, and sees his wasted face flushing with fatigue and worry and mental
      suffering. Oh, what a bitter wave of desolateness rolls over her! But she smiles.
"I still do not understand what I am to forgive you for. I suppose that you could no more
      help having once thought you loved me, than you can help"—she stops abruptly in compassion for
      the look of acute regret, shame and remorse that crosses his sharp features, and, in her mercy
      to him, gives a different close to her phrase from that which its beginning had seemed to
      bespeak—"than you can help having been so ill."
Her tone, quite unconsciously to herself is inexpressibly touching; and Byng, weakened by
      illness, turns his face upon the pillow, and breaks into violent weeping. His mother had cried
      too. It seems to be in the family.
She has risen—what further is there for her to stay for?—and pauses quietly at his side till
      the paroxysm is past. Her standing posture tells him that she is going, and he consequently
      struggles to recover himself in some degree; but having never cultivated self-control when he
      was in health, it declines to come at his enfeebled bidding now.
"Forgive me! forgive me!" is all he can stammer.
She looks down upon him with a strange and tender smile, in which for the moment the
      selfless, pitying sweetness has swallowed up the misery.
"Which am I to forgive you for—for having loved me? or for having ceased to love me? For
      having been mad? or for being sane? Yes, of course I forgive you from the very bottom of my
      heart! God bless you! Make haste and get well!"
She walks cheerfully to the door, and, reaching it, turns, still wearing that smile, that he
      may see how perfectly friendly is her last look; but he does not see it. He has rolled over on
      his face, and the whole sofa is shaking with his sobs.
