
III.
Mary Carton was locking the harmonium as he went in. She came to meet him with a surprised
      and joyful air.
“How often I have wished to see you. When did you come? How well you remembered my habits to
      know where to find me. My dear John, how glad I am to see you.”
“You are the same as when I left, and this room is the same, too.”
“Yes,” she answered, “the same, only I have had some new prints hung up—prints of fruits and
      leaves and bird-nests. It was only done last week.
       When people choose pictures and poems for children they choose out such domestic
      ones. I would not have any of the kind; children are such undomestic animals. But, John, I am
      so glad to see you in this old schoolhouse again. So little has changed with us here. Some
      have died and some have been married, and we are all a little older and the trees a little
      taller.”
“I have come to tell you I am going to be married.”
She became in a moment perfectly white, and sat down as though attacked with faintness. Her
      hand on the edge of the chair trembled.
Sherman looked at her, and went on in a bewildered, mechanical way—“My betrothed is a Miss
      Leland. She has a good deal of money. You know my mother always wished me to marry some one
      with money. Her father, when alive, was an old client of Sherman and
       Saunders. She is much admired in society.” Gradually his voice became a mere
      murmur. He did not seem to know that he was speaking. He stopped entirely. He was looking at
      Mary Carton.
Everything around him was as it had been some three years before. The table was covered with
      cups and the floor with crumbs. Perhaps the mouse pulling at a crumb under the table was the
      same mouse as on that other evening. The only difference was the brooding daylight of summer
      and the ceaseless chirruping of the sparrows in the ivy outside. He had a confused sense of
      having lost his way. It was just the same feeling he had known as a child, when one dark night
      he had taken a wrong turning, and instead of arriving at his own house, found himself at a
      landmark he knew was miles from home.
A moment earlier, however
       difficult his life, the issues were always definite; now suddenly had entered the
      obscurity of another’s interest.
Before this it had not occurred to him that Mary Carton had any stronger feeling for him
      than warm friendship.
He began again, speaking in the same mechanical way—“Miss Leland lives with her mother near
      us. She is very well educated and very well connected, though she has lived always among
      business people.”
Miss Carton, with a great effort, had recovered her composure.
“I congratulate you,” she said. “I hope you will be always happy. You came here on some
      business for your firm, I suppose? I believe they have some connection with the town
      still.”
“I only came here to tell you I was going to be married.”
“Do you not think it would have been better to have
       written?” she said, beginning to put away the children’s tea-things in a cupboard
      by the fireplace.
“It would have been better,” he answered, drooping his head.
Without a word, locking the door behind them, they went out. Without a word they walked the
      grey streets. Now and then a woman or a child curtseyed as they passed. Some wondered,
      perhaps, to see these old friends so silent. At the rectory they bade each other good-bye.
“I hope you will be always happy,” she said. “I will pray for you and your wife. I am very
      busy with the children and old people, but I shall always find a moment to wish you well in.
      Good-bye now.”
They parted; the gate in the wall closed behind her. He stayed for a few moments looking up
      at the tops of the trees and bushes showing over the wall, and at the house a little
       way beyond. He stood considering his problem—her life, his life. His, at any
      rate, would have incident and change; hers would be the narrow existence of a woman who,
      failing to fulfil the only abiding wish she has ever formed, seeks to lose herself in
      routine—mournfulest of things on this old planet.
This had been revealed: he loved Mary Carton, she loved him. He remembered Margaret Leland,
      and murmured she did well to be jealous. Then all her contemptuous words about the town and
      its inhabitants came into his mind. Once they made no impression on him, but now the sense of
      personal identity having been disturbed by this sudden revelation, alien as they were to his
      way of thinking, they began to press in on him. Mary, too, would have agreed with them, he
      thought; and might it be that at some distant time weary monotony in abandonment would have so
      weighed
       down the spirit of Mary Carton, that she would be merely one of the old and
      sleepy whose dulness filled the place like a cloud?
He went sadly towards the hotel; everything about him, the road, the sky, the feet wherewith
      he walked seeming phantasmal and without meaning.
He told the waiter he would leave by the first train in the morning. “What! and you only
      just come home?” the man answered. He ordered coffee and could not drink it. He went out and
      came in again immediately. He went down into the kitchen and talked to the servants. They told
      him of everything that had happened since he had gone. He was not interested, and went up to
      his room. “I must go home and do what people expect of me; one must be careful to do
      that.”
Through all the journey home his problem troubled him. He saw the figure of Mary
       Carton perpetually passing through a round of monotonous duties. He saw his own
      life among aliens going on endlessly, wearily.
From Holyhead to London his fellow-travellers were a lady and her three young daughters, the
      eldest about twelve. The smooth faces shining with well-being became to him ominous symbols.
      He hated them. They were symbolic of the indifferent world about to absorb him, and of the
      vague something that was dragging him inch by inch from the nook he had made for himself in
      the chimney corner. He was at one of those dangerous moments when the sense of personal
      identity is shaken, when one’s past and present seem about to dissolve partnership. He sought
      refuge in memory, and counted over every word of Mary’s he could remember. He forgot the
      present and the future. “Without love,” he said to himself, “we would be either gods or
      vegetables.”

 The rain beat on the window of the carriage. He began to listen; thought and
      memory became a blank; his mind was full of the sound of rain-drops.
