
CHAPTER II
A CHILD
THE life of Mary Erle, like that of many another woman in the end of the nineteenth
     century, had been more or less in the nature of an experiment. Born too late for the simple
     days of the fifties, when all it behoved a young girl to do was to mind her account-book, read
     her Tennyson, show a proper enthusiasm for fancy-work stitches, and finally, with many blushes,
     accept the hand of the first young man who desired to pay taxes and to fulfil the duties of a
     loyal British subject (and the young man, it must be remembered, in the middle of this century,
     actually did both), Mary was yet too soon for the time when parents begin to take their
     responsibilities seriously, and when the girl is sometimes as carefully prepared, as thoroughly
     equipped, as her brother for the fight of life. A garden full of flowers, a house full of
     books, scraps of travel: these things were her education. Out of the years she
      could pick scenes and figures which typified her
     bringing-up.
There was the plain, self-contained, and not too clean baby. A child who was always grubbing
     in a garden, for it lived then in a house in St. John's Wood; a child who was devoted to
     animals and insects, who was on intimate terms with the many-legged wood-lice, which curled
     themselves up with all haste into complete balls when she touched them; a child for whom snails
     and black-beetles had no terrors, and who had much to say to the green, hairy caterpillars
     which hung about the pear tree.
There was a huge, fluffy, black cat, too, which represented, perhaps, the child's primitive
     idea of a deity; for, though she adored it, the adoration was leavened with a wholesome awe, a
     feeling which was not unconnected with certain unmerited chastisements in the shape of
     scratches on her fat, bare legs. More often, to be sure, the black cat was amiable, and even
     allowed itself to be carried up to bed, with its hind legs straying out helplessly from under
     the child's arm, to be presently concealed with all haste and caution under the white sheets
     and blankets, from whence its sharp-pointed ears and wide black cheeks arose with the most
     exquisitely mirth-provoking effect. With what inscrutable
      amber eyes did the black cat gaze for hours into hers! how it
     imposed on her babyish imagination with its self-contained, majestic manners, its air of
     detachment from the vain shows of the world! The man with the kind smile, whom the child called
     ‘father,’ used to laugh at her adoration, tell her she was a little Egyptian, and called the
     cat ‘Pasht.’ She thought it a funny name, and not being altogether sure the black cat would
     approve of it, generally addressed it as ‘you.’ And the cat would sit on long summer afternoons
     on the grass under the pear tree, or on foggy autumn days on a stool by the fireside, with paws
     neatly tucked away, its neck-ruff fluffed out, purring benignly in response to her confidences.
     Indeed, in looking back, the first tragedy of the child's life was the death of the black cat.
     It lay, one sultry July day, under a laurel bush in the garden, with glazed eyes which gave no
     signs of life. All morning and all afternoon the child sat there and fanned the flies away,
     until her idol was stiff, and then a hole was hastily dug, and the black cat was thrust out of
     sight. And never any more, in the warm summer afternoons, did a soft, furry thing go sailing,
     tail in air, over the close-cropped lawn; nor, on winter evenings, was a rhythmical purring to
     be heard hard by the tall fender which guarded
      the nursery fire. It was the first great void; the first
     heartache had come.
A strange, indolent child, whose little hands were usually thrust beneath her pinafore when
     anyone spoke to her; for surely she could not be always washing herself, and to be on really
     intimate terms with insects and things, one cannot, like grown-up people, be always thinking of
     one's nails. She usually, too, concealed a small piece of putty about her person—an
     unpardonable sin, this, in the eyes of mother and nurse—for putty is useful in a thousand ways,
     and is, besides, so thrillingly delicious to feel surreptitiously in the recesses of one's
     pocket. At this time the child held the whole race of dolls in high scorn. They were a foolish,
     over-dressed, uninteresting tribe, with manifestly absurd cheeks and eye-lashes, and with a
     simper which was as artificial as that of the ladies in chignons and flounces who came to call
     at the house of an afternoon. She, on her part, was all for the violent delights of miniature
     guns and real gunpowder, the toilsome construction of fleets of wooden boats with the aid of a
     blunt knife and a plank of wood; fleets which were set a-sail, with flying pennants, on the
     cistern hard by the kitchen. There were boy neighbours who aided and abetted her in these
     delights, and great naval battles would come off
      between the Dutch and English fleets in the kitchen cistern,
     in which sometimes Van Tromp, and sometimes Blake, emerged victorious. The child, perhaps, did
     not take her patriotism seriously, as the boys did; she was content to be Van Tromp, since they
     insisted on being Blake and Monk. All that was of vital importance was that a fight of some
     sort should come off.
The mother sank early out of ken. First they said that she was poorly, and had gone to Italy,
     and then they said that she was very ill, and afterwards that she was in heaven; so that for a
     long time the child used to think vaguely, as she sat in the summer-house with pursed-up lips
     and knitted brows, notching and slicing at her ships, that Italy and heaven were perhaps the
     same place. Nurse said that her mummy was an angel now; but, in all the picture-books, angels
     had long, smooth hair, wore a kind of night-gown, and had enormous, folding wings. The child
     could not picture her mother looking like that; she always remembered her in many flounces,
     with a headache; and certainly, no, certainly, mummy never had any wings out of her back.
The child could recollect that, some little time before her mother went to Italy, they took
     her upstairs one day and showed her a baby, with
      a red, crinkled face, lying in an over-trimmed cradle. She
     did not care for babies, she would rather have had a nice, new, fluffy kitten to replace the
     old black cat; but when they told her it was a little brother, of course that altered matters.
     She was sorry her brother should be so small, so fretful, and so red in the face; she would
     rather have had him the same size as herself, so that he could have been Van Tromp for once,
     and she the victorious Blake; but still, any sort or size of brother was better than none.
     Although, in a year or so, the baby developed into something suspiciously like a doll, with his
     fat, pink cheeks, his round, china-blue eyes, his dump of a nose, and his entire absence of
     chin, still, he was far more entertaining than that simpering and foolish tribe. Baby Jim's
     pink toes could kick; his little fist, with the creases of fat at the wrist, could hit out;
     there were warlike possibilities in him. In a word, Baby Jim was alive.
At ten years old the girl began to have strange fits of vanity. There were little shoes and
     frocks which she held in high favour, and others which nothing would induce her to put on. To
     wear a pinafore, now, was a bitter humiliation, and about this period she had the most definite
     theories about the dressing of hair. The discussion on coiffures usually took
      place in her bath, when a small, slippery person covered in
     soap-suds was to be heard arguing with her nurse—an argument which was not unusually enforced
     by physical violence—on the superior attractions of crimped to curled locks. At ten years
     old—she was of opinion—a person was grown up, or at least as old as any one need be. Why, big,
     tall men, with long beards and spectacles, who came to see her father, would bend down and ask
     her gravely if she would be their little wife? The child had been to more than one wedding, and
     she was aware that a wife was a person who began by wearing a beautiful white satin train, with
     white flowers and a veil; a person who was as imposing as that angel which nurse said her
     mother had become, although she had not, of course, any wings. The child was not sure whether
     she would best like to be a bride or an angel. The latter, it was true, had the additional
     attraction of a golden halo; but she thought, probably, that matters might be compromised, and
     that she could be a wife and have a halo, too.
The scene shifts now, for they had moved to another quarter of London, and the change made a
     vast difference in the child's tastes and habits. There was no cropped lawn now, where the pear
     tree made long shadows on summer afternoons, where she had a personal interest in
      a plot of ground of her own, and at least a bowing
     acquaintance with a whole host of fussy bumble-bees, gay yellow butterflies, furry
     caterpillars, and lazy snails. There was no summer-house in which ship-building could be
     carried on, and no convenient cistern in which to sail one's fleet. The firing off of toy guns
     was erased from the list of possible amusements. The house was a tall one, in a street in town,
     and rural delights were represented by a square yard at the back, which was haunted by stray,
     attenuated cats, and in which grew a solitary, stunted sycamore.
But, on the other hand, there was the new fascination of book-shelves, which ran all over the
     new house, so that the child had but to mount a chair and reach out a small hand, and, lo!
     romance and battles, laughter and tears, were all to be enjoyed at her will. She had only to
     pick out her volume. It was a revelation in the possibilities of life.
Looking back now, it must be owned that she led an odd life. The man with the kind smile was
     fond of his little daughter, but he was always at work, either at experiments in his laboratory
     or bending over his desk in the study. Nothing happened in the way of experience as it does to
     other children. One night her father took her to the theatre for the first time. A
      famous actress, an old friend, was giving Antony and
      Cleopatra, and they went first behind the scenes. They walked across a bare, lofty,
     cavern-like place, with dusty wooden boards, which sloped upwards, and the child was lifted up
     to peep through a little hole in a red velvet curtain, and through it she saw a large
     horse-shoe with quantities of people chattering as they waited. There was a great deal of
     tawdry gilt, and many gas chandeliers, and the people, especially at the top of the horseshoe,
     stamped with their feet and whistled. She did not care much for the play, when they presently
     took their places in a box close to the stage. There was a stout lady in long amber draperies,
     who kept throwing her arms round a tired-looking man with a brown face and a suit of gilt
     armour. The child was more amused when, between the acts, they went behind the scenes again to
     see the famous actress in her dressing-room. Unfortunately, the stout lady looked fatter than
     ever when seen close, but there were so many amusing things about—a wig with long plaits,
     several serpent bracelets, a diadem, and a beautiful golden girdle set with emeralds as big as
     pheasants' eggs. There was a middle-aged gentleman, too, who sat at his ease in a shabby
     armchair, and drank some pinkish, sparkling wine out of a low, round glass. Some
      one said that he was the editor of a great paper. The child
     had never seen an editor; she was glad to see one, because she had always thought they were
     quite different from other people. She liked to see him laugh, and whisper in a familiar,
     condescending way to the stout lady, and yet keep on drinking the pink wine out of the round
     glass.
The child was incorrigibly idle. A mild, non-descript, unimaginative governess and a fat,
     bald Frenchman who came once a week to instruct her in the Gallic tongue did nothing to take
     away the inherent unattractiveness of ‘lessons.’ She could read, and that was enough. The child
     read all day long. She lay concealed among the footstools under the long dining-room table,
     poring over The Ancient Mariner—her favourite poem—or thrilled with the lurid
     emotion of Wuthering Heights. A little later Villette became her
     cherished book; a well-thumbed copy, long ago bereft of its cover, stands on the girl's shelf
     to-day. Poor drab, patient, self-contained Miss Snow! How the child's heart ached for you in
     your bare, dismal, Belgian schoolroom, when Dr. John grew fickle; how she rejoiced when you
     found your ugly, be-spectacled Fate; how choky she felt at the throat when she read those last
     pessimistic, despairing words—words full of the sound and
      fury of angry seas and moaning winds. Why, poor patient
     hypochondriacal soul, were you destined never to be happy? And all these people were real to
     the child, much more real than the people she saw when she went out to tea-parties in her best
     frock and sash. They were as real as the little Tin Soldier and the little Sea-maiden of Hans
     Christian Andersen, types of humanity which will last as long as there are tender little human
     hearts to be touched.
And, later on, there is the rather plain girl of fourteen, with somewhat inscrutable eyes,
     and a seriousness which would have been portentous were it not laughable. Gone, for the time
     being, were her fits of high spirits and her wild gaiety; lost, the love of battle, and even
     the love of books about battles. The girl had much to occupy her mind. She began to understand
     something of life now. It was no longer a kind of coloured picture-book, made to catch the eye
     and amuse an idle half-hour. The pictures meant a great deal more than that. There were
     dreadful things, sad things, horrible things behind. Things that the girl could only guess at,
     but which were there, she was sure, all the same. The world, she could see from her books and
     newspapers, was full of injustice.
There was the great wrong which had been
      done some eighteen hundred years ago, when the most beautiful
     life that was ever lived had come to a shameful end. The girl was always reading that moving
     story; the Old Testament, with its revengeful, Jewish Deity, did not appeal to her at all. The
     poignant tragedy enacted at Jerusalem ate into her heart, and this child of fourteen felt
     herself burdened with the reproach which that senseless crime has left on humanity for
     well-nigh two thousand years.
Yes, those were serious days. Once in her teens, she had to make up her mind on many
     subjects. There were the questions of marriage, of maternity, of education. The girl had
     learned French by now, and the chance fingering of a small, last-century volume made her
     approach those supremely feminine subjects under the somewhat insecure guidance of Jean Jacques
     Rousseau. She imbibed, indeed, the Swiss philosopher's diatribes on virtue before she had
     comprehended what civilised mankind stigmatises as vice. Emile: ou, de
      l'Education was wearily, conscientiously toiled through for the sake of posterity.
      Le Contrat Social was a work which it behoved a person of fourteen—a person who
     wished to understand the scheme of civilisation—to know.
Strange, anxious days, passed in the twilight of ignorance, groping among the vain shadows
      with which man in his wisdom has elected to surround the
     future mothers of the race. It was not, of course, till years afterwards, that Mary became
     conscious of the fine irony of the fact that man—the superior intelligence—should take his
     future companion, shut her within four walls, fill that dimly-lighted interior with images of
     facts and emotions which do not exist, and then, pushing her suddenly into the blinding glare
     of real life, should be amazed when he finds that his exquisite care of her ethical sense has
     stultified her brain.
The girl was reading David Copperfield when she descended one day, with
     knitted brows, to the room where her governess was laboriously copying in water-colours a
     lithographed bunch of roses.
‘What is a lost woman really, Miss Brown?’ demanded the girl, with her tense look. ‘Dickens
     says that little Em'ly is a lost woman, because she goes to Italy with that Mr. Steerforth. Was
     Mr. Steerforth a lost man, too?’
