

CHAPTER IV
IT is really rather annoying to find how, having once, though for the most
      perfectly legitimate object, started a disturbing line of thought, that line of thought
      refuses to quit you, finds perpetual occasion for reproducing itself; hunts you, in short, as
      though it had started you instead of your starting it. For instance, I had been very
      thoroughly into the question of the One Man and the One Woman on the lake-boat that afternoon.
      It would have appeared that, having so satisfactorily closed the question, I ought also to
      have disposed of it, and have been—for a time, at all events—delivered from its hauntings. But
      it was not so, it was not so. I might have closed the question, but very certainly I had
      failed to dispose of it. I had relieved my feelings in a sonnet to an imaginary Uniquely Fair
      One, in the small hours of the night. Yet, notwithstanding this drastic remedy—the metrical
      difficulties of sonnet-construction I find extremely reducing to an enkindled imagination, no
      wonder this particular form of poetic outcry has been dear to the
       distracted lover of all ages—I discovered next morning
      that, in truth, the question still retained the very strongest disposition to dispose, if not
      of me, still of my time and thought.
I loitered on the verandah after breakfast. The morning was positively divine, the air
      having just that hint of an edge to it which agreeably convinced you, notwithstanding the heat
      haze dancing over the brilliant landscape, that glaciers and snow-fields were after all within
      easy reach. And that edge to the air, far from soothing a slightly heated fancy, is liable to
      produce des éblouissements and provoke a feverish
      restlessness. Across the startlingly green lawn, just below, the lithe young Russian lady of
      the scarlet silk blouse and black pigtail wandered bare-headed. She was innocently employed in
      picking ox-eyed daisies and clover heads from among the grass; and as she plucked them she
      indulged in snatches of song—sad with the sorrow of long northern winters, as it seemed to me,
      and the endless monotony of the Steppe.
I do not attempt to trace out the association of ideas. It may have been a revolt against
      the melancholy of the folk-song; it may have been an effect of colour—vivid scarlet against
      vivid green, the strong note of black—heaven forgive me if I begin to talk like an art
      critic!—in skirt and hair, affecting my brain as a dram might; it may have
       been a certain fierceness in the action of the fine-made,
      angular figure, stooping and pulling at the flowers—I can't pretend to say. Suffice it that my
      soul was invaded by a crazy longing to live, to give myself away, to be dangerous. I went back
      upon the position of yesterday; and it was borne in upon me—it has often been so before—that I
      am but a paltry creature, the decadent product of a decadent age. I know so well what to
      avoid, I know so very ill what to do. I fell to envying Leversedge his diabolic dog; Charlotte
      Perry the courage of her perversions—that perhaps is the best way of stating it; even Perry
       père his enthusiasm for the Primrose League and rich
      enjoyment of the enunciation of platitudes; even Percy Gerrard his inherent grossness. Oh! to
      be positive for once, instead of tentative merely, or negative! When candid persons tell me
      so, I wish, of course, to beat them; but, in the privacy of that evil quarter of an hour, I
      accused myself of being thin; and Myself answered that in truth I was, morally emotionally,
      and in respect of all action, thin, very lamentably thin indeed.
And just when I was touching the lowest deep of this unpleasant, but, no doubt, salutary
      depth of self-abasement, when I was becoming literally flattened out by the heavy weight of my
      own inadequacies, enter unto me Mrs. Perry. She
       emerged from the glass doors of the salon rotund and beaming.
“Dear me now, Mr. Hammond,” she exclaimed, “this is what I really do call a piece of luck. I
      have been so wishing all the morning I had some lady-friend to talk it all over with; and you
      see I have nothing but acquaintances here, and I never can get over the feeling it isn't very
      suitable to be intimate with the people you just meet travelling. You see, you don't really
      know anything about them, nor how they live, and how many servants they keep, and how they
      behave at home. It's so easy for anybody to look respectable on the Continent. And you're so
      afraid, if you take to them, it may make awkwardnesses afterwards,aren't you?”
All of which certainly did not come very much under the head of adventurous and vigorous
      living! Failing other female acquaintances, of well-accredited position, good Mrs. Perry took
      me. I was relegated to the modest position of the safe she-gossip, to that of the maiden aunt.
      For a moment the Eternal Masculine in me—for the Eternal Masculine does exist just as actually
      as the Eternal Feminine, though it happens at the present time not to have so fashionable a
      notoriety as the latter—arose in revolt. But in my present condition of self-abasement, it
      rebelled only for a moment. I had fallen very low in my own estimation. I was almost willing
      to regard myself as
       nothing better than an example of infructuous and hoary
      spinsterhood.
“You have always taken such a kind interest in our dear young people,” she continued, “that
      I know you will be pleased to hear everything is so comfortably settled.”
She confronted me bridling, her worthy moon-face suffused with smiles. But, unfortunately,
      the searching morning light did not suit my present companion as well as the scarlet-bloused
      figure that had been my late inspiration, and torment.
Mrs. Perry's matutinal appearance invariably suggested the thought that she was wearing out
      her last year's Sunday gown. The present example of that economical habit was green; enriched
      by steel and bugle ornaments, notably in the region of the waist, where they took the form of
      strings of pendants bearing an affinity to Papuan full dress. Her grey hair, smoothly banded
      on the brow, was greenish in hue from the too lavish application of some adhesive unguent. It
      was, moreover, surmounted by a lace and ribbon cap, in form and colour curiously resembling a
      poached egg. What remained to her of her eyebrow, raised to a permanently surprised height,
      pushed her forehead up into innumerable horizontal lines. I found it impossible to dislike
      Mrs. Perry, she was too perfectly simple and genuine a being. Yet to me, just now, she proved
      confusing, for the tone of her profoundly
       insular voice, her comfortable and somewhat uncontrolled
      figure, even the last few words she had spoken, recalled irresistibly to my mind that
      mysterious functionary, the monthly nurse, whom, to my terror, I meet at the recurrent
      christening festivals which enliven the house of my excellent little married sister. Unable to
      divest my mind of this association of ideas, I answered Mrs. Perry slightly at random.
“I am delighted to hear it. I am to understand you, then, that they are both doing very
      well?”
“Oh, very well,” Mrs. Perry replied with unction. “Indeed, Mr. Hammond, between ourselves, I
      think Charlotte's a very fortunate girl, for Constantine Leversedge has really being doing
      better than could have been expected.”
The phrase was a little astonishing; but I retained my presence of mind.
“Good news upon good news!” I exclaimed. “This is capital.”
“So it is; and I am sure I feel very thankful, and so does Mr. Perry.”
Her eyebrows aspired still higher.
“For, of course, we've had our misgivings at times, Mr. Hammond. You see, we lost our dear
      little boy as an infant. So she's our only child.”
The tenderness of the maternal passion found quite moving expression in Mrs. Perry's homely
      countenance.

“And being so remarkable and gifted as she is, we have sometimes wondered whether we ought
      to let things go on. Often and often, since we've been here, Mr. Perry's woke me in the night
      to talk about it—specially since Mrs. Mertyns came, and we couldn't help seeing what an
      interest Mr. Gerrard took in Lottie. Mr. Perry's a dreadfully poor sleeper when he has
      anything on his mind. I am sure if I've asked him once, I've asked him a dozen times,—‘My
      dear, what does make you so restless?’ And he always answers,—‘Charlotte's marriage, Mamma,
      Charlotte's marriage. It's not too late yet to interfere. She must not be permitted to throw
      herself away.’”
“A most proper sentiment on the part of your husband,” I said.
“I am so pleased to know you think that, for sometimes I have been afraid Mr. Perry was
      inclined to place his hopes too high, and that it wouldn't bring a blessing. You see, there's
      a great deal said about not taking too much thought in the Bible, and—I daresay it is because
      I don't understand very quickly—these new translations do explain a great many of those
      difficulties in the Gospels, they tell me—but sometimes I was frightened lest we should be
      asking too much for Lottie.”
Here Mrs. Perry placed herself in a chair. Hers was not the style of figure which can be described
       as gracefully permitting its possessor to sit down. I
      cannot pretend that Mrs. Perry was classic in her attitudes. She invariably sat up. Her smiles
      had waned rather beneath the disturbing influences of biblical criticism—now they shone forth
      again.
“Dear me!” she exclaimed, “how pleasant it is to have a little chat! Though I don't know
      that I ought to be so confidential with you, Mr. Hammond. Only, as I say, you've always taken
      such a warm interest in our young people that I can't help feeling as if you were quite one of
      ourselves now. And then I always do think you can say things to a bachelor like you, you
      couldn't say to another gentleman. And you're older, you see,” she added, heaping Pelion on
      Ossa in the matter of compliment. “I'm sure I don't know how I should have felt about leaving
      Charlotte alone the other night—particularly after what they told me afterwards—if I had not
      known you were there, Mr. Hammond.”
Mrs. Perry beamed upon me while thus stabbing me. I seem to remember as a small boy
      discerning just such an air of complete and candid satisfaction upon the face of the hall
      clock, in our house at Brighton, when about to strike the dinner hour. I fear I was a greedy
      child, and may therefore have transferred the sensation of satisfaction resident in my own
      breast to the face of the clock. I am sadder and wiser now. When satisfactions
       come I don't transfer them. They are too rare; I keep them
      for myself. Therefore I was very sure it was no reflected glory which now illuminated Mrs.
      Perry's countenance. And, repressing a recurring revolt of the Eternal Masculine in favour of
      the gratification of curiosity,—for a change had very evidently come over the spirit of the
      Perry-Leversedge dream since yesterday afternoon,—I sat down beside Mrs. Perry and tried by
      gentle arts to induce her to reveal more clearly the cause of jubilation.
