

CHAPTER II
BUT just then a deprecating voice, worthy to be that of modesty incarnate, gently
      addressed me.—“Mr. Hammond, I hesitate to interrupt you, for I have watched you and I see you
      are thinking. I fancy you are regretting. And so I hesitate.”
Charlotte Perry had approached from somewhere in the surrounding dimness. She stood on my
      right, between me and the steps, and her appearance was arresting. She had swathed herself in
      an Indian shawl, which framed her face, was drawn closely about her shoulders and folded arms,
      draping her whole figure and almost concealing even the skirt of her dress. This shawl was an
      exquisite thing—one of Leversedge's many costly gifts. In colour violet, it was stiffened at
      the border with delicate gold and silver threads and arabesques worked in many-coloured silks.
      The warm light from the windows behind us touched these rich colours in places, touched the
      girl's profile and the soft brown hair about her forehead. The result was eminently picturesque.
       Charlotte Perry looked quite delightfully pretty; and had
      Leversedge not possessed prior claims, I really could have found it in my heart—but then
      fortunately Leversedge did possess them. I remembered this; yet I hold a man a fool who, be
      his sentiments ever so honourable, omits to let a woman know when he finds her pleasant to
      look upon.
“Hesitate no longer, my dear young lady,” I therefore answered. “Interruptions, when they
      appear in so charming a form, believe me, are never unwelcome.”
Miss Perry gazed at me for a moment, and her dewy eyes were very bright.—“I wonder,” she
      said softly, “are you ever in earnest? Are you ever serious?”
“I am profoundly serious in my welcome of this particular interruption.”
The girl drew her breath with a little sob. “Can—can one trust you, I wonder?” she said.
“Try me,” I cried,—“try me. Such as I am you shall not, I warrant you, find me wanting.”
Still Miss Perry drew her breath somewhat sobbingly. She leaned her shrouded head against
      the iron pillar of the verandah. The leaves and scarlet flowers of the honeysuckle clustered
      around it. I regretted the half dark, for I merely received an impression, and the picture
      must have been worthy to be seen clearly. Just then I heard a
       distinct grunt. Various animals grunt; my knowledge of
      natural history, though by no means profound, carries me as far as that. But only one human
      being of my acquaintance produces—whether voluntarily or involuntarily I know not—that
      unengaging sound. A rather squat black person passed slowly down the farther side of the
      marble steps.
“Percy Gerrard!” I exclaimed. “Where has the great man been hiding the light of his
      countenance? I did not know he was here.”
“I am in trouble,” Miss Perry murmured, disregarding my remark.—“I am in great trouble.” She
      clasped her hands, and the shawl fell in loose folds about her.—“You know my parents, Mr.
      Hammond. You know their devotion to me? Of course you know it, and have probably smiled at
      it.”
“Heaven forbid!” I murmured.
“Ah, but you have. For is it not obviously exaggerated—an affection blinding to the critical
      faculty? They have no measure. No one realises more keenly than I do that their misplaced
      admiration makes both me and themselves absurd.”—Miss Perry's tone expressed the tenderest
      apology, the most appeasing humility.—“They cannot help it, I suppose,” she said gently. “But
      their attitude does not fail to distress and embarrass me greatly, all the same. Do not
      imagine that I undervalue
       their goodness to me. It is beautiful, but, alas! it is
      impeding. I cannot be quite frank with them. I cannot dare to risk causing them pain.”
She swung aside with a really fine movement. As she did so the light from the salon window fell full on her face; I saw that her eyes overflowed
      with tears.
“And I am in pain,” she cried softly. “I suffer, ah! I suffer. I am cruelly perplexed. For I
      fail to see where duty—the high duty which compels acquiescence, and dignifies
      self-surrender—truly lies.”
I am very alive to sentiment. This was touching and I was touched. Yet in the girl's speech
      and action was there not just a hint, a remote hint, of Perry père in his noblest manner? I therefore hardened my heart slightly, determining to
      test the fair sufferer and bring her to book.
“Leversedge has spoken to you,” I said.
“Yes, that is part of the pain; but not in the way you no doubt imagine, Mr. Hammond. If my
      parents knew all that he has told me, they would certainly require us to part. They would
      think only of me. Therefore they must not know.”
And I, hearing this, repented of my late suspicion in mental sackcloth and ashes. “That is
      well,” I said,—“very well.”
“Is it?”—Miss Perry smiled upon me. I divined more than saw the working of her singularly
       captivating mouth.—“How little men know of women, after all!
      How easily they mistake that which will attract and that which will repulse us! I should have
      expected Constantine to mistake; but you, Mr. Hammond, are different. From you I should have
      hoped for a more subtle judgment. Understand, this strange story of Constantine's has no
      terror for me.”
“The gods be praised for that,” I murmured. “Leversedge is not born under so very unlucky a
      star, after all.”
The girl leaned her head against the iron pillar, clustered with honeysuckle, again. The
      wind took her hair, blowing it back over the embroidered edge of the shawl. Her eyes were
      astonishingly bright.
“No, it has no terror for me,” she repeated. “If this curse is laid upon him, it is clearly
      my office to share it, to shield him, to sustain him in these dark seasons and places of his
      existence. And so, far from repulsing, it attracts me. It supplies the touch of mystery which
      was lacking. It dignifies what was otherwise commonplace. It wraps us—him and me—about with a
      peculiar atmosphere.”
As she spoke, she pressed her head in among the leaves and flowers and drew the folds of her
      shawl tighter about her with an odd action as of physical enjoyment. Charlotte Perry had never
       appeared to me so perfectly natural as at this moment. Her
      deprecatory manner had vanished. She glowed, so to speak. She was positively seductive, but
      she was also a little displeasing.
“If Constantine knew how to use it,” she continued, “it might be tremendous and splendid. He
      might make an immense success, an immense reputation. He would be received anywhere on the
      strength of it. Ah! what a superb opportunity some men would find in this! To have your legend
      thus ready to hand, and, if properly treated, such a legend! You might dominate society.”
The girl let her hands fall at her sides dejectedly.
“But he has no idea how to use it—no more idea than a child. The opportunity will be wasted.
      He does not rise to it in the very least. I have tried to inspire him, tried to show him how
      unique and therefore precious a fate has befallen him; but I cannot develop any enthusiasm in
      him. I cannot, cannot make him see.”
“No,” I agreed; “that, I am afraid, is a point of view which will never commend itself to
      Leversedge. I fear you will never make him see.”
Miss Perry looked at me sharply—as her father might have looked. Then she bent her head, put
      her hands over her eyes, moved a couple of paces to the right hurriedly, while the
      wind—lending itself sympathetically to the situation—caught her
       shawl and blew it up and outward into a great arc of dusky
      colour, against which her light dress, her slightly bowed figure, her arms bare to the elbow,
      were revealed.
“Ah!” she cried, “I am very unfortunate. I have given you a wrong impression—you, Antony
      Hammond, the last person I would have misjudge my motives.”
The hypercritical might have called all this artificial and theatrical perhaps. I can never
      find it in my heart to be hypercritical where a thing is really well done; and, without
      question, this was beautifully done. The personal note, too, in the young lady's outcry I
      found comforting to my little sprig of private vanity. So, naturally I protested vehemently
      against all possibility of misjudging her motives. But Miss Perry refused to listen. She stood
      before me clutching one corner of her shawl, letting the rest of it lie heaped about her feet
      on the wet marble pavement, while she addressed me with lips trembling from emotion.
“I know it,” she said, “and of course you know it—who better, seeing who you are and what
      you are? But I cannot help it. I am not well-bred—my poor, dear parents are altogether
      mistaken about me; how should they, alas! of all people, perceive just that? I am not
      well-bred, and the knowledge I am not haunts me and poisons my
       happiness; for I am conscious that to you, and such as you,
      Mr. Hammond, I must seem lacking in delicacy at times, lacking in innate refinement. I am
      conscious that in what I said just now I have seemed thus lacking. I misled you by my inherent
      inability to express myself, to put things as a high-bred woman would put them.”
Distress impeded the girl's utterance.
“I seemed guilty of proposing to trade upon Constantine's strange hallucination. I seemed
      oh! it is too dreadful—like the unnatural mother who makes capital out of the deformity of her
      child. And I am incapable of entertaining such an idea. Surely you must feel I am incapable of
      it? Indeed, you cruelly misread me. It was not of myself I was thinking, not of any advantage
      I could gain, but of him, of Constantine—exclusively, solely of him.”
This was abundantly moving. I would have spoken, but Miss Perry paused only an instant for
      breath, and then continued in the most charmingly pleading tones.
“You know—as a poet, who should know better?—that we none of us can live without our
      romance, without an ideal, without some secret, hidden place in which the soul finds and
      maintains the completeness of its individuality. We must have not only this passive support;
      we must have an active one too—we must have some
       realm to conquer. A strange fate has overtaken Constantine.
      He must either sink under it or find his romance in it. I thought it conceivable he might do
      that last. I dreamed he might be saved, that I might save him that way—but—but you say it
      cannot be.”
I tried to point out to Miss Perry that a far less recondite way of salvation was open to
      Leversedge through her instrumentality. She had only to stand by him, to be good to him, to—if
      I might put it crudely—love him. Why are homely, honest things such as these always the most
      difficult to say? I feared I was playing a somewhat bearish part, and most unromantically
      drowning fine fancifulness in the cold waters of common-sense. I protest the position was hard
      on me, for I should greatly have preferred meeting my fair companion's utterances in a more
      sympathetic spirit. I found her abundantly captivating. But friendship demanded I should not
      yield too freely to such finding. I therefore strove to quench our little possible flames—both
      hers and mine—in this douche of cold water.
But I am only a man after all. Miss Perry was far more than man, namely, woman—which means
      that she was a past-master in the art of strategy. I had advanced upon her lumberingly along
      the plain. She suddenly opened fire upon me from heights I had never even reconnoitred.

“Forgive me if I have spoken too plainly,” I said, “and preached you a desolatingly dull
      sermon. You will be within your rights if you are offended; still, my dear young lady, if you
      can possibly avoid it, don't be offended. Clemency is a great virtue, specially when extended
      to that vilest of bores—the giver of sound practical advice. Remember, our object is the same;
      the straightening out, the reconstructing, of Constantine Leversedge.”
Miss Perry's face was in the light again. Her charming lips were quivering.—“I am not
      offended,” she said gently; “I am a little hurt—that is inevitable.”—She put up her hands and
      held both sides of her head with a sort of distraction.—“If I was only sure, only sure,” she
      repeated, “that I could only trust you—that you would not misunderstand again, would not think
      me indelicate—unmaidenly.”
She gazed first questioningly at me, then out into the wild night.
“I will trust you,” she said finally. “Come down into the garden. The neighbourhood of all
      these people in the salon paralyses me. Here I cannot speak,
      and I must speak, I must.”
Now clearly it was indiscreet to accede to Miss Perry's proposition. Moreover, the gravel
      was wet and the soles of my evening shoes thin. Still, I went down with her into the
      garden.
