

CHAPTER II
I APPROACHED Miss Perry. Her reception of me was not enthusiastic; in fact for some
      seconds she appeared unaware of my presence. She had taken off her large, lace hat and thrown
      it on the deck beside her. Her face and upper portion of her figure were shaded by her
      parasol; the yellow and black frills of which, like the short curly hair about her forehead
      and the nape of her neck, were uplifted and softly dropped again by the warm wind. Her head
      was turned away; I could only see the outline of her cheek. She had, I remember, unfastened
      the collar of her yellow silk blouse, thereby exposing rather more of her throat than is
      customary in morning dress. A bunch of buttercups was stuck in her waistband. They drooped
      with the heat, some were crushed and broken, as though in sympathy with their wearer. For Miss
      Perry drooped too, was crushed too. Her whole attitude betokened this in the most touching
      manner. To recognise in this withdrawn and pensive figure the player of the evil witch-music
      of last night, or the very capable
       woman who had bidden me, so peremptorily, leave her to
      manage her own affairs, was a heavy tax on my imagination. If change is essential to charm in
      woman, then Miss Perry was triumphantly charming, for her capacity of change was Protean.
As the steamer-bell ceased ringing and the decks began to vibrate with the working of the
      engines, Miss Perry turned her head. She gazed at me mutely. Her eyes were full of tears, her
      dark eyelashes were gathered into little points by those she had already shed.
“You do not care to talk,” I said. “Your father tells me you are over-tired. You would
      rather have me go away.”
“No,” she replied. “There are things of which I must speak to you. I should not myself
      perhaps have chosen to-day, for I have hardly arranged my thought as yet. I can hardly see my
      trouble, or my action, still less my future”—the girl paused, and two tears rolled slowly down
      over her pretty red-brown cheeks—“in perspective. It is all too close to me as yet. Still,
      perhaps this opportunity is given me purposely; I dare not reject it. It is improbable we
      shall often see each other alone again.”
I had not been feeling altogether friendly towards Charlotte Perry. I had doubted her, and
      that on rather ugly grounds. And I had not the least proposed that our interview should be of a
       sentimental character. But listening to her modest
      hesitating speech, seeing her evident distress, of course I softened towards her and was moved
      to sympathy. I am not a stock or a stone, so, how the devil could I help it?
“Whatever course events may take,” I protested, “it will not be my fault if we do not meet
      often hereafter.”
“You are hopeful because to you it is a light matter,” said Miss Perry.
“On the contrary, I am hopeful because I am in a normal condition, and am therefore
      qualified to judge of the probabilities of things. You are somewhat over-tired.”
“Yes, I am cruelly tired,” the girl assented.
“Then be advised, my dear young lady, and do not overtax yourself with the discussion of
      burning questions just now. Tell me whether you slept—no? Well, I almost feared as much,—and
      then let me do my poor best to entertain you. Let me talk to you about the weather; about our
       compagnons de voyage, whose voices reverberate so
      pleasingly under that truly beautiful tin awning; about our friend Clement Bartlett's new
      play, of which Carr writes me word that it is to be a brilliant success.—Picture that! The
      foolish things of this world do indeed confound the wise at times! Your memory happily cannot
      carry you back to that prehistoric period, but I well remember
       Clement's first appearance. Like the man in ‘The Egoist,’
      he ‘had a leg,’ but this appeared to me to constitute the whole of his dramatic outfit. And
      now we are called upon to hail him as the coming play-wright!”
“Is it quite kind always to—to scoff?” Charlotte Perry asked very softly.
“Poor dear Bartlett has survived so many smiles that one more will not greatly affect
      him—specially as he will remain serenely unaware of it. Moreover, I am past the appeals of
      friendship at this moment; I would ruthlessly offer up the reputation of my nearest and
      dearest to afford you a little amusement.”
Whereat to my extreme embarrassment the girl bowed her head, dragged her handkerchief out of
      the bosom of her blouse, and fell to weeping in a perfectly audible manner.
“Pray, pray don't, my dear Miss Perry, this is too distressing; pray control yourself,” I
      feebly entreated.
“It is always the same,” she moaned—really my position was rather frightful!—“I had hoped
      that for once you would understand, and treat me seriously—after last night. But it is
      useless. Nothing makes any difference. You always play with me—because, at heart, you always
      despise me.”
“Despise you?—good heavens! of what imbecility have I been guilty now, that you should
      imagine I despise you?”

“When I saw you coming,” she sobbed, “I knew it would be very painful—I could not speak at
      first—but I thought that the opportunity had been given me, and that I should gain strength,
      and tell you; and that you would approve for once—just for once-and that would be my
      compensation—but—”
As fate would have it, there was a vacant camp-stool near by. I fetched it. I sat down
      beside Charlotte Perry. I took her parasol and held it over her. All of which was radically
      unwise; but under the circumstances what man of feeling could be a slave to discretion, that
      possibly better, but certainly very cold-blooded, part of valour? The sun was scorching, so
      that the Americans and Germans, the clergy with their feminine appendages, and even the
      possessive schoolmasters, preferred the shelter of the awning to the glare of the open deck.
      For this I returned heartfelt thanks. Close scrutiny would have been intolerably disconcerting
      just then.
“Now tell me anything and everything you like,” I said recklessly. “I have been an idiot in
      trying to divert your attention to indifferent matters.”
Charlotte Perry turned to me with streaming eyes. She was among the very few women I have
      ever known who are not spoiled by crying. I instinctively tilted the parasol so as to shelter us
       both, not so much from the rays of the sun, as from the
      remark of possible observers.
“I asked bread of you, and you seemed to give me a stone. It was too hard. I lost
      myself—”
“No wonder, you are over-wrought,” I answered. “You went through a most agitating experience
      last night, and behaved—you will not think me guilty of impertinence in referring to
      this?—with a courage beyond all praise.”
The girl's mouth gathered into that strangely seductive sketch of a kiss.
“Ah! how precious it is to hear you say that!” she—I don't like the word, it has a suspicion
      of vulgarity about it, nevertheless I must employ it—she whispered.
I began to speak, I was on the edge of committing myself to statements of a vastly foolish
      description, but Miss Perry stopped me by raising her hand.
“Be silent, I implore you,—be silent. That was a slip. It would be unworthy of you to notice
      it, knowing that I am, as you said just now, over-wrought. Put it down to my sleepless night,
      and overlook it.”
She paused, and I feared the tears would again break forth. But in a moment she continued,
      with really angelic gentleness—
“All that is closed, finished. After the events of last night, finished for ever. Only sometimes,
       for an instant, one forgets. If you have once dreamed very
      vividly of a great good, the dream comes back upon you, even in your most cruelly wakeful
      hours; don't you think so?”
“How can I answer you?” I inquired, feeling rather like a knave and most completely like a
      fool.
“Don't attempt to answer,” she said. “Truly, it is kinder not to do so. Listen, that is all
      I ask, and if you can, encourage and approve. The hope”—her voice sank away again in a
      caressing cadence—“the hope of your approval has, I am afraid,—for it is very weak of me,—been
      the mainspring of my action.”
“You humiliate me,” I protested.
The girl smiled at me through her tears in the most beguiling manner.
“Had the circumstances of our meeting been different,” I said desperately,—“had you been
      free to listen to proposals, which I was equally and honourably free to make, the result of
      our acquaintance—”
“Don't,” she cried, shutting her eyes, and pressing her hands to either side of her charming
      head. “This is a superfluous torture. Again I entreat you to be silent. I am bound
      irrevocably. I bound myself last night, after you went. Constantine was in a terrible
      condition. Upon his frenzy—which you witnessed—there followed an alarming
       prostration. In one and the same breath he told me—is it
      indelicate to tell you this?—that he should die without me, and implored me to break with him.
      He said it was wicked to marry me, and yet declared that without me he would die. Indeed, I
      feared he would destroy himself.”
She waited, shuddering, closing her eyes, again pressing her hands against her head.
“I realised clearly, for the first time, what a frightful future must inevitably lie before
      me,” she continued, speaking slowly and in hesitating accents, while she gazed into the vague,
      over the glittering expanse of the great lake.—“I felt, and for the first time dreaded, the
      gloom which must for ever envelop us—I and he. We shall travel through life with this malign
      and supernatural companion; and what repose, what security, what possibility of spontaneous
      and fearless gladness can there be in such a life? For I shall be for ever face to face with
      the probability of a dark and swift catastrophe.”
“Catastrophe?” I said.
“Assuredly,” Miss Perry answered. “My nerves are not of ircn, though I am strong. Eventually
      they will give under the strain put upon them. Even the most reasonable mind must be affected
      by constant contact with unreason. At last I may—I shall—be infected by the terror which
      haunts my husband. To me, also, it will take
       on bodily form, and then Constantine will kill—kill—either
      me or himself.”
I was stricken by sudden compunction. After all, one human being is as good as another in a
      certain sense; each life is of supreme value to its possessor; all have equal rights. Why, in
      the eternal justice of things, should this pretty and clever girl be required to pay the price
      of her lover's singular misfortune? He adored her, I know; but did that create so tremendous
      an obligation on her side? It might be very fairly argued that he adored her to please
      himself.
“Leversedge is right. You must not marry him,” I cried, with conviction. “Poor, dear fellow,
      it is tragic for him, horribly tragic; but you are in no degree responsible for that. You must
      not marry him; the risk is too great. You must cancel your engagement.”
“No, no,” she answered. “I must not cancel my engagement. It must stand. I must marry
      him—and at once.”
In the excitement of the conversation we had both risen to our feet. We stood near each
      other, and for a perceptible space of time looked full at each other. The girl's cheeks were
      flushed; her eyes were swimming in tears, yet they danced. Charlotte Perry was brilliant just
      then,—the wind ruffling her abundant hair, while her hands plucked almost fiercely at the
      drooping buttercups in her belt.

“Are you afraid of your handiwork,” she asked me; “afraid of it at last?”
“My handiwork?—I am very honestly afraid of your happiness being wrecked.”
“Ah! that is wrecked already,” she answered softly. “Now I am only trying to save what poor
      remnant is possible of saving from the wreck.—I do not reproach you, though it is your doing.
      No—don't protest; you told me you would listen. Keep your promise, that is only just. Listen—I
      perceive only one way to gain your respect, perhaps your admiration. It is a bitter way—flesh
      and blood can hardly endure it—yet I take it. Constantine is your friend, not I. I am
      interesting to you, have been so from the first, merely on account of the relation in which I
      stand to him.”
Miss Perry lowered her eyes; she picked the buttercups to pieces one by one, scattering
      their green stems and shining yellow petals upon the grey-drab planks of the deck.
“You think lightly of me—do not deny it. I know I speak the truth. You criticise me at every
      turn; you consider my breeding doubtful, my taste doubtful. You question my sincerity. You
      cheapen my talents—in your own mind—I do not say you do all this openly, you are too
      gentleman-like to fall into that error. But being idle, you amuse your leisure by casting me
      up and dividing
       me out. For Constantine you really care, so you do not
      sacrifice him to your rage for analysis; I understand that.—No—do not interrupt me. I must say
      it all, all this once. You think me worldly, scheming, a mere actress. By marrying
      Constantine, by yielding myself up unreservedly to the horror which encircles him, I can
      vindicate myself; I can prove to you that you have misjudged me, and that I am very far from
      being the cheap, artificial, half-hearted adventuress you have supposed me to be.”
