

CHAPTER III
WHY is there always a third person to whom one owes a duty? And why do the claims
      of that third person become paramount at precisely the most inconvenient moments? “'Twas even
      thus from childhood's hour” in my experience. Ah! what is it to have retained a little odd and
      end of a conscience! I protest I wish I had been born a blackguard; a gentleman-like, but
      otherwise unmitigated, villain, then life might indeed have been worth living!
Charlotte Perry moved down the dusky alley beside me in silence. We reached the path running
      along the shore before she spoke.
The moon had sailed out from behind the floats of cloud, and her light made a wide pale
      stain right across the lake, in which the broken crests of the waves leapt up like tongues of
      silver flame. The wind swept tumultuously through the thick foliage of the trees above us.
      Away on the Savoy side, under the shadowy mass of the mountains, clusters of twinkling lights
      marked the site of the villages of St. Gingolph and Meillerie. The scene
       was a wholly appropriate setting to a romantic tête-à-tête. It might have really been enchanting but for the
      intruding claims of the inevitable third person.
Miss Perry paced along slowly, swathed closely in her shawl, her head bent. She addressed me
      in broken sentences. Her voice was so low that, what with the swishing wind and breaking
      waves, at times I could barely catch her words.
“The root of my suffering is this,” she murmured, “I am sensible of a change in myself,
      which makes me doubt whether the voice of supreme duty counsels self-emancipation or
      self-abnegation. Now that we have met again, I cannot disguise from myself that I have
      developed, and that Constantine—you care for him, you are his friend, therefore I can say
      it,—that Constantine has not developed. There was a time when what he had to offer me seemed
      enough—wealth and all the advantages it brings with it, a very respectable social position
      and—”
“And very sincere affection,” I put in.
The girl stopped abruptly and faced me, wringing, literally wringing, her hands.
“Ah! what will you think of me?” she cried.
“That you are entirely charming,” I answered.
“Be serious, pray, pray be serious,” Miss Perry implored.
She stood gazing up at the moon, trying apparently to control some overmastering emotion,
       pressing her hands upon her bosom; while her shawl, once
      more yielding to the wind blew hither and thither, forming all manner of fantastic evolutions.
      Sometimes it sailed out in a streaming pennon, sometimes it clung closely, shrouding her
      figure as that of a nun.
“Constantine has much, very much to give. But, but in the last year—is it faithless, is it
      wrong of me?—I have come to dream of a love very different from his. And I cannot decide
      whether that is a temptation or a revelation. A love occult, profound, mysterious—a love which
      should be a religion, an illumination, which should realise all the richest, deepest
      aspirations of one's soul. I think, from what I read, they knew this love in Italy during the
      Renaissance—some, a few, a very few, have known it since—”
Her voice sank away into an awestricken whisper.
“Only a few, a very few,” she repeated, “have known it since. Constantine could never know
      it; he could not grasp the idea. And therefore I tremble lest I should do violence to the
      light that is in me by contracting a marriage in which this element must of necessity be
      absent—this hidden mutual adoration of elect hearts.”
There was a momentary silence. The sound of the lake was hoarse along the shore, the trees
      bent, reeled under the force of the warm wind.
       The girl's shawl suddenly sprung up in flapping bat-like
      wings from her shoulders, giving her lightly clad figure the strangest appearance. It affected
      me. I became resolutely practical.
“You wish to break off your engagement,” I said.
“No, no—not unless, unless—”
And Charlotte Perry's lips gathered into that fascinating sketch of a kiss, while she looked
      full at me in the most astonishing manner.
I grew hot. I grew cold. I rallied my friendship for Leversedge. I wished I was not a man of
      honour. I wished a cloud would pass over the moon. I thanked God I was a man of honour. I blew
      up the embers of my affection for the woman I ought to have married. I wished I knew what on
      earth to say. I craved for the presence of Perry père; I
      should have hailed him as my deliverer from one of the worst moments of my life. I wondered if
      I was making a contemptible mistake. I wished sweet Lydia Castern had never refused me. I
      wondered if I was a fatuous ass. I wished Leversedge would rush out of the nearest bush and
      seize me by the throat. I wished anything and everything, in short, but that this marvellously
      pretty girl, with the dewy eyes and bewitching mouth, should continue to stand looking thus at
      me.
“My dear, young lady—” I began, with a courage born of desperation.

But Miss Perry moved back a step or two, extending one hand in a movement of entreaty and
      protest, covering her eyes with the other.
“Oh! spare me the crowning humiliation of an explanation,” she cried. “It is uncalled for.
      It is almost unchivalrous. Can you doubt that I see my error—that, with a scathing clearness,
      I comprehend.”
“I will go—I will leave here to-night. I will leave by the first train in the morning,” I
      exclaimed distractedly.
The girl made no immediate response. Her attitude stiffened, like that of a person who
      listens and thinks acutely. Was it conceivable that behind the screen of her uplifted hand
      Charlotte Perry was thinking acutely? I detested myself for entertaining so cold-blooded a
      supposition; yet as the seconds passed I could not avoid entertaining it.
“I will go,” I repeated.
Miss Perry lowered her hand, and gathered her shawl languidly about her. Never had she
      looked more flower-like, more adorably virginal.
“No!” she said, and there was not any trace of resentment in her gentle tones; “indeed, you
      must not go. For after all you owe me something—a little, just a very little, Mr. Hammond—”
      her charming eyes dwelt momentarily upon my most unworthy face.

“It is almost intolerable to think how much I owe you,” I replied. “Dispose of me as you
      please.”
The girl's mouth quivered, her eyelids drooped. “Then I lay it upon you to remain here,” she
      said. “You will still be my friend. Have I not bought your friendship at a rather bitter
      price—the price of my woman's pride? You will remain. You will teach me where my highest duty
      lies. I think perhaps you have begun to teach me that already. You will help me to save
      Constantine,” she sighed.—“You will help me to conceal this double pain from my poor, dear,
      doting parents. For they must absolutely know nothing of Constantine's strange
      hallucination,—they must know nothing of—”
The girl's voice died down into a sobbing whisper. She held out her hand to me. I kissed it
      in silence, and Miss Perry turned away.—“Do not come with me, please,” she murmured. “It is
      far kinder to let me find my way back through this troubled wind-vexed night alone.”
I permitted a decent time to elapse before I returned to the hotel. I am human.
      Consequently, I was moved; I was flattered; I was attendri—specially at first. Then the blighting habit of analysis, the one habit
      with which, alas! I utterly fail to play fast and loose, laid its chill influence upon my
      feelings. I began to ask myself
       self whether the Carissima was—just possibly—among the
      greatest actresses of the world? I recalled that odious grunt. I began to ask myself, where
      the devil Mr. Percy Gerrard could possibly come in?
