
CHAPTER VII.

“We form not our affections. It is they
That do form us; and form us in despite
Of our poor protests.”
Lytton.
Summer slid into autumn, and autumn into winter. The first few months of married life had
     been difficult to Mr. Loftus, but he had brought his whole attention and an infinite patience
     to bear on them, and gradually his reward came to him. Sibyl could learn because she loved. She
     learned slowly, but still she did learn, to read, not her husband's thoughts—those were far
     from her—but his wishes. She discovered, with a pang which cost
      her many secret tears—but still she did discover—that he often wished to be
     alone, and that she must not go into his study unless she were asked to do so. She learned
     gradually when to join him when he paced in the rose-garden, and when it vexed and wearied him
     to have her by him. And she learned, too, after the first horrible experience, which neither
     could remember without anguish, when, with blue lips, he had begged her not to touch him; that
     when he had an attack of the heart she must not betray her agony of mind, if she was to be
     allowed to remain in the room, and she must not ignorantly try to apply the remedies, but must
     leave it to Mr. Loftus's valet, whose imperturbable calm and promptitude had often ministered
     to his master before. Sibyl's terror of death and violent emotion at
      its approach were peculiarly trying to Mr. Loftus, who had long since ceased to
     regard death with horror, and only wished to be allowed to meet it quietly, without a
     scene.
All intimacy was difficult to his solitary nature. It was alien while it was courteously
     welcomed. It was the natural instinct of hers. She had to learn to suppress her tenderness—or,
     at any rate, its expression—a hard lesson for an over-demonstrative nature, not long out of its
     teens. But Sibyl learned even that for his sake. And there her knowledge stopped. It never
     reached beyond his wishes to his mind. She was merged entirely in her love of her husband, but
     if he had been unworthy of the exalted pedestal on which she had placed him, she would not have
     discovered it.

“It might just as well have been Doll.” Mr. Loftus thought occasionally, half amused, when he
     had the barbarity to try a platitude of the first water upon her—one of Doll's best, such as
     the young man, after diving into the recesses of his being, could produce, and found she
     received it with as much interest as the thoughts for which he had dug deep. For hero-worship
     was necessary to Sibyl, but not a hero—only that she should consider him one. The sham was to
     her the same as the real. She saw no difference. Like many another woman, she would have adored
     an ass's ears, wondering at the blindness of the rest of mankind. But if the truth about those
     ears had been forced upon her, rubbed into her, tattooed upon her, her entire belief in human
     nature would have fallen with the fall of one fellow-
     creature. The heights and depths of human nature had never awed her, nor its great
     forces moved her to reverence or compassion. She was of the stuff out of which the female
     cynic, as well as the female devotee, is made.
Mr. Loftus did not marvel at an adoration which has been the birthright of his fortunate sex
     since the world began, but his perennial wonder at the enigma of feminine human nature had a
     new element added to it—that of amusement. She played with his tools, as a robin perches on a
     spade, thinking it is stuck in the earth for that purpose, and for the turning up of worms.
The struggles, the despair, the hope and the aspiration, through which his youth had climbed,
     and out of which it had forged its tools, were not a part of Sibyl's youth. She liked the tools
     now that they were
      made, and desired them for her own small uses. She was naturally drawn to those
     of deeper convictions and larger faiths. She liked the luxury of being moved by them, stirred
     by them, lifted beyond herself by a power outside of herself. She loved to nibble the edge of
     their hard-earned bread and feel that she, too, was of them, and make believe that she had
     helped to grind the flour; and to make believe with Sibyl was the same thing as to believe. Her
     insolvent nature clung to the rich one, ostensibly because it was sympathetic, but really
     because it was rich.
This unconscious audacity was a novel source of entertainment to Mr. Loftus, a bubbling
     wayside spring which he had hardly hoped to meet with on the dry highroad of married life. It
     is greatly to be feared that his conscience, usually a
      tender one, was hardly as watchful as it should have been on this subject. It
     certainly had lapses when Sibyl conversed with him seriously, especially when she coupled his
     feelings with her own on the greatest subjects, never doubting that they were identical. But
     after a short time he dared not speak to her of anything really dear to him. She had a gift for
     making sacred things common by touching them, and age had not tarnished reverence in Mr.
     Loftus's soul, though it had tarnished many things which youth holds in reverence. He talked to
     her, instead, on subjects which he had not much at heart, and that did quite as well.
And she, on her side, would bring to him the inferior religious books, and superficial
     unorthodox works which she believed to be deep because they were unorthodox,
      which were the natural food of her little soul, and he received them and her
     remarks upon them, as he received a flower when she gave him one, with courtesy and
     gratitude.
So absorbed was she in her devotion to her husband, and in the interchange of beautiful
     sentiments, that her other duties, increased by her position at Wilderleigh, were not even
     perceived. Unobservant persons are sometimes surprised at the real devotion—and Sibyl's was
     real—of which a shallow and cold-hearted nature shows itself capable. But those who look closer
     perceive at what heavy expense to others that one link is held, which is in reality only a new
     and more subtle form of selfishness.
She dropped the other links without even knowing that she had dropped them.
      She had no tender, watchful gratitude for Lady Pierpoint, no interest in Peggy's
     new gowns and lovers, or as to whether Molly had enjoyed her first season. If this had been
     pointed out to her, she would have glibly ascribed the result to marriage, which, according to
     some women, is the death-bed of all sympathy and impersonal love. It is like ascribing sin to
     temptation.
The Gresleys were much disappointed in her, and they had reason to be so, for Sibyl had
     changed over after her discovery of Mr. Loftus's convictions, or, rather, her interpretation of
     them, and, instead of being rather High Church, had now decided to be “wide,” which state, it
     soon appeared, was not compatible with being an efficient helper to the earnest hard-working
     young couple at her gate. Mr. Loftus, who now
      had command of money, was far more considerate than his wife.
“She,” Mrs. Gresley complained, “did not seem to care to do anything with her life, for she
     would neither sing in the choir nor teach in the Sunday-school.”
She did consent to give prizes for needlework in the schools, but when the day came it was
     discovered that she had forgotten all about it, and, as she had a cold, Mr. Loftus drove into
     the nearest town and brought a mind weighted with political matter to bear upon the requisite
     number of prizes suited to girls of from seven to fourteen years, and hurried back just in time
     to prevent disappointment by distributing them himself.
“Have you written lately to Lady Pierpoint?” he sometimes asked, and Sibyl generally had to
     confess, “Not lately,” and
      then she would write and then forget again.
“I suppose Lady Pierpoint is less well off now that you are married?” he asked one day
     tentatively. “No doubt your guardians made her an allowance while you lived with her.”
“Yes,” said Sibyl, who was sitting on the hearthrug, trying to make Crack do his trick of
     sitting up. It was his only trick, and he could not do that unless he happened to be sitting
     down when called upon to perform it. If he were on all fours at the moment, he could not
     remember how it began. “Aunt Marion often said it was a very handsome allowance.”
“And have you continued it, or part of it?” asked Mr. Loftus gravely.
Sibyl owned that she had never thought of doing so.

“Everything I have is yours now,” she said, looking up at him.
“And I am spending it,” he said, “freely. Thousands of yours are being put into the estate,
     in repairs, and new farms and buildings. I am like the man in Scripture who pulled down his
     barns to build greater—at least, who intended to do so if he had had time.”
Mr. Loftus stopped. For the first time for many years a faint wish crossed his mind that his
     soul might not be required of him till all those expensive improvements were paid for, which
     would make Doll's position as landlord easier than his own had been.
“Even in these bad times,” he went on, “Wilderleigh will come round. You have taken a great
     weight off my mind, Sibyl.”
“That is what I wish,” she said, turning
      her face, as he put back a little ring of hair behind her ear, so that her lips
     met his hand.
“But Lady Pierpoint? I am afraid, Sibyl, her husband left her very badly off.”
“I will write now,” said Sibyl, springing to her feet.
Crack rose too, and jumped on Mr. Loftus's knees, quietly pushing his hands off them with his
     strong nose, and accommodating his long, thin body by a few jerks into the groove which a
     masculine lap presents. Mr. Loftus did not want him, and it tired him to keep his knees
     together; but he knew there was a draught on the floor, and he allowed him to remain.
“How much shall I say? A thousand a year or fifteen hundred for her life?” asked Sibyl,
     dipping her pen in the ink. It was all one to her. She always gave
      freely of what cost her nothing—namely, money.
“It must not be too much, or she won't feel able to take it,” said Mr. Loftus, considering.
     “And if it is an annuity, it does not help the children.” And he wondered how far he dared
     go.
And when, a few days later, Lady Pierpoint received a note from Sibyl, very delicately and
     affectionately expressed, and offering, in such a manner as to make refusal almost impossible,
     a sum of money more than sufficient to provide for both her daughters, she guessed immediately
     whose tact had dictated the letter.
“Sibyl would never have thought of it,” she said to herself, as she wrote a note of
     acceptance. “It never crossed her mind when she left us, or even to offer to pay
      for Peggy's and Molly's bridesmaids” gowns, although she chose such expensive
     ones. And if it had occurred to her since, she would not have put it like that.”

