
CHAPTER TEN
MOONLIGHT
That evening Thomasin had another spasm of face-ache and went to bed soon after drinking
      tea. Michael was due at home about ten o'clock or earlier, and Joan—having set out supper,
      made all ready, and ascertained that her stepmother had gone to sleep—walked out to the
      pierhead, there to wait for Mr. Tregenza and Tom. Under moonlight, the returning luggers crept
      homeward, like inky silhouettes on a background of dull silver. Every moment added to the
      forest of masts anchored at the moorings outside the harbor; every minute another rowing-boat
      shot between the granite piers, slid silently into the darkness under shore, leaving moonlit
      rings widening out behind at each dip of the oars. Joan sat down under the lighthouse and
      waited in the stillness for her father's boat. Yellow flashes, like fireflies, twinkled along
      through Newlyn, and above them the moon brought out square patches of silver-bright roof seen
      through a blue night. Now and then a bell rang in the harbor, and lights leaped here and
      there, mingling red snakes and streamers of fire with the white moonbeams where they lay on
      still water. Then Joan knew the fish were being sold by auction, and she grew anxious for her
      father's return, fearing prices might have fallen before he arrived. Great periods of silence
      lay between the ringings of the bell, and at such times only faint laughter floated out from
      shore, or blocks chipped and rattled as a sail came down or a concertina squeaked fitfully
      where it was played on a Norwegian iceboat at the harbor quay. The tide ran high, and Joan
      watched the lights reflected in the harbor and wondered why the gold of them contrasted so ill
      with the silver from the moon.
Presently two men came along to the pierhead. They smoked, looked at the sea, and did not
      notice her where she sat in shadow. One, the larger, wore knickerbockers, talked loudly, and
      looked a giant in the vague light; the other was muffled up in a big ulster, and Joan would
      not have recognized Barron had he not spoken. But he answered his friend, and then the girl's
      heart leaped to hear that quiet, unimpassioned voice. He spoke of matters which she did not
      understand, of pictures and light and all manner of puzzles set by Nature for the solution of
      art; but though for the most part his remarks conveyed no meaning to her, yet he closed a
      sentence with words that made her happy, and warmed her heart and left a precious memory
      behind them.
"Moonlight is a problem only less difficult than sunshine," he said to his friend. "Where
      are you going to get that?" and he pointed to the sea.
"It's been jolly well done all the same."
"Never. It is not to be done. You can suggest by a trick, but God defend us from tricks and
      sleight-of-hand in connection with the solemn business of painting pictures. Let us be true or
      nothing."
They walked away together, and Joan pondered over the last words. Truth seemed an eternal,
      abiding passion with John Barron, and the contemplation of this idea gave her considerable
      pleasure. She did not know that a man may be at once true to his art and a liar to his
      fellows.
Presently her father returned with Tom, and the three walked home together. Gray Michael
      appeared quietly satisfied that his son was shaping well and showing courage and nerve. But he
      silenced the lad quickly enough when Tom began to talk with some gasconade concerning greet
      deeds done westward of the Scilly Islands.
"'Let another man praise thee an' not thine awn mouth,' my bwoy," said Mr. Tregenza. "It
      ban't the wave as makes most splash what gaws highest up the beach, mind. You get Joan to
      teach 'e how to peel 'taties, 'cause 'tis a job you made a tidy bawk of, not to mention no
      other. Keep your weather-eye liftin' an' your tongue still. Then you'll do. An' mind—the
      bwoat's clean as a smelt by five o'clock to-morrow marnin', an' no later."
Tom, dashed by these base details, answered seaman fashion:
"Ay, ay, faither."
Then they all tramped home, and the boy enjoyed the glories of a late supper, though he was
      half asleep before he had finished it.
