
BOY AND GIRL
 Pocket Upton was able to relieve his soul of one load that morning. Dr. Baumgartner had left
     the schoolboy to his soap and water, taking the newspaper with him; but apparently Pocket had
     followed him down in quicker time than the other anticipated. At any rate the little lady of
     the house was all alone in the dining-room, where Pocket found her boiling eggs on the
     gas-fire, and had her to himself for several seconds of which he wasted none. There was neither
     grace nor tact in what he said, and his
      manner was naturally at its worst, but the penitential torrent came from his
     heart, and was only stemmed by the doctor's hasty arrival on the scene. Miss Platts had not
     been given time to say a word, but now she asked Mr. Upton how many minutes he liked his egg
     boiled, and would not let him do it himself, but smiled when he told her it was “done to a
     shake.” Dr. Baumgartner, on the other hand, scowled upon them both until observation or
     reflection had convinced him that no promises had been broken and no confidences exchanged. 
 The callow pair saw something more of each other during the morning; for Pocket hotly
     resented being distrusted, and showed it by making up to the young girl under the doctor's
     nose. He talked to her about books in the other room. He had the impertinence to invite her
     into the dining-room for a game of billiards, but the sense next moment to include her uncle in
     an amended form of more becoming suggestion. Baumgartner eventually countenanced a game, but
     spent most of the time with his back to the players and his eye on the street. The boy and girl
     got on very well now; they seemed frankly glad of each other, though he caught her more than
     once with a large and furtive eye on him. But she seemed to enjoy her baptism of schoolboy
     slang. And it was only when she
      began to question him about his special vocabulary, that Baumgartner looked on
     for a little, and put in his word. 
 “You see he still believes in his public school,” said he to Phillida, in a tone which
     reminded their visitor of his first breakfast in the house. 
 “I should think I did!” cried Pocket, and did a little loyal boasting about the best of
     schools, and the best house in that school, until memory took him by the throat and filled his
     eyes. It was twelve o'clock, and a summer's Saturday. School was over for the week. Only your
     verses to do in your own time, and get signed by Spearman before you went up to dormitory on
     Saturday night; but meanwhile, Saturday afternoon! A match on the Upper, where you could lie on
     your rug and watch the game you couldn't play; call-over at the match; ices and lemon-drinks in
     a tent on the field; and for Saturday supper anything you liked to buy, cooked for you in the
     kitchen and put piping hot at your place in hall, not even for the asking, but merely by
     writing your name plainly on the eggs and leaving them on the slab outside! It was not these
     simple luxuries that Pocket missed so sorely; it was the whole full life of ups and downs, and
     no yesterdays and no to-morrows, that he had lost for ever since last Saturday. The heavy
     midday meal came in smoking from
      the Italian restaurant, and Pocket was himself again, as a boy will be; after
     all, they knew about him at home by this time, their worst fears were allayed, and in the end
     it would all come right. In the end he would be sitting in his own old place at home, instead
     of with strangers in an unknown street; telling them everything, instead of holding his peace;
     and watching even Fred and Horace listening to every word—much as Dr. Baumgartner was listening
     to something now. 
 What was it? Phillida was listening, too, and watching her uncle as she listened. Pocket did
     both in his turn. 
 It was the voice of newspaper hawkers, shouting in couples, coming nearer with their shouts.
     Dr. Baumgartner jumped up from the table, and ran outside without his hat. 
 His promise alone prevented Pocket from following and outstripping the doctor. He knew what
     the shouting was about before he could have sworn to a single raucous word. But Phillida could
     not know, and she resumed at once where they had left off before breakfast. 
 “Of course I forgive you,” she whispered. “It was I began it!” 
 “Began what?” 
 “Our row yesterday.” 
 Phillida had a demure twinkle, after all; but it
      was lost on Pocket now. “I'd forgotten all about it,” he said with superfluous
     candour, his ear still on the street. 
 “I haven't.” 
 Her voice made him remember better. “I hope to goodness I didn't hurt you?” 
 “Of course you didn't.” 
 “But you must have thought me mad!” 
 There was a slight but most significant pause. 
 “Well, I never shall again.” 
 “Then you did!” he gasped. Their eyes had met sharply; both young faces were flooded with
     light, and it was much the same light. There was no nonsense about it, but there was indignant
     horror on his side, and indignant shame on hers. 
 “You really are at school?” she whispered, not increduously, but as one seeking assurance in
     so many words; and in a flash he saw what she had thought, what she had been deliberately made
     to think, that his beloved school was not a school at all, but an Ayslum! 
 But at that moment Dr. Baumgartner was heard bargaining at the gate with one raucous voice,
     while the other went on roaring huskily, “Park murder—arrest! 'Rest o' de Park murderer! Park
     murder—Park murder—arrest!” And Pocket sprang up from the table in a state that swept his last
     thoughts clean from his mind. 

 The girl said something; he did not hear what. He was white and trembling, in pitiable case
     even to eyes that could only see skin-deep; but the doctor's step came beating like a drum to
     him, and he was solidly seated when the doctor entered—without any paper at all. 
 “It's that murder the papers are all exploiting,” he explained benignly. “They were shouting
     out something about an arrest; you would hear them, I daresay. But it's the usual swindle; the
     police are merely hoping to effect an arrest. I threatened to send for them unless the
     scoundrel took his paper back!” 
 He was in his lightest mood of sardonic gaiety. The sins of the vendors recalled those of
     “your vermin press itself”; the association was wilfully unfair, the favourite phrase a studied
     insult; but the English boy was either dense or indifferent, and Phillida's great eyes were in
     some other world. Baumgartner subjected them both to a jealous scrutiny, and suddenly cried out
     upon his own bad memory. It appeared there was a concert at the Albert Hall, where “the most
     popular and handsome pair in England” (the inverted commas were in the doctor's sneer) were
     being welcomed on their return from the ends of the earth. He had intended going to hear what
     they could do; but Phillida should go instead; she was not past the ballad stage. 

 And Phillida rose submissively, with unreal thanks which could not conceal her recognition
     of the impromptu pretext for getting rid of her; her uncle called a taxicab, and with harsh
     hilarity turned her off the premises in the frock she had been wearing all day. 
 “And now,” said he, returning with a scowl, “what the devil were you two talking about while
     my back was turned?” 
 “Yesterday,” replied Pocket, more than ready for him, though his heart beat fast. 
 “What about yesterday?” 
 “Our scuffle in the other room.” 
 “Is that all?” 
 “No—I found out something; she didn't tell me.” 
 “What did you find out?” 
 “That you let her think me mad!” cried Pocket, in monstrous earnest. He might have laughed
     at himself, could he have seen his own reproachful face. But he could have killed Baumgartner
     for laughing at him; it did not occur to him that the laugh was partly one of pure relief. 
 “Why, my young fellow, how else can I account for you?” 
 “You said she would think I was a patient.” 
 “Exactly! A mental case.” 
 “You had no business to make me out mad,” persisted Pocket, with dogged valour. 

 “Pardon me! I had all the business in the world; and I beg that you'll continue to foster
     the illusion as thoroughly as you did yesterday when I was out. It's no good shaking your head
     at me; listen to reason,” continued Baumgartner, with an adroit change of tone. “And try, my
     good young fellow, do try to think of somebody besides yourself; have some consideration for my
     niece, if you have none for me.” 
 Pocket was mystified, but still more incensed; for he felt himself being again put gently
     but clearly in the wrong. 
 “And I should like to know,” he cried, “what good it does her to think she's associating
     with a lunatic?” 
 “She would probably prefer the idea to that of a murderer,” was the suave reply. “I speak
     only of ideas; otherwise I should not make use of such an expression, even in jest. It's as
     ugly as it's ridiculous in your case. Yet you heard for yourself that others are applying the
     horrid term in all sobriety.” 
 “I heard more than that,” returned Pocket. “They've arrested somebody!” 
 “I thought I told you there was no truth in that?” 
 But Baumgartner had winced for once, and the boy had seen it, and his retort was a
     precocious inspiration. 

 “That was only to avoid a scene at table, Dr. Baumgartner!” 
 “Well, my young fellow,” said the doctor, after one of his wise pauses, “and what if it
     was?” 
 “I can't sit here and let an innocent man lie in prison.” 
 “He won't lie long.” 
 “It's absolutely wicked to let them keep him at all.” 
 “Nor will they, longer than another hour or two.” 
 “Well, if they do, you know what I shall do!” 
 Pocket had never displayed such determination, nor incurred quite the same measure or
     quality of wrath that Baumgartner poured upon him without a word for the next few moments. It
     was a devouring gaze of sudden and implacable animosity. The ruthless lips were shut out of
     sight, yet working as though the teeth were being ground behind them; the crow's footed face
     flushed up, and the crow's feet were no more; it was as though age was swallowed in that flood
     of speechless passion till the whole man was no older than the fiery eyes that blazed upon the
     boy. And yet the most menacing thing of all was the complete control with which the doctor
     broke this pregnant silence. 
 “You say that. I say otherwise. You had better find a book in the other room till you know
     your own mind again.” 

 “I know it now, unless they release that man,” said Pocket, through his teeth, although they
     chattered. 
 “Give them a chance, and give yourself one! It will be time to think of clearing other
     people when they fail to clear themselves. Have more patience! Think of your own friends, and
     give them time too.” 
 If the last allusion was to the lad's letter, due in Leicestershire that morning, it was as
     happy as all Baumgartner's last words. If he meant himself to be included among Pocket's
     friends, there was food for thought in the suggestion that a man of the doctor's obvious
     capacity was not idle in the boy's best interests. Pocket was made to feel rather ashamed of
     himself, as usual; but he could not forget the concentrated fury of the look which had not been
     weakened by infuriate words; and the recollection remained as an excuse, as well as a menace,
     in his mind. He had time enough to think it over. Dr. Baumgartner smoked his meerschaum in the
     gathering shade at the back of the house. The schoolboy sulked for some time in the big chair,
     but eventually took the doctor at his word about a book. 
 If it be ever true that a man may be known by his books, it was certainly so to some extent
     in the case of Dr. Otto Baumgartner. His library
      was singularly small for an intellectual man who wrote himself, and a majority of
     the volumes were in languages which no public schoolboy could be expected to read; but of the
     English books many were on military subjects, some few anthropological; there were photographic
     year-books and Psychical Research Reports by the foot or yard, and there was an odd assortment
     of second-hand books which had probably been labelled “occult” in their last bookseller's list.
     Boismont on “Hallucinations” was one of these; it was the book for Pocket. He took the little
     red volume down, and read a long chapter on somnambulism in the big chair. In a way it
     comforted him. It was something to find that he was far from being the only harmless creature
     who had committed a diabolical deed in his sleep; here among several cases was one of another
     boy who had made an equally innocent and yet determined attempt on his own father. But there
     was something peculiar in poor Pocket's case, something that distinguished it from any of those
     cited in the book, and he was still ferreting for its absolute fellow when Phillida came in
     long before he expected her. Boismont had made the time fly wonderfully, in spite of
     everything; the girl, too, appeared to have been taken out of herself, and talked about her
     concert as any other young girl might have done, both to Pocket and her
      uncle, who glided in at once from the garden. The doctor, however, was himself in
     mellower mood; and they were having tea, for all the world like any ordinary trio, the girl
     still making talk about sundry songs, the man quizzing them and her, and the boy standing up
     for one that his sister sang at home, when a metallic tattoo put a dramatic stop to the
     conversation. 
 The two young people, but not their elder, were startled quite out of their almost
     inadvertent tranquillity; and the knocker was not still before Pocket realised that it was the
     first time he had heard it. No letters were delivered at that house; not a soul had he seen or
     heard at the door before. Even in his excitement, however, with its stunning recrudescence of
     every reality, its instantaneous visions of his people or the police, there was room for a
     measure of disgust when the girl got up, at an ungallant nod from the German, to go to the
     door. 
 “It's a huge fat man,” whispered Phillida, on her return to the big room at the back of the
     house. “Here's his card.” 
 “Thrush!” muttered Baumgartner as though he knew the name, and he glowered at the two young
     faces on which it made no impression whatever. It was plain how he hated leaving them together;
     but for once it must be done, and done
      quickly—with both doors open and the visitor's very movements audible on the
     steps. To the door the doctor must go, and went, shutting that one pointedly behind him. 
 The young creatures, looking in each other's eyes, listened for raised voices and the slam
     of prompt expulsion; but the voices were pitched too low to reach their ears in words, and were
     only interrupted by the sound of footsteps in the hall, and the perfectly passive closing of an
     outer and an inner door in quick succession. 
 “He's taken him into the dining-room,” murmured Phillida. “Who can it be?” 
 “Hasn't he any friends?” 
 “None who ever come here; none of that name anywhere, I feel sure.” Her great eyes, without
     leaving his for an instant, filled with thought as a blank screen takes a shadow. “I wonder if
     it's about that!” she whispered. 
 “What?” 
 “What they were calling out with the newspapers while we were at table.” 
 There was a pause. The look in her eyes had changed. It was purely penetrating now. 
 “Why should it be?” asked Pocket, his own eyes falling. 
 “It's no use asking me, Mr. Upton.” 
 “But I don't understand the question.” 

 “Is that true?” 
 “No,” he muttered; “it isn't.” 
 She was leaning over to him; he felt it, without looking up. 
 “Mr. Upton,” she said, speaking quickly in the undertone they were both instinctively
     adopting, “you know now what I thought about you at first. I won't say what made me; but that
     was what I thought, but could hardly believe, and never will again. It makes it all the more a
     mystery, your being here. I can't ask my uncle—he tells me nothing—but there's something I can
     and must ask you.” 
 Pocket hung his head. He knew what was coming. It came. 
 “My uncle brought you here, Mr. Upton, on the very morning that thing happened they were
     calling out about to-day. In the Park. It is to the Park he goes so often in the early morning
     with his camera! How can I say what I want to say? But, if you think, you will see that
     everything points to it; especially the way he ran out for that paper—and hid the truth when he
     came in!” 
 Pocket looked up at last. 
 “I know the truth.” 
 “About the arrest?” 
 “Yes; it was quite obvious, and he admitted it when you'd gone.” 

 “Why not before?” 
 “I couldn't tax him about it in front of you,” he muttered, looking up and down quickly,
     unable to face her fierce excitement. 
 “Do tell me what it is you both know about this dreadful case!” 
 “I can't,” the boy said hoarsely; “don't ask me.” 
 “Then you know who did it. I can see you do.” 
 There was a new anguish even in her whisper; he could hear what she thought. 
 “It was nobody you care about,” he mumbled, hoarser than before, and his head lower. 
 “You don't mean——” 
 She stopped aghast. 
 “I can't say another word—and you won't say another to me!” he added, a bitter break in his
     muffled voice. He longed to tell her it had been an accident, to tell her all; but he had given
     his word to Baumgartner not to confide in her, and he did not think that he had broken it yet. 
 “You don't know me,” she whispered, and for a moment her hand lay warm in his; “trust me!
     I'm your friend in spite of all you've said—or done!” 
 Dr. Baumgartner might have been ten minutes getting rid of the intruder; before that he had
     been first amazed and then relieved to hear the piano in the drawing-room; and that was all his
     anxious ear had heard of either boy or girl during his absence.
      Yet the boy was not standing over the piano, as he might have been, for Phillida
     was trying to recall one of the concert songs he said his sister sang. Pocket, however, was
     staring out into the garden with a troubled face, which he turned abruptly, aggressively, and
     yet apprehensively to meet the doctor's. 
 But the doctor no longer looked suspiciously from him to Phillida, but stood beaming on them
     both, and rubbing his hands as though he had done something very clever indeed. 
