
THE FOURTH CASE
 The boy and girl sat long and late in the open window at the back of the house. The room
     would have been in darkness but for a flood of moonlight pouring over them. The only light in
     the house was in the room above, and they only saw its glimmer on the garden when a casual
     cloud hid the moon; but once Pocket had crept out into the garden to steal a look at the
     lighted window itself; and what he saw was the shadow of a huge bent head smoking a huge bent
     pipe, and dense clouds of shadow floating up the wall and over the ceiling. 
 It seemed hours since they had heard footstep or other sound upstairs or anywhere. There had
     been a brisk interval—and then an end—of more or less distant hansom-bells and motor-horns.
     There was no longer even a certain minute intermittent trembling of trifles on the
     walnut-tables, to which Pocket had become subconsciously accustomed in that house, so that he
     noticed its absence more than the thing itself. It was as though the whole town was at rest,
     and the tunnels under the town, and every single soul above or below ground, but those two
     white faces in the moonlight, and perhaps one other overhead. 

 Pocket wondered; it was so long since a single sound had come down to their ears. He wanted
     to steal out and look up again. Phillida was against it; perhaps she was wondering too. Pocket,
     as usual, saw what he did see so very vividly, in his mind's eye, that he shivered and was
     asked if he felt cold. The whispered debate that followed was the longest conversation they had
     that night. The window was not shut as a result of it, but Pocket fetched his overcoat on
     tiptoe, and it just went over both their shoulders, when the chairs were drawn as near together
     as they would go. 
 The ragged little garden was brimming over with moonlight from wall to wall. The unkempt
     grass looked pale and ghostly, like the skin of some monstrous wolf. The moon rolled high in
     the sky and clouds flew above and below the moon, varying in pace as well. Yet it was a still
     night, and Pocket did not think that he had broken the stillness, until the door burst open
     behind them, and Baumgartner stood there, holding his lamp aloft. The wick was turned too high,
     the flame ran up the chimney in the draught, and for an instant a demoniac face flared up
     behind it. Then the chimney cracked, and fell in a tinkling shower, and the doctor was seen
     whirling a naked tongue of fire about his head. The boy drew back as the lamp flew through the
     open window, within
      an inch of his nose, and crashed upon the path outside. 
 The trio stood without a word in the moonbeams; but the doctor was breathing hard through
     his teeth, like a man wrestling with himself; and at last he laughed sardonically as though he
     had won. 
 “A lamp like that's a dangerous thing,” said he, with a kind of forced solemnity and a shake
     of the head; “you never know what may happen when a lamp does that! I'm glad the window was
     open; it didn't go very near my young fellow, I hope?” 
 And he took Pocket playfully by the ear, but pinched it so hard that the boy could have
     screamed with pain. 
 “It would have served you right,” continued the doctor, before Pocket could find his tongue,
     “for sitting up so late, and keeping a young lady from her bed to bear you company. Come,
     Phillida! I shall have another word with you, young fellow.” 
 The two words to the girl were in a different key from all the rest. They were tolerant,
     conciliatory, tenderly persuasive. The rest was suavely sinister; it made her hesitate; but
     Pocket had the presence of mind to bid her a cheery good-night, and she went, closely followed
     by Baumgartner. 
 Posted once more at the open door, the boy heard Baumgartner on the next flight, soothing
     and affectionate still, allaying her fears; and his
      own surged into his throat. He looked wildly about him, and an idea came. He
     opened the front door wide, and then stole back through the conservatory into the moonlight. He
     heard Baumgartner coming down before he gained the garden. He tore to the end of it, and
     cowered in the shadow of the far wall. 
 The doctor came running into the moonlit room, but not for a minute; it looked as though he
     had run out first into the road. In the room he lit the gas, and Pocket saw him have a look in
     all the corners, but hardly the look of a seeker who expects to find. Some long moments he
     stood out horribly at the open window, gazing straight at the spot where the fugitive crouched
     a few inches out of the moonlight and hugged the revolver in his pocket. He seemed to see
     nothing to bring him out that way, for he closed that window and put out the gas. The trembling
     watcher heard the front door shut soon after, and saw another light in Baumgartner's room the
     minute after that, and the blind drawn down. But on the blind there lagged a cloud-capped
     shadow till the doctor's pipe was well in blast. 
 There were no more shadows after that. The moon moved round to the right, and set behind the
     next house. The sky grew pale, and the lighted blind paler still, until Baumgartner drew it up
      before putting out his light. Pocket was now too stiff to stir; but it was not
     necessary; the doctor had scarcely looked out. There was a twitter of sparrows all down the
     road, garden answering to garden. The sun came up behind Pocket's wall, behind the taller
     houses further back. And Baumgartner reappeared at his window for one instant in his cap. 
 The front door shut again. 
 Down the garden ran Pocket without the least precaution now. There was a gravel passage
     between the tradesmen's entrance, on the detached side of the house, and the garden wall. This
     passage was closed by a gate, and the gate was locked, but Pocket threw himself over it almost
     in his stride and darted over into the open road. 
 Just then it was a perfectly empty road, but for a gaunt black figure stalking away in the
     distance. An overwhelming curiosity urged the boy to follow, but an equal dread of detection
     kept him cowering in gateways, until Baumgartner took the turning past the shops without a
     backward glance. Pocket promptly raced to that corner, and got another glimpse of his leader
     before he vanished round the next. So the spasmodic chase continued over a zigzag course; but
     at every turn the distance between them was a little less. Neither looked round, and once the
     boy's feet were actually on the man's shadow; for half the streets were raked with
      level sunlight, but the other half were ladders of dusk with rungs of light at
     the gaps between the houses. All were dustier, dirtier, and emptier than is ever the case by
     night or day, because this was neither one nor the other, though the sun was up to make the
     most of dust, dirt, and emptiness. It was before even the cleansing hour of the scavenger and
     the water-cart. A dead cat was sprawling horribly in one deserted reach of wood-paving. And a
     motor-car at full speed in a thoroughfare calling itself King's Road, which Pocket was about to
     cross, had at all events the excuse of a visible mile of asphalt to itself. 
 Pocket drew back to let it pass, without looking twice at the car itself, which indeed was
     disguised out of knowledge in the promiscuous mire of many countries; but the red eyes behind
     the driver's goggles were not so slow. Down went his feet on clutch and brake without a
     second's interval; round spun the car in a skid that tore studs from the tyres, and fetched her
     up against the kerb with a shivered wheel. Pocket started forward with a cry; but at that
     moment a ponderous step fell close behind him; his arm was seized, and he was dragged in
     custody across the road. 
 “Your boy, I think!” cried one whom he had never seen before, and did not now, being locked
     already in the motorist's arms. 

 “When did you find him?” the father asked when he was man enough, still patting Pocket's
     shoulders as if he were a dog. 
 “Only last night when I wired.” 
 “And where?” 
 “In the house where you and I couldn't make ourselves heard.” 
 The schoolboy flared up through all his emotion. 
 “Why, I never saw you before this minute!” 
 “Well, I've had my eye on you, more or less, for a day or two.” 
 “Then why didn't you wire before?” demanded Mr. Upton, quite ready to mask his own emotion
     with a little heat. “I didn't get it till after nine o'clock—too late for the evening train—but
     I wasn't going to waste three hours with a forty-horser eating its head off! So here I am, on
     my way to the address you gave.” 
 “It was plumb opposite Baumgartner's. I mounted guard there the very night you left. He came
     out twenty minutes ago, and your boy after him!” 
 “But what does it all mean, Thrush? What on earth were you doing there, my dear boy?” 
 The notes of anger and affection were struck in ludicrously quick succession; but the first
     was repeated on the boy's hang-dog admission that he had been hiding. 

 “Hiding, Tony?” 
 Thrush himself seemed surprised at the expression. “But at all events we found you better
     employed,” he said to Pocket, “and the sooner we all take up the chase again the more chance we
     shall have of laying this rascal by the heels.” 
 “Take it up, then!” snapped Mr. Upton. “Jump into the motor, and bring the brute to me when
     you've got him! I want to speak to my boy.” 
 He did not realise the damage done to his car, or listen to a word that passed between
     Thrush and his chauffeur; he had eyes only for those of his child who had been lost but was
     found, and not a thought in his head outside the story he extracted piecemeal on the spot. Poor
     Pocket told it very volubly and ill; he would not confine himself to simple facts. He stated
     his suspicion of Baumgartner's complicity in the Hyde Park affair as though he knew it for a
     fact; cited the murders in Holland Walk and Park Lane as obvious pieces of the same handiwork,
     and yet declared his conviction that the actual hand was not Dr. Baumgartner's at all. 
 “But why should you think he had an accomplice, Tony?” 
 “He was unarmed the other morning. I'm quite positive of that. And his niece, who lives
      with him, has never seen a firearm of any kind in the house.” 
 “Well, he's villain enough to hang, if ever there was one! It's time we laid hold of him.
     Where's Mr. Thrush? I thought you'd taken him on in the car?” 
 This to the chauffeur, now the centre of the carrion crowd that gathers about the body of
     any disabled motor. The chauffeur, a countryman like his master, was enjoying himself vastly
     with a surreptitious cigarette and sardonic mutterings on the cause of his scattered spokes;
     the facts being that he had nearly fallen asleep at his wheel, which Mr. Upton had
     incontinently taken into his own less experienced hands. 
 “The car won't take anybody anywhere to-day,” explained the chauffeur, with his cigarette
     behind his back. “I shall have to get a lorry to take the car.” He held his head on one side
     suddenly. “There's a bit o' tyre trouble for somebody!” he cried, grimly. 
 Indeed, a sharp crack had come from the direction of the river, not unlike the bursting of a
     heavy tyre; but Pocket Upton did not think it was that. He caught his father's arm, and
     whispered in his father's ear, and they plunged together into a side street broader than the
     asphalt thoroughfare, but with scarcely a break in either phalanx of drab
      mediocre dwellings, and not a creature stirring except themselves and a few who
     followed. The hog's back of a still more deserted bridge arched itself at the foot of the
     street, its suspension cables showing against the sky in foreshortened curves. As they ran a
     peculiarly shrill whistle cut the morning air like a streak of sound. 
 “P'lice!” screamed one of those bringing up the rear, and they easily spurted past father
     and son, each already contending with his own infirmity. Mr. Upton was dangerously scarlet in
     the neck, and Pocket panting as he had not done for days. In sad labour they drew near the
     suspension bridge, to a crescendo accompaniment on the police whistle. It was evidently being
     blown on the Embankment to the right of the bridge, and already with considerable effect. As
     the pair were about to pass an intermediate turning on the right, a constable flew across it on
     a parallel course, and they altered theirs with one accord. Pocket panted after the constable,
     and his father thundered after Pocket, into a narrow street debouching upon a fenced strip of
     greenery, not too dense to hide broad pavement and low parapet on its further side, with a
     strip of brown river beyond that, and a skyline of warehouses on the Surrey shore. 
 The narrow garden had not been opened for the day. There was a gate opposite the end of the
     road,
      another gate leading out on the Embankment opposite that. Between the two gates a
     grimy statue rose upon a granite pedestal, a meditative figure clad to the heels in some
     nondescript garment, and gazing across the river as he sat with a number of discarded volumes
     under his chair. It was a peculiarly lifelike monument, which Pocket would have been just the
     boy to appreciate at any other time; even now it struck him for an instant, before his
     attention was attracted to the group of commonplace living people on the Embankment beyond the
     narrow garden. They were standing together on the far side of one of the fixed seats. There was
     the policeman who had blown the whistle, and a small but motley crew who had answered to the
     call. Conspicuous units were a gentleman in dressing-gown and pyjamas, a couple of
     chimneysweeps, and a labouring cyclist on his way to work. They had formed a circle about some
     hidden object on the ground; and long before the new-comers could run round and join them, the
     schoolboy had steeled himself to look upon another murdered man. He was in no hurry to look;
     apart from a natural dread of death, which he had seen for the first time, and then
     unwittingly, only the other morning, it was the murderer and not his victim of whom the boy was
     thinking as he arrived last upon the scene. It was Dr. Baumgartner whom he half expected to
      see swimming the river or hiding among the bushes in the enclosed garden; for he
     was not one of the group on the Embankment; and how else could he have made his escape? The
     point was being discussed as Pocket came into earshot; all he could see of the fallen man was
     the soles of his boots upright among living legs. 
 “Is he dead?” he asked of one of the chimneysweeps, who was detaching himself from the group
     with the air of a man who had seen the best of the fun. 
 “Dead as an 'erring,” replied the sweep cheerfully. “Sooicide in the usual stite o' mind.” 
 “Rats!” said the other sweep over a sooty shoulder; “unless 'e shot 'isself first an'
     swallered the shooter afterwards! Some'un's done 'im in.” 
 Pocket set his teeth, and shouldered his way into the group. His father was already in the
     thick of it, talking to the stout man in spectacles, who had risen miraculously from the ground
     and was busy brushing his trouser-knees. Pocket forced himself on with much the same nutter he
     had taken into the Chamber of Horrors, but with an equal determination to look just once upon
     Dr. Baumgartner's latest victim. A loud cry escaped him when he did look; for the murdered man,
     and not the murderer, was Dr. Baumgartner himself. 

