
A GRIM SAMARITAN
 Though he afterwards remembered a shout as well, it actually was the sound of a shot that
     brought the boy to his senses in Hyde Park. He opened his eyes on a dazzle of broad daylight
     and sparkling grass. The air was strangely keen for the amount of sunshine, the sunshine
     curiously rarefied, and the grass swept grey where it did not sparkle. 
 Pocket's first sensation was an empty stomach, and his next a heavy head into which the
     puzzle of his position entered by laborious steps. He was not in bed. He was not at school. He
     was not even under the shrub he now remembered in a mental flash which lit up all his
     adventures overnight. He was wandering ankle deep in the dew, towards a belt of poplars like
     birch-rods on the skyline, and a row of spiked palings right in front of his nose. He had
     walked in his sleep for the first time for years, and some one had fired a shot to wake him. 
 Slow as these automatic discoveries had seemed, they had been in reality so swift that the
     report was still ringing in his ears when he who must have made it sprang hideously into being
     across the palings. A hand darted through them and caught Pocket's
      wrist as in a vice. And he looked up over the spikes into a gnarled face tinged
     with fear and fury, and working spasmodically at the suppression of some incomprehensible
     emotion. 
 “Do you know what you did?” the man demanded in the end. The question seemed an odd one, but
     a very slight foreign accent, not to be reproduced phonetically, corresponded with the
     peculiarity of tense, reminding Pocket of the music-masters at his school. It was less easy to
     account for the tone employed, which was low in pitch and tremulous with passion. And the man
     stood tall and dominant, with a silver stubble on an iron jaw, and a weird cloak and hat that
     helped to invest him with the goblin dignity of a Spanish inquisitor; no wonder his eyes were
     like cold steel in quivering flesh. 
 “I must have been walking in my sleep,” began Pocket, shakily; further explanations were cut
     very short. 
 “Sleep!” echoed the other, in bitter unbelief. 
 Pocket felt his prime quality impugned. 
 “Well? I can't help it! I've done it before to-day; you needn't believe me if you don't
     like! Do you mind letting go of my hand?” 
 “With that in it!” 
 The scornful tone made the boy look down, and there was the pistol he had strapped to his
     wrist,
      not only firm in his unconscious clasp, but his finger actually on the trigger. 
 “You don't mean to say I let it off?” cried Pocket, horrified. 
 “Feel the barrel.” 
 The tall man had done so first. Pocket touched it with his left hand. The barrel was still
     warm. 
 “It was in my sleep,” protested Pocket, in a wheezy murmur. 
 “I'm glad to hear it.” 
 “I tell you it was!” 
 The tall man opened his lips impulsively, but shut them on a second impulse. The daggers in
     his eyes probed deeper into those of the boy, picking his brains, transfixing the secrets of
     his soul. No master's eye had ever delved so deep into his life; he felt as though the very
     worst of him at school was known in an instant to this dreadful stranger in the wilds of
     London. He writhed under the ordeal of that protracted scrutiny. He tugged to free his
     imprisoned wrist. His captor was meanwhile fumbling with a penknife in his unoccupied hand. A
     blade was slowly opened; the leather watch-guard was sliced through in a second; the revolver
     dropped harmlessly into the dew. The man swooped down and whipped it through the railings with
     a snarl of satisfaction. 
 “And now,” said he, releasing Pocket, but
      standing by with his weapon, “I suppose you know that, apart from everything else,
     you had no right to spend the night in here at all?” 
 The boy, already suffering from his humiliating exertions, gasped out, “I'm not the only
     one!” He had just espied a recumbent figure through the palings; it was that of a dilapidated
     creature lying prone, a battered hat beside him, on the open grass beyond the path. The tall
     man merely redoubled his scrutiny of the face in front of, him, without so much as a glance
     behind. 
 “That,” said he, “is the sort that staggers in as soon as the gates are open, and spends the
     day sleeping itself sober. But you are not that sort at all, and you have spent the night here
     contrary to the rules. Who are you, and what's the matter with you?” 
 “Asthma,” wheezed Pocket, clinging to the palings in dire distress. 
 “So I thought. Yet you spend your night on the wet grass!” 
 “I had nowhere else to go.” 
 “Have you come up from the country?” 
 “To see a doctor about it!” cried Pocket bitterly, and told the whole truth about himself in
     a series of stertorous exclamations. It scarcely lessened the austerity of the eyes that still
     ran him through and through; but the hard mouth did relax
      a little; the lined face looked less deeply slashed and furrowed, and it was a
     less inhuman voice that uttered the next words. 
 “Well, we must get you out of this, my young fellow! Come to these chairs.” 
 Pocket crept along the palings towards the chairs by which he had climbed them. His
     breathing was pitiful now. The stranger accompanied him on the other side. 
 “If I lift one over, and lend you a hand, do you think you can manage it?” 
 “I did last night.” 
 “Here, then. Wait a bit! Can you tell me where you slept?” 
 Pocket looked round and pointed. 
 “Behind that bush.” 
 “Have you left nothing there?” 
 “Yes; my bag and hat!” 
 In his state it took him some time to go and fetch them; he was nearly suffocating when he
     came creeping back, his shoulders up to his ears. 
 “Stop! I see something else. Is that medicine-bottle yours? There—catching the sun.” 
 “It was.” 
 “Bring it.” 
 “It's empty.” 
 “Bring it!” 
 Pocket obeyed. The strange man was standing
      on a chair behind the palings, waiting to help him over, with a wary eye upon the
     path. But no third creature was in sight except the insensate sprawler in the dew. Pocket
     surmounted the obstacle, he knew not how; he was almost beside himself in the throes of his
     attack. Later, he feared he must have been lifted down like a child; but this was when he was
     getting his breath upon a seat. They had come some little distance very slowly, and Pocket had
     received such support from so muscular an arm as to lend colour to his humiliating suspicion. 
 His grim companion spoke first. 
 “Well, I'm sorry for you. But I feel for your doctor too. I am one myself.” 
 Pocket ignored the somewhat pointed statement. 
 “I'll never forgive the brute!” he panted. 
 “Come, come! He didn't send you to sleep in the Park.” 
 “But he took away the only thing that does me any good.” 
 “What's that?” 
 “Cigarettes d'Auvergne.” 
 “I never heard of them.” 
 “They're the only thing to stop it, and he took away every one I had.” 
 But even as he spoke Pocket remembered the cigarette he had produced from his bag, but
     lacked
      the moral courage to light, in the train. He had slipped it into one of his
     pockets, not back into the box. He felt for it feverishly. He gave a husky cheer as his fingers
     closed upon the palpable thing, and he drew forth a flattened cylinder the size of a cigarette
     and the colour of a cigar. The boy had to bite off both ends; the man was ready with the match.
     Pocket drank the crude smoke down like water, coughed horribly, drank deeper, coughed the tears
     into his eyes, and was comparatively cured. 
 “And your doctor forbids a sovereign remedy!” said his companion. “I cannot understand him,
     and I'm a doctor myself.” His voice and look were deliberate even for him. “My name is
     Baumgartner,” he added, and made a pause. “I don't suppose you know it?” 
 “I'm not sure I don't,” replied Pocket, swelling with breath and gratitude; but in truth the
     name seemed vaguely familiar to him. 
 “A schoolboy in the country,” observed Dr. Baumgartner, “is scarcely likely to have heard of
     me; but if you inquire here in London you will find that I am not unknown. I propose to carry
     you off to my house for breakfast, and a little rest. That is,” added the doctor, with his
     first smile, “if you will trust yourself to me first and make your inquiries later.” 
 Pocket scouted the notion of inquiries in an
      impulsive outburst; but even as he proceeded to mumble out his thanks he could not
     help feeling it would have been less embarrassing to know more exactly whom he was thanking and
     must needs accompany now. Dr. Baumgartner? Where was it he had come across that name? And when
     and where had anybody ever seen such a doctor as this unshaven old fellow in the cloak and hat
     of a conspirator by limelight? 
 But the schoolboy had still to learn the lesson of naked personality as the one human force;
     and he learnt it now unknown to himself. The gaunt grey man stood up in his absurd and rusty
     raiment, and Pocket thought, “How the chaps would rag him at school!” because the dreadful old
     hat and cloak suggested a caricature of a master's cap and gown. But there was no master at
     Pocket's school whom he would not sooner have disobeyed than this shabby stranger with the
     iron-bound jaw and the wintry smile; there was no eye on the staff that had ever made him quail
     as he had quailed that morning before these penetrating eyes of steel. Baumgartner said they
     must hurry, and Pocket had his asthma back in the first few yards. Baumgartner said they could
     buy more cigarettes on the way, and Pocket kept up, panting, at his side. 
 In the cab Baumgartner said, “Try sitting with your head between your knees.” Pocket tried
     it
      like a lamb. They had encountered a young man or so hurrying into the Park with
     towels round the neck but no collar, an early cavalcade who never looked at them, and that was
     about all until the hansom had been hailed outside. During the drive, which seemed to Pocket
     interminable, his extraordinary attitude prevented him from seeing anything but his own boots,
     and those only dimly owing to the apron being shut and indeed pressing uncomfortably against
     his head. Yet when Dr. Baumgartner inquired whether that did not make him easier, he said it
     did. It was not all imagination either; the posture did relieve him; but it was none the less
     disagreeable to be driven through London by an utter stranger, and not to see the names of the
     streets or a single landmark. Pocket had not even heard the cabman's instructions where to
     drive; they had been given after he got in. His ear was more alert now. He noted the change
     from wood-paving to rough metal. Then more wood, and an indubitable omnibus blundering by; then
     more metal, in better repair; quieter streets, the tinkle of cans, the milkman's queer cry; and
     finally, “Next to the right and the fifth house on your left,” in the voice with the almost
     imperceptibly foreign accent. 
 The fifth house on the left was exactly like the fourth and the sixth from the little Pocket
     saw
      of any of them. He was hurried up a tiled path, none too clean between swarthy and
     lack-lustre laurels; the steps had not been “done”; the door wore the nondescript complexion of
     prehistoric paint debased by the caprices of the London climate. One touch of colour the lad
     saw before this unpromising portal opened and shut upon him: he had already passed through a
     rank of pollard trees, sprouting emeralds in the morning sun, that seemed common to this side
     of the road, and effectually hid the other. 
 Within the doctor held up a finger and they both trod gently. The passage was dark and
     short. The stairs began abruptly on the right. Baumgartner led the way past a closed door on
     the left, into an unexpectedly bright and large room beyond it. “Sit down,” said he, and shut
     the door softly behind him. 
 Pocket took observations from the edge of his chair. The room was full of walnut
     trivialities that looked aggressively obsolete in the sunshine that filled it and flooded a
     green little garden at the back of the house. Dr. Baumgartner had pulled up a blind and opened
     a window, and he stood looking out in thought while Pocket hurriedly completed his optical
     round. A set of walnut chairs were dreadfully upholstered in faded tapestry; but a deep, worn
     one looked comfortable enough,
      and a still more redeeming feature was the semi-grand piano. There were books,
     too, and in the far corner by the bow-window a glass door leading into a conservatory as minute
     as Pocket's study at school, and filled with geraniums. On the walls hung a series of battle
     engravings, one representing a bloody advance over ridged fields in murderously close
     formation, others the storming of heights and villages. 
 Baumgartner met his visitor's eyes with the faint cold smile that scarcely softened the
     hoary harshness of his visage. 
 “I was present at some of those engagements,” said he. “They were not worse than disarming a
     man who has just fired a revolver in his sleep!” 
 He flung his cloak upon one of the walnut chairs, and Pocket heard the pistol inside it
     rattle against the back; but his attention was distracted before he had time to resent the
     forgotten fact of its forcible confiscation. Under his cloak the doctor had been carrying all
     this time, slung by a strap which the boy had noticed across his chest, a stereoscopic camera
     without a case. Pocket exclaimed upon it with the instructed interest of a keen photographer. 
 “Do you take photographs?” asked Baumgartner, a reciprocal note in his unemotional voice.
     

 “Rather!” cried the schoolboy, with considerable enthusiasm. “It's the only thing I have to
     do instead of playing games. But I haven't got an instantaneous camera like that. I only wish I
     had!” 
 And he looked with longing eyes at the substantial oblong of wood and black morocco, and
     duplicate lenses like a pair of spectacles, which the doctor had set between them on one of the
     fussy little walnut tables. 
