
IV
BUT there was once a month of November, about which I could not so grandly say that I would
     not like to spend it in London; for something happened which threw me in a great hurly-burly of
     change into an uncomfortable little flat in Monday Road, which is in South Kensington, but for
     all the life and gaiety there is in it might just as well be in a scrubby corner of the Sahara
     on a dusty day. My father had died suddenly, and what little question there was of my ever
     going into business now dropped away, so I had to make at least a pretence of earning my
     living, or, rather, of making a career for myself. I was very definite about this, that I must
      do something, be something: for I had learnt this much of the world, that there
     is no room in it for casual comers, that a man must have a background (any background will do,
     but the more individual the better); that there is no room
      in any part soever of the social scale for a man who is just nothing at all; and
     as I have never seriously contemplated living exclusively in the company of landladies and
     their friends, I saw that I must put my back into it and cease being a very insignificant
      rentier. I couldn't bear the idea of going through life as just a
     complacent Armenian in a world where millions and millions of others were trying honestly and
     otherwise to climb up the greasy pole of respectable attainment.
But I cannot resist saying what I think of Monday Road, though I am sure I can do it no harm,
     because better men than I must have hated it, and more virulently. Monday Road, like all the
     other roads which sink their mutual differences into the so dreary Fulham Road, consists of
     large, equal-faced houses stuck together in two opposite rows which are separated by about
     fifteen yards or so of second-hand Tarmac; a road like another, you will mildly say, but you
     cannot possibly realise its dismal grimness if you have not lived there. The people who live in
     the angular-faced houses are artists who believe in art for art's sake—else they
      wouldn't be forced to live in the dismalest street in the world—amateur
     intellectuals like myself, and various sorts of women. The tribe of organ-grinders have a great
     weakness for Monday Road, probably because some tactless ass has stuck up a notice there that
     "Barrel-organs are prohibited," which is a silly thing to say if you can't enforce it.
     Altogether it is the sort of road in which a "spinster lady" might at any moment lock her door,
     close her windows, turn on the gas, and read a novel to death. A woman in the flat next to mine
     did that a week after I arrived, and I have never viewed death more sympathetically.
When men grow old they are apt to discover pleasant memories attached even to the worst
     periods, as they thought them at the time, of their lives. I am not very old as yet, but
     looking back calmly on the eighteen months I spent in South Kensington, I can find here and
     there, through an exaggerated cloud of depression and wretchedness, a pleasant memory smiling
     reprovingly at me; as though, perhaps, I should not be treacherous to the good hours God or my
      luck had given me.... And there was one moment of them all, when, in the first
     darkness of an early autumn night, a dim slight figure stood mysteriously on my doorstep, and I
     blinked childishly at it because I did not know who the figure was nor how it had come there—if
     indeed it had come at all, and I had not dreamed the ring of the bell which had startled me out
     of my book. Or, perhaps, she had made a mistake, hadn't come for me at all....
But when she spoke, asking for me, I began to remember her, but only her voice, for I could
     not see her face which was hidden in the high fur collar of an evening cloak. She looked so
     mysterious that I didn't want to remember where I had seen her.
"I simply can't bear it," she said nervously, "if you don't remember me. I'll go away." And
     she turned her head quickly to the gates where there stood the thick dark shape of a taxi which
     I had somehow not seen before, else I would have known for certain that she was not a fairy, a
     Lilith fairy, but just a woman; a nice woman who
      takes life at a venture, I decided, and said abruptly: "Don't go."
When we were upstairs in my sitting-room and I could see her by the light of eight candles, I
     remembered her perfectly well, though I had only seen her once before. We had met at some
     tiresome bridge party six months before, but just incidentally, and without enough interest on
     either side to carry the conversation beyond the tepid limits of our surroundings. And as I had
     never once thought of her since I had shaken myself free of them, I couldn't imagine how on
     earth she had known my address or even remembered my name, which she didn't dare try to
     pronounce, she had told me as we went up the stairs.
She said that she, too, had never thought about me at all since then, "until to-night when I
     was playing bridge in the same room with the same people, except that you were not there—and I
     remembered you only suddenly, as something missing from the room. I didn't remember you because
     of anything you said, but because you had been the worst bridge player in the room, and had the
     most
      unscrupulous brown eyes that ever advised a flapper to inhale her cigarette
     smoke, as it was no use her smoking if she didn't. And thinking about you among those people
     who seemed more dreary than ever to-night, I had a silly homesick feeling about you as though
     we were comrades in distress, whereas I didn't even know your name properly and never shall if
     you don't somehow make it a presentable one.
"So I turned the conversation to Armenians in general, which is an easy thing to do, because
     you have only to murmur the word 'massacre' and the connection is obvious, isn't it? Of course
     that sent that dear old snob, Mrs. ——, off like mad, saying what bad luck it was for you being
     an Armenian, because you could so nicely have been anything else, and even a Montenegrin would
     have been a better thing to be; how surprised she had been when she met you, she told us, for
     she had always had a vague idea that Armenians were funny little old men with long hooked noses
     and greasy black hair, who hawked carpets about on their
      backs, and invariably cheated people, even Jews and Greeks....
"But you are quite English and civilised really, aren't you? I mean you don't think that,
     just because I managed to wrangle out your address and came here on impulse, I want to stay
     with you or anything like that, do you?"
As she said that, I suddenly thought of Lord Dusiote's gallant villainy in Meredith's poem,
     and I told her quickly how a whole Court had been lovesick for a young princess, but Lord
     Dusiote had laughed, heart-free, and said:

"I prize her no more than a fling of the dice,
But oh, shame to my manhood, a lady of ice,
We master her by craft!"
"But I seem to remember that my Lord Dusiote came to a bad end," she laughed at me.
"Not so bad an end—it must have been worth it. And at least he died for a mistake, which is
     better than living on one:
     

"'All cloaked and masked, with naked blades,
That flashed of a judgment done,
The lords of the Court, from the palace-door,
Came issuing forth, bearers four,
And flat on their shoulders one.'"
But Lord Dusiote's gallant death left her quite cold, for she was suddenly by the bookcase,
     running caressing fingers over a binding here and there.
"What perfectly divine books you have! I shall read them all, and give up Ethel M. Dell for
     good—but you are probably one of those stuffy people who 'take care' of their books and never
     lend them to any one because they are first editions or some such rubbish."
"You can have them all," I said, "and you can turn up the corner of every page if you like,
     and you can spill tea on every cover or you can use them as table props, because all these
     books from Chaucer to Pater are absolute nonsense at this moment, for in not one of them is
     there anything about a dark-haired young woman with blue eyes and a tentative mouth, and the
     indolent caress of a Latin ancestress somewhere in her
      voice, standing on a doorstep in a dingy road, calling on a man who might quite
     easily be a murderer, for all you know."
But enough of that, for the situation of a young man and a young woman in a third-floor flat
     miles away from anywhere that mattered, at eleven o'clock on such a warm autumn night as makes
     all things seem unreal and beautiful, is a situation with a beard on it, so to speak.
When I first knew Phyllis, though always candid, she was inclined to be rather "county," the
     sort of woman "whose people are all Service people, you know"; she lived with her mother, near
     Chester Square, who at first disliked me because I was not in the Brigade of Guards, but later
     grew quite pleasantly used to me since I, unlike the Brigade of Guards, it seems, did at least
     acknowledge my habitual presence in her house by emptying Solomon's glory into her flower
     vases; and if there's a better reason than gratitude for getting into debt, tell it to me,
     please.
But Phyllis, like many another good woman of these Liberal times, turned her
      bored back on "county," and only remembered what was "done" the better not to do
     it; fought for, and won a latchkey; asserted her right to come home at night as late as she
     pleased, and how she pleased—for she had come home from a dance one night on a
     benevolent motor lorry, which she had begged to pick her up on Piccadilly in pity for her
     "tired bones," and which, in cumbrously dropping her at mother's door, woke up the whole
     street. And I can so well imagine Phyllis, as she fitted in her latchkey, murmuring, languidly,
     but without much conviction, "What fun women have...."
But, in the reaction of her type against the preceding age of Victoria, she went to the other
     extreme; saw life too much through the medium of a couple of absinthe cocktails before each
     meal, and sex too much as though it were entirely a joke, which it isn't ... quite. She cut her
     hair short, and took to saying "damn" more often than was strictly necessary. In fact, she
     would have been quite unbearable if she hadn't been pretty, which she delightfully was. And,
     unlike her more careless sisters of
      Chelsea, Hampstead, and Golders' Green, she did not make the terrible mistake of
     dressing all anyhow, or make a point of being able to "put up with anything"; such as, sleeping
     on studio floors after a party, in such a way as to collect the maximum amount of candle grease
     and spilled drink on her skirts, and wearing men's discarded felt hats, cut as no decent man
     would be seen alive wearing one, and Roger Fry sort of blouses which don't quite make two ends
     meet at the back, and carrying queer handbags made, perhaps, out of the sole of a Red Indian's
     threadbare moccasin.... Bohemians indeed, but without so much as a "Bo" anywhere about
     them!
They can "stand anything," as they have let it be generally known. But, by dressing like
     freaks and by being able to stand anything, they have detracted considerably from their
     attraction for men; for freaks are well enough in freak-land but look rather silly in the world
     as it is—which is the world that matters, after all; and what the devil is the good of being
     polite and making a fuss of a woman if she tells you repeatedly that she
      can "stand anything," and much prefers the feeling of independence fostered by
     lighting cigarettes with her own matches, and opening doors with her own so unmanicured
     fingers?
I suddenly realise at this very moment of writing why those months in South Kensington seemed
     so overpoweringly dismal, and that even now it is only time which lends a real pleasure to the
     memory of the tall, dim figure (Mr. Charles Garvice would have called her "sylph-like." I wish
     I were Mr. Garvice) which stood on my doorstep on an autumn night, and so mysteriously asked
     for me. For that beginning had a dreary end, as indeed all endings are dreary if the silken
     cord is not swiftly and sharply cut, thus leaving a neat and wonderful surprise, instead of the
     long-drawn ending of frayed edges and worn-out emotions which drive quite nice young men into a
     premature cynicism of dotage.
For we very soon tired of each other, and began to slip away into our different lives with a
     great deal of talk about our "wonderful friendship"; though we both of us knew very well that
     there is nothing left to
      eat in an empty oyster, and nothing to talk about on a desert island except how
     deserted it is, and nothing to look forward to when you have too quickly reached
      Ultima Thule but to get as quickly back again and examine your bruises—but
     he is a coward who hasn't enough kick left in him to begin again and repeat his mistake, for
     though two wrongs may not make a right, three or four mistakes of this sort do certainly make a
     man.... So we both set out to get back again, but not as quickly as possible, because Phyllis
     is a woman, and, perhaps, I am by way of having a few manners left—and, therefore, we had to
     take the longest way back; and were both very tired and bored with each other when at last I
     suddenly left her one night after dinner at her house at half-past nine, because I had a
     headache—"my dear, aspirin isn't any good, really it isn't"—and was sure she had one,
     too....
Six months ago I had a letter from her, saying that she was going to marry a nice fat
     baronet, a real, not a Brummagem one, and not so much because of his money, but because of his
     nice, solid, middle-class ideas,
      which would help to tone down hers. Phyllis was like that, and I've often
     wondered very much about that wretched baronet, whether he will tone her down, or whether she
     will persuade him to open a hat shop off Bond Street in aid of a "bus conductors'"
     orphanage.
Phyllis, Phyllis, you really can't go through life with half a cold grouse in one hand and a
     pint of Cliquot '04 in the other. There are other things ... so they say.




