
VII
I asked her once, but long after I had realised that loving Shelmerdene could not be my one
     business in life, if she did not feel that perhaps—I was tentative—she would some day be
     punished. "But how young you are!" she said. "You don't really think I am a sort of Zuleika
     Dobson, do you?—just because one wretched man once thought it worth while to shoot himself
     because of me, and just because men have that peculiar form of Sadism which makes them torture
     themselves through their love, when they have ceased to be loved.... It's a horrible sight, my
     dear—men grovelling in their unreturned emotions so as to get the last twinge of pain out of
     their humiliation. I've seen them grovelling, and they knew all the time that it would do no
     good, merely put them farther away from me—or from any woman, for the matter of that. But
      they like grovelling, these six-foot, stolid men."
"But haven't you ever been on your knees, Shelmerdene?"
"Of course I have. Lots of times. I always begin like that—in fact, I've never had an affair
     which didn't begin with my being down and under. I am so frightfully impressionable....
"You see," she touched my arm, "I am rather a quick person. I mean I fall in love, or
     whatever you call my sort of emotion, quickly. While the man is just beginning to think that
     I've got rather nice eyes, and that I'm perhaps more amusing than the damfool women he's known
     so far, I'm frantically in love. I do all my grovelling then. And, Dikran! if you could only
     see me, if you could only be invisible and see me loving a man more than he loves me—you simply
     wouldn't know me. And I make love awfully well, in my quiet sort of way, much better than any
     man—and different love-speeches to every different man, too! I say the divinest things to
     them—and quite seriously, thank God! The day I can't fall
      in love with a man seriously, and tell him he's the only man I've ever
      really loved, and really believe it when I'm saying it—the day I
     can't do that I shall know I'm an old, old woman, too old to live any more."
"Then, of course, you will die?" I suggested.
"Of course I will die," she said. "But not vulgarly—I mean I won't make a point of it, and
     feel a fat coroner's eyes on my body as my soul goes up to Gabriel. I shall die in my bed, of a
     broken heart. My heart will break when I begin to fade. I shall die before I have
     faded...."
"No, you won't, Shelmerdene," I said. "Many women have sworn that, from Theodosia to La
     Pompadour, but they have not died of broken hearts because they never realised when they began
     to fade, and no man ever dared tell them, not even a Roi Soleil."
"Oh, don't be pedantic, Dikran, and don't worry me about what other women will or won't do.
     You will be quoting the 'Dolly Dialogues' at me next, and saying 'Women will be women all the
     world over.'
     
"It is always like that about me and men," she said. "I burn and burn and fizzle out. And all
     the time the man is wondering if I am playing with him or not, if it is worth his while to fall
     in love with me or not—poor pathos, as if he could help it in the end! And then, at last, when
     he realises that he is in love, he begins to say the things I had longed for him to say four
     weeks before; every Englishman in love is simply bound to say, at one time or another, that he
     would adore to lie with his beloved in a gondola in Venice, looking at the stars; any
     Englishman who doesn't say that when he is in love is a suspicious character, and it will
     probably turn out that he talks French perfectly.
"And when at last he has fallen in love," she said dreamily, "he wants me to run away with
     him, and he is very hurt and surprised when I refuse, and pathetically says something 'about my
     having led him to expect that I loved him to death, and would do anything for or with him.' The
     poor little man doesn't know that he is behind the times, that he could have done anything he
     liked
      with me the first week we met, when I was madly in love with him, that when I was
     dying for him to ask me to go away with him, and would gladly have made a mess of my life at
     one word from him—but four weeks later I would rather have died than go away with him.
"Only once," she said, "I was almost beaten. I fell in love with a stone figure. Women are
     like sea-gulls, they worship stone figures.... I went very mad, Dikran. He told me that he
     didn't deserve being loved by me—he admired me tremendously, you see—because he hadn't it in
     his poor soul to love any one. He simply couldn't love, he said ... and he felt such a brute.
     He said that often, poor boy—he felt such a brute! He passed a hand over his forehead and, with
     a tragic little English gesture, tried to be articulate, to tell me how intensely he felt that
     he was missing the best things in life, and yet couldn't rectify it, because .... 'Oh, my dear,
     I'm a hopeless person!' he said despairingly, and I forgot to pity myself in pitying him.
     
"But he got cold again. He weighed his words carefully: No, he liked me as much as he could
     like any one, but he didn't think he loved me—mark that glorious, arrogant
      think, Dikran!... He was very ambitious; with the sort of confident, yet
     intensive, nerve-racking ambition which makes great men. Very young, very wonderful,
     brilliantly successful in his career at an age when other men were only beginning theirs—an
     iron man, with the self-destructive selfishness of ice, which freezes the thing that touches
     it, but itself melts in the end.... He froze me. Don't think I'm exaggerating,
     please, but, as he spoke—it was at lunch, and a coon band was playing—I died away all to
     myself. I just died, and then came to life again, coldly, and bitterly, and despairingly, but
     still loving him.... I couldn't not love him, you see. His was the sort of beauty
     that was strong, and vital, and a little contemptuous, and with an English cleanness about it
     that was scented.... I am still loyal to my first despairing impression of him. And I knew that
     I was really in love with him, because I couldn't bear the
      idea of ever having loved any one else. I was sixteen again, and worshipped a
     hero, a man who did things.
"I was a fool, of course—to believe him, I mean. But when women lose their heads they lose
     the self-confidence and pride of a lifetime, too—and, anyway, it's all rubbish about pride;
     there isn't any pride in absolute love. There's a name to be made out of a brilliant epigram on
     love and pride—think it over, Dikran.... What an utter fool I was to believe him! As he spoke,
     over that lunch-table, I watched his grey English eyes, which tried to look straight into mine
     but couldn't, because he was shy; he was trying to be frightfully honest with me, you see, and
     being so honest makes decent men shy. He felt such a brute, but he had to warn me that in any
     love affair with him, he ... yes, he did love me, in his way, he suddenly admitted. But his way
     wasn't, couldn't ever be, mine. He simply couldn't give himself wholly to any one, as I was
     doing. And he so frightfully wanted to—to sink into my love for him.... 'Shelmerdene, it's all
     so damnable,' he said pathetically, and his sincerity
      bit into me. But I had made up my mind. I was going to do the last foolish thing
     in a foolish life—I'm a sentimentalist, you know.
"I believed him. But I clung to my pathetic love affair with both hands, so tight—so tight
     that my nails were white and blue with their pressure against his immobility. I made up my mind
     not to let go of him, however desperate, however hopeless ... it was an attempt at life. He was
     all I wanted, I could face life beside him. Other men had been good enough to play with, but my
     stone figure—why, I had been looking for him all my life! But in my dreams the stone figure was
     to come wonderfully to life when I began to worship it—in actual life my worshipping could make
     the stone figure do nothing more vital than crumble up bits of bread in a nervous effort to be
     honest with me! I took him at that—I told you I was mad, didn't I?—I took him at his own value,
     for as much as I could get out of him.
"I set out to make myself essential to him, mentally, physically, every way.... If he
     couldn't love me as man to woman, then he
      would have to love me as a tree trunk loves the creepers round it; I was going to
     cling all round him, but without his knowing. But I hadn't much time—just a month or perhaps
     six weeks. He was under orders for Africa, where he was going to take up a big administrative
     job, amazing work for so young a man; but, then, he was amazing. Just a few weeks I had, then,
     to make him feel that he couldn't bear life, in Africa or anywhere, without me. And, my dear!
     life didn't hold a more exquisite dream than that which brought a childish flush under my
     rouge, the very dream of dreams, of how, a few days before he went, he would take me in his
     arms and tell me that he couldn't bear to go alone, and that I must follow him, and together we
     would face all the scandal that would come of it.... I passionately wanted the moment to come
     when he would offer to risk his career for me; I wanted him to offer me his ambition, and then
     I would consider whether to give it back to him or not. But he didn't. I lost.
"And I had seemed so like winning during that six weeks between that horrible
      lunch and his going away! London love affairs are always scrappy,
     hole-in-the-corner things, but we managed to live together now and again. And then,
      mon Dieu! he suddenly clung to me and said he wasn't seeing enough of me,
     that London was getting between us, and that we must go away somewhere into the country for at
     least a week before he left, to breathe and to love.... Wouldn't you have thought I was
     winning? I thought so, and my dreams were no more dreams, but actual, glorious certainties; he
     would beg me on his knees to follow him to Africa!
"We went away ten days before he sailed, to a delightful little inn a few miles from
     Llangollen. Seven days we spent there. Wonderful, intimate days round about that little inn by
     the Welsh stream; we were children playing under a wilderness of blue sky, more blue than
     Italy's because of the white and grey puffs of clouds which make an English sky more human than
     any other; and we played with those toy hills which are called mountains in Wales, and we were
     often silent because there was too much to
      talk about.... And as we sat silently facing each other in the train back to
     London, I knew I had won. There were three days left.
"In London, he dropped me here at my house, and went on to his flat; he was to come in the
     evening to fetch me out to dinner. But he was back within an hour. I had to receive him in a
     kimono. I found him pacing up and down this room, at the far end there, by the windows. He came
     quickly to me, and told me that his orders had been changed—he had to go to Paris first, spend
     two days there, and then to Africa via Marseilles. 'To Paris?' I said, not understanding. 'Yes,
     to-night—in two hours,' he said, quickly, shyly. He was embarrassed at the idea of a possible
     scene. But he was cold. He must go at once, he said. And he looked eager to go, to go and be
     doing. He shook both my hands—I hadn't a word—and almost forgot to kiss me. It was just as
     though nothing had ever happened between us, as though we hadn't ever been to Wales, or played,
     and laughed, and loved; as though he had never begged me to run my fingers
      through his hair, because I had said his hair was a garden where gold and green
     flowers grew. He was going away; and he was just as when I had first met him, or at that
     lunch—I hadn't gained anything at all, it was all just a funny, tragic, silly dream ... he had
     come and now he was going away. He would write to me, he said, and he would be back in sixteen
     months....
"I'm not a bad loser, you know; I can say such and such a thing isn't for me, and then try
     and undermine my wretchedness with philosophy. But I simply didn't exist for a few months; I
     just went into my little shell and stayed there, and was miserable all to myself, and not
     bitter at all, because I sort of understood him, and knew he had been true to himself. It was I
     who had failed in trying to make him false to his own nature.... But there's a limit to all
     things; there comes a time when one can't bear any more gloom, and then there is a reaction. No
     one with any courage can be wretched for ever—anyway, I can't. So, suddenly, after a few
     months, I went out into the world again, and played and jumped
      about, and made my body so tired that my mind hadn't a chance to think.
"His first few letters were cold, honest things, a little pompous in their appreciations of
     me tacked on to literary descriptions of the Nile, and the desert, and the natives. I wrote to
     him only once, a wonderful letter, but I hadn't the energy to write again—what was the
     good?
"At the end of a year I was really in the whirl of the great world again. There were a few
     kicks left in Shelmerdene yet, I told myself hardly, and Maurice became just a tender memory. I
     never thought of how he would come back to England soon, as he had said, and what we would do
     then, for I had so dinned it into myself that he wasn't for me that I had entirely given up the
     quest of the Blue Bird. He was just a tender memory ... and impressionable me fell in love
     again. But not as with Maurice—I was top-dog this time. He was the sort of man that didn't
     count except in that I loved him. He was the servant of my reaction against Maurice, and to
     serve me well he had to help me wipe out all the castles
      of sentiment I had built around Maurice. And the most gorgeous castle of all I
     had built round that little Welsh inn! Something must be done about that, I told myself, but
     for a long time I was afraid of the ghost of Maurice, which might still haunt the place, and
     bring him back overpoweringly to me. It was a risk; by going there with some one else I might
     either succeed in demolishing Maurice's last castle, or I might tragically have to rebuild all
     the others, and worship him again.
"He had continued to write to me, complaining of my silence. And he had somehow become
     insistent—he missed me, it seemed. He didn't write that he loved me, but he forgot to describe
     the Nile, and wrote about love as though it were a real and beautiful thing and not a pastime
     to be wedged in between fishing and hunting. I wrote to him once again, rather lightly, saying
     that I had patched up my heart and might never give him a chance to break it again. That was
     just before I went to demolish the last castle of my love for him. For I did go; one day my
     young man produced a high-powered
      car which could go fast enough to prevent one sleeping from boredom, and I said
     'Us for Llangollen,' and away we went ...
"The divinest thing about that little inn was its miniature dining-room, composed almost
     entirely of a large bow-window and a long Queen Anne refectory table. There were three tables,
     of which never more than one was occupied. Maurice and I had sat at the table by the window,
     and now my reaction and I sat there again; we looked out on to a toy garden sloping down to a
     brown stream which made much more noise than you could think possible for so narrow a thing. My
     back was to the door, and I sat facing a large mirror, with the garden and the stream on my
     right; he sat facing the window, adoring me, the adventure, the stream, and the food. And I was
     happy too, for now I realised that I had fallen out of love with Maurice, for his ghost didn't
     haunt the chair beside me, and I could think of him tenderly, without regret. I was
     happy—until, in the mirror in front of me, I saw the great figure of Maurice, and his face, at
      the open door. Our eyes met in the mirror, the eyes of statues, waiting.... I
     don't know what I felt—I wasn't afraid, I know. Perhaps I wasn't even ashamed. I don't know how
     long he stood there, filling the doorway. Not more than a few seconds, but all the intimacy of
     six weeks met in our glance in that mirror. At last he took his eyes off mine and looked at the
     man beside me, who hadn't seen him. I thought his lips twitched, and his eyes became adorably
     stern, and then the mirror clouded over.... When I could see again the door was closed, and
     Maurice was gone. The magic mirror was empty of all but my unbelieving eyes, and the profile of
     the man beside me, who hadn't seen him and never knew that I had lived six weeks while he ate a
     potato....
"I stayed my week out in Wales, because I always try to do what is expected of me. When I got
     home, right on the top of a pile of letters—I had given orders for nothing, not even wires, to
     be sent on to me—was a wire, which had arrived one hour after I had left for Wales. It was from
     Southampton, and it said: 'Just arrived. Am going straight
      up to the little palace in Wales because of memories. Will arrive there
     dinner-time. Shall we dine together by the window?'
"And so, you see, I had won and lost and won again, but how pathetically.... Am I such a bad
     woman, d'you think?"



