
 CHAPTER VIII. 
 BREADALBY 
 Breadalby was a Georgian house with Corinthian pillars, standing among the softer, greener
     hills of Derbyshire, not far from Cromford. In front, it looked over a lawn, over a few trees,
     down to a string of fish-ponds in the hollow of the silent park. At the back were trees, among
     which were to be found the stables, and the big kitchen garden, behind which was a wood. 
 It was a very quiet place, some miles from the high-road, back from the Derwent Valley,
     outside the show scenery. Silent and forsaken, the golden stucco showed between the trees, the
     house-front looked down the park, unchanged and unchanging. 
 Of late, however, Hermione had lived a good deal at the house. She had turned away from
     London, away from Oxford, towards the silence of the country. Her father was mostly absent,
     abroad, she was either alone in the house, with her visitors, of whom there were always
     several, or she had with her her brother, a bachelor, and a Liberal member of Parliament. He
     always came down when the House was not sitting, seemed always to be present in Breadalby,
     although he was most conscientious in his attendance to duty. 
 The summer was just coming in when Ursula and Gudrun went to stay the second time with
     Hermione. Coming along in the car, after they had entered the park, they looked across the dip,
     where the fish-ponds lay in silence, at the pillared front of the house, sunny and small like
     an English drawing of the old school, on the brow of the green hill, against the trees. There
     were small figures on the green lawn, women in lavender and yellow moving to the shade of the
     enormous, beautifully balanced cedar tree. 
 “Isn’t it complete!” said Gudrun. “It is as final as an old aquatint.” She spoke with some
     resentment in her voice, as if she were captivated unwillingly, as if she must admire against
     her will. 
 “Do you love it?” asked Ursula. 
 “I don’t love it, but in its way, I think it is quite complete.” 
 The motor-car ran down the hill and up again in one breath, and they were curving to the
     side door. A parlour-maid appeared, and then Hermione, coming forward with her pale face
     lifted, and her hands outstretched, advancing straight to the newcomers, her voice singing: 
 “Here you are—I’m so glad to see you—” she kissed Gudrun—“so glad to see you—” she kissed
     Ursula and remained with her arm round her. “Are you very tired?” 
 “Not at all tired,” said Ursula. 
 “Are you tired, Gudrun?” 
 “Not at all, thanks,” said Gudrun. 
 “No—” drawled Hermione. And she stood and looked at them. The two girls were embarrassed
     because she would not move into the house, but must have her little scene of welcome there on
     the path. The servants waited. 
 “Come in,” said Hermione at last, having fully taken in the pair of them. Gudrun was the
     more beautiful and attractive, she had decided again, Ursula was more physical, more womanly.
     She admired Gudrun’s dress more. It was of green poplin, with a loose coat above it, of broad,
     dark-green and dark-brown stripes. The hat was of a pale, greenish straw, the colour of new
     hay, and it had a plaited ribbon of black and orange, the stockings were dark green, the shoes
     black. It was a good get-up, at once fashionable and individual. Ursula, in dark blue, was more
     ordinary, though she also looked well. 
 Hermione herself wore a dress of prune-coloured silk, with coral beads and coral coloured
     stockings. But her dress was both shabby and soiled, even rather dirty. 
 “You would like to see your rooms now, wouldn’t you! Yes. We will go up now, shall we?” 
 Ursula was glad when she could be left alone in her room. Hermione lingered so long, made
     such a stress on one. She stood so near to one, pressing herself near upon one, in a way that
     was most embarrassing and oppressive. She seemed to hinder one’s workings. 
 Lunch was served on the lawn, under the great tree, whose thick, blackish boughs came down
     close to the grass. There were present a young Italian woman, slight and fashionable, a young,
     athletic-looking Miss Bradley, a learned, dry Baronet of fifty, who was always making
     witticisms and laughing at them heartily in a harsh, horse-laugh, there was Rupert Birkin, and
     then a woman secretary, a Fräulein März, young and slim and pretty. 
 The food was very good, that was one thing. Gudrun, critical of everything, gave it her full
     approval. Ursula loved the situation, the white table by the cedar tree, the scent of new
     sunshine, the little vision of the leafy park, with far-off deer feeding peacefully. There
     seemed a magic circle drawn about the place, shutting out the present, enclosing the
     delightful, precious past, trees and deer and silence, like a dream. 
 But in spirit she was unhappy. The talk went on like a rattle of small artillery, always
     slightly sententious, with a sententiousness that was only emphasised by the continual
     crackling of a witticism, the continual spatter of verbal jest, designed to give a tone of
     flippancy to a stream of conversation that was all critical and general, a canal of
     conversation rather than a stream. 
 The attitude was mental and very wearying. Only the elderly sociologist, whose mental fibre
     was so tough as to be insentient, seemed to be thoroughly happy. Birkin was down in the mouth.
     Hermione appeared, with amazing persistence, to wish to ridicule him and make him look
     ignominious in the eyes of everybody. And it was surprising how she seemed to succeed, how
     helpless he seemed against her. He looked completely insignificant. Ursula and Gudrun, both
     very unused, were mostly silent, listening to the slow, rhapsodic sing-song of Hermione, or the
     verbal sallies of Sir Joshua, or the prattle of Fräulein, or the responses of the other two
     women. 
 Luncheon was over, coffee was brought out on the grass, the party left the table and sat
     about in lounge chairs, in the shade or in the sunshine as they wished. Fräulein departed into
     the house, Hermione took up her embroidery, the little Contessa took a book, Miss Bradley was
     weaving a basket out of fine grass, and there they all were on the lawn in the early summer
     afternoon, working leisurely and spattering with half-intellectual, deliberate talk. 
 Suddenly there was the sound of the brakes and the shutting off of a motor-car. 
 “There’s Salsie!” sang Hermione, in her slow, amusing sing-song. And laying down her work,
     she rose slowly, and slowly passed over the lawn, round the bushes, out of sight. 
 “Who is it?” asked Gudrun. 
 “Mr Roddice—Miss Roddice’s brother—at least, I suppose it’s he,” said Sir Joshua. 
 “Salsie, yes, it is her brother,” said the little Contessa, lifting her head for a moment
     from her book, and speaking as if to give information, in her slightly deepened, guttural
     English. 
 They all waited. And then round the bushes came the tall form of Alexander Roddice, striding
     romantically like a Meredith hero who remembers Disraeli. He was cordial with everybody, he was
     at once a host, with an easy, offhand hospitality that he had learned for Hermione’s friends.
     He had just come down from London, from the House. At once the atmosphere of the House of
     Commons made itself felt over the lawn: the Home Secretary had said such and such a thing, and
     he, Roddice, on the other hand, thought such and such a thing, and had said so-and-so to the
     PM. 
 Now Hermione came round the bushes with Gerald Crich. He had come along with Alexander.
     Gerald was presented to everybody, was kept by Hermione for a few moments in full view, then he
     was led away, still by Hermione. He was evidently her guest of the moment. 
 There had been a split in the Cabinet; the minister for Education had resigned owing to
     adverse criticism. This started a conversation on education. 
 “Of course,” said Hermione, lifting her face like a rhapsodist, “there can be no
     reason, no excuse for education, except the joy and beauty of knowledge in itself.”
     She seemed to rumble and ruminate with subterranean thoughts for a minute, then she proceeded:
     “Vocational education isn’t education, it is the close of education.” 
 Gerald, on the brink of discussion, sniffed the air with delight and prepared for action. 
 “Not necessarily,” he said. “But isn’t education really like gymnastics, isn’t the end of
     education the production of a well-trained, vigorous, energetic mind?” 
 “Just as athletics produce a healthy body, ready for anything,” cried Miss Bradley, in
     hearty accord. 
 Gudrun looked at her in silent loathing. 
 “Well—” rumbled Hermione, “I don’t know. To me the pleasure of knowing is so great, so
      wonderful—nothing has meant so much to me in all life, as certain knowledge—no, I am
     sure—nothing.” 
 “What knowledge, for example, Hermione?” asked Alexander. 
 Hermione lifted her face and rumbled— 
 “M—m—m—I don’t know . . . But one thing was the stars, when I really understood something
     about the stars. One feels so uplifted, so unbounded . . .” 
 Birkin looked at her in a white fury. 
 “What do you want to feel unbounded for?” he said sarcastically. “You don’t want to
      be unbounded.” 
 Hermione recoiled in offence. 
 “Yes, but one does have that limitless feeling,” said Gerald. “It’s like getting on top of
     the mountain and seeing the Pacific.” 
 “Silent upon a peak in Dariayn,” murmured the Italian, lifting her face for a moment from
     her book. 
 “Not necessarily in Dariayn,” said Gerald, while Ursula began to laugh. 
 Hermione waited for the dust to settle, and then she said, untouched: 
 “Yes, it is the greatest thing in life—to know. It is really to be happy, to be
      free.” 
 “Knowledge is, of course, liberty,” said Mattheson. 
 “In compressed tabloids,” said Birkin, looking at the dry, stiff little body of the Baronet.
     Immediately Gudrun saw the famous sociologist as a flat bottle, containing tabloids of
     compressed liberty. That pleased her. Sir Joshua was labelled and placed forever in her mind. 
 “What does that mean, Rupert?” sang Hermione, in a calm snub. 
 “You can only have knowledge, strictly,” he replied, “of things concluded, in the past. It’s
     like bottling the liberty of last summer in the bottled gooseberries.” 
 “Can one have knowledge only of the past?” asked the Baronet, pointedly. “Could we
     call our knowledge of the laws of gravitation for instance, knowledge of the past?” 
 “Yes,” said Birkin. 
 “There is a most beautiful thing in my book,” suddenly piped the little Italian woman. “It
     says the man came to the door and threw his eyes down the street.” 
 There was a general laugh in the company. Miss Bradley went and looked over the shoulder of
     the Contessa. 
 “See!” said the Contessa. 
 “Bazarov came to the door and threw his eyes hurriedly down the street,” she read. 
 Again there was a loud laugh, the most startling of which was the Baronet’s, which rattled
     out like a clatter of falling stones. 
 “What is the book?” asked Alexander, promptly. 
 “Fathers and Sons, by Turgenev,” said the little foreigner, pronouncing every syllable
     distinctly. She looked at the cover, to verify herself. 
 “An old American edition,” said Birkin. 
 “Ha!—of course—translated from the French,” said Alexander, with a fine declamatory voice.
      “Bazarov ouvra la porte et jeta les yeux dans la rue.” 
 He looked brightly round the company. 
 “I wonder what the ‘hurriedly’ was,” said Ursula. 
 They all began to guess. 
 And then, to the amazement of everybody, the maid came hurrying with a large tea-tray. The
     afternoon had passed so swiftly. 
 After tea, they were all gathered for a walk. 
 “Would you like to come for a walk?” said Hermione to each of them, one by one. And they all
     said yes, feeling somehow like prisoners marshalled for exercise. Birkin only refused. 
 “Will you come for a walk, Rupert?” 
 “No, Hermione.” 
 “But are you sure?” 
 “Quite sure.” There was a second’s hesitation. 
 “And why not?” sang Hermione’s question. It made her blood run sharp, to be thwarted in even
     so trifling a matter. She intended them all to walk with her in the park. 
 “Because I don’t like trooping off in a gang,” he said. 
 Her voice rumbled in her throat for a moment. Then she said, with a curious stray calm: 
 “Then we’ll leave a little boy behind, if he’s sulky.” 
 And she looked really gay, while she insulted him. But it merely made him stiff. 
 She trailed off to the rest of the company, only turning to wave her handkerchief to him,
     and to chuckle with laughter, singing out: 
 “Good-bye, good-bye, little boy.” 
 “Good-bye, impudent hag,” he said to himself. 
 They all went through the park. Hermione wanted to show them the wild daffodils on a little
     slope. “This way, this way,” sang her leisurely voice at intervals. And they had all to come
     this way. The daffodils were pretty, but who could see them? Ursula was stiff all over with
     resentment by this time, resentment of the whole atmosphere. Gudrun, mocking and objective,
     watched and registered everything. 
 They looked at the shy deer, and Hermione talked to the stag, as if he too were a boy she
     wanted to wheedle and fondle. He was male, so she must exert some kind of power over him. They
     trailed home by the fish-ponds, and Hermione told them about the quarrel of two male swans, who
     had striven for the love of the one lady. She chuckled and laughed as she told how the ousted
     lover had sat with his head buried under his wing, on the gravel. 
 When they arrived back at the house, Hermione stood on the lawn and sang out, in a strange,
     small, high voice that carried very far: 
 “Rupert! Rupert!” The first syllable was high and slow, the second dropped down.
     “Roo-o-opert.” 
 But there was no answer. A maid appeared. 
 “Where is Mr Birkin, Alice?” asked the mild straying voice of Hermione. But under the
     straying voice, what a persistent, almost insane will!

 “I think he’s in his room, madam.” 
 “Is he?” 
 Hermione went slowly up the stairs, along the corridor, singing out in her high, small call: 
 “Ru-oo-pert! Ru-oo pert!” 
 She came to his door, and tapped, still crying: “Roo-pert.” 
 “Yes,” sounded his voice at last. 
 “What are you doing?” 
 The question was mild and curious. 
 There was no answer. Then he opened the door. 
 “We’ve come back,” said Hermione. “The daffodils are so beautiful.” 
 “Yes,” he said, “I’ve seen them.” 
 She looked at him with her long, slow, impassive look, along her cheeks. 
 “Have you?” she echoed. And she remained looking at him. She was stimulated above all things
     by this conflict with him, when he was like a sulky boy, helpless, and she had him safe at
     Breadalby. But underneath she knew the split was coming, and her hatred of him was subconscious
     and intense. 
 “What were you doing?” she reiterated, in her mild, indifferent tone. He did not answer, and
     she made her way, almost unconsciously into his room. He had taken a Chinese drawing of geese
     from the boudoir, and was copying it, with much skill and vividness. 
 “You are copying the drawing,” she said, standing near the table, and looking down at his
     work. “Yes. How beautifully you do it! You like it very much, don’t you?” 
 “It’s a marvellous drawing,” he said. 
 “Is it? I’m so glad you like it, because I’ve always been fond of it. The Chinese Ambassador
     gave it me.” 
 “I know,” he said. 
 “But why do you copy it?” she asked, casual and sing-song. “Why not do something original?” 
 “I want to know it,” he replied. “One gets more of China, copying this picture, than reading
     all the books.” 
 “And what do you get?” 
 She was at once roused, she laid as it were violent hands on him, to extract his secrets
     from him. She must know. It was a dreadful tyranny, an obsession in her, to know all
     he knew. For some time he was silent, hating to answer her. Then, compelled, he began: 
 “I know what centres they live from—what they perceive and feel—the hot, stinging centrality
     of a goose in the flux of cold water and mud—the curious bitter stinging heat of a goose’s
     blood, entering their own blood like an inoculation of corruptive fire—fire of the cold-burning
     mud—the lotus mystery.” 
 Hermione looked at him along her narrow, pallid cheeks. Her eyes were strange and drugged,
     heavy under their heavy, drooping lids. Her thin bosom shrugged convulsively. He stared back at
     her, devilish and unchanging. With another strange, sick convulsion, she turned away, as if she
     were sick, could feel dissolution setting-in in her body. For with her mind she was unable to
     attend to his words, he caught her, as it were, beneath all her defences, and destroyed her
     with some insidious occult potency. 
 “Yes,” she said, as if she did not know what she were saying. “Yes,” and she swallowed, and
     tried to regain her mind. But she could not, she was witless, decentralised. Use all her will
     as she might, she could not recover. She suffered the ghastliness of dissolution, broken and
     gone in a horrible corruption. And he stood and looked at her unmoved. She strayed out, pallid
     and preyed-upon like a ghost, like one attacked by the tomb-influences which dog us. And she
     was gone like a corpse, that has no presence, no connection. He remained hard and vindictive. 
 Hermione came down to dinner strange and sepulchral, her eyes heavy and full of sepulchral
     darkness, strength. She had put on a dress of stiff old greenish brocade, that fitted tight and
     made her look tall and rather terrible, ghastly. In the gay light of the drawing-room she was
     uncanny and oppressive. But seated in the half-light of the dining-room, sitting stiffly before
     the shaded candles on the table, she seemed a power, a presence. She listened and attended with
     a drugged attention. 
 The party was gay and extravagant in appearance, everybody had put on evening dress except
     Birkin and Joshua Mattheson. The little Italian Contessa wore a dress of tissue, of orange and
     gold and black velvet in soft wide stripes, Gudrun was emerald green with strange net-work,
     Ursula was in yellow with dull silver veiling, Miss Bradley was of grey, crimson and jet,
     Fräulein März wore pale blue. It gave Hermione a sudden convulsive sensation of pleasure, to
     see these rich colours under the candle-light. She was aware of the talk going on, ceaselessly,
     Joshua’s voice dominating; of the ceaseless pitter-patter of women’s light laughter and
     responses; of the brilliant colours and the white table and the shadow above and below; and she
     seemed in a swoon of gratification, convulsed with pleasure and yet sick, like a
      revenant. She took very little part in the conversation, yet she heard it all, it was
     all hers. 
 They all went together into the drawing-room, as if they were one family, easily, without
     any attention to ceremony. Fräulein handed the coffee, everybody smoked cigarettes, or else
     long warden pipes of white clay, of which a sheaf was provided. 
 “Will you smoke?—cigarettes or pipe?” asked Fräulein prettily. There was a circle of people,
     Sir Joshua with his eighteenth-century appearance, Gerald the amused, handsome young
     Englishman, Alexander tall and the handsome politician, democratic and lucid, Hermione strange
     like a long Cassandra, and the women lurid with colour, all dutifully smoking their long white
     pipes, and sitting in a half-moon in the comfortable, soft-lighted drawing-room, round the logs
     that flickered on the marble hearth. 
 The talk was very often political or sociological, and interesting, curiously anarchistic.
     There was an accumulation of powerful force in the room, powerful and destructive. Everything
     seemed to be thrown into the melting pot, and it seemed to Ursula they were all witches,
     helping the pot to bubble. There was an elation and a satisfaction in it all, but it was
     cruelly exhausting for the newcomers, this ruthless mental pressure, this powerful, consuming,
     destructive mentality that emanated from Joshua and Hermione and Birkin and dominated the rest. 
 But a sickness, a fearful nausea gathered possession of Hermione. There was a lull in the
     talk, as it was arrested by her unconscious but all-powerful will. 
 “Salsie, won’t you play something?” said Hermione, breaking off completely. “Won’t somebody
     dance? Gudrun, you will dance, won’t you? I wish you would. Anche tu, Palestra,
      ballerai?—sì, per piacere. You too, Ursula.” 
 Hermione rose and slowly pulled the gold-embroidered band that hung by the mantel, clinging
     to it for a moment, then releasing it suddenly. Like a priestess she looked, unconscious, sunk
     in a heavy half-trance. 
 A servant came, and soon reappeared with armfuls of silk robes and shawls and scarves,
     mostly oriental, things that Hermione, with her love for beautiful extravagant dress, had
     collected gradually. 
 “The three women will dance together,” she said. 
 “What shall it be?” asked Alexander, rising briskly. 
 “Vergini Delle Rocchette,” said the Contessa at once. 
 “They are so languid,” said Ursula. 
 “The three witches from Macbeth,” suggested Fräulein usefully. It was finally decided to do
     Naomi and Ruth and Orpah. Ursula was Naomi, Gudrun was Ruth, the Contessa was Orpah. The idea
     was to make a little ballet, in the style of the Russian Ballet of Pavlova and Nijinsky. 
 The Contessa was ready first, Alexander went to the piano, a space was cleared. Orpah, in
     beautiful oriental clothes, began slowly to dance the death of her husband. Then Ruth came, and
     they wept together, and lamented, then Naomi came to comfort them. It was all done in dumb
     show, the women danced their emotion in gesture and motion. The little drama went on for a
     quarter of an hour. 
 Ursula was beautiful as Naomi. All her men were dead, it remained to her only to stand alone
     in indomitable assertion, demanding nothing. Ruth, woman-loving, loved her. Orpah, a vivid,
     sensational, subtle widow, would go back to the former life, a repetition. The interplay
     between the women was real and rather frightening. It was strange to see how Gudrun clung with
     heavy, desperate passion to Ursula, yet smiled with subtle malevolence against her, how Ursula
     accepted silently, unable to provide any more either for herself or for the other, but
     dangerous and indomitable, refuting her grief. 
 Hermione loved to watch. She could see the Contessa’s rapid, stoat-like sensationalism,
     Gudrun’s ultimate but treacherous cleaving to the woman in her sister, Ursula’s dangerous
     helplessness, as if she were helplessly weighted, and unreleased. 
 “That was very beautiful,” everybody cried with one accord. But Hermione writhed in her
     soul, knowing what she could not know. She cried out for more dancing, and it was her will that
     set the Contessa and Birkin moving mockingly in Malbrouk. 
 Gerald was excited by the desperate cleaving of Gudrun to Naomi. The essence of that female,
     subterranean recklessness and mockery penetrated his blood. He could not forget Gudrun’s
     lifted, offered, cleaving, reckless, yet withal mocking weight. And Birkin, watching like a
     hermit crab from its hole, had seen the brilliant frustration and helplessness of Ursula. She
     was rich, full of dangerous power. She was like a strange unconscious bud of powerful
     womanhood. He was unconsciously drawn to her. She was his future. 
 Alexander played some Hungarian music, and they all danced, seized by the spirit. Gerald was
     marvellously exhilarated at finding himself in motion, moving towards Gudrun, dancing with feet
     that could not yet escape from the waltz and the two-step, but feeling his force stir along his
     limbs and his body, out of captivity. He did not know yet how to dance their convulsive,
     rag-time sort of dancing, but he knew how to begin. Birkin, when he could get free from the
     weight of the people present, whom he disliked, danced rapidly and with a real gaiety. And how
     Hermione hated him for this irresponsible gaiety. 
 “Now I see,” cried the Contessa excitedly, watching his purely gay motion, which he had all
     to himself. “Mr Birkin, he is a changer.” 
 Hermione looked at her slowly, and shuddered, knowing that only a foreigner could have seen
     and have said this. 
 “Cosa vuol’dire, Palestra?” she asked, sing-song. 
 “Look,” said the Contessa, in Italian. “He is not a man, he is a chameleon, a creature of
     change.” 
 “He is not a man, he is treacherous, not one of us,” said itself over in Hermione’s
     consciousness. And her soul writhed in the black subjugation to him, because of his power to
     escape, to exist, other than she did, because he was not consistent, not a man, less than a
     man. She hated him in a despair that shattered her and broke her down, so that she suffered
     sheer dissolution like a corpse, and was unconscious of everything save the horrible sickness
     of dissolution that was taking place within her, body and soul. 
 The house being full, Gerald was given the smaller room, really the dressing-room,
     communicating with Birkin’s bedroom. When they all took their candles and mounted the stairs,
     where the lamps were burning subduedly, Hermione captured Ursula and brought her into her own
     bedroom, to talk to her. A sort of constraint came over Ursula in the big, strange bedroom.
     Hermione seemed to be bearing down on her, awful and inchoate, making some appeal. They were
     looking at some Indian silk shirts, gorgeous and sensual in themselves, their shape, their
     almost corrupt gorgeousness. And Hermione came near, and her bosom writhed, and Ursula was for
     a moment blank with panic. And for a moment Hermione’s haggard eyes saw the fear on the face of
     the other, there was again a sort of crash, a crashing down. And Ursula picked up a shirt of
     rich red and blue silk, made for a young princess of fourteen, and was crying mechanically: 
 “Isn’t it wonderful—who would dare to put those two strong colours together—” 
 Then Hermione’s maid entered silently and Ursula, overcome with dread, escaped, carried away
     by powerful impulse. 
 Birkin went straight to bed. He was feeling happy, and sleepy. Since he had danced he was
     happy. But Gerald would talk to him. Gerald, in evening dress, sat on Birkin’s bed when the
     other lay down, and must talk. 
 “Who are those two Brangwens?” Gerald asked. 
 “They live in Beldover.” 
 “In Beldover! Who are they then?” 
 “Teachers in the Grammar School.” 
 There was a pause. 
 “They are!” exclaimed Gerald at length. “I thought I had seen them before.” 
 “It disappoints you?” said Birkin. 
 “Disappoints me! No—but how is it Hermione has them here?” 
 “She knew Gudrun in London—that’s the younger one, the one with the darker hair—she’s an
     artist—does sculpture and modelling.” 
 “She’s not a teacher in the Grammar School, then—only the other?” 
 “Both—Gudrun art mistress, Ursula a class mistress.” 
 “And what’s the father?” 
 “Handicraft instructor in the schools.” 
 “Really!” 
 “Class-barriers are breaking down!” 
 Gerald was always uneasy under the slightly jeering tone of the other. 
 “That their father is handicraft instructor in a school! What does it matter to me?” 
 Birkin laughed. Gerald looked at his face, as it lay there laughing and bitter and
     indifferent on the pillow, and he could not go away. 
 “I don’t suppose you will see very much more of Gudrun, at least. She is a restless bird,
     she’ll be gone in a week or two,” said Birkin. 
 “Where will she go?” 
 “London, Paris, Rome—heaven knows. I always expect her to sheer off to Damascus or San
     Francisco; she’s a bird of paradise. God knows what she’s got to do with Beldover. It goes by
     contraries, like dreams.” 
 Gerald pondered for a few moments. 
 “How do you know her so well?” he asked. 
 “I knew her in London,” he replied, “in the Algernon Strange set. She’ll know about Pussum
     and Libidnikov and the rest—even if she doesn’t know them personally. She was never quite that
     set—more conventional, in a way. I’ve known her for two years, I suppose.” 
 “And she makes money, apart from her teaching?” asked Gerald. 
 “Some—irregularly. She can sell her models. She has a certain réclame.” 
 “How much for?” 
 “A guinea, ten guineas.” 
 “And are they good? What are they?” 
 “I think sometimes they are marvellously good. That is hers, those two wagtails in
     Hermione’s boudoir—you’ve seen them—they are carved in wood and painted.” 
 “I thought it was savage carving again.” 
 “No, hers. That’s what they are—animals and birds, sometimes odd small people in everyday
     dress, really rather wonderful when they come off. They have a sort of funniness that is quite
     unconscious and subtle.” 
 “She might be a well-known artist one day?” mused Gerald. 
 “She might. But I think she won’t. She drops her art if anything else catches her. Her
     contrariness prevents her taking it seriously—she must never be too serious, she feels she
     might give herself away. And she won’t give herself away—she’s always on the defensive. That’s
     what I can’t stand about her type. By the way, how did things go off with Pussum after I left
     you? I haven’t heard anything.” 
 “Oh, rather disgusting. Halliday turned objectionable, and I only just saved myself from
     jumping in his stomach, in a real old-fashioned row.” 
 Birkin was silent. 
 “Of course,” he said, “Julius is somewhat insane. On the one hand he’s had religious mania,
     and on the other, he is fascinated by obscenity. Either he is a pure servant, washing the feet
     of Christ, or else he is making obscene drawings of Jesus—action and reaction—and between the
     two, nothing. He is really insane. He wants a pure lily, another girl, with a baby face, on the
     one hand, and on the other, he must have the Pussum, just to defile himself with her.” 
 “That’s what I can’t make out,” said Gerald. “Does he love her, the Pussum, or doesn’t he?” 
 “He neither does nor doesn’t. She is the harlot, the actual harlot of adultery to him. And
     he’s got a craving to throw himself into the filth of her. Then he gets up and calls on the
     name of the lily of purity, the baby-faced girl, and so enjoys himself all round. It’s the old
     story—action and reaction, and nothing between.” 
 “I don’t know,” said Gerald, after a pause, “that he does insult the Pussum so very much.
     She strikes me as being rather foul.” 
 “But I thought you liked her,” exclaimed Birkin. “I always felt fond of her. I never had
     anything to do with her, personally, that’s true.” 
 “I liked her all right, for a couple of days,” said Gerald. “But a week of her would have
     turned me over. There’s a certain smell about the skin of those women, that in the end is
     sickening beyond words—even if you like it at first.” 
 “I know,” said Birkin. Then he added, rather fretfully, “But go to bed, Gerald. God knows
     what time it is.” 
 Gerald looked at his watch, and at length rose off the bed, and went to his room. But he
     returned in a few minutes, in his shirt. 
 “One thing,” he said, seating himself on the bed again. “We finished up rather stormily, and
     I never had time to give her anything.” 
 “Money?” said Birkin. “She’ll get what she wants from Halliday or from one of her
     acquaintances.” 
 “But then,” said Gerald, “I’d rather give her her dues and settle the account.” 
 “She doesn’t care.” 
 “No, perhaps not. But one feels the account is left open, and one would rather it were
     closed.” 
 “Would you?” said Birkin. He was looking at the white legs of Gerald, as the latter sat on
     the side of the bed in his shirt. They were white-skinned, full, muscular legs, handsome and
     decided. Yet they moved Birkin with a sort of pathos, tenderness, as if they were childish. 
 “I think I’d rather close the account,” said Gerald, repeating himself vaguely. 
 “It doesn’t matter one way or another,” said Birkin. 
 “You always say it doesn’t matter,” said Gerald, a little puzzled, looking down at the face
     of the other man affectionately. 
 “Neither does it,” said Birkin. 
 “But she was a decent sort, really—” 
 “Render unto Cæsarina the things that are Cæsarina’s,” said Birkin, turning aside. It seemed
     to him Gerald was talking for the sake of talking. “Go away, it wearies me—it’s too late at
     night,” he said. 
 “I wish you’d tell me something that did matter,” said Gerald, looking down all the
     time at the face of the other man, waiting for something. But Birkin turned his face aside. 
 “All right then, go to sleep,” said Gerald, and he laid his hand affectionately on the other
     man’s shoulder, and went away. 
 In the morning when Gerald awoke and heard Birkin move, he called out: “I still think I
     ought to give the Pussum ten pounds.” 
 “Oh God!” said Birkin, “don’t be so matter-of-fact. Close the account in your own soul, if
     you like. It is there you can’t close it.” 
 “How do you know I can’t?” 
 “Knowing you.” 
 Gerald meditated for some moments. 
 “It seems to me the right thing to do, you know, with the Pussums, is to pay them.” 
 “And the right thing for mistresses: keep them. And the right thing for wives: live under
     the same roof with them. Integer vitae scelerisque purus—” said Birkin. 
 “There’s no need to be nasty about it,” said Gerald. 
 “It bores me. I’m not interested in your peccadilloes.” 
 “And I don’t care whether you are or not—I am.” 
 The morning was again sunny. The maid had been in and brought the water, and had drawn the
     curtains. Birkin, sitting up in bed, looked lazily and pleasantly out on the park, that was so
     green and deserted, romantic, belonging to the past. He was thinking how lovely, how sure, how
     formed, how final all the things of the past were—the lovely accomplished past—this house, so
     still and golden, the park slumbering its centuries of peace. And then, what a snare and a
     delusion, this beauty of static things—what a horrible, dead prison Breadalby really was, what
     an intolerable confinement, the peace! Yet it was better than the sordid scrambling conflict of
     the present. If only one might create the future after one’s own heart—for a little pure truth,
     a little unflinching application of simple truth to life, the heart cried out ceaselessly. 
 “I can’t see what you will leave me at all, to be interested in,” came Gerald’s voice from
     the lower room. “Neither the Pussums, nor the mines, nor anything else.” 
 “You be interested in what you can, Gerald. Only I’m not interested myself,” said Birkin. 
 “What am I to do at all, then?” came Gerald’s voice. 
 “What you like. What am I to do myself?” 
 In the silence Birkin could feel Gerald musing this fact. 
 “I’m blest if I know,” came the good-humoured answer. 
 “You see,” said Birkin, “part of you wants the Pussum, and nothing but the Pussum, part of
     you wants the mines, the business, and nothing but the business—and there you are—all in bits—” 
 “And part of me wants something else,” said Gerald, in a queer, quiet, real voice. 
 “What?” said Birkin, rather surprised. 
 “That’s what I hoped you could tell me,” said Gerald. 
 There was a silence for some time. 
 “I can’t tell you—I can’t find my own way, let alone yours. You might marry,” Birkin
     replied. 
 “Who—the Pussum?” asked Gerald. 
 “Perhaps,” said Birkin. And he rose and went to the window. 
 “That is your panacea,” said Gerald. “But you haven’t even tried it on yourself yet, and you
     are sick enough.” 
 “I am,” said Birkin. “Still, I shall come right.” 
 “Through marriage?” 
 “Yes,” Birkin answered obstinately. 
 “And no,” added Gerald. “No, no, no, my boy.” 
 There was a silence between them, and a strange tension of hostility. They always kept a
     gap, a distance between them, they wanted always to be free each of the other. Yet there was a
     curious heart-straining towards each other. 
 “Salvator femininus,” said Gerald, satirically. 
 “Why not?” said Birkin. 
 “No reason at all,” said Gerald, “if it really works. But whom will you marry?” 
 “A woman,” said Birkin. 
 “Good,” said Gerald. 
 Birkin and Gerald were the last to come down to breakfast. Hermione liked everybody to be
     early. She suffered when she felt her day was diminished, she felt she had missed her life. She
     seemed to grip the hours by the throat, to force her life from them. She was rather pale and
     ghastly, as if left behind, in the morning. Yet she had her power, her will was strangely
     pervasive. With the entrance of the two young men a sudden tension was felt. 
 She lifted her face, and said, in her amused sing-song: 
 “Good morning! Did you sleep well? I’m so glad.” 
 And she turned away, ignoring them. Birkin, who knew her well, saw that she intended to
     discount his existence. 
 “Will you take what you want from the sideboard?” said Alexander, in a voice slightly
     suggesting disapprobation. “I hope the things aren’t cold. Oh no! Do you mind putting out the
     flame under the chafing-dish, Rupert? Thank you.” 
 Even Alexander was rather authoritative where Hermione was cool. He took his tone from her,
     inevitably. Birkin sat down and looked at the table. He was so used to this house, to this
     room, to this atmosphere, through years of intimacy, and now he felt in complete opposition to
     it all, it had nothing to do with him. How well he knew Hermione, as she sat there, erect and
     silent and somewhat bemused, and yet so potent, so powerful! He knew her statically, so
     finally, that it was almost like a madness. It was difficult to believe one was not mad, that
     one was not a figure in the hall of kings in some Egyptian tomb, where the dead all sat
     immemorial and tremendous. How utterly he knew Joshua Mattheson, who was talking in his harsh,
     yet rather mincing voice, endlessly, endlessly, always with a strong mentality working, always
     interesting, and yet always known, everything he said known beforehand, however novel it was,
     and clever. Alexander the up-to-date host, so bloodlessly free-and-easy, Fräulein so prettily
     chiming in just as she should, the little Italian Countess taking notice of everybody, only
     playing her little game, objective and cold, like a weasel watching everything, and extracting
     her own amusement, never giving herself in the slightest; then Miss Bradley, heavy and rather
     subservient, treated with cool, almost amused contempt by Hermione, and therefore slighted by
     everybody—how known it all was, like a game with the figures set out, the same figures, the
     Queen of chess, the knights, the pawns, the same now as they were hundreds of years ago, the
     same figures moving round in one of the innumerable permutations that make up the game. But the
     game is known, its going on is like a madness, it is so exhausted. 
 There was Gerald, an amused look on his face; the game pleased him. There was Gudrun,
     watching with steady, large, hostile eyes; the game fascinated her, and she loathed it. There
     was Ursula, with a slightly startled look on her face, as if she were hurt, and the pain were
     just outside her consciousness. 
 Suddenly Birkin got up and went out. 
 “That’s enough,” he said to himself involuntarily. 
 Hermione knew his motion, though not in her consciousness. She lifted her heavy eyes and saw
     him lapse suddenly away, on a sudden, unknown tide, and the waves broke over her. Only her
     indomitable will remained static and mechanical, she sat at the table making her musing, stray
     remarks. But the darkness had covered her, she was like a ship that has gone down. It was
     finished for her too, she was wrecked in the darkness. Yet the unfailing mechanism of her will
     worked on, she had that activity. 
 “Shall we bathe this morning?” she said, suddenly looking at them all. 
 “Splendid,” said Joshua. “It is a perfect morning.” 
 “Oh, it is beautiful,” said Fräulein. 
 “Yes, let us bathe,” said the Italian woman. 
 “We have no bathing suits,” said Gerald. 
 “Have mine,” said Alexander. “I must go to church and read the lessons. They expect me.” 
 “Are you a Christian?” asked the Italian Countess, with sudden interest. 
 “No,” said Alexander. “I’m not. But I believe in keeping up the old institutions.” 
 “They are so beautiful,” said Fräulein daintily. 
 “Oh, they are,” cried Miss Bradley. 
 They all trailed out on to the lawn. It was a sunny, soft morning in early summer, when life
     ran in the world subtly, like a reminiscence. The church bells were ringing a little way off,
     not a cloud was in the sky, the swans were like lilies on the water below, the peacocks walked
     with long, prancing steps across the shadow and into the sunshine of the grass. One wanted to
     swoon into the by-gone perfection of it all. 
 “Good-bye,” called Alexander, waving his gloves cheerily, and he disappeared behind the
     bushes, on his way to church. 
 “Now,” said Hermione, “shall we all bathe?” 
 “I won’t,” said Ursula. 
 “You don’t want to?” said Hermione, looking at her slowly. 
 “No. I don’t want to,” said Ursula. 
 “Nor I,” said Gudrun. 
 “What about my suit?” asked Gerald. 
 “I don’t know,” laughed Hermione, with an odd, amused intonation. “Will a handkerchief do—a
     large handkerchief?” 
 “That will do,” said Gerald. 
 “Come along then,” sang Hermione. 
 The first to run across the lawn was the little Italian, small and like a cat, her white
     legs twinkling as she went, ducking slightly her head, that was tied in a gold silk kerchief.
     She tripped through the gate and down the grass, and stood, like a tiny figure of ivory and
     bronze, at the water’s edge, having dropped off her towelling, watching the swans, which came
     up in surprise. Then out ran Miss Bradley, like a large, soft plum in her dark-blue suit. Then
     Gerald came, a scarlet silk kerchief round his loins, his towels over his arms. He seemed to
     flaunt himself a little in the sun, lingering and laughing, strolling easily, looking white but
     natural in his nakedness. Then came Sir Joshua, in an overcoat, and lastly Hermione, striding
     with stiff grace from out of a great mantle of purple silk, her head tied up in purple and
     gold. Handsome was her stiff, long body, her straight-stepping white legs, there was a static
     magnificence about her as she let the cloak float loosely away from her striding. She crossed
     the lawn like some strange memory, and passed slowly and statelily towards the water. 
 There were three ponds, in terraces descending the valley, large and smooth and beautiful,
     lying in the sun. The water ran over a little stone wall, over small rocks, splashing down from
     one pond to the level below. The swans had gone out on to the opposite bank, the reeds smelled
     sweet, a faint breeze touched the skin. 
 Gerald had dived in, after Sir Joshua, and had swum to the end of the pond. There he climbed
     out and sat on the wall. There was a dive, and the little Countess was swimming like a rat, to
     join him. They both sat in the sun, laughing and crossing their arms on their breasts. Sir
     Joshua swam up to them, and stood near them, up to his arm-pits in the water. Then Hermione and
     Miss Bradley swam over, and they sat in a row on the embankment. 
 “Aren’t they terrifying? Aren’t they really terrifying?” said Gudrun. “Don’t they look
     saurian? They are just like great lizards. Did you ever see anything like Sir Joshua? But
     really, Ursula, he belongs to the primeval world, when great lizards crawled about.” 
 Gudrun looked in dismay on Sir Joshua, who stood up to the breast in the water, his long,
     greyish hair washed down into his eyes, his neck set into thick, crude shoulders. He was
     talking to Miss Bradley, who, seated on the bank above, plump and big and wet, looked as if she
     might roll and slither in the water almost like one of the slithering sealions in the Zoo. 
 Ursula watched in silence. Gerald was laughing happily, between Hermione and the Italian. He
     reminded her of Dionysos, because his hair was really yellow, his figure so full and laughing.
     Hermione, in her large, stiff, sinister grace, leaned near him, frightening, as if she were not
     responsible for what she might do. He knew a certain danger in her, a convulsive madness. But
     he only laughed the more, turning often to the little Countess, who was flashing up her face at
     him. 
 They all dropped into the water, and were swimming together like a shoal of seals. Hermione
     was powerful and unconscious in the water, large and slow and powerful. Palestra was quick and
     silent as a water rat, Gerald wavered and flickered, a white natural shadow. Then, one after
     the other, they waded out, and went up to the house. 
 But Gerald lingered a moment to speak to Gudrun. 
 “You don’t like the water?” he said. 
 She looked at him with a long, slow inscrutable look, as he stood before her negligently,
     the water standing in beads all over his skin. 
 “I like it very much,” she replied. 
 He paused, expecting some sort of explanation. 
 “And you swim?” 
 “Yes, I swim.” 
 Still he would not ask her why she would not go in then. He could feel something ironic in
     her. He walked away, piqued for the first time. 
 “Why wouldn’t you bathe?” he asked her again, later, when he was once more the
     properly-dressed young Englishman. 
 She hesitated a moment before answering, opposing his persistence. 
 “Because I didn’t like the crowd,” she replied. 
 He laughed, her phrase seemed to re-echo in his consciousness. The flavour of her slang was
     piquant to him. Whether he would or not, she signified the real world to him. He wanted to come
     up to her standards, fulfil her expectations. He knew that her criterion was the only one that
     mattered. The others were all outsiders, instinctively, whatever they might be socially. And
     Gerald could not help it, he was bound to strive to come up to her criterion, fulfil her idea
     of a man and a human-being. 
 After lunch, when all the others had withdrawn, Hermione and Gerald and Birkin lingered,
     finishing their talk. There had been some discussion, on the whole quite intellectual and
     artificial, about a new state, a new world of man. Supposing this old social state
      were broken and destroyed, then, out of the chaos, what then? 
 The great social idea, said Sir Joshua, was the social equality of man. No, said
     Gerald, the idea was, that every man was fit for his own little bit of a task—let him do that,
     and then please himself. The unifying principle was the work in hand. Only work, the business
     of production, held men together. It was mechanical, but then society was a mechanism.
     Apart from work they were isolated, free to do as they liked. 
 “Oh!” cried Gudrun. “Then we shan’t have names any more—we shall be like the Germans,
     nothing but Herr Obermeister and Herr Untermeister. I can imagine it—‘I am Mrs Colliery-Manager
     Crich—I am Mrs Member-of-Parliament Roddice. I am Miss Art-Teacher Brangwen.’ Very pretty
     that.” 
 “Things would work very much better, Miss Art-Teacher Brangwen,” said Gerald. 
 “What things, Mr Colliery-Manager Crich? The relation between you and me, par
      exemple?” 
 “Yes, for example,” cried the Italian. “That which is between men and women—!” 
 “That is non-social,” said Birkin, sarcastically. 
 “Exactly,” said Gerald. “Between me and a woman, the social question does not enter. It is
     my own affair.” 
 “A ten-pound note on it,” said Birkin. 
 “You don’t admit that a woman is a social being?” asked Ursula of Gerald. 
 “She is both,” said Gerald. “She is a social being, as far as society is concerned. But for
     her own private self, she is a free agent, it is her own affair, what she does.” 
 “But won’t it be rather difficult to arrange the two halves?” asked Ursula. 
 “Oh no,” replied Gerald. “They arrange themselves naturally—we see it now, everywhere.” 
 “Don’t you laugh so pleasantly till you’re out of the wood,” said Birkin. 
 Gerald knitted his brows in momentary irritation. 
 “Was I laughing?” he said. 
 “If,” said Hermione at last, “we could only realise, that in the spirit we
     are all one, all equal in the spirit, all brothers there—the rest wouldn’t matter, there would
     be no more of this carping and envy and this struggle for power, which destroys, only
     destroys.” 
 This speech was received in silence, and almost immediately the party rose from the table.
     But when the others had gone, Birkin turned round in bitter declamation, saying: 
 “It is just the opposite, just the contrary, Hermione. We are all different and unequal in
     spirit—it is only the social differences that are based on accidental material
     conditions. We are all abstractly or mathematically equal, if you like. Every man has hunger
     and thirst, two eyes, one nose and two legs. We’re all the same in point of number. But
     spiritually, there is pure difference and neither equality nor inequality counts. It is upon
     these two bits of knowledge that you must found a state. Your democracy is an absolute lie—your
     brotherhood of man is a pure falsity, if you apply it further than the mathematical
     abstraction. We all drank milk first, we all eat bread and meat, we all want to ride in
     motor-cars—therein lies the beginning and the end of the brotherhood of man. But no equality. 
 “But I, myself, who am myself, what have I to do with equality with any other man or woman?
     In the spirit, I am as separate as one star is from another, as different in quality and
     quantity. Establish a state on that. One man isn’t any better than another, not
     because they are equal, but because they are intrinsically other, that there is no
     term of comparison. The minute you begin to compare, one man is seen to be far better than
     another, all the inequality you can imagine is there by nature. I want every man to have his
     share in the world’s goods, so that I am rid of his importunity, so that I can tell him: ‘Now
     you’ve got what you want—you’ve got your fair share of the world’s gear. Now, you one-mouthed
     fool, mind yourself and don’t obstruct me.’” 
 Hermione was looking at him with leering eyes, along her cheeks. He could feel violent waves
     of hatred and loathing of all he said, coming out of her. It was dynamic hatred and loathing,
     coming strong and black out of the unconsciousness. She heard his words in her unconscious
     self, consciously she was as if deafened, she paid no heed to them. 
 “It sounds like megalomania, Rupert,” said Gerald, genially. 
 Hermione gave a queer, grunting sound. Birkin stood back. 
 “Yes, let it,” he said suddenly, the whole tone gone out of his voice, that had been so
     insistent, bearing everybody down. And he went away. 
 But he felt, later, a little compunction. He had been violent, cruel with poor Hermione. He
     wanted to recompense her, to make it up. He had hurt her, he had been vindictive. He wanted to
     be on good terms with her again. 
 He went into her boudoir, a remote and very cushiony place. She was sitting at her table
     writing letters. She lifted her face abstractedly when he entered, watched him go to the sofa,
     and sit down. Then she looked down at her paper again. 
 He took up a large volume which he had been reading before, and became minutely attentive to
     his author. His back was towards Hermione. She could not go on with her writing. Her whole mind
     was a chaos, darkness breaking in upon it, and herself struggling to gain control with her
     will, as a swimmer struggles with the swirling water. But in spite of her efforts she was borne
     down, darkness seemed to break over her, she felt as if her heart was bursting. The terrible
     tension grew stronger and stronger, it was most fearful agony, like being walled up. 
 And then she realised that his presence was the wall, his presence was destroying her.
     Unless she could break out, she must die most fearfully, walled up in horror. And he was the
     wall. She must break down the wall—she must break him down before her, the awful obstruction of
     him who obstructed her life to the last. It must be done, or she must perish most horribly. 
 Terrible shocks ran over her body, like shocks of electricity, as if many volts of
     electricity suddenly struck her down. She was aware of him sitting silently there, an
     unthinkable evil obstruction. Only this blotted out her mind, pressed out her very breathing,
     his silent, stooping back, the back of his head. 
 A terrible voluptuous thrill ran down her arms—she was going to know her voluptuous
     consummation. Her arms quivered and were strong, immeasurably and irresistibly strong. What
     delight, what delight in strength, what delirium of pleasure! She was going to have her
     consummation of voluptuous ecstasy at last. It was coming! In utmost terror and agony, she knew
     it was upon her now, in extremity of bliss. Her hand closed on a blue, beautiful ball of lapis
     lazuli that stood on her desk for a paper-weight. She rolled it round in her hand as she rose
     silently. Her heart was a pure flame in her breast, she was purely unconscious in ecstasy. She
     moved towards him and stood behind him for a moment in ecstasy. He, closed within the spell,
     remained motionless and unconscious. 
 Then swiftly, in a flame that drenched down her body like fluid lightning and gave her a
     perfect, unutterable consummation, unutterable satisfaction, she brought down the ball of jewel
     stone with all her force, crash on his head. But her fingers were in the way and deadened the
     blow. Nevertheless, down went his head on the table on which his book lay, the stone slid aside
     and over his ear, it was one convulsion of pure bliss for her, lit up by the crushed pain of
     her fingers. But it was not somehow complete. She lifted her arm high to aim once more,
     straight down on the head that lay dazed on the table. She must smash it, it must be smashed
     before her ecstasy was consummated, fulfilled for ever. A thousand lives, a thousand deaths
     mattered nothing now, only the fulfilment of this perfect ecstasy. 
 She was not swift, she could only move slowly. A strong spirit in him woke him and made him
     lift his face and twist to look at her. Her arm was raised, the hand clasping the ball of lapis
     lazuli. It was her left hand, he realised again with horror that she was left-handed.
     Hurriedly, with a burrowing motion, he covered his head under the thick volume of Thucydides,
     and the blow came down, almost breaking his neck, and shattering his heart. 
 He was shattered, but he was not afraid. Twisting round to face her he pushed the table over
     and got away from her. He was like a flask that is smashed to atoms, he seemed to himself that
     he was all fragments, smashed to bits. Yet his movements were perfectly coherent and clear, his
     soul was entire and unsurprised. 
 “No you don’t, Hermione,” he said in a low voice. “I don’t let you.” 
 He saw her standing tall and livid and attentive, the stone clenched tense in her hand. 
 “Stand away and let me go,” he said, drawing near to her. 
 As if pressed back by some hand, she stood away, watching him all the time without changing,
     like a neutralised angel confronting him. 
 “It is not good,” he said, when he had gone past her. “It isn’t I who will die. You hear?” 
 He kept his face to her as he went out, lest she should strike again. While he was on his
     guard, she dared not move. And he was on his guard, she was powerless. So he had gone, and left
     her standing. 
 She remained perfectly rigid, standing as she was for a long time. Then she staggered to the
     couch and lay down, and went heavily to sleep. When she awoke, she remembered what she had
     done, but it seemed to her, she had only hit him, as any woman might do, because he tortured
     her. She was perfectly right. She knew that, spiritually, she was right. In her own infallible
     purity, she had done what must be done. She was right, she was pure. A drugged, almost sinister
     religious expression became permanent on her face. 
 Birkin, barely conscious, and yet perfectly direct in his motion, went out of the house and
     straight across the park, to the open country, to the hills. The brilliant day had become
     overcast, spots of rain were falling. He wandered on to a wild valley-side, where were thickets
     of hazel, many flowers, tufts of heather, and little clumps of young fir-trees, budding with
     soft paws. It was rather wet everywhere, there was a stream running down at the bottom of the
     valley, which was gloomy, or seemed gloomy. He was aware that he could not regain his
     consciousness, that he was moving in a sort of darkness. 
 Yet he wanted something. He was happy in the wet hillside, that was overgrown and obscure
     with bushes and flowers. He wanted to touch them all, to saturate himself with the touch of
     them all. He took off his clothes, and sat down naked among the primroses, moving his feet
     softly among the primroses, his legs, his knees, his arms right up to the arm-pits, lying down
     and letting them touch his belly, his breasts. It was such a fine, cool, subtle touch all over
     him, he seemed to saturate himself with their contact. 
 But they were too soft. He went through the long grass to a clump of young fir-trees, that
     were no higher than a man. The soft sharp boughs beat upon him, as he moved in keen pangs
     against them, threw little cold showers of drops on his belly, and beat his loins with their
     clusters of soft-sharp needles. There was a thistle which pricked him vividly, but not too
     much, because all his movements were too discriminate and soft. To lie down and roll in the
     sticky, cool young hyacinths, to lie on one’s belly and cover one’s back with handfuls of fine
     wet grass, soft as a breath, soft and more delicate and more beautiful than the touch of any
     woman; and then to sting one’s thigh against the living dark bristles of the fir-boughs; and
     then to feel the light whip of the hazel on one’s shoulders, stinging, and then to clasp the
     silvery birch-trunk against one’s breast, its smoothness, its hardness, its vital knots and
     ridges—this was good, this was all very good, very satisfying. Nothing else would do, nothing
     else would satisfy, except this coolness and subtlety of vegetation travelling into one’s
     blood. How fortunate he was, that there was this lovely, subtle, responsive vegetation, waiting
     for him, as he waited for it; how fulfilled he was, how happy! 
 As he dried himself a little with his handkerchief, he thought about Hermione and the blow.
     He could feel a pain on the side of his head. But after all, what did it matter? What did
     Hermione matter, what did people matter altogether? There was this perfect cool loneliness, so
     lovely and fresh and unexplored. Really, what a mistake he had made, thinking he wanted people,
     thinking he wanted a woman. He did not want a woman—not in the least. The leaves and the
     primroses and the trees, they were really lovely and cool and desirable, they really came into
     the blood and were added on to him. He was enrichened now immeasurably, and so glad. 
 It was quite right of Hermione to want to kill him. What had he to do with her? Why should
     he pretend to have anything to do with human beings at all? Here was his world, he wanted
     nobody and nothing but the lovely, subtle, responsive vegetation, and himself, his own living
     self. 
 It was necessary to go back into the world. That was true. But that did not matter, so one
     knew where one belonged. He knew now where he belonged. This was his place, his marriage place.
     The world was extraneous. 
 He climbed out of the valley, wondering if he were mad. But if so, he preferred his own
     madness, to the regular sanity. He rejoiced in his own madness, he was free. He did not want
     that old sanity of the world, which was become so repulsive. He rejoiced in the new-found world
     of his madness. It was so fresh and delicate and so satisfying. 
 As for the certain grief he felt at the same time, in his soul, that was only the remains of
     an old ethic, that bade a human being adhere to humanity. But he was weary of the old ethic, of
     the human being, and of humanity. He loved now the soft, delicate vegetation, that was so cool
     and perfect. He would overlook the old grief, he would put away the old ethic, he would be free
     in his new state. 
 He was aware of the pain in his head becoming more and more difficult every minute. He was
     walking now along the road to the nearest station. It was raining and he had no hat. But then
     plenty of cranks went out nowadays without hats, in the rain. 
 He wondered again how much of his heaviness of heart, a certain depression, was due to fear,
     fear lest anybody should have seen him naked lying against the vegetation. What a dread he had
     of mankind, of other people! It amounted almost to horror, to a sort of dream terror—his horror
     of being observed by some other people. If he were on an island, like Alexander Selkirk, with
     only the creatures and the trees, he would be free and glad, there would be none of this
     heaviness, this misgiving. He could love the vegetation and be quite happy and unquestioned, by
     himself. 
 He had better send a note to Hermione: she might trouble about him, and he did not want the
     onus of this. So at the station, he wrote saying: 
 I will go on to town—I don’t want to come back to Breadalby for the present.
     But it is quite all right—I don’t want you to mind having biffed me, in the least. Tell the
     others it is just one of my moods. You were quite right, to biff me—because I know you wanted
     to. So there’s the end of it. 
 In the train, however, he felt ill. Every motion was insufferable pain, and he was sick. He
     dragged himself from the station into a cab, feeling his way step by step, like a blind man,
     and held up only by a dim will. 
 For a week or two he was ill, but he did not let Hermione know, and she thought he was
     sulking; there was a complete estrangement between them. She became rapt, abstracted in her
     conviction of exclusive righteousness. She lived in and by her own self-esteem, conviction of
     her own rightness of spirit. 
