
CHAPTER XX. Which Shall It Be?  
The next day was Sunday, and it was well known at the lodging-house in the Close that Mr.
      Cheesacre would not be seen there then. Mrs. Greenow had specially warned him that she was not
      fond of Sunday visitors, fearing that otherwise he might find it convenient to give them too
      much of his society on that idle day. In the morning the aunt and niece both went to the
      Cathedral, and then at three o'clock they dined. But on this occasion they did not dine alone.
      Charlie Fairstairs, who, with her family, had come home from Yarmouth, had been asked to join
      them; and in order that Charlie might not feel it dull, Mrs. Greenow had, with her usual
      good-nature, invited Captain Bellfield. A very nice little dinner they had. The captain carved
      the turkey, giving due honour to Mr. Cheesacre as he did so; and when he nibbled his celery
      with his cheese, he was prettily jocose about the richness of the farmyard at Oileymead.
"He is the most generous man I ever met," said Mrs. Greenow.
"So he is," said Captain Bellfield, "and we'll drink his health. Poor old Cheesy! It's a
      great pity he shouldn't get himself a wife."
"I don't know any man more calculated to make a young woman happy," said Mrs. Greenow.
"No, indeed," said Miss Fairstairs. "I'm told that his house and all about it is quite
      beautiful."
"Especially the straw-yard and the horse-pond," said the Captain. And then they drank the
      health of their absent friend.
It had been arranged that the ladies should go to church in the evening, and it was thought
      that Captain Bellfield would, perhaps, accompany them; but when the time for starting came,
      Kate and Charlie were ready, but the widow was not, and she remained,—in order, as she
      afterwards explained to Kate, that Captain Bellfield might not seem to be turned out of the
      house. He had made no offer churchwards, and,—"Poor man," as Mrs. Greenow said in her little
      explanation, "if I hadn't let him stay there, he would have had no resting-place for the sole
      of his foot, but some horrid barrack-room!" Therefore the Captain was allowed to find a
      resting-place in Mrs. Greenow's drawing-room; but on the return of the young ladies from
      church, he was not there, and the widow was alone, "looking back," she said, "to things that
      were gone;—that were gone. But come, dears, I am not going to make you melancholy." So they
      had tea, and Mr. Cheesacre's cream was used with liberality.
Captain Bellfield had not allowed the opportunity to slip idly from his hands. In the first
      quarter of an hour after the younger ladies had gone, he said little or nothing, but sat with
      a wine-glass before him, which once or twice he filled from the decanter. "I'm afraid the wine
      is not very good," said Mrs. Greenow. "But one can't get good wine in lodgings."
"I'm not thinking very much about it, Mrs. Greenow; that's the truth," said the Captain. "I
      daresay the wine is very good of its kind." Then there was another period of silence between
      them.
"I suppose you find it rather dull, living in lodgings; don't you?" asked the Captain.
"I don't know quite what you mean by dull, Captain Bellfield; but a woman circumstanced as I
      am, can't find her life very gay. It's not a full twelvemonth yet since I lost all that made
      life desirable, and sometimes I wonder at myself for holding up as well as I do."
"It's wicked to give way to grief too much, Mrs. Greenow."
"That's what my dear Kate always says to me, and I'm sure I do my best to overcome it." Upon
      this soft tears trickled down her cheek, showing in their course that she at any rate used no
      paint in producing that freshness of colour which was one of her great charms. Then she
      pressed her handkerchief to her eyes, and removing it, smiled faintly on the Captain. "I
      didn't intend to treat you to such a scene as this, Captain Bellfield."
"There is nothing on earth, Mrs. Greenow, I desire so much, as permission to dry those
      tears."
"Time alone can do that, Captain Bellfield;—time alone."
"But cannot time be aided by love and friendship and affection?"
"By friendship, yes. What would life be worth without the solace of friendship?"
"And how much better is the warm glow of love?" Captain Bellfield, as he asked this
      question, deliberately got up, and moved his chair over to the widow's side. But the widow as
      deliberately changed her position to the corner of a sofa. The Captain did not at once follow
      her, nor did he in any way show that he was aware that she had fled from him.
"How much better is the warm glow of love?" he said again, contenting himself with looking
      into her face with all his eyes. He had hoped that he would have been able to press her hand
      by this time.
"The warm, glow of love, Captain Bellfield, if you have ever felt it—"
"If I have ever felt it! Do I not feel it now, Mrs. Greenow? There can be no longer any mask
      kept upon my feelings. I never could restrain the yearnings of my heart when they have been
      strong."
"Have they often been strong, Captain Bellfield?"
"Yes; often;—in various scenes of life; on the field of battle—"
"I did not know that you had seen active service."
"What!—not on the plains of Zuzuland, when with fifty picked men I kept five hundred Caffres
      at bay for seven weeks;—never knew the comfort of a bed, or a pillow to my head, for seven
      long weeks!"
"Not for seven weeks?" said Mrs. Greenow.
"No. Did I not see active service at Essiquebo, on the burning coast of Guiana, when all the
      wild Africans from the woods rose up to destroy the colony; or again at the mouth of the
      Kitchyhomy River, when I made good the capture of a slaver by my own hand and my own
      sword!"
"I really hadn't heard," said Mrs. Greenow.
"Ah, I understand. I know. Cheesy is the best fellow in the world in some respects, but he
      cannot bring himself to speak well of a fellow behind his back. I know who has belittled me.
      Who was the first to storm the heights of Inkerman?" demanded the Captain, thinking in the
      heat of the moment that he might as well be hung for a sheep as a lamb.
"But when you spoke of yearnings, I thought you meant yearnings of a softer kind."
"So I did. So I did. I don't know why I have been led away to speak of deeds that are very
      seldom mentioned, at any rate by myself. But I cannot bear that a slanderous backbiting tongue
      should make you think that I have seen no service. I have served her Majesty in the four
      quarters of the globe, Mrs. Greenow; and now I am ready to serve you in any way in which you
      will allow me to make my service acceptable." Whereupon he took one stride over to the sofa,
      and went down upon his knees before her.
"But, Captain Bellfield, I don't want any services. Pray get up now; the girl will come
      in."
"I care nothing for any girl. I am planted here till some answer shall have been made to me;
      till some word shall have been said that may give me a little hope." Then he attempted to get
      hold of her hand, but she put them behind her back and shook her head. "Arabella," he said,
      "will you not speak a word to me?"
"Not a word, Captain Bellfield, till you get up; and I won't have you call me Arabella. I am
      the widow of Samuel Greenow, than whom no man was more respected where he was known, and it is
      not fitting that I should be addressed in that way."
"But I want you to become my wife,—and then—"
"Ah, then indeed! But that then isn't likely to come. Get up, Captain Bellfield, or I'll
      push you over and then ring the bell. A man never looks so much like a fool as when he's
      kneeling down,—unless he's saying his prayers, as you ought to be doing now. Get up, I tell
      you. It's just half past seven, and I told Jeannette to come to me then."
There was that in the widow's voice which made him get up, and he rose slowly to his feet.
      "You've pushed all the chairs about, you stupid man," she said. Then in one minute she had
      restored the scattered furniture to their proper places, and had rung the bell. When Jeannette
      came she desired that tea might be ready by the time that the young ladies returned, and asked
      Captain Bellfield if a cup should be set for him. This he declined, and bade her farewell
      while Jeannette was still in the room. She shook hands with him without any sign of anger, and
      even expressed a hope that they might see him again before long.
"He's a very handsome man, is the Captain," said Jeannette, as the hero of the Kitchyhomy
      River descended the stairs.
"You shouldn't think about handsome men, child," said Mrs. Greenow.
"And I'm sure I don't," said Jeannette. "Not no more than anybody else; but if a man is
      handsome, ma'am, why it stands to reason that he is handsome."
"I suppose Captain Bellfield has given you a kiss and a pair of gloves."
"As for gloves and such like, Mr. Cheesacre is much better for giving than the Captain; as
      we all know; don't we, ma'am? But in regard to kisses, they're presents as I never takes from
      anybody. Let everybody pay his debts. If the Captain ever gets a wife, let him kiss her."
On the following Tuesday morning Mr. Cheesacre as usual called in the Close, but he brought
      with him no basket. He merely left a winter nosegay made of green leaves and laurestinus
      flowers, and sent up a message to say that he should call at half past three, and hoped that
      he might then be able to see Mrs. Greenow—on particular business.
"That means you, Kate," said Mrs. Greenow.
"No, it doesn't; it doesn't mean me at all. At any rate he won't see me."
"I dare say it's me he wishes to see. It seems to be the fashionable plan now for gentlemen
      to make offers by deputy. If he says anything, I can only refer him to you, you know."
"Yes, you can; you can tell him simply that I won't have him. But he is no more thinking of
      me than—"
"Than he is of me, you were going to say."
"No, aunt; I wasn't going to say that at all."
"Well, we shall see. If he does mean anything, of course you can please yourself; but I
      really think you might do worse."
"But if I don't want to do at all?"
"Very well; you must have your own way. I can only tell you what I think."
At half past three o'clock punctually Mr. Cheesacre came to the door, and was shown
      up-stairs. He was told by Jeannette that Captain Bellfield had looked in on the Sunday
      afternoon, but that Miss Fairstairs and Miss Vavasor had been there the whole time. He had not
      got on his black boots nor yet had his round topped hat. And as he did wear a new frock coat,
      and had his left hand thrust into a kid glove, Jeannette was quite sure that he intended
      business of some kind. With new boots, creaking loudly, he walked up into the drawing-room,
      and there he found the widow alone.
"Thanks for the flowers," she said at once. "It was so good of you to bring something that
      we could accept."
"As for that," said he, "I don't see why you should scruple about a trifle of cream, but I
      hope that any such feeling as that will be over before long." To this the widow made no
      answer, but she looked very sweetly on him as she bade him sit down.
He did sit down; but first he put his hat and stick carefully away in one corner, and then
      he pulled off his glove—somewhat laboriously, for his hand was warm. He was clearly prepared
      for great things. As he pushed up his hair with his hands there came from his locks an
      ambrosial perfume,—as of marrow-oil, and there was a fixed propriety of position of every hair
      of his whiskers, which indicated very plainly that he had been at a hairdresser's shop since
      he left the market. Nor do I believe that he had worn that coat when he came to the door
      earlier in the morning. If I were to say that he had called at his tailor's also, I do not
      think that I should be wrong.
"How goes everything at Oileymead?" said Mrs. Greenow, seeing that her guest wanted some
      little assistance in leading off the conversation.
"Pretty well, Mrs. Greenow; pretty well. Everything will go very well if I am successful in
      the object which I have on hand to-day."
"I'm sure I hope you'll be successful in all your undertakings."
"In all my business undertakings I am, Mrs. Greenow. There isn't a shilling due on my land
      to e'er a bank in Norwich; and I haven't thrashed out a quarter of last year's corn yet, which
      is more than many of them can say. But there ain't many of them who don't have to pay rent,
      and so perhaps I oughtn't to boast."
"I know that Providence has been very good to you, Mr. Cheesacre, as regards worldly
      matters."
"And I haven't left it all to Providence, either. Those who do, generally go to the wall, as
      far as I can see. I'm always at work late and early, and I know when I get a profit out of a
      man's labour and when I don't, as well as though it was my only chance of bread and
      cheese."
"I always thought you understood farming business, Mr. Cheesacre."
"Yes, I do. I like a bit of fun well enough, when the time for it comes, as you saw at
      Yarmouth. And I keep my three or four hunters, as I think a country gentleman should; and I
      shoot over my own ground. But I always stick to my work. There are men, like Bellfield, who
      won't work. What do they come to? They're always borrowing."
"But he has fought his country's battles, Mr. Cheesacre."
"He fight! I suppose he's been telling you some of his old stories. He was ten years in the
      West Indies, and all his fighting was with the mosquitoes."
"But he was in the Crimea. At Inkerman, for instance—"
"He in the Crimea! Well, never mind. But do you inquire before you believe that story. But
      as I was saying, Mrs. Greenow, you have seen my little place at Oileymead."
"A charming house. All you want is a mistress for it."
"That's it; that's just it. All I want is a mistress for it. And there's only one woman on
      earth that I would wish to see in that position. Arabella Greenow, will you be that woman?" As
      he made the offer he got up and stood before her, placing his right hand upon his heart.

"I, Mr. Cheesacre!" she said.
"Yes, you. Who else? Since I saw you what other woman has been anything to me; or, indeed, I
      may say before? Since the first day I saw you I felt that there my happiness depended."
"Oh, Mr. Cheesacre, I thought you were looking elsewhere."
"No, no, no. There never was such a mistake as that. I have the highest regard and esteem
      for Miss Vavasor, but really—"
"Mr. Cheesacre, what am I to say to you?"
"What are you to say to me? Say that you'll be mine. Say that I shall be yours. Say that all
      I have at Oileymead shall be yours. Say that the open carriage for a pair of ponies to be
      driven by a lady which I have been looking at this morning shall be yours. Yes, indeed; the
      sweetest thing you ever saw in your life,—just like one that the lady of the Lord Lieutenant
      drives about in always. That's what you must say. Come, Mrs. Greenow!"
"Ah, Mr. Cheesacre, you don't know what it is to have buried the pride of your youth hardly
      yet twelve months."
"But you have buried him, and there let there be an end of it. Your sitting here all alone,
      morning, noon, and night, won't bring him back. I'm sorry for him; I am indeed. Poor Greenow!
      But what more can I do?"
"I can do more, Mr. Cheesacre. I can mourn for him in solitude and in silence."
"No, no, no. What's the use of it,—breaking your heart for nothing,—and my heart too. You
      never think of that." And Mr. Cheesacre spoke in a tone that was full of reproach.
"It cannot be, Mr. Cheesacre."
"Ah, but it can be. Come, Mrs. Greenow. We understand each other well enough now, surely.
      Come, dearest." And he approached her as though to put his arm round her waist. But at that
      moment there came a knock at the door, and Jeannette, entering the room, told her mistress
      that Captain Bellfield was below and wanted to know whether he could see her for a minute on
      particular business.
"Show Captain Bellfield up, certainly," said Mrs. Greenow.
"D–––– Captain Bellfield!" said Mr. Cheesacre.
