
 CHAPTER XXXI. 
 EXEUNT 
 When they brought the body home, the next morning, Gudrun was shut up in her room. From her
     window she saw men coming along with a burden, over the snow. She sat still and let the minutes
     go by. 
 There came a tap at her door. She opened. There stood a woman, saying softly, oh, far too
     reverently: 
 “They have found him, madam!” 
 “Il est mort?” 
 “Yes—hours ago.” 
 Gudrun did not know what to say. What should she say? What should she feel? What should she
     do? What did they expect of her? She was coldly at a loss. 
 “Thank you,” she said, and she shut the door of her room. The woman went away mortified. Not
     a word, not a tear—ha! Gudrun was cold, a cold woman. 
 Gudrun sat on in her room, her face pale and impassive. What was she to do? She could not
     weep and make a scene. She could not alter herself. She sat motionless, hiding from people. Her
     one motive was to avoid actual contact with events. She only wrote out a long telegram to
     Ursula and Birkin. 
 In the afternoon, however, she rose suddenly to look for Loerke. She glanced with
     apprehension at the door of the room that had been Gerald’s. Not for worlds would she enter
     there. 
 She found Loerke sitting alone in the lounge. She went straight up to him. 
 “It isn’t true, is it?” she said. 
 He looked up at her. A small smile of misery twisted his face. He shrugged his shoulders. 
 “True?” he echoed. 
 “We haven’t killed him?” she asked. 
 He disliked her coming to him in such a manner. He raised his shoulders wearily. 
 “It has happened,” he said. 
 She looked at him. He sat crushed and frustrated for the time being, quite as emotionless
     and barren as herself. My God! this was a barren tragedy, barren, barren. 
 She returned to her room to wait for Ursula and Birkin. She wanted to get away, only to get
     away. She could not think or feel until she had got away, till she was loosed from this
     position. 
 The day passed, the next day came. She heard the sledge, saw Ursula and Birkin alight, and
     she shrank from these also. 
 Ursula came straight up to her. 
 “Gudrun!” she cried, the tears running down her cheeks. And she took her sister in her arms.
     Gudrun hid her face on Ursula’s shoulder, but still she could not escape the cold devil of
     irony that froze her soul. 
 “Ha, ha!” she thought, “this is the right behaviour.” 
 But she could not weep, and the sight of her cold, pale, impassive face soon stopped the
     fountain of Ursula’s tears. In a few moments, the sisters had nothing to say to each other. 
 “Was it very vile to be dragged back here again?” Gudrun asked at length. 
 Ursula looked up in some bewilderment. 
 “I never thought of it,” she said. 
 “I felt a beast, fetching you,” said Gudrun. “But I simply couldn’t see people. That is too
     much for me.” 
 “Yes,” said Ursula, chilled. 
 Birkin tapped and entered. His face was white and expressionless. She knew he knew. He gave
     her his hand, saying: 
 “The end of this trip, at any rate.” 
 Gudrun glanced at him, afraid. 
 There was silence between the three of them, nothing to be said. At length Ursula asked in a
     small voice: 
 “Have you seen him?” 
 He looked back at Ursula with a hard, cold look, and did not trouble to answer. 
 “Have you seen him?” she repeated. 
 “I have,” he said, coldly. 
 Then he looked at Gudrun. 
 “Have you done anything?” he said. 
 “Nothing,” she replied, “nothing.” 
 She shrank in cold disgust from making any statement. 
 “Loerke says that Gerald came to you, when you were sitting on the sledge at the bottom of
     the Rudelbahn, that you had words, and Gerald walked away. What were the words about? I had
     better know, so that I can satisfy the authorities, if necessary.” 
 Gudrun looked up at him, white, childlike, mute with trouble. 
 “There weren’t even any words,” she said. “He knocked Loerke down and stunned him, he half
     strangled me, then he went away.” 
 To herself she was saying: 
 “A pretty little sample of the eternal triangle!” And she turned ironically away, because
     she knew that the fight had been between Gerald and herself and that the presence of the third
     party was a mere contingency—an inevitable contingency perhaps, but a contingency none the
     less. But let them have it as an example of the eternal triangle, the trinity of hate. It would
     be simpler for them. 
 Birkin went away, his manner cold and abstracted. But she knew he would do things for her,
     nevertheless, he would see her through. She smiled slightly to herself, with contempt. Let him
     do the work, since he was so extremely good at looking after other people. 
 Birkin went again to Gerald. He had loved him. And yet he felt chiefly disgust at the inert
     body lying there. It was so inert, so coldly dead, a carcase, Birkin’s bowels seemed to turn to
     ice. He had to stand and look at the frozen dead body that had been Gerald. 
 It was the frozen carcase of a dead male. Birkin remembered a rabbit which he had once found
     frozen like a board on the snow. It had been rigid like a dried board when he picked it up. And
     now this was Gerald, stiff as a board, curled up as if for sleep, yet with the horrible
     hardness somehow evident. It filled him with horror. The room must be made warm, the body must
     be thawed. The limbs would break like glass or like wood if they had to be straightened. 
 He reached and touched the dead face. And the sharp, heavy bruise of ice bruised his living
     bowels. He wondered if he himself were freezing too, freezing from the inside. In the short
     blond moustache the life-breath was frozen into a block of ice, beneath the silent nostrils.
     And this was Gerald! 
 Again he touched the sharp, almost glittering fair hair of the frozen body. It was icy-cold,
     hair icy-cold, almost venomous. Birkin’s heart began to freeze. He had loved Gerald. Now he
     looked at the shapely, strange-coloured face, with the small, fine, pinched nose and the manly
     cheeks, saw it frozen like an ice-pebble—yet he had loved it. What was one to think or feel?
     His brain was beginning to freeze, his blood was turning to ice-water. So cold, so cold, a
     heavy, bruising cold pressing on his arms from outside, and a heavier cold congealing within
     him, in his heart and in his bowels. 
 He went over the snow slopes, to see where the death had been. At last he came to the great
     shallow among the precipices and slopes, near the summit of the pass. It was a grey day, the
     third day of greyness and stillness. All was white, icy, pallid, save for the scoring of black
     rocks that jutted like roots sometimes, and sometimes were in naked faces. In the distance a
     slope sheered down from a peak, with many black rock-slides. 
 It was like a shallow pot lying among the stone and snow of the upper world. In this pot
     Gerald had gone to sleep. At the far end, the guides had driven iron stakes deep into the
     snow-wall, so that, by means of the great rope attached, they could haul themselves up the
     massive snow-front, out on to the jagged summit of the pass, naked to heaven, where the
     Marienhütte hid among the naked rocks. Round about, spiked, slashed snow-peaks pricked the
     heaven. 
 Gerald might have found this rope. He might have hauled himself up to the crest. He might
     have heard the dogs in the Marienhütte, and found shelter. He might have gone on, down the
     steep, steep fall of the south-side, down into the dark valley with its pines, on to the great
     Imperial road leading south to Italy. 
 He might! And what then? The Imperial road! The south? Italy? What then? Was it a way out?
     It was only a way in again. Birkin stood high in the painful air, looking at the peaks, and the
     way south. Was it any good going south, to Italy? Down the old, old Imperial road? 
 He turned away. Either the heart would break, or cease to care. Best cease to care. Whatever
     the mystery which has brought forth man and the universe, it is a non-human mystery, it has its
     own great ends, man is not the criterion. Best leave it all to the vast, creative, non-human
     mystery. Best strive with oneself only, not with the universe. 
 “God cannot do without man.” It was a saying of some great French religious teacher. But
     surely this is false. God can do without man. God could do without the ichthyosauri and the
     mastodon. These monsters failed creatively to develop, so God, the creative mystery, dispensed
     with them. In the same way the mystery could dispense with man, should he too fail creatively
     to change and develop. The eternal creative mystery could dispose of man, and replace him with
     a finer created being. Just as the horse has taken the place of the mastodon. 
 It was very consoling to Birkin, to think this. If humanity ran into a cul de sac
     and expended itself, the timeless creative mystery would bring forth some other being, finer,
     more wonderful, some new, more lovely race, to carry on the embodiment of creation. The game
     was never up. The mystery of creation was fathomless, infallible, inexhaustible, forever. Races
     came and went, species passed away, but ever new species arose, more lovely, or equally lovely,
     always surpassing wonder. The fountain-head was incorruptible and unsearchable. It had no
     limits. It could bring forth miracles, create utter new races and new species, in its own hour,
     new forms of consciousness, new forms of body, new units of being. To be man was as nothing
     compared to the possibilities of the creative mystery. To have one’s pulse beating direct from
     the mystery, this was perfection, unutterable satisfaction. Human or inhuman mattered nothing.
     The perfect pulse throbbed with indescribable being, miraculous unborn species. 
 Birkin went home again to Gerald. He went into the room, and sat down on the bed. Dead, dead
     and cold! 
 There was no response from that which had been Gerald. Strange, congealed, icy substance—no
     more. No more! 
 Terribly weary, Birkin went away, about the day’s business. He did it all quietly, without
     bother. To rant, to rave, to be tragic, to make situations—it was all too late. Best be quiet,
     and bear one’s soul in patience and in fullness. 
 But when he went in again, at evening, to look at Gerald between the candles, because of his
     heart’s hunger, suddenly his heart contracted, his own candle all but fell from his hand, as,
     with a strange whimpering cry, the tears broke out. He sat down in a chair, shaken by a sudden
     access. Ursula who had followed him, recoiled aghast from him, as he sat with sunken head and
     body convulsively shaken, making a strange, horrible sound of tears. 
 “I didn’t want it to be like this—I didn’t want it to be like this,” he cried to himself.
     Ursula could but think of the Kaiser’s: “Ich habe es nicht gewollt.” She looked almost
     with horror on Birkin. 
 Suddenly he was silent. But he sat with his head dropped, to hide his face. Then furtively
     he wiped his face with his fingers. Then suddenly he lifted his head, and looked straight at
     Ursula, with dark, almost vengeful eyes. 
 “He should have loved me,” he said. “I offered him.” 
 She, afraid, white, with mute lips answered: 
 “What difference would it have made!” 
 “It would!” he said. “It would.” 
 He forgot her, and turned to look at Gerald. With head oddly lifted, like a man who draws
     his head back from an insult, half haughtily, he watched the cold, mute, material face. It had
     a bluish cast. It sent a shaft like ice through the heart of the living man. Cold, mute,
     material! Birkin remembered how once Gerald had clutched his hand, with a warm, momentaneous
     grip of final love. For one second—then let go again, let go for ever. If he had kept true to
     that clasp, death would not have mattered. Those who die, and dying still can love, still
     believe, do not die. They live still in the beloved. Gerald might still have been living in the
     spirit with Birkin, even after death. He might have lived with his friend, a further life. 
 But now he was dead, like clay, like bluish, corruptible ice. Birkin looked at the pale
     fingers, the inert mass. He remembered a dead stallion he had seen: a dead mass of maleness,
     repugnant. He remembered also the beautiful face of one whom he had loved, and who had died
     still having the faith to yield to the mystery. That dead face was beautiful, no one could call
     it cold, mute, material. No one could remember it without gaining faith in the mystery, without
     the soul’s warming with new, deep life-trust. 
 And Gerald! The denier! He left the heart cold, frozen, hardly able to beat. Gerald’s father
     had looked wistful, to break the heart: but not this last terrible look of cold, mute Matter.
     Birkin watched and watched. 
 Ursula stood aside watching the living man stare at the frozen face of the dead man. Both
     faces were unmoved and unmoving. The candle-flames flickered in the frozen air, in the intense
     silence. 
 “Haven’t you seen enough?” she said. 
 He got up. 
 “It’s a bitter thing to me,” he said. 
 “What—that he’s dead?” she said. 
 His eyes just met hers. He did not answer. 
 “You’ve got me,” she said. 
 He smiled and kissed her. 
 “If I die,” he said, “you’ll know I haven’t left you.” 
 “And me?” she cried. 
 “And you won’t have left me,” he said. “We shan’t have any need to despair, in death.” 
 She took hold of his hand. 
 “But need you despair over Gerald?” she said. 
 “Yes,” he answered. 
 They went away. Gerald was taken to England, to be buried. Birkin and Ursula accompanied the
     body, along with one of Gerald’s brothers. It was the Crich brothers and sisters who insisted
     on the burial in England. Birkin wanted to leave the dead man in the Alps, near the snow. But
     the family was strident, loudly insistent. 
 Gudrun went to Dresden. She wrote no particulars of herself. Ursula stayed at the Mill with
     Birkin for a week or two. They were both very quiet. 
 “Did you need Gerald?” she asked one evening. 
 “Yes,” he said. 
 “Aren’t I enough for you?” she asked. 
 “No,” he said. “You are enough for me, as far as a woman is concerned. You are all women to
     me. But I wanted a man friend, as eternal as you and I are eternal.” 
 “Why aren’t I enough?” she said. “You are enough for me. I don’t want anybody else but you.
     Why isn’t it the same with you?” 
 “Having you, I can live all my life without anybody else, any other sheer intimacy. But to
     make it complete, really happy, I wanted eternal union with a man too: another kind of love,”
     he said. 
 “I don’t believe it,” she said. “It’s an obstinacy, a theory, a perversity.” 
 “Well—” he said. 
 “You can’t have two kinds of love. Why should you!” 
 It seems as if I can’t,” he said. “Yet I wanted it.” 
 “You can’t have it, because it’s false, impossible,” she said. 
 “I don’t believe that,” he answered. 
