<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Mistress and Maid</title><author>Craik, Dinah Maria (1826-1887)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1863</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
CHAPTER XXI.
It was not a cheerful morning on which to be married. A dense, yellow, London fog, the like
     of which the Misses Leaf had never yet seen, penetrated into every corner of the parlor at No.
     15, where they were breakfasting drearily by candle-light, all in their wedding attire. They
     had been up since six in morning, and Elizabeth had dressed her three mistresses one after the
     other, taking exceeding pleasure in the performance. For she was still little more than a girl,
     to whom a wedding was a wedding, and this was the first she had ever had to do with in her
     life.
True, it disappointed her in some things. She was a little surprised that last evening had
     passed off just like all other evenings. The interest and bustle of packing soon subsided—the
     packing consisting only of the traveling trunk, for the rest of the trousseau went straight to
     Russell Square, every means having been taken to ignore the very existence of No. 15; and then
     the three ladies had supper as usual, and went to bed at their customary hour without any
     special demonstrations of emotion of affection. To Elizabeth this was strange. She had not yet
     learned the unspeakable bitterness of a parting where no body has any grief to restrain.
On a wedding morning, of course, there is no time to be spared for sentiment. The principal
     business appeared to be—dressing. Mr. Ascott had insisted on doing his part in making his new
     connections appear "respectable" at his marriage, and for Selina's sake they had consented.
     Indeed, it was inevitable: they had no money whatever to clothe themselves withal. They must
     either have accepted Mr. Ascott's gifts—in which, to do him justice, he was both thoughtful and
     liberal—or they must have staid away from the wedding altogether, which they did not like to do
     "for the sake of the family."
So, with a sense of doing their last duty by the sister, who would be, they felt,
     henceforward a sister no more, Miss Leaf attired herself in her violet silk and white China
     shawl, and Miss Hilary put on her silver-grey poplin, with a cardinal cape, as was then in
     fashion, trimmed with white swan's-down. It was rather an elderly costume for a bridemaid; but
     she was determined to dress warmly, and not risk, in muslins and laces, the health which to her
     now was money, life—nay, honor.
For Ascott's creditor had been already paid: Miss Balquidder never let grass grow under her
     feet. When Hilary returned to her sisters that day there was no longer any fear of public
     exposure; she had the receipted bill in her hand, and she was Miss Balquidder's debtor to the
     extent of eighty pounds.
But it was no debt of disgrace or humiliation, nor did she feel it as such. She had learned
     the lesson which the large hearted rich can always teach the poor, that, while there is
     sometimes, to some people, no more galling chain, there is to others—and these are the highest
     natures, too—no more firm and sacred bond than gratitude. But still the debt was there; and
     Hilary would never feel quite easy till it was paid—in money, at least. The generosity she
     never wished to repay. She would rather feel it wrapping her round, like an arm that was heavy
     only through its exceeding tenderness, to the end of her days.
Nevertheless she had arranged that there was to be a regular monthly deduction from her
     salary; and how, by retrenchment, to make this monthly payment as large as she could, was a
     question which had occupied herself and Johanna for a good while after they had retired to
     rest. For there was no time to be lost. Mrs. Jones must be given notice to; and there was
     another notice to be given, if the Richmond plan were carried out; another sad retrenchment,
     foreboding which, when Elizabeth brought up supper, Miss Hilary could hardly look the girl in
     the face, and, when she bade her good night, had felt almost like a secret conspirator.
For she knew that, if the money to clear this debt was to be saved, they must part with
     Elizabeth.
No doubt the personal sacrifice would be considerable, for Hilary would have to do the work
     of their two rooms with her own hands, and give up a hundred little comforts in which
     Elizabeth, now become a most clever and efficient servant, had made herself necessary to them
     both. But the two ladies did not think of that at the moment; they only thought of the pain of
     parting with her. They thought of it sorely, even though she was but a servant, and there was a
     family parting close at hand. Alas! people must take what they earn. It was a melancholy fact
     that, of the two impending losses, the person they should miss most would be, not their sister,
     but Elizabeth.
Both regrets combined made them sit at the breakfast table—the last meal they should ever
     take together as a family—sad and sorry, speaking about little else than the subject which
     presented itself as easiest and uppermost, namely, clothes.
Finally, they stood all completely arrayed, even to bonnets; Hilary looking wonderfully
     bewitching in hers, which was the very pattern of one that may still be seen in a youthful
     portrait of our gracious Queen—a large round brim, with a wreath of roses inside; while Miss
     Leaf's was somewhat like it, only with little bunches of white ribbon: "for," she said, "my
     time of roses has gone by." But her sweet faded face had a peace that was not in the other
     two—not even in Hilary's.
But the time arrived; the carriage drew up at the door. Then nature and sisterly feeling
     asserted themselves for a minute. Miss Selina "gave way," not to any loud or indecorous extent,
     to nothing that could in the least harm her white satin, or crumple her laces and ribbons; but
     she did shed a tear or two—real honest tears—kissed her sisters affectionately, hoped they
     would be very happy at Richmond, and that they would often come to see her at Russell
     Square.
"You know," said she, half apologetically, "it is a great deal better for one of us at least
     to be married and settled. Indeed I assure you. I have done it all for the good of my
     family."
And for the time being she devoutly believed she had.
So it was all over. Elizabeth herself, from the aisle of St. Pancras Church, watched the
     beginning and ending of the show; a very fine show, with a number of handsomely dressed people,
     wedding guests, who seemed to stare about them a good deal and take little interest in either
     bride or bridegroom. The only persons Elizabeth recognized were her mistresses—Miss Leaf, who
     kept her veil down and never stirred; and Miss Hilary, who stood close behind the bride,
     listening with downcast eyes to the beautiful marriage service. It must have touched her more
     than on her sister's account, for a tear, gathered under each eyelash, silently rolled down the
     soft cheek and fell."
"Miss Hilary's an angel, and he'll be a lucky man that gets her," meditated her faithful
     "bower-maiden" of old; as, a little excited by the event of the morning, she stood by the
     mantle-piece and contemplated a letter which had come after the ladies departed; one of these
     regular monthly Indian letters, after which, Elizabeth was sharp enough to notice, Miss
     Hilary's step always grew lighter and her eye brighter for many days.
"It must be a nice thing to have somebody fond of one, and somebody to be fond of," meditated
     she. And "old fashioned piece of goods" as she was—according to Mrs. Jones (who now, from the
     use she was in the Jones's menage, patronized and confided in her extremely) some little bit of
     womanly craving after the woman's one hope and crown of bliss crept into the poor
     maid-servant's heart. But it was not for the maid-servant's usual necessity—a "sweet
     heart"—somebody to "keep company with;" it was rather for somebody to love, and perhaps take
     care of a little. People love according to their natures; and Elizabeth's was a strong nature;
     its principal element being a capacity for passionate devotedness, almost unlimited in extent.
     Such women, who love most, are not always, indeed very rarely, loved best. And so it was
     perhaps as well that poor Elizabeth should make up her mind, as she did very composedly, that
     she herself should never be married; but after that glorious wedding of Miss Hilary's to Mr.
     Lyon, should settle down to take care of Miss Leaf all her days.
"And if I turn out only half as good and contented as my mistress, it can't be such a
     dreadful thing to be an old maid after all," stoically said Elizabeth Hand.
The words were scarcely out of her mouth when her attention was caught by some one in the
     passage inquiring for her; yes, actually for her. She could hardly believe her eyes when she
     perceived it was her new-found old acquaintance, Tom Cliffe.
He was dressed very well, out of livery; indeed, he looked so extremely like a gentleman that
     Mrs. Jones's little girl took him for one, called him "Sir," and showed him into the
     parlor.
"All right. I thought this was the house. Uncommon sharp of me to hunt you out; wasn't it
     Elizabeth?"
But Elizabeth was a little stiff, flurried, and perplexed. Her mistresses were out; she did
     not know whether she ought to ask Tom in, especially as it must be into the parlor; there was
     no other place to take him to.
However, Tom settled the matter with a conclusive, "Oh, gammon!"—sat himself down, and made
     himself quite comfortable. And Elizabeth was so glad to see him—glad to have another chance of
     talking about dear old Stowbury. It could not be wrong; she would not say a word about, the
     family, not even tell him she lived with the Misses Leaf if she could help it. And Tom did not
     seem in the least curious.
"Now, I call this quite a coincidence. I was stopping at St. Pancras Church to look at a
     wedding—some old city fogy who lives in Russell Square, and is making a great splash; and there
     I see you, Elizabeth, standing in the crowd, and looking so nice and spicy—as fresh as an apple
     and as brisk as a bee. I hummed and hawed and whistled, but I couldn't catch your eye; then I
     missed you, and was vexed above a bit, till I saw one like you going in at this door, so I just
     knocked and asked; and here you are! 'Pon my life, I am very glad to see you."
"Thank you, Tom," said Elizabeth, pleased, even grateful for the trouble he had taken about
     her: she had so few friends; in truth, actually none.
They began to talk, and Tom Cliffe talked exceedingly well. He had added to his natural
     cleverness a degree of London sharpness, the result of much "knocking about" ever since
     childhood. Besides, his master, the literary gentleman, who had picked him out of the printing
     office, had taken a deal of pains with him. Tom was, for his station, a very intelligent and
     superior young man. Not a boy, though he was still under twenty, but a young man: that
     precocity of development which often accompanies a delicate constitution, making him appear, as
     he was indeed, in mind and character, fully six or seven years older than his real age.
He was a handsome fellow, too, though small; dark haired, dark eyed, with regular and yet
     sensitive and mobile features. Altogether Tom Cliffe was decidedly interesting, and Elizabeth
     took great pleasure in looking at him, and in thinking, with a certain half motherly, half
     romantic satisfaction, that but for her, and her carrying him home from under the horse's
     heels, he might, humanly speaking, have been long ago buried in Stowbury church yard.
"I have a 'church yard cough' at times still," said he, when speaking of this little episode
     of early life. "I don't think I shall ever live to be a middle-aged man." And he shook his
     head, and looked melancholy and poetical; nay, even showed Elizabeth some poetry that he
     himself had written on the subject, which was clever enough in its way.
Elizabeth's interest grew. An ordinary baker or butcher boy would not have attracted her in
     the least; but here was something in the shape of a hero, somebody who at once touched her
     sympathies and roused her admiration. For Tom was quite as well informed as she was herself;
     more so, indeed. He was one of the many shrewd and clever working men who were then beginning
     to rise up and think for themselves, and educate themselves. He attended classes at mechanics'
     institutions, and young men's debating societies; where every topic of the day, religion,
     politics, political economy, was handled freely, as the young do handle these serious things.
     He threw himself, heart and soul, into the new movement, which, like all revolutions, had at
     first its great and fatal dangers, but yet resulted in much good; clearing the political sky,
     and bringing all sorts of hidden abuses under the sharp eyes of that great scourge of
     evil-doers—public opinion.
Yet Elizabeth, reared under the wing of the conservative Misses Leaf, was a little startled
     when Tom Cliffe, who apparently liked talking and being listened to, gave her a long
     dissertation on the true principles of the Charter, and how Frost, Williams, and Jones—names
     all but forgotten now—were very ill-used men, actual martyrs. She was more than
     startled—shocked indeed—until there came a reaction of the deepest pity—when he confessed that
     he never went to church. He saw no use in going, he said; the parsons were all shams, paid
     largely to chatter about what they did not understand; the only real religion was that which a
     man thought out for himself, and acted out for himself. Which was true enough, though only a
     half truth; and innocent Elizabeth did not see the other half.
But she was touched and carried away by the earnestness and enthusiasm of the lad, wild,
     fierce iconoclast as he was, ready to cast down the whole fabric of Church and State; though
     without any personal hankering after lawless rights and low pleasures. His sole idol was, as he
     said, intellect, and that was his preservation.
Also, the fragile health which was betrayed in every flash of his eye, every flush of his
     sallow cheek, made Tom Cliffe, even in the two hours he staid with her, come very close to
     Elizabeth's heart. It was such a warm heart, such a liberal heart, thinking so little of itself
     or of its own value.
So here began to be told the old story, familiar in kitchens as parlors; but, from the higher
     bringing up of the two parties concerned, conducted in this case more after the fashion of the
     latter than the former.
Elizabeth Hand was an exceptional person, and Tom had the sense to see that at once. He paid
     her no coarse attentions, did not attempt to make love to her; but he liked her, and he let her
     see that he did. True, she was not pretty, and she was older than he; but that to a boy of
     nineteen is rather flattering than otherwise. Also, for there is a law even under the blind
     mystery of likings and fallings in love—a certain weakness in him, that weakness which
     generally accompanies the poetical nature, clung to the quiet, solid, practical strength of
     hers. He liked to talk and be listened to by those silent, admiring, gentle gray eyes; and he
     thought it very pleasant when, with a motherly prudence, she warned him to be careful over his
     cough, and gave him a flannel breast-plate to protect his chest against the cold.
When he went away Tom was so far in love that, following the free and easy ways of his class,
     he attempted to give Elizabeth a kiss; but she drew back so hotly that he begged her pardon,
     and slipped away rather confounded.
"That's an odd sort of young woman; there's something in her," said he to himself. "I'll get
     a kiss, though, by-and-by."
Meanwhile Elizabeth, having forgotten all about her dinner, sat thinking, actually doing
     nothing but thinking, until within half an hour of the time when her mistresses might be
     expected back. They were to go direct to the hotel, breakfast, wait till the newly-married
     couple had departed, and then come home. They would be sure to be weary, and want their
     tea.
So Elizabeth made every thing ready for them, steadily putting Tom Cliffe out of her mind.
     One thing she was glad of, that talking so much about his own affairs, he had forgotten to
     inquire concerning hers, and was still quite ignorant even of her mistresses' name. He
     therefore could tell no tales of the Leaf family at Stowbury. Still she determined at once to
     inform Miss Hilary that he had been here, but that, if she wished it, he should never come
     again. And it spoke well for her resolve, that while resolving she was startled to find how
     very sorry she should feel if Tom Cliffe never came again.
I know I am painting this young woman with a strangely tender conscience, a refinement of
     feeling, and a general moral sensitiveness which people say is seldom or never to be found in
     her rank of life. And why not? Because mistresses treat servants as servants, and not as women;
     because in the sharp, hard line they draw, at the outset, between themselves and their
     domestics, they give no chance for any womanliness to be developed. And therefore since human
     nature is weak, and without help from without, a long degraded class can never rise,
     sweet-hearts will still come crawling through back entries and down at area doors; mistresses
     will still have to dismiss helpless and fallen, or brazen in iniquity, many a wretched girl who
     once was innocent; or, if nothing actually vicious results, may have many a good, respectable
     servant, who left to get married, return, complaining that her "young man," whom she knew so
     little about, has turned out a drunken scoundrel of a husband, who drives her back to her old
     comfortable "place" to beg for herself and her starving babies a morsel of bread.
When, with a vivid blush that she could not repress, Elizabeth told her mistress that Tom
     Cliffe had been to see her, the latter replied at first carelessly, for her mind was
     preoccupied. Then, her attention caught by the aforesaid blush, Miss Hilary asked.
"How old is the lad?"
"Nineteen."
"That's a bad age, Elizabeth. Too old to be a pet, and rather too young for a husband."
"I never thought of such a thing," said Elizabeth, warmly—and honestly, at the time.
"Did he want to come and see you again?"
"He said so."
"Oh, well, if he is a steady, respectable lad there can be no objection. I should like to see
     him myself next time."
And then a sudden sharp recollection that there would likely be no next time, in their
     service at least, made Miss Hilary feel quite a hypocrite.
"Elizabeth," said she, "we will speak about Tom Cliffe—is not that his name?—by-and-by. Now,
     as soon as tea is over, my sister wants to talk to you. When you are ready, will you come up
     stairs?"
She spoke in an especially gentle tone, so that by no possibility could Elizabeth fancy they
     were displeased with her.
Now, knowing the circumstances of the family, Elizabeth's conscience had often smitten her
     that she must eat a great deal, that her wages, paid regularly month by month, must make a
     great hole in her mistress's income. She was, alack! a sad expense, and she tried to lighten
     her cost in every possible way. But it never struck her that they could do without her, or that
     any need would arise for their doing so. So she went into the parlor quite unsuspiciously, and
     found Miss Leaf lying on the sofa, and Miss Hilary reading aloud the letter from India. But it
     was laid quietly aside as she said, "Johanna, Elizabeth is here."
Then Johanna, rousing herself to say what must be said, but putting it as gently and kindly
     as she could, told Elizabeth, what mistresses often think it below their dignity to tell to
     servants, the plain truth—namely, that circumstances obliged herself and Miss Hilary to
     retrench their expenses as much as they possibly could. That they were going to live in two
     little rooms at Richmond, where they would board with the inmates of the house.
"And so, and so—" Miss Leaf faltered. It was very hard to say it with those eager eyes fixed
     upon her.
Hilary took up the word— "And so, Elizabeth, much as it grieves us, we shall be obliged to
     part with you. We cannot any longer afford to keep a servant."
No answer.
"It is not even as it was once before, when we thought you might do better for yourself. We
     know, if it were possible, you would rather stay with us, and we would rather keep you. It is
     like parting with one of our own family." And Miss Hilary's voice too failed. "However, there
     is no help for it; we must part."
Elizabeth, recovered from her first bewildered grief, was on the point of bursting out into
     entreaties that she might do like many another faithful servant, live without wages, put up
     with any hardships, rather than be sent away. But something in Miss Hilary's manner told her it
     would be useless—worse than useless, painful: and she would do any thing rather than give her
     mistress pain. When, utterly unable to control it, she gave vent to one loud sob, the
     expression of acute suffering on Miss Hilary's countenance was such that she determined to sob
     no more. She felt that, for some reason or other, the thing was inevitable; that she must take
     up her burden, as her mistress had done, even though it were the last grief of all—leaving that
     beloved mistress.
"That's right, Elizabeth," said Miss Hilary, softly. "All these changes are very bitter to us
     also, but we bear them. There is nothing lasting in this world, except doing right, and being
     good and faithful and helpful to one another."
She sighed. Possibly there had been sad tidings in the letter which she still held in her
     hand, clinging to it as we do to something which, however sorely it hurts us, we would not part
     with for the whole world. But there was no hopelessness or despair in her tone, and Elizabeth
     caught the influence of that true courageous heart.
"Perhaps you may be able to take me back again soon, Ma'am," said she, looking toward Miss
     Leaf. "And meantime I might get a place; Mrs. Jones has told me of several;" and she stopped,
     afraid lest it might be found out how often Mrs. Jones had urged her to "better herself," and
     she had indignantly refused. "Or," (a bright idea occurred) "I wonder if Miss Selina, that is,
     Mrs. Ascott, would take me in at Russell Square?"
Hilary looked hard at her.
"Would you really like that?"
"Yes, I should; for I should see and hear of you. Miss Hilary, if you please, I wish you
     would ask Mrs. Ascott to take me."
And Hilary, much surprised—for she was well acquainted with Elizabeth's sentiments toward
     both Mr. Ascott and the late Miss Selina—-promised. 
</div></body></text></TEI>