
Chapter XXVII
Miss Marjoribanks, except for her habitual walk, did not go out much that day. She was too
     much occupied with what she had in hand. She could not conceive—for Lucilla naturally took a
     reasonable view of affairs in general, and did not account for the action of any such unknown
     quantity as love, for example—why Mr Cavendish should conceal himself so carefully from society
     in Carlingford, and yet run all the risk of meeting Barbara Lake in the evenings. It seemed to
     Lucilla inconceivable, and yet it was impossible not to believe it. Mr Cavendish, though she
     had seen him on the very verge of a proposal, did not present himself to her mind in the aspect
     of a man who would consider the world well lost for any such transitory passion; neither, as
     was natural, did Barbara Lake appear to Lucilla the least like a person calculated to call
     forth that sentiment; but nevertheless it must be true, and the only way to account for it was
     by thinking, after all, what fools They were, and what poor judges, and how little to
     be depended on, when women were concerned. Miss Marjoribanks was determined to lose no more
     time, but to speak to Mr Cavendish, if it was Mr Cavendish, and she could get the chance, quite
     plainly of the situation of affairs—to let him know how much she knew, and to spur him up to
     come forward like a man and brave anything the Archdeacon could do. Had it been any small
     personal aim that moved Lucilla, no doubt she would have shrunk from such a decided step; but
     it was, on the contrary, the broadest philanthropical combination of Christian principles, help
     to the weak and succour to the oppressed, and a little, just a very little, of the equally
     Evangelical idea of humbling the proud and bringing down the mighty. She was so much occupied
     with her plans that it was with a little difficulty she roused herself to keep up the
     conversation with her father at dinner, and be as amusing and agreeable as ordinary; which
     indeed was more than ordinarily her duty, since Dr Marjoribanks came in, in a fractious and
     disturbed state of mind, discontented with things in general. The truth was, he had got a
     letter from Tom Marjoribanks from India, where that unlucky man had gone. It was all very well
     and natural to go to India, and Lucilla had felt, indeed, rather satisfied with herself for
     having helped forward that desirable conclusion, especially after the Doctor had taken pains to
     explain to her, not knowing that she had any share in it, that it was the very best thing for
     Tom to do. For it has been already said that Dr Marjoribanks, though he liked Tom, and thought
     it very odd that Providence should have given the girl to him, and the boy to his incapable
     sister-in-law, who did not in the least know how to manage him, had no desire to have his
     nephew for a son-in-law. Going to India was very right and proper, and the best thing to do;
     for a man might get on there, even at the bar, who would have no chance here;
     but after he had made one step in the right direction, it was only to be expected that all
     sorts of misfortunes should happen to Tom. He was wrecked, which might have been looked for,
     and he lost his boxes, with the greater part of his outfit, either at that unhappy moment, or
     in the Desert, or at an after part of his unlucky career; and the object of the letter which Dr
     Marjoribanks had just received was to get money to make up for his losses. Tom, who was a very
     good son, did not want to vex his mother, and accordingly it was his uncle whom he applied to,
     to sell out a portion of the money he had in the Funds. "She would think I was ruined, or that
     it was my fault, or at least that I meant to spend all my money," wrote Tom, "and you
     understand, uncle, that it is not my fault." "Confound him! it is never his fault," said Dr
     Marjoribanks, as if that could possibly be brought against the unfortunate young man as a
     crime.
"No, papa, it is his luck," said Lucilla; "poor Tom!—but I should not like to take a passage
     in the same boat with him if I was the other people. Though I am sure he is not a bit to
     blame."
"I hope he does not mean to go on like this," said the Doctor. "He will soon make ducks and
     drakes of his five thousand pounds. A young fellow like that ought to mind what he's doing. It
     is a great deal easier to throw money away than to lay it by."
"Papa, it is his luck," said Miss Marjoribanks; "it is all put into a system in political
     economy, you know. For my part, I am always the other way. It is very funny before you get used
     to it; but you know there has to be a balance in everything, and that is how it must be."
"I don't think it at all funny," said Dr Marjoribanks, "unless your good luck and his bad
     were to be joined together; which is not an expedient I fancy." When he said this the Doctor
     gave a sharp glance at his daughter, to see if by chance that might perhaps be what she was
     thinking of; but naturally the maiden candour and unsuspecting innocence of Lucilla was proof
     to such glances. She took no notice at all of the implied suspicion. But though it was very
     absurd for anybody to think that she would have married him, it was not in Miss Marjoribanks's
     nature to be disloyal to Tom.
"I think he is quite right about his mother, papa," said Lucilla; "she would never understand
     it, you know; she would think the world was coming to an end. I would not for anything take a
     passage in the same boat with him, but he is nice in his way, poor fellow! I wonder what he has
     ever done to have such dreadful luck—but I hope you are going to do what he asks you:" and with
     this calm expression of her interest Miss Marjoribanks went upstairs. When the Doctor became
     thus aware of his daughter's sentiments, it seemed to him that he was more at liberty to be
     kind to his nephew. He had never been able to divest himself of a little lurking dread, an
     inherent idea which was so obstinate that it felt like a prophecy, that somehow or other, after
     costing her father so much, and making such a difference in the house, Lucilla, who on the
     whole was a dear production, would fall to Tom's share, with all Dr Marjoribanks's other
     possessions; and the Doctor saw no reason why he should work and lay up money for a boy whom
     Providence, with a wonderful want of discrimination, had bestowed, not upon him, but upon Mrs
     John Marjoribanks. However, when that question was settled and done with, his heart began to
     relent to Tom the unlucky, who, after all, when the son-in-law hypothesis was fully dismissed,
     was his natural born nephew, and, as Lucilla said, very nice in his way, poor fellow! The
     Doctor began to write him a letter, and softened more and more with every line he wrote; but as
     for Lucilla, she had something more immediately important to occupy her upstairs.
The fact was that Miss Marjoribanks had found a shadowy figure in black in the corner of one
     of the sofas when she came into the drawing-room—a-figure with a veil down, and a large shawl,
     and a tremulous air. It was very seldom that Mrs Mortimer took courage to visit her young
     patroness; and to go out at night, except sometimes to Salem Chapel when there was a meeting,
     and when the timid woman represented to herself that it was her duty, was a thing unknown to
     her. But yet, nevertheless, it was Mrs Mortimer who sat waiting for Lucilla. They had not met
     since that momentous interview in which the widow revealed her history to Miss Marjoribanks's
     sympathetic ears, and the poor woman had been able to bear no longer the solitude of her
     cottage, and her garden-walls, and her little pupils, and Mary Jane. To know that something was
     going on outside that concerned her—to hear the waves, as it were, beating round the walls of
     her prison, and never to have even so much as a peep at them, what they were about, if the tide
     was beginning to turn, or the wind to change, or the lifeboat to appear—was more than Mrs
     Mortimer, even with all her training to patience, could put up with; and accordingly she had
     made a frantic rush out, under cover of night, to see if there was anything to see, and hear if
     there was anything to hear.
"You don't know how dreadful it is to keep staring at the walls all day and never see any
     change," said the widow. "It is very stupid and silly, but you know I cannot help it. I get to
     fancy always that something wonderful must be going on on the other side."
"That is because you don't go out enough," said Lucilla. "You know how often I have said you
     should go out once every day; and then you would see that everything outside was very much the
     same as everything within."
"Oh, Lucilla! don't say so," said Mrs Mortimer; "and besides, he has been again, and
     I could see you had been saying something to him. He spoke as if I understood it all when I did
     not understand a word of it; and he spoke of him, you know, and was quite solemn, and warned me
     to think well of it, and not do anything rash—as if I had anything to think about, or was going
     to do anything! Tell me what you said to him, Lucilla; for I am sure, by the way he spoke, he
     must have taken him for himself, and perhaps you for me."
"Who did he take for himself, I wonder?" said Lucilla. "As for you and me, dear Mrs Mortimer,
     we are so different that he could never take us for each other, whatever the circumstances
     might be."
"Ah, yes, Lucilla! we are different," said the poor widow. "You have all your own people to
     take care of you, and you are not afraid of anybody; but as for me, I have not a creature in
     the world who cares what becomes of me." As she made this forlorn statement it was only natural
     that the poor woman should cry a little. This was no doubt the result of the four garden-walls
     that closed in so tightly, and the aggravating little pupils; but Miss Marjoribanks felt it was
     not a state of feeling that could be allowed to go on.
"You ought not to speak like that; I am sure there are a great many people who are interested
     in you; and you have always Me," said Lucilla, with a certain reproachful tenderness. As for
     Mrs Mortimer, she raised her head and dried her eyes when Miss Marjoribanks began to speak, and
     looked at her in a somewhat eager, inquiring way; but when Lucilla uttered those last
     reassuring words, it is undeniable that the widow's countenance fell a little. She faltered and
     grew pale again, and only cried the more—perhaps with gratitude, perhaps with disappointment.
     And when she said, "I am sure you are very kind, Lucilla," which was all the poor soul could
     utter, it was in a very tremulous undecided voice. The fact that she had always the sympathy
     and co-operation of such a friend as Miss Marjoribanks, did not seem to have the exhilarating
     effect upon her that it ought to have had. It did not apparently do any more for her than the
     similar reassurance that Lucilla was coming to tea did for Rose Lake. But then, like every
     other benefactor of the human race, Miss Marjoribanks was aware that the human mind has its
     moments of unbelief. It was a discouraging experience to meet with; but she never permitted it
     seriously to interrupt her exertions for the good of her kind.
"You should not have so poor an opinion of your friends," said Lucilla, who after all was
     giving only a stone when her suppliant asked for bread. "You know how much interested we all
     are in you; and for me, anything I can do——"
"Oh, Lucilla, you are very kind; nobody could be kinder," cried Mrs Mortimer, with
     compunction. "It is very nice to have friends. I do not know what I should do without you, I am
     sure; but then one cannot live upon one's friends; and then one knows, when they go away," said
     the widow, with more feeling than distinctness of expression, "that they all go away to
     something of their own, and pity you or forget you; but you always stay there, and have nothing
     of your own to go away to. I am not grumbling, but it is hard, Lucilla; and then you are young,
     and happy, and at home, and I don't think it is possible you can understand."
"My dear," said Miss Marjoribanks, "it is quite easy to understand, and I know exactly what
     you mean. You want me to tell you all about Mr Beverley, and what I said to him, and what he
     has in his mind. If he is the something of your own you would like to go away to, I think it is
     a pity. I am sure he has a temper, and I would not marry him for my part. But if you
     mean me, I have nothing to go away to," said Lucilla, with a little scorn. "I should
     be ashamed not to be enough for myself. When I leave you it is not to enjoy myself, but to
     think about you and to plan for you; and all that you want to know is about him!" said
     Miss Marjoribanks, piercing through and through the thin armour of her incapable assailant.
     Naturally all the widow's defences fell before this ruthless response. She cried with a mingled
     sensation of shame at being found out, and penitence for being so ungrateful, and a certain
     desolate distress with her own incapacity and want of power to defend herself. It was an acute
     variety of feminine anguish on the whole. The idea that she, a mature woman, a married woman
     and widow, who ought to have been done with all these vanities, should have been found out by a
     young girl to be thinking about a gentleman, struck poor Mrs Mortimer with a sharp
     sense of shame as if her wistful preoccupation had been a crime. Indeed the chances are, if it
     had been a crime, she would not have been nearly so much ashamed of it. She hid her face in her
     hands and blushed down to the very edge of her black dress and up into the glooms of her
     widow's veil; and all the self-defence she was capable of was a faint "Oh, Lucilla!" a mere
     appeal of weakness without reason—a virtual throwing of herself in acknowledged guilt at her
     judge's feet.
"Thomas is coming with the tea," said Miss Marjoribanks. "Come into my room and take off your
     bonnet. What is the good of worrying yourself when you know I have taken it into my own hands?
     Spoiling your eyes with crying, and making everybody uncomfortable never does the least good;
     and, besides, one never knows what harm one might do one's self," said Lucilla seriously. "I
     don't think you gone off at all, for my part; but if you don't take proper care——I shall give
     you some rose-water, and you will be all right after you have had a cup of tea."
"Oh, no; it will be best to go home. I am such a poor creature now. I am not good for
     anything. Let me go home, Lucilla," said poor Mrs Mortimer. But Lucilla would not let her go
     home; and by the time tea was ready, and Dr Marjoribanks had come upstairs, she had so managed
     to soothe her visitor's nerves, and console her spirits, that the Doctor himself grew
     complimentary. He was so civil, in fact, that Lucilla felt slightly startled, and on the whole
     thought it was as well that the Archdeacon was at hand, and affairs in a promising way; for it
     was doubtful whether even Miss Marjoribanks's magnanimity could have got over any ridiculous
     exhibition of interest on the part of her father, who certainly was old enough to know better.
     Even to see him taking Mrs Mortimer's tea to her, and congratulating her upon her improved
     looks, and felicitating himself and the world in general on the fact that Carlingford agreed
     with her, was aggravating to his daughter—more aggravating, though it is strange to say so,
     than even the blank looks of General Travers in the morning, or his transference of the homage
     intended for herself to little Rose Lake; that was no more than a blunder, and Lucilla
     felt a consolatory conviction that, so far as incivility went, the General had received a very
     satisfactory set-off. But to see Dr Marjoribanks exerting himself in such an unheard-of way
     made her open her eyes. If he were still accessible to such influences, nobody could answer for
     anything that might happen; and the widow was so grateful for his kindness, that at one moment
     it was all that Lucilla could do to keep her lips shut fast, and restrain herself from a
     tempting allusion which would have made an end of Mrs Mortimer. It was the first time that
     Lucilla's protégée had ventured to come thus familiarly and uninvited to her friend's house;
     and the Doctor, who knew no special reason for the visit, expressed his satisfaction with a
     warmth which was quite uncalled-for, and hoped that Lucilla might often "have the advantage of
     her company;" and actually betrayed symptoms of a disposition to "see her home," if Miss
     Marjoribanks had not already made provision for that emergency. When the visitor had finally
     departed, under the charge of Thomas and Mary Jane, the father and daughter regarded each
     other, for the first time, with dubious glances—for, as far as Lucilla was concerned, it was a
     revelation to her of a new and altogether unsuspected danger; and the Doctor, for his part, was
     very conciliatory, and showed a certain consciousness of having committed himself, which made
     matters twenty times worse.
"Really, Lucilla, your friend is a credit to you," said Dr Marjoribanks. "It was a stroke of
     talent to pick her up, as you did, and make a woman of her—and a pretty woman too," he added
     incautiously; as if he, at his age, had anything to do with that.
"I am so glad you think so, papa," said Lucilla, in her dutiful way. "I don't think myself
     that she has gone off at all to speak of. In some lights she might pass for being no older than
     I am—if she was very well dressed, you know; and it really does not matter what age a woman is
     if she keeps her looks. I should be very glad to see her nicely married, for my part; she is
     one of the people who ought to be married," Miss Marjoribanks continued, with an inflection of
     compassionate tolerance in her voice. As for the Doctor, he mistook her as usual, and took her
     tone of pity and kindly patronising disdain for another instance of his daughter's policy and
     high art; whereas the truth was she was quite in earnest, and meant every word she said. And
     then Dr Marjoribanks's sense of humour was keener than that of Lucilla. After this the
     conversation flagged slightly, for Miss Marjoribanks had undeniably received a shock. In the
     midst of her benevolent preoccupation and care for other people, it had suddenly dawned upon
     her that her own stronghold might be attacked, and the tables turned upon her in the twinkling
     of an eye. There are days of discouragement in the most triumphant career and this was one of
     those uncomfortable moments. Her faith in herself did not fail her for an instant; but the
     faith of her natural born subjects—the creatures of her bounty—had visibly failed her. Neither
     Rose Lake nor Mrs Mortimer had shown that confidence in Lucilla's genius which experience and
     loyalty both called upon them to show. When Dr Marjoribanks had gone downstairs to resume the
     case which he was writing out for the Lancet, Lucilla passed through one of those
     moments of sublime despondency which now and then try the spirits of the benefactors of their
     race. A few tears came to her eyes as she reflected upon this great problem. Without such
     trials genius would not fully know itself nor be justly aware of its own strength. For no
     temptation to give up her disinterested exertions had any effect upon the mind of Miss
     Marjoribanks; and even her sense of pain at the unbelief of her followers was mingled with that
     pity for their weakness which involves pardon. Even when they wounded her she was sorry for
     them. It was nature that was in fault, and not the fallible human creatures who had it not in
     them to believe in the simple force of genius. When Lucilla had shed these few tears over her
     subjects' weakness and want of faith, she rose up again in new strength from the momentary
     downfall. It was, as we have said, a sublime moment. The idea of giving them up, and leaving
     their affairs to their own guidance, never for an instant penetrated into her heroic mind; but
     she was human, and naturally she felt the prick of ingratitude. When the crisis was over she
     rose up calmly and lighted her candle, and went to her room with a smile upon her magnanimous
     lips. As she performed that simple action, Lucilla had lifted up the feeble widow, and taken
     the family of Lakes, and Mr Cavendish, and even the burly Archdeacon himself, upon her
     shoulders. They might be ungrateful, or even unaware of all she was doing for them; but they
     had the supreme claim of Need upon Strength; and Miss Marjoribanks, notwithstanding the wound
     they had given her, was loyal to that appeal, and to her own consciousness of superior
     Power.
At the same time, it would not be just to omit all mention of a consolatory recollection
     which occurred to Lucilla in this moment of her weakness. At such a crisis the mind of genius
     may be supported by a matter very trifling in itself. Even at the instant when the moisture
     sprang to her eyes, Miss Marjoribanks said to herself, "Poor Tom!" and felt that the
     bitterness, to a certain extent, had evaporated out of her tears. He was a long way off, and
     Lucilla would have thought it madness indeed to connect herself in any way with the fortunes of
     her unlucky cousin; yet it gave her a certain support to think that, amid all the want of faith
     she was encountering, Tom believed in her, heart and soul. It was an insignificant matter, so
     far as any practical result was concerned, if, indeed, anything can be called insignificant
     which gives strength to a great mind in a moment of discouragement. She said "Poor Tom!" and
     felt as if for the moment she had something to lean on, and was comforted. We mention this fact
     rather as a contribution to the history of those phenomena of the human mind, which have as yet
     escaped the metaphysician, than as an actual circumstance in the life of Miss Marjoribanks. She
     was a woman of genius, and he only a very simple, unlucky fellow; and yet a sensation of
     comfort came to Lucilla's heart when she said "Poor Tom!"
