<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XLVII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>As the election approached, it became gradually the one absorbing object of interest in
     Carlingford. The contest was so equal that everybody took a certain share in it, and became
     excited as the decisive moment drew nigh. Most of the people in Grange Lane were for Mr
     Ashburton, but then the Rector, who was a host in himself, was for Mr Cavendish; and the
     coquetting of the Dissenting interest, which was sometimes drawn towards the liberal sentiments
     of the former candidate, but sometimes could not help reflecting that Mr Ashburton "dealt" in
     George Street; and the fluctuations of the bargemen, who were, many of them, freemen, and a
     very difficult part of the population, excited the most vivid interest. Young Mr Wentworth, who
     had but lately come to Carlingford, had already begun to acquire a great influence at
     Wharfside, where most of the bargees lived, and the steady ones would no doubt have been
     largely swayed by him had his inclinations been the same as the Rector's; but Mr Wentworth,
     perversely enough, had conceived that intuitive repugnance for Mr Cavendish which a
     high-principled and not very tolerant young man often feels for the middle-aged individual who
     still conceives himself to have some right to be called young, and whose antecedents are not
     entirely beyond suspicion. Mr Wentworth's disinclination (and he was a man rather apt to take
     his own way) lay like a great boulder across the stream of the Rector's enthusiasm, and
     unquestionably interrupted it a little. Both the candidates and both the committees had
     accordingly work enough to do up to the last moment. Mr Cavendish all at once became a
     connoisseur in hams, and gave a magnificent order in the most complimentary way to Tozer, who
     received it with a broad smile, and "booked" it, as he said. "It ain't ham he's a wanting," the
     butterman said, not without amusement; for Tozer was well-to-do, and, except that he felt the
     honour of a mark of confidence, was not to be moved one way or another by one order. "If he
     dealt regular, it might be different. Them's the sort of folks as a man feels drawn to," said
     the true philosopher. Mr Ashburton, on the other side, did not make the impression which his
     friends thought he ought to have made in Prickett's Lane; but at least nobody could say that he
     did not stick very close to his work. He went at it like a man night and day, and neglected no
     means of carrying it to a successful issue; whereas, as Mr Centum and Mr Woodburn mourned in
     secret to each other, Cavendish required perpetual egging on. He did not like to get up in the
     morning, and get early to his work. It went against all his habits—as if his habits mattered in
     the face of so great an emergency; and in the afternoon it was hard to prevent him from
     lounging into some of his haunts, which were utterly out of the way of business. He would stay
     in Masters's for an hour at a time, though he knew Mr Wentworth, who was Masters's great
     patron, did not care for him, and that his favour for such a Tractarian sort of place was
     bitter to the Rector. Anything for a little idleness and waste of time, poor Mr Centum said,
     who was two stone lighter on the eve of the election than when the canvass began. Such a
     contrast would make any man angry. Mr Cavendish was goaded into more activity as the decisive
     moment approached, and performed what seemed to himself unparalleled feats. But it was only two
     days before the moment of fate when the accident happened to him which brought such dismay to
     all his supporters. Our own opinion is, that it did not materially affect the issue of the
     contest one way or other; but that was the reverse of the feeling which prevailed in Grange
     Lane.</t:p>
<t:p>It was just two days before the election, and all seemed going on sufficiently well. Mr
     Cavendish had been meeting a Dissenting committee, and it was on leaving them that he found
     himself at the corner of Grove Street, where, under ordinary circumstances, he had no occasion
     to be. At a later period he was rather fond of saying that it was not of his own motion that he
     was there at all, but only in obedience to the committee, which ordered him about like a
     nigger. The spring afternoon was darkening, and the Dissenters (almost wholly unimpressed by
     his arguments, and remarking more strongly than ever where Mr Ashburton "dealt," and how
     thoroughly everybody knew all about him) had all dispersed. It was but natural, when Mr
     Cavendish came to the corner of Grove Street, where, in other days, he had played a very
     different part, that certain softening influences should take possession of his soul. "What a
     voice she had, by Jove!" he said to himself; "very different from that shrill pipe of
     Lucilla's." To tell the truth, if there was one person in Carlingford whom he felt a resentment
     against, it was Lucilla. She had never done him any harm to speak of, and once she had
     unquestionably done him a great deal of good. But, on the other hand, it was she who first
     showed herself candidly conscious that he had grown stout, and who all along had supported and
     encouraged his rival. It was possible, no doubt, that this might be pique; and, mixed with his
     anger for her sins against him, Mr Cavendish had, at the same time, a counterbalancing sense
     that there still remained to him in his life one supereminently wise thing that he still could
     do—and that was, to go down Grange Lane instantly to the Doctor's silenced house, and go down
     on his knees, or do any other absurdity that might be necessary to make Lucilla marry him;
     after which act he would henceforward be, pecuniarily and otherwise (notwithstanding that she
     was poor), a saved man. It did not occur to him that Lucilla would never have married him, even
     had he gone down on his knees; but perhaps that would be too much to ask any man to believe of
     any woman; and his feeling that this was the right thing to do, rather strengthened than
     otherwise the revolt of his heart against Lucilla. It was twilight, as we have said, and he had
     done a hard day's work, and there was still an hour before dinner which he seemed to have a
     right to dispose of in his own way; and he did hesitate at the corner of Grove Street, laying
     himself open, as it were, to any temptation that might offer itself. Temptations come, as a
     general rule, when they are sought; and thus, on the very eve of the election, a grievous
     accident happened to Mr Cavendish. It might have happened at any time, to be sure, but this was
     the most inopportune moment possible, and it came accordingly now.</t:p>
<t:p>For, as he made that pause, some one passed him whom he could not but look after with a
     certain interest. She went past him with a whisk, as if she too was not without reminiscences.
     It was not such a figure as a romantic young man would be attracted by on such a sudden
     meeting, and it was not attraction but recollection that moved Mr Cavendish. It was the figure
     of a large woman in a large shawl, not very gracefully put on, and making her look very square
     about the shoulders and bunchy at the neck; and the robe that was whisked past him was that
     peculiar kind of faded silk gown which looks and rustles like tin, or some other thin metallic
     substance. He made that momentary pause at the street corner, and then he went on, slowly, not
     following her, to be sure, but merely, as he said to himself, pursuing his own course; for it
     was just as easy to get into Grange Lane by the farther end as by this end. He went along very
     slowly, and the lady before him walked quickly, even with something like a bounce of
     excitement, and went in at Mr Lake's door long before Mr Cavendish reached it. When he came up
     on a level with the parlour window, which was partially open though the evening was so cold, Mr
     Cavendish positively started, notwithstanding the old associations which had been rising in his
     mind; for there was pouring forth from the half-open window such a volume of melody as had not
     been heard for years in Grove Street. Perhaps the voice had lost some of its freshness, but in
     the surprise of the moment the hearer was not critical; and its volume and force seemed even
     greater than before.</t:p>
<t:p>It has been already mentioned in this history that a contralto had a special charm for Mr
     Cavendish. He was so struck that he stood stock-still for the moment, not knowing what to make
     of it; and then he wavered for another moment, with a sudden sense that the old allegorical
     crisis had occurred to him, and that Pleasure, in a magnificent gush of song, wooed him on one
     side, while Duty, with still small voice, called him at the other. He stood still, he
     wavered—for fifty seconds perhaps the issue was uncertain, and the victim was still within
     reach of salvation; but the result in such a case depends very much upon whether a man really
     likes doing his duty, which is by no means an invariable necessity. Mr Cavendish had in the
     abstract no sort of desire to do his unless when he could not help it, and consequently his
     resistance to temptation was very feeble. He was standing knocking at Mr Lake's door before
     half the thoughts appropriate to the occasion had got through his mind, and found himself
     sitting on the little sofa in Mr Lake's parlour as he used to do ten years ago, before he could
     explain to himself how he came there. It was all, surely, a kind of enchantment altogether. He
     was there—he who had been so long away from Carlingford—he who had been so deeply offended by
     hearing his name seriously coupled with that of Barbara Lake—he who ought to have been anywhere
     in the world rather than here upon the eve of his election, when all the world was keeping
     watch over his conduct. And it was Barbara who sat at the piano singing—singing one of the same
     songs, as if she had spent the entire interval in that occupation, and never had done anything
     else all these years. The sensation was so strange that Mr Cavendish may be excused for feeling
     a little uncertainty as to whether or not he was dreaming, which made him unable to answer
     himself the graver question whether or not he was doing what he ought to do. He did not seem to
     be able to make out whether it was now or ten years ago—whether he was a young man free to
     amuse himself, or a man who was getting stout, and upon whom the eyes of an anxious
     constituency were fixed. And then, after being so virtuous for a length of time, a forbidden
     pleasure was sweet.</t:p>
<t:p>Mr Cavendish's ideas, however, gradually arranged themselves as he sat in the corner of the
     little haircloth sofa, and began to take in the differences as well as the bewildering
     resemblances of the present and past. Barbara, like himself, had changed. She did not insult
     him, as Lucilla had done, by fresh looks and mischievous candour about "going off." Barbara
      <t:hi>had</t:hi> gone off, like himself, and, like himself, did not mean to acknowledge it. She
     had expanded all over, as was natural to a contralto. Her eyes were blacker and more brilliant
     in a way, but they were eyes which owned an indescribable amount of usage; and her cheeks, too,
     wore the deep roses of old, deepened and fixed by wear and tear. Instead of feeling ashamed of
     himself in her presence, as he had done in Lucilla's, Mr Cavendish felt somehow consoled and
     justified and sympathetic. "Poor soul!" he said to himself, as he sat by while she was singing.
     She, too, had been in the wars, and had not come out scatheless. She did not reproach him, nor
     commiserate him, nor look at him with that mixture of wonder and tolerance and pity which other
     people had manifested. She did not even remark that he had grown stout. He was not a man
     fallen, fallen, fallen from his high estate, to Barbara. She herself had fallen from the
     pinnacles of youth, and Mr Cavendish was still a great man in her eyes. She sang for him as she
     had sung ten years ago, and received him with a flutter of suppressed delight, and in her
     satisfaction was full of excitement. The hardworked candidate sank deeper and deeper into the
     corner of the sofa and listened to the music, and felt it very soothing and pleasant, for
     everybody had united in goading him on rather than petting him for the last month or two of his
     life.</t:p>
<t:p>"Now tell me something about yourself," he said, when the song was over, and Barbara had
     turned round, as she used to do in old times, on her music-stool; "I hear you have been away,
     like me."</t:p>
<t:p>"Not like you," said Barbara, "for you went because you pleased, and I went——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Why did you go?" asked Mr Cavendish.</t:p>
<t:p>"Because I could not stay here any longer," said Barbara, with her old vehemence; "because I
     was talked about, and looked down upon, and——Well, never mind, that's all over now; and I am
     sure I am very glad to see you, Mr Cavendish, as a <t:hi>friend</t:hi>."</t:p>
<t:p>And with that something like a tear came into her eye. She had been knocked about a good deal
     in the world, and though she had not learned much, still she had learned that she was young no
     longer, and could not indulge in the caprices of that past condition of existence. Mr
     Cavendish, for his part, could not but smile at this intimation that he was to be received as a
     friend, and consequently need not have any fear of Barbara's fascinations,—as if a woman of her
     age, worn and gone off as she was, could be supposed dangerous; but still he was touched by her
     tone.</t:p>
<t:p>"We were once very good friends, Barbara," said the inconsistent man; "we have lost sight of
     each other for a long time, as people do in this world; but we were once very good
     friends."</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes," she said, with a slight touch of annoyance in her voice; "but since we have lost sight
     of each other for so long, I don't see why you should call me Barbara. It would be much more
     becoming to say Miss Lake."</t:p>
<t:p>Mr Cavendish was amused, and he was touched and flattered. Most people had been rather
     forbearing to him since he came back, putting up with him for old friendship's sake, or
     supporting his cause as that of a reformed man, and giving him, on the whole, a sort of
     patronising humiliating countenance; and to find somebody in whose eyes he was still the
     paladin of old times, <t:hi>the</t:hi> Mr Cavendish whom people in Grange Lane were proud of, was
     balm to his wounded soul.</t:p>
<t:p>"I don't know how I am to learn to say Miss Lake—when you are just as good to me as ever, and
     sing as you have just been doing," he said. "I suppose you say so because you find me so
     changed?"</t:p>
<t:p>Upon which Barbara lifted her black eyes and looked at him as she had scarcely done before.
     The eyes were as bright as ever, and they were softened a little for the moment out of the
     stare that seemed to have grown habitual to them; and her crimson cheeks glowed as of old; and
     though she was untidy, and looked worn, and like a creature much buffeted about by wind and
     waves, she was still what connoisseurs in that article call a fine woman. She looked full at Mr
     Cavendish, and then she cast down her eyes, as if the sight was too much for her. "I don't see
     any difference," she said, with a certain tremor in her voice; for he was a man of whom, in the
     days of her youth, she had been fond in her way.</t:p>
<t:p>And naturally Mr Cavendish was more touched than ever. He took her hand, and called her
     Barbara again without any reproof; and he saw that she trembled, and that his presence here
     made to the full as great an impression as he had ever done in his palmiest days. Perhaps a
     greater impression; for their old commerce had been stormy, and interrupted by many a
     hurricane; and Barbara then had, or thought she might have, many strings to her bow, and did
     not believe that there was only one Mr Cavendish in the world. Now all that was changed: and if
     this old hope should revive again, it would not be allowed to die away for any gratification of
     temper. Mr Cavendish did not remember ever to have seen her tremble before, and he too was fond
     of her in his way.</t:p>
<t:p>This curious revival did not come to anything of deeper importance, for of course just then
     Rose came in from her household affairs, and Mr Lake to tea; and the candidate recollected that
     it was time for dinner. But father and sister also gave him, in their different ways, a rather
     flattering reception. Mr Lake had already pledged him his vote, and was full of interest as to
     how things were going on, and enthusiastic for his success; and Rose scowled upon him as of
     old, as on a dangerous character, whose comings and goings could not be seen without
     apprehension; which was an unexpected pleasure to a man who had been startled to find how very
     little commotion his presence made in Grange Lane. He pressed Barbara's hand as he went away,
     and went to his dinner with a heart which certainly beat lighter, and a more pleasant sense of
     returning self-confidence, than he had felt for a long time. When he was coming out of the
     house, as a matter of course, he met with the chief of his Dissenting supporters, accompanied
     (for Mr Bury, as has been said, was very Low-Church, and loved, wherever he could do it, to
     work in unison with his Dissenting brethren) by the Rector's churchwarden, both of whom stopped
     with a curiously critical air to speak to the Candidate, who had to be every man's friend for
     the time being. The look in their eyes sent an icy chill through him, but still the forbidden
     pleasure had been sweet. As he walked home, he could not help thinking it over, and going back
     ten years, and feeling a little doubtful about it, whether it was then or now. And as he mused
     Miss Marjoribanks, whom he could not help continually connecting and contrasting with the
     other, appeared to him as a kind of jealous Queen Eleanor, who had a right to him, and could
     take possession at any time, should she choose to make the effort; while Barbara was a
     Rosamond, dilapidated indeed, but always ready to receive and console him in her bower. This
     was the kind of unconscious sentiment he had in his mind, feeling sure, as he mused, that
     Lucilla would be very glad to marry him, and that it would be very wise on his part to ask her,
     and was a thing which might still probably come to pass. Of course he could not see into Miss
     Marjoribanks's mind, which had travelled such a long way beyond him. He gave a glance up at the
     windows as he passed her door, and felt a kind of disagreeable satisfaction in seeing how
     diminished the lights were in the once radiant house. And Lucilla was so fond of a great deal
     of light! but she could not afford now to spend as much money upon wax as a Continental church
     might do. Mr Cavendish had so odd a sense of Lucilla's power over him, that it gave him a
     certain pleasure to think of the coming down of her pride and diminution of her lights.</t:p>
<t:p>But the fact was, that not more than ten minutes after he had passed her door with this
     reflection, Lucilla, sitting with her good book on the table and her work in her hand, in the
     room which was not so well lighted as it used to be, heard that Mr Cavendish had been met with
     coming out of Mr Lake's, and that Barbara had been singing to him, and that there was no
     telling what might have happened. "A man ain't the man for Carlingford as takes up with that
     sort," Thomas said indignantly, who had come to pay his former mistress a visit, and to assure
     her of his brother-in-law's vote. He was a little more free-spoken than of old, being now set
     up, and an independent householder, and calling no man master; and he was naturally indignant
     at an occurrence which, regarded in the light of past events, was an insult not only to
     Carlingford, but to Lucilla. Miss Marjoribanks was evidently startled by the news. She looked
     up quickly as if she had been about to speak, and then stopped herself and turned her back upon
     Thomas, and poked the fire in a most energetic way. She had even taken the hearth-brush in her
     hand to make all tidy after this onslaught, but that was a thing that went to Thomas's
     heart.</t:p>
<t:p>"I couldn't stand by and see it, Miss Lucilla," said Thomas; "it don't feel natural;" and
     there was actually a kind of moisture in his eye as he took that domestic implement out of her
     hand. Mr Cavendish pitied Lucilla for having less light than of old, and Thomas for being
     reduced so low as to sweep her own hearth. But Lucilla was very far from pitying her own case.
     She had been making an effort over herself, and she had come out of it triumphant; after
     reading so many good books, it is not to be wondered at if she felt herself a changed and
     softened and elevated character. She had the means in her hands of doing her candidate's rival
     a deadly mischief, and yet, for old friendship's sake, Lucilla made up her mind to forbear.</t:p>
<t:p>"I will give it you, Thomas," she said, with dignity, holding the hearth-brush, which was in
     such circumstances elevated into something sublime, "if you will promise, never, until after
     the election—never to say a word about Mr Cavendish and Miss Lake. It was quite right to tell
     me, and you are very kind about the hearth; but you must promise never to say a syllable about
     it, not even to Nancy, until the election is over; or I will never give it you, nor ask you to
     do a single thing for me again."</t:p>
<t:p>Thomas was so much struck with this address that he said "Good Lord!" in sheer amazement; and
     then he made the necessary vow, and took the hearth-brush out of Lucilla's hand.</t:p>
<t:p>"No doubt he was asking for Mr Lake's vote," said Miss Marjoribanks. "They say everybody is
     making great exertions, and you know they are both my friends. I ought to be pleased whoever
     wins. But it is impressed on my mind that Mr Ashburton will be the man," Lucilla added, with a
     little solemnity, "and, Thomas, we must give them fair-play."</t:p>
<t:p>It would be vain to assert that Thomas understood this romantic generosity, but he was taken
     by surprise, and had relinquished his own liberty in the matter, and had nothing further to
     say. Indeed he had so little to say downstairs, that Nancy, who was longing for a little
     gossip, insulted and reviled him, and declared that since he took up with <t:hi>that</t:hi> Betsy
     there never was a sensible word to be got out of him. And all the time the poor man was burning
     with this bit of news. Many a man has bartered his free-will before under the influence of
     female wiles, or so at least history would have us believe; but few have done it for so poor a
     compensation as that hearth-brush. Thomas withdrew sore at heart, longing for the election to
     be over, and kept his word like an honest man; but notwithstanding, before the evening was
     over, the fatal news was spreading like fire to every house in Grange Lane.</t:p>
</t:div>