<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XXXVII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>It would be vain to follow Lucilla in detail through her consistent and admirable career; nor
     is it necessary to say that she went on steadily in face of all her discouragements, with that
     mixture of success and failure which comes natural to all human affairs. The singular thing
     about it was, that the years passed on, and that she was permitted by the world in general to
     fulfil her own promise and prophecy about remaining ten years at home to be a comfort to her
     dear papa. She had been nineteen when she began her career, and she was nine-and twenty when
     that little episode occurred with young Dr Rider, before he was married to his present wife.
     There would have been nothing in the least unsuitable in a marriage between Dr Rider and Miss
     Marjoribanks, though people who were the best informed never thought either of them had any
     serious meaning; but, of course, the general public, having had Lucilla for a long time before
     their eyes, naturally added on seven or eight years to her age, and concluded her to be a great
     deal older than the young doctor, though everybody allowed that it would have been a most
     advantageous match for him in every possible point of view. But, however, it did not come to
     anything, no more than a great many other nibbles of the same kind did. The period arrived at
     which Lucilla had thought she might perhaps have begun to go off in her looks, but still there
     was no immediate appearance of any change of name or condition on her part. Many people quite
     congratulated themselves on the fact, as it was impossible to imagine what might be the social
     condition of Grange Lane without Miss Marjoribanks; but it is doubtful whether Lucilla
     congratulated herself. She was very comfortable, no doubt, in every way, and met with little
     opposition to speak of, and had things a great deal more in her own hands than she might have
     had, had there been a husband in the case to satisfy; but notwithstanding, she had come to an
     age when most people have husbands, and when an independent position in the world becomes
     necessary to self-respect. To be sure, Lucilla <t:hi>was</t:hi> independent; but then—there is a
     difference, as everybody knows.</t:p>
<t:p>And Miss Marjoribanks could not but feel that the world had not shown that appreciation of
     her, to which, in her earlier days, she looked forward with so little fear. The ten years, as
     they had really gone by, were very different from the ten years she had looked forward to,
     when, in the triumph of her youth, she named that period as the time when she might probably
     begin to go off, and would be disposed to marry. By this time the drawing-room carpets and
     curtains had faded a little, and Lucilla had found out that the delicate pale green which
     suited her complexion was not to call a profitable colour; and nobody could have thought or
     said that to marry at this period would be in the least degree to swindle the Doctor. Thus the
     moment had arrived to which she looked forward, but the man had not arrived with it. Ten years
     had passed, during which she had been at the head of society in Grange Lane, and a great
     comfort to her dear papa; and now, if there remained another development for Lucilla's
     character, it was about time that it should begin to show itself. But at the same time, the
     main element necessary for that new development did not seem at present likely to be found in
     Grange Lane.</t:p>
<t:p>Unless, indeed, it might happen to be found in the person of Mr Ashburton, who was so often
     in Carlingford that he might be said to form a part of society there. It was he who was related
     to the Richmonds, who were a family much respected in the county. He had been at the bar, and
     even begun to distinguish himself, before old Miss Penrhyn died and left him the Firs. He had
     begun to distinguish himself, but he had not, it appeared, gone so far as to prevent him from
     coming down to his new property and settling upon it, and taking his place as a local
     notability. He was not a man who could be expected to care for evening parties in a provincial
     town; but he never refused to dine with Dr Marjoribanks, and was generally popular upstairs,
     where he always paid a little attention to Lucilla, though nothing very marked and noticeable.
     Mr Ashburton was not like Mr Cavendish, for instance (if anybody remembered Mr Cavendish), a
     man whose money might be in the Funds, but who more probably speculated. Everybody knew
     everything about him, which was an ease to the public mind. The Firs was as well known as
     Carlingford steeple, and how much it was worth a year, and everything about it; and so was the
     proprietor's pedigree, which could be traced to a semi-mythical personage known as old Penrhyn,
     whose daughter was Sir John Richmond's grandmother. The Firs, it is true, had descended in the
     female line, but still it is something to know where a man comes from, even on one side.</t:p>
<t:p>Mr Ashburton made himself very agreeable in the neighbourhood, and was never above
     enlightening anybody on a point of law. He used to say that it was kind to give him something
     to do, which was an opinion endorsed practically by a great many people. It is true that some
     of his neighbours wondered much to see his patience, and could not make out why he chose to
     rusticate at the Firs at his age, and with his abilities. But either he never heard these
     wonderings, or at least he never took any notice of them. He lived as if he liked it, and
     settled down, and presented to all men an aspect of serene contentment with his sphere. And it
     would be difficult to say what suggestion or association it was which brought him all of a
     sudden into Miss Marjoribanks's head, one day, when, seeing a little commotion in Masters's
     shop, she went in to hear what it was about. The cause of the commotion was an event which had
     been long expected, and which, indeed, ten years before, had been looked on as a possible thing
     to happen any day. The wonder was, not that old Mr Chiltern should die, but that he should have
     lived so long. The ladies in Masters's cried, "Poor dear old man!" and said to each other that
     however long it might have been expected, a death always seemed sudden at the last. But, to
     tell the truth, the stir made by this death was rather pleasant than sad. People thought, not
     of the career which was ended, but of the one which must now begin, and of the excitement of an
     election, which was agreeable to look forward to. As for Lucilla, when she too had heard the
     news, and had gone upon her way, it would be vain to assert that a regretful recollection of
     the time when Mr Cavendish was thought a likely man to succeed Mr Chiltern did not occur to
     her. But when Miss Marjoribanks had dismissed that transitory thought, Mr Ashburton suddenly
     came into her head by one of those intuitions which have such an effect upon the mind that
     receives them. Lucilla was not of very marked political opinions, and perhaps was not quite
     aware what Mr Ashburton's views were on the Irish Church question, or upon parliamentary
     reform; but she said after, that it came into her mind in a moment, like a flash of lightning,
     that he was the man. The idea was so new and so striking, that she turned back and went, in the
     excitement of the moment, to suggest it to Mrs Chiley, and see what her old friend and the
     Colonel would say. Of course, if such a thing was practicable, there was no time to lose. She
     turned round quickly, according to her prompt nature; and such was her absorbed interest in the
     idea of Mr Ashburton, that she did not know until she had almost done it, that she was walking
     straight into her hero's arms.</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, Mr Ashburton!" said Lucilla, with a little scream, "is it you? My mind was quite full of
     you. I could not see you for thinking. Do come back with me, for I have something very
     particular to say——"</t:p>
<t:p>"To me?" said Mr Ashburton, looking at her with a smile and a sudden look of interest; for it
     is always slightly exciting to the most philosophical mortal to know that somebody else's mind
     is full of him. "What you have said already is so flattering——"</t:p>
<t:p>"I did not mean anything absurd," said Miss Marjoribanks. "Don't talk any nonsense, please.
     Mr Ashburton, do you know that old Mr Chiltern is dead?"</t:p>
<t:p>Lucilla put the question solemnly, and her companion grew a little red as he looked at her.
     "It is not my fault," he said, though he still smiled; and then he grew redder and redder,
     though he ought to have been above showing such signs of emotion; and looked at her curiously,
     as if he would seize what she was going to say out of her eyes or her lips before it was
     said.</t:p>
<t:p>"It is not anything to laugh about," said Lucilla. "He was a very nice old man; but he is
     dead, and somebody else must be Member for Carlingford: that was why I told you that my mind
     was full of you. I am not in the least superstitious," said Miss Marjoribanks, solemnly; "but
     when I stood there—there, just in front of Mr Holden's—you came into my mind like a flash of
     lightning. I was not thinking of you in the least, and you came into my mind like—like Minerva,
     you know. If it was not an intimation, I don't know what it was. And that was why I ran against
     you, and did not see you were there. Mr Ashburton, it is you who must be the man," said
     Lucilla. It was not a thing to speak lightly about, and for her part she spoke very solemnly;
     and as for Mr Ashburton, his face flushed deeper and deeper. He stood quite still in the
     excitement of the moment, as if she had given him a blow.</t:p>
<t:p>"Miss Marjoribanks, I don't know how to answer you," he cried; and then he put out his hand
     in an agitated way and grasped her hand. "You are the only creature in Carlingford, man or
     woman, that has divined me," he said, in a trembling voice. It was a little public at the top
     of Grange Lane, where people were liable to pass at every moment; but still Miss Marjoribanks
     accepted the pressure of the hand, which, to be sure, had nothing whatever to do with
     love-making. She was more shy of such demonstrations than she had been in her confident youth,
     knowing that in most cases they never came to anything, and at the same time that the
     spectators kept a vivid recollection of them; but still, in the excitement of the moment, Miss
     Marjoribanks accepted and returned in a womanly way the pressure of Mr Ashburton's hand.</t:p>
<t:p>"Come in and let us talk it over," Lucilla said, feeling that no time was to be lost. It was
     a conference very different from that which, had Mr Chiltern been so well advised as to die ten
     years before, might have been held in Dr Marjoribanks's drawing-room over his successor's
     prospects; but at the same time there was something satisfactory to the personal sentiments of
     both in the way in which this conversation had come about. When Lucilla took off her hat and
     sat down to give him all her attention, Mr Ashburton could not but feel the flattering
     character of the interest she was taking in him. She was a woman, and young (comparatively
     speaking), and was by no means without admirers, and unquestionably took the lead in society;
     and to be divined by such a person was perhaps, on the whole, sweeter to the heart of the
     aspirant than if Colonel Chiley had found out his secret, or Dr Marjoribanks, or even the
     Rector: and Lucilla for her part had all that natural pleasure in being the first to embrace a
     new interest which was natural under the circumstances. "Let us talk it all over," she said,
     giving Mr Ashburton a chair near her own. "If I believed in spirit-rapping, you know, I should
     be sure that was what it meant. I was not thinking of you in the least, and all at once, like a
     flash of lightning—Mr Ashburton sit down and tell me—what is the first thing that must be
     done?"</t:p>
<t:p>"If I could ask you to be on my committee, that would be the first thing to be done," said Mr
     Ashburton, "but unfortunately I can't do that. Let me tell you in the first place how very much
     I am obliged——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Don't say that, please," said Miss Marjoribanks, with her usual good sense, "for I have done
     nothing. But papa can be on the committee, and old Colonel Chiley, who is such a one for
     politics; and of course Sir John—that will be a very good beginning; and after that——"</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear Miss Marjoribanks," Mr Ashburton said, with a smile, and a little hesitation, "Sir
     John takes exactly the other side in politics; and I am afraid the Doctor and the Colonel are
     not of the same way of thinking; and then my opinions——"</t:p>
<t:p>"If they are not of the same way of thinking we must make them," said Lucilla: "after having
     such an intimation, I am not going to be put off for a trifle; and besides, what does it matter
     about opinions? I am sure I have heard you all saying over and over that the thing was to have
     a good <t:hi>man</t:hi>. Don't go and make speeches about opinions. If you begin with that, there
     is no end to it," said Miss Marjoribanks. "I know what you gentlemen are. But if you just say
     distinctly that you are the best man——"</t:p>
<t:p>"It would be an odd thing to say for oneself," said Mr Ashburton, and he laughed; but, to
     tell the truth, he was not a man of very quick understanding, and at the first outset of the
     thing he did not understand Lucilla; and he was a little—just a very little—disappointed. She
     had divined him, which was a wonderful proof of her genius; but yet at the bottom she was only
     an ignorant woman after all.</t:p>
<t:p>"I see it all quite clear what to do," said Miss Marjoribanks. "You must have the Colonel and
     Sir John, and everybody. I would not pay the least attention to Tories or Whigs, or anything of
     the sort. For my part I don't see any difference. All that has to be said about it is simply
     that you are the right man. Papa might object to one thing and the Colonel might object to
     another, and then if Sir John, as you say, is of quite another way of thinking——But you are the
     man for Carlingford all the same; and none of them can say a word against that," said Lucilla,
     with energy. She stopped short, with her colour rising and her eyes brightening. She felt
     herself inspired, which was a new sensation, and very pleasant; and then the idea of such a
     coming struggle was sweet to Miss Marjoribanks, and the conviction burst upon her that she was
     striking out a perfectly new and original line.</t:p>
<t:p>As for her candidate, he smiled, and hesitated, and paid her pretty little compliments for a
     few minutes longer, and said it was very good of her to interest herself in his fortunes. All
     which Lucilla listened to with great impatience, feeling that it had nothing to do with the
     matter in hand. But then after these few minutes had elapsed the meaning of his fair adviser,
     as he called her, began to dawn upon Mr Ashburton's mind. He began to prick up his mental ears,
     so to speak, and see that it was not womanish ignorance, but an actual suggestion. For, after
     all, so long as he was the Man for Carlingford, all the rest was of little importance. He took
     something out of his pocket, which was his address to the constituency of Carlingford (for
     being anxious on the subject, he had heard of Mr Chiltern's death an hour or two before anybody
     else), and choke-full of political sentiments. In it he described to the electors what he would
     do if they sent him to Parliament, as carefully as if their election could make him Prime
     Minister at least; and naturally a man does not like to sacrifice such a confession of faith.
     "I should like to read it to you," he said, spreading it out with affectionate care: but
     Lucilla had already arranged her plans, and knew better than that.</t:p>
<t:p>"If you were to read it to me," said Miss Marjoribanks, "I should be sure to be convinced
     that you were quite right, and to go in with you for everything; and then I should be no good,
     you know. If it were to drive papa and Sir John and the Colonel all to their own ways of
     thinking, we never should make any progress. I would never mind about anybody's ways of
     thinking, if I were you. After all," said Lucilla, with fine satire, of which she was
     unconscious, "what does it matter what people think? I suppose when it comes to doing anything,
     the Whigs and the Tories are just the same. Mr Ashburton, it is the Man that is wanted," said
     Miss Marjoribanks, with all the warmth of sudden conviction. She felt a little like Joan of Arc
     as she spoke. When an army has the aid of a sacred maiden to bring inspiration to its counsels,
     the idea of going on in the old formal way is no longer to be tolerated. And such was the force
     of Lucilla's conviction, that Mr Ashburton, though he felt a little affronted, and could not
     but look with fond and compunctious regret upon his address, yet began more and more to feel
     that there was justice in what she said.</t:p>
<t:p>"I will think over what you say," he said, rather stiffly, and put up his address—for it was
     natural, when he had done her such an honour as to offer to read it to her, that he should be
     affronted by her refusal. It was a bold experiment on Lucilla's part, but then she was carried
     out of herself at the moment by this singular flash of inspiration. "I will think over what you
     say," Mr Ashburton continued; "and if my judgment approves——At all events I shall not issue
      <t:hi>this</t:hi> till I have thought it all over. I am sure I am extremely obliged to you for
     your interest." And here he stopped short, and looked as if he were going to get up and go
     away, which would have spoiled all.</t:p>
<t:p>"You are going to stop to lunch," said Lucilla; "somebody is sure to come in. And you know
     you must not lose any opportunity of seeing people. I am so glad to-night is Thursday. Tell me
     just one thing, Mr Ashburton, before any one comes. There is one thing that is really
     important, and must be fixed upon. If we were to make any mistake, you know——"</t:p>
<t:p>"What?" said the candidate eagerly—"about Reform? I have expressed myself very clearly——"</t:p>
<t:p>Lucilla smiled compassionately, and with the gentlest tolerance, at this wild suggestion. "I
     was not thinking of Reform," she said, with that meekness which people assume when it is of no
     use being impatient. "I was thinking what your colours were to be. I would not have anything to
     do with the old colours, for my part—they would be as bad as opinions, you know. You may laugh,
     but I am quite in earnest," said Miss Marjoribanks. As for Mr Ashburton, he did not begin to
     laugh until he had fixed upon her that gaze of utter amazement and doubt with which on many
     similar occasions ordinary people had regarded Lucilla—thinking she was joking, or acting, or
     doing something quite different from the severe sincerity which was her leading principle. She
     was so used to it, that she waited with perfect patience till her companion's explosion of
     amusement was over. He was thinking to himself what a fool she was, or what a fool he was to
     think of taking a woman into his counsels, or what curious unintelligible creatures women were,
     made up of sense and folly; and all the time he laughed, which was a relief to his feelings.
     Miss Marjoribanks laughed a little too, to keep him in countenance, for she was always the soul
     of good nature; and then she repeated, "Now you must tell me what our colours are to be——"</t:p>
<t:p>"I am sure I don't know anything about colours," said the candidate, "any more than you do
     about opinions. I think they are equally unimportant, to say the least. I shall adopt the
     colours of my fair counsellor," Mr Ashburton added, laughing, and making a mock bow to her, and
     getting his hat as he did so—for he had naturally calmed down a little from the first
     enthusiasm with which he had hailed the woman who divined him, and he did not mean to stay.</t:p>
<t:p>"Blue and yellow are the old colours," said Lucilla thoughtfully, "and you are the new man,
     you know, and we must not meddle with these antiquated things. Do you think this would do?" As
     she spoke she took up a handful of ribbons which were lying by, and put them up to her face
     with an air of serious deliberation which once more disturbed Mr Ashburton's gravity. And yet,
     when a young woman who is not at all bad-looking puts up a rustling, gleaming knot of ribbons
     to her hair and asks a man's opinion of the same, the man must be a philosopher or a wretch
     indeed who does not give a glance to see the effect. The candidate for Carlingford looked and
     approached, and even, in the temptation of the moment, took some of the long streamers in his
     hand. And he began to think Miss Marjoribanks was very clever, and the most amusing companion
     he had met with for a long time. And her interest in him touched his heart; and, after all, it
     is no drawback to a woman to be absurd by moments. His voice grew quite soft and caressing as
     he took the end of ribbon into his hand.</t:p>
<t:p>"If they are your colours they shall be mine," he said, with a sense of patronage and
     protection which was very delightful; and the two were still talking and laughing over the
     silken link thus formed between them, when the people came in whom Lucilla was expecting to
     lunch, and who were naturally full of Mr Chiltern's death, which, poor old man! was so sudden
     at the last. Mr Ashburton stayed, though he had not intended it, and made himself very
     pleasant. And Lucilla took no pains to conceal her opinion that the thing was neither to
     consider Whigs nor Tories, but a good <t:hi>Man</t:hi>. And Major Brown, who had come with his
     daughters, echoed this sentiment so warmly that Mr Ashburton was entirely convinced of the
     justice of Miss Marjoribanks's ideas. "We can't have a tip-topper, you know," Major Brown said,
     who was not very refined in his expressions; "and what I should like to see is a man that knows
     the place and would look after Carlingford. That's what we're all looking for." Mr Ashburton
     did not declare himself to Major Brown, but he dashed off his new address ten minutes after he
     had taken leave of Miss Marjoribanks, and put the other one in the fire like a Christian, and
     telegraphed for his agent to town. Lucilla, for her part, made an effort equally great and
     uncompromising. She took the ribbon Mr Ashburton had played with, and cut it up into cockades
     of all descriptions. It was an early moment, but still there was no time to be lost in a matter
     of such importance. And she wore one on her breast and one in her hair when Mr Ashburton's
     address was published, and all the world was discussing the new candidate.</t:p>
<t:p>"Of course they are his colours—that is why I wear them," said Lucilla. "I shall always think
     there was something very strange in it. Just after I had heard of poor old Mr Chiltern's death,
     as I was passing Holden's—when I was not in the least thinking of him—he came into my mind like
     a flash of lightning, you know. If I had been very intimate with poor old Mr Chiltern, or if I
     believed in spirit-rapping, I should think <t:hi>that</t:hi> was it. He came into my head without
     my even thinking of him, all in a moment, with his very hat on and his umbrella, like
     Minerva—wasn't it Minerva?" said Miss Marjoribanks. And she took up Mr Ashburton's cause
     openly, and unfurled his standard, and did not even ask her father's opinion. "Papa knows about
     politics, but he has not had an intimation, as I have," said Lucilla. And, naturally, she threw
     all the younger portion of Grange Lane, which was acquainted with Mr Ashburton, and looked
     forward eagerly to a little excitement, and liked the idea of wearing a violet-and-green
     cockade, into a flutter of excitement. Among these rash young people there were even a few
     individuals who took Lucilla's word for it, and knew that Mr Ashburton was very <t:hi>nice</t:hi>,
     and did not see that anything more was necessary. To be sure, these enthusiasts were chiefly
     women, and in no cases had votes; but Miss Marjoribanks, with instinctive correctness of
     judgment, decided that there were more things to be thought of than the electors. And she had
     the satisfaction of seeing with her own eyes and hearing with her own ears the success of that
     suggestion of her genius. Carlingford had rarely been more excited by any public event than it
     was by the address of the new candidate, who was in the field before anybody else, and who had
     the boldness to come before them without uttering any political creed. "The enlightened
     electors of Carlingford do not demand, like other less educated constituencies, a system of
     political doctrines cut and dry, or a representative bound to give up his own judgment, and act
     according to arbitrary promises," said the daring candidate: "what they want is an honest man,
     resolved to do his duty by his country, his borough, and his constituency; and it is this idea
     alone which has induced me to solicit your suffrages." This was what Mr Ashburton said in his
     address, though at that moment he had still his other address in his pocket, in which he had
     entered at some length into his distinctive personal views. It was thus that an independent
     candidate, unconnected with party, took the field in Carlingford, with Miss Marjoribanks, like
     another Joan of Arc, wearing a knot of ribbons, violet and green, in her hair, to inspire and
     lead him on.</t:p>
</t:div>