<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter IV</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>"My daughter is coming home, Nancy," said Dr Marjoribanks. "You will have to make
     preparations for her immediately. So far as I can make out from this letter, she will arrive
     to-morrow by the half-past five train."</t:p>
<t:p>"Well, sir," said Nancy, with the tone of a woman who makes the best of a misfortune, "it
     ain't every young lady as would have the sense to fix an hour like that. Ladies is terrible
     tiresome in that way; they'll come in the middle o' the day, when a body don't know in the
     world what to have for them; or they'll come at night, when a body's tired, and ain't got the
     heart to go into a supper. There was always a deal of sense in Miss Lucilla, when she hadn't
     got nothing in her head."</t:p>
<t:p>"Just so," said Dr Marjoribanks, who was rather relieved to have got through the announcement
     so easily. "You will see that her room is ready, and everything comfortable; and, of course,
     to-morrow she and I will dine alone."</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes, sir," said Nancy; but this assent was not given in the decisive tone of a woman whose
     audience was over; and then she was seized with a desire to arrange in a more satisfactory
     manner the cold beef on the sideboard. When she had secured this little interval for thought,
     she returned again to the table, where her master ate his breakfast, with a presentiment. "If
     you please, sir," said Nancy, "not to give you no vexation nor trouble, which every one knows
     as it has been the aim o' my life to spare you, as has so much on your mind. But it's best to
     settle afore commencing, and then we needn't have no heartburning. If you please, am I to take
     my orders of Miss Lucilla, or of you, as I've always been used to? In the missus's time," said
     Nancy, with modest confidence, "as was a good missus, and never gave no trouble as long as she
     had her soup and her jelly comfortable, it was always you as said what there was to be for
     dinner. I don't make no objection to doing up a nice little luncheon for Miss Lucilla, and
     giving a little more thought now and again to the sweets; but it ain't my part to tell you,
     sir, as a lady's taste, and more special a young lady's, ain't to be expected to be the same as
     yours and mine as has been cultivated like. I'm not one as likes contention," continued the
     domestic oracle, "but I couldn't abear to see a good master put upon; and if it should be as
     Miss Lucilla sets her mind upon messes as ain't got no taste in them, and milk-puddings and
     stuff, like the most of the ladies, I'd just like to know out of your own mouth, afore the
     commencement, what I'm to do?"</t:p>
<t:p>Dr Marjoribanks was so moved by this appeal that he laid down his knife and contemplated the
     alarming future with some dismay. "It is to be hoped Miss Lucilla will know better," he said.
     "She has a great deal of good sense, and it is to be hoped that she will be wise enough to
     consult the tastes of the house."</t:p>
<t:p>But the Doctor was not to be let off so easily. "As you say, sir, everything's to be hoped,"
     said Nancy steadily; "but there's a-many ladies as don't seem to me to have got no taste to
     their mouths; and it ain't as if it was a thing that could be left to hopes. Supposin' as it
     comes to that, sir, what am I to do?"</t:p>
<t:p>"Well," said the Doctor, who was himself a little puzzled, "you know Miss Lucilla is
     nineteen, Nancy, and my only child, and the natural mistress of the house."</t:p>
<t:p>"Sir," said Nancy austerely, "them is things as it ain't needful to name; that ain't the
     question as I was asking. Supposin' as things come to such a point, what am I to do?"</t:p>
<t:p>"Bless me! it's half-past nine," said the Doctor, "and I have an appointment. You can come
     just as usual when we are at breakfast, that will be the best way," he said as he went out at
     the door, and chuckled a little to himself when he felt he had escaped. "Lucilla is her
     mother's daughter, it is true," he said to himself when he had got into the safe seclusion of
     his brougham, with a degree of doubt in his tone which was startling, to say the least of it,
     from the lips of a medical man; "but she is my child all the same," he added briskly, with
     returning confidence; and in this conviction there was something which reassured the Doctor. He
     rubbed his hands as he bowled along to his appointment, and thought within himself that if she
     turned out a girl of spirit, as he expected, it would be good fun to see Lucilla's struggle
     with Nancy for the veritable reins of government. If Dr Marjoribanks had entertained any
     positive apprehensions that his dinners would be spoiled in consequence, his amusement would
     have come to an abrupt conclusion; but he trusted entirely in Nancy and a little in Lucilla,
     and suffered his long upper-lip to relax at the thought without much fear.</t:p>
<t:p>Her father had not returned from the labours of his long day when Lucilla arrived, but he
     made his last visits on foot in order to be able to send the brougham for her, which was a
     great thing for the Doctor to do. There was, indeed, a mutual respect between the two, who were
     not necessary to each other's comfort, it is true, as such near relations sometimes are; but
     who, at the same time, except on the sole occasion of Mrs Marjoribanks's death, had never
     misunderstood each other, as sometimes happens. This time Miss Marjoribanks was rather pleased,
     on the whole, that the Doctor did not come to meet her. At other times she had been a visitor;
     now she had come into her kingdom, and had no desire to be received like a guest. A sense of
     coming home, warmer than she remembered to have felt before, came into Lucilla's active mind as
     she stepped into the brougham. Not that the words bore any special tender meaning,
     notwithstanding that it was the desire of her heart, well known to all her friends, to live
     henceforward as a comfort to dear papa, but that now at last she was coming into her kingdom,
     and entering the domain in which she intended her will to be law. After living for a year with
     friends whose arrangements (much inferior to those which she could have made had she had the
     power) she had to acquiesce in, and whose domestic economy could only be criticised up to a
     certain point, it was naturally a pleasure to Miss Marjoribanks to feel that now at length she
     was emancipated, and at liberty to exercise her faculty. There were times during the past year
     when Lucilla had with difficulty restrained herself from snatching the reins out of the hands
     of her hosts, and showing them how to manage. But, impatient as she was, she had to restrain
     herself, and make the best of it. Now all that bondage was over. She felt like a young king
     entering in secret a capital which awaits him with acclamations. Before she presented herself
     to the rejoicing public, there were arrangements to be made and things to be done; and Miss
     Marjoribanks gave a rapid glance at the shops in George Street as she drove past, and decided
     which of them she meant to honour with her patronage. When she entered the garden it was with
     the same rapid glance of reorganising genius that she cast her eyes around it; and still more
     decided was the look with which she regarded her own room, where she was guided by the new
     housemaid, who did not know Miss Lucilla. Nancy, who knew no better (being, like most gifted
     persons, a woman of one idea), had established her young mistress in the little chamber which
     had been Lucilla's when she was a child; but Miss Marjoribanks, who had no sentimental notions
     about white dimity, shook her head at the frigid little apartment, where, however, she was not
     at all sorry to be placed at present; for if Dr Marjoribanks had been a man of the
      <t:hi>prevenant</t:hi> class, disposed to make all the preparations possible for his daughter, and
     arrange elegant surprises for her, he would have thoroughly disgusted Lucilla, who was bent on
     making all the necessary improvements in her own person. When she went down to the drawing-room
     to await her father, Miss Marjoribanks's look of disapprobation was mingled with so much
     satisfaction and content in herself that it was pleasant to behold. She shook her head and
     shrugged her shoulders as she paused in the centre of the large faded room, where there was no
     light but that of the fire, which burned brightly, and kept up a lively play of glimmer and
     shadow in the tall glass over the fireplace, and even twinkled dimly in the three long windows,
     where the curtains hung stiff and solemn in their daylight form. It was not an uncomfortable
     sort of big, dull, faded, respectable drawing-room; and if there had been a family in it, with
     recollections attached to every old ottoman and easy-chair, no doubt it would have been
     charming; but it was only a waste and howling wilderness to Lucilla. When she had walked from
     one end to the other, and verified all the plans she had already long ago conceived for the
     embellishment of this inner court and centre of her kingdom, Lucilla walked with her
     unhesitating step to the fire, and took a match and lighted all the candles in the large
     old-fashioned candlesticks, which had been flickering in grotesque shadows all over the roof.
     This proceeding threw a flood of light on the subject of her considerations, and gave Miss
     Marjoribanks an idea, in passing, about the best mode of lighting, which she afterwards acted
     upon with great success. She was standing in this flood of light, regarding everything around
     her with the eye of an enlightened critic and reformer, when Dr Marjoribanks came in. Perhaps
     there arose in the soul of the Doctor a momentary thought that the startling amount of
      <t:hi>éclairage</t:hi> which he witnessed was scarcely necessary, for it is certain that he gave a
     momentary glance at the candles as he went up to greet his daughter; but he was far too
     well-bred a man to suggest such an idea at the moment. On the contrary, he kissed her with a
     sentiment of real pleasure, and owned to himself that, if she was not a fool, and could keep to
     her own department, it might be rather agreeable on the whole to have a woman in the house. The
     sentiment was not enthusiastic, and neither were the words of his salutation: "Well, Lucilla;
     so this is you!" said the moderate and unexcited father. "Yes, papa, it is me," said Miss
     Marjoribanks, "and very glad to get home;" and so the two sat down and discussed the
     journey—whether she had been cold, and what state the railway was in—till the Doctor bethought
     himself that he had to prepare for dinner. "Nancy is always very punctual, and I am sure you
     are hungry," he said; "so I'll go upstairs, with your permission, Lucilla, and change my coat;"
     and with this the actual arrival terminated, and the new reign began.</t:p>
<t:p>But it was only next morning that the young sovereign gave any intimation of her future
     policy. She had naturally a great deal to tell that first night; and though it was exclusively
     herself, and her own adventures and achievements, which Miss Marjoribanks related, the occasion
     of her return made that sufficiently natural; and the Doctor was not altogether superior to the
     natural prejudice which makes a man interested, even when they are not in themselves
     particularly interesting, in the doings of his children. She succeeded in doing what is
     certainly one of the first duties of a woman—she amused her father. He followed her to the
     drawing-room for a marvel, and took a cup of tea, though it was against his principles; and, on
     the whole, Lucilla had the satisfaction of feeling that she had made a conquest of the Doctor,
     which, of course, was the grand and most essential preliminary. In the little interval which he
     spent over his claret, Miss Marjoribanks had succeeded in effecting another fundamental duty of
     woman—she had, as she herself expressed it, harmonised the rooms, by the simple method of
     rearranging half the chairs and covering the tables with trifles of her own—a proceeding which
     converted the apartment from an abstract English drawing-room of the old school into Miss
     Marjoribanks's drawing-room, an individual spot of ground revealing something of the character
     of its mistress. The Doctor himself was so moved by this, that he looked vaguely round when he
     came in, as if a little doubtful where he was—but that might only be the effect of the
     sparkling mass of candles on the mantelpiece, which he was too well-bred to remark upon the
     first night. But it was only in the morning that Lucilla unfolded her standard. She was down to
     breakfast, ready to pour out the coffee, before the Doctor had left his room. He found her, to
     his intense amazement, seated at the foot of the table, in the place which he usually occupied
     himself, before the urn and the coffee-pot. Dr Marjoribanks hesitated for one momentous
     instant, stricken dumb by this unparalleled audacity; but so great was the effect of his
     daughter's courage and steadiness, that after that moment of fate he accepted the seat by the
     side where everything was arranged for him, and to which Lucilla invited him sweetly, though
     not without a touch of mental perturbation. The moment he had seated himself, the Doctor's eyes
     were opened to the importance of the step he had taken. "I am afraid I have taken your seat,
     papa," said Miss Marjoribanks, with ingenuous sweetness. "But then I should have had to move
     the urn, and all the things, and I thought you would not mind." The Doctor said nothing but
     "Humph!" and even that in an undertone; but he became aware all the same that he had abdicated,
     without knowing it, and that the reins of state had been smilingly withdrawn from his
     unconscious hands.</t:p>
<t:p>When Nancy made her appearance the fact became still more apparent, though still in the
     sweetest way. "It is so dreadful to think papa should have been bothered with all these things
     so long," said Miss Marjoribanks. "After this I am sure you and I, Nancy, can arrange it all
     without giving him the trouble. Perhaps this morning, papa, as I am a stranger, you will say if
     there is anything you would like, and then I shall have time to talk it all over with Nancy,
     and find out what is best,"—and Lucilla smiled so sweetly upon her two amazed subjects that the
     humour of the situation caught the fancy of the Doctor, who had a keen perception of the
     ridiculous.</t:p>
<t:p>He laughed out, much to Nancy's consternation, who was standing by in open-eyed dismay. "Very
     well, Lucilla," he said; "you shall try what you can do. I daresay Nancy will be glad to have
     me back again before long; but in the meantime I am quite content that you should try," and he
     went off laughing to his brougham, but came back again before Lucilla could take Nancy in hand,
     who was an antagonist more formidable. "I forgot to tell you," said the Doctor, "that Tom
     Marjoribanks is coming on Circuit, and that I have asked him to stay here, as a matter of
     course. I suppose he'll arrive to-morrow. Good-bye till the evening."</t:p>
<t:p>This, though Dr Marjoribanks did not in the least intend it, struck Lucilla like a Parthian
     arrow, and brought her down for the moment. "Tom Marjoribanks!" she ejaculated in a kind of
     horror. "Of all people in the world, and at this moment!" but when she saw the open eyes and
     rising colour of Nancy the young dictator recovered herself—for a conqueror in the first moment
     of his victory has need to be wary. She called Nancy to her in her most affectionate tones as
     she finished her breakfast. "I sent papa away," said Miss Marjoribanks, "because I wanted to
     have a good talk with you, Nancy. I want to tell you my object in life. It is to be a comfort
     to papa. Ever since poor mamma died that is what I have been thinking of; and now I have come
     home, and I have made up my mind that he is not to be troubled about anything. I know what a
     good, faithful, valuable woman you are, I assure you. You need not think me a foolish girl who
     is not able to appreciate you. The dinner was charming last night, Nancy," said Lucilla, with
     much feeling; "and I never saw anything more beautifully cooked than papa's cutlets
     to-day."</t:p>
<t:p>"Miss Lucilla, I may say as I am very glad I have pleased you," said Nancy, who was not quite
     conquered as yet. She stood very stiffly upright by the table, and maintained her integrity.
     "Master <t:hi>is</t:hi> particular, I don't deny," continued the prime minister, who felt herself
     dethroned. "I've always done my best to go in with his little fancies, and I don't mean to say
     as it isn't right and natural as you should be the missis. But I ain't used to have ado with
     ladies, and that's the truth. Ladies is stingy in a-many things as is the soul of a good dinner
     to them as knows. I may be valleyable or not, it ain't for me to say; but I'm not one as can
     always be kept to a set figger in my gravy-beef, and my bacon, and them sorts of things. As for
     the butter, I don't know as I could give nobody an idea. I ain't one as likes changes, but I
     can't abide to be kept to a set figger; and that's the chief thing, Miss Lucilla, as I've got
     to say."</t:p>
<t:p>"And quite reasonable too," said Miss Marjoribanks; "you and I will work perfectly well
     together, Nancy. I am sure we have both the same meaning; and I hope you don't think I am less
     concerned about dear papa than about the gravy-beef. He must have been very desolate, with no
     one to talk to, though he has been so good and kind and self-sacrificing in leaving me to get
     every advantage; but I mean to make it up to him, now I've come home."</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes, miss," said Nancy, somewhat mystified; "not but what master has had his little parties
     now and again, to cheer him up a bit; and I make bold to say, miss, as I have heard
     compliments, which it was Thomas that brought 'em downstairs, as might go nigh to turn a body's
     head, if it was vanity as I was thinking of; but I ain't one as thinks of anything but the
     comfort of the family," said Nancy, yielding in spite of herself to follow the leadings of the
     higher will in presence of which she found herself, "and I'm always one as does my best, Miss
     Lucilla, if I ain't worried nor kept to a set figger with my gravy-beef."</t:p>
<t:p>"I have heard of papa's dinners," said Lucilla graciously, "and I don't mean to let down your
     reputation, Nancy. Now we are two women to manage everything, we ought to do still better. I
     have two or three things in my head that I will tell you after; but in the meantime I want you
     to know that the object of my life is to be a comfort to poor papa; and now let us think what
     we had better have for dinner," said the new sovereign. Nancy was so totally unprepared for
     this manner of dethronement, that she gave in like her master. She followed Miss Marjoribanks
     humbly into those details in which Lucilla speedily proved herself a woman of original mind,
     and powers quite equal to her undertaking. The Doctor's formidable housekeeper conducted her
     young mistress downstairs afterwards, and showed her everything with the meekness of a saint.
     Lucilla had won a second victory still more exhilarating and satisfactory than the first; for,
     to be sure, it is no great credit to a woman of nineteen to make a man of any age throw down
     his arms; but to conquer a woman is a different matter, and Lucilla was thoroughly sensible of
     the difference. Now, indeed, she could feel with a sense of reality that her foundations were
     laid.</t:p>
<t:p>Miss Marjoribanks had enough of occupation for that day, and for many days. But her mind was
     a little distracted by her father's parting intelligence, and she had, besides, a natural
     desire to view the country she had come to conquer. When she had made a careful supervision of
     the house, and shifted her own quarters into the pleasantest of the two best bedrooms, and
     concluded that the little bare dimity chamber she had occupied the previous night was quite
     good enough for Tom Marjoribanks, Lucilla put on her hat and went out to make a little
     reconnaissance. She walked down to the spot where St Roque's now stands, on her own side of
     Grange Lane, and up on the other side into George Street, surveying all the capabilities of the
     place with a rapid but penetrating glance. Dr Marjoribanks's house could not have been better
     placed as a strategic position, commanding as it did all Grange Lane, of which it was, so to
     speak, the key, and yet affording a base of communication with the profaner public, which Miss
     Marjoribanks was wise enough to know a leader of society should never ignore completely; for,
     indeed, one of the great advantages of that brilliant position is, that it gives a woman a
     right to be arbitrary, and to select her materials according to her judgment. It was more from
     a disinclination to repeat herself than any other motive that Lucilla, when she had concluded
     this preliminary survey, went up into Grove Street, meaning to return home that way. At that
     hour in the morning the sun was shining on the little gardens on the north side of the street,
     which was the plebeian side; and as it was the end of October, and by no means warm, Lucilla
     was glad to cross over and continue her walk by the side of those little enclosures where the
     straggling chrysanthemums propped each other up, and the cheerful Michaelmas daisies made the
     best of it in the sunshine that remained to them. Miss Marjoribanks had nearly reached Salem
     Chapel, which pushed itself forward amid the cosy little line of houses, pondering in her mind
     the unexpected hindrance which was about to be placed in her triumphant path, in the shape of
     Tom Marjoribanks, when that singular piece of good fortune occurred to her which had so much
     effect upon her career in Carlingford. Such happy accidents rarely happen, except to great
     generals or heroes of romance; and it would have been, perhaps, a presumption on the part of
     Lucilla to place herself conspicuously in either of these categories. The fact is, however,
     that at this eventful moment she was walking along under the shade of her pretty parasol, not
     expecting anything, but absorbed in many thoughts, and a little cast down in her expectations
     of success by a consciousness that this unlucky cousin would insist upon making love to her,
     and perhaps even, as she herself expressed it, <t:hi>saying the words</t:hi> which it had taken all
     her skill to prevent him from saying before. Not that we would have any one believe that
     love-making in the abstract was disagreeable to Miss Marjoribanks; but she was only nineteen,
     well off and good-looking, and with plenty of time for all that; and at the present moment she
     had other matters of more importance in hand. It was while occupied with these reflections, and
     within three doors of Salem Chapel, in front of a little garden where a great deal of
     mignonette had run to seed, and where the Michaelmas daisies had taken full possession, that
     Lucilla was roused suddenly out of her musings. The surprise was so great that she stopped
     short and stood still before the house in the extremity of her astonishment and delight. Who
     could it be that possessed that voice which Miss Marjoribanks felt by instinct was the very one
     thing wanting—a round, full, delicious contralto, precisely adapted to supplement without
     supplanting her own high-pitched and much-cultivated organ? She stopped short before the door
     and made a rapid observation even in the first moment of her surprise. The house was not
     exactly like the other humble houses in Grove Street. Two little blank squares hung in the
     centre of each of the lower windows, revealed to Lucilla's educated eye the existence of so
     much "feeling" for art as can be satisfied with a transparent porcelain version of a famous
     Madonna; and she could even catch a glimpse, through the curtains of the best room—which,
     contrary to the wont of humble gentility in Carlingford, were well drawn back, and allowed the
     light to enter fully—of the glimmer of gilt picture-frames. And in the little garden in front,
     half buried among the mignonette, were some remains of plaster-casts, originally placed there
     for ornament, but long since cast down by rain and neglect. Lucilla made her observations with
     the promptitude of an accomplished warrior, and before the second bar of the melody indoors was
     finished, had knocked very energetically. "Is Miss Lake at home?" she asked, with confidence,
     of the little maid-servant who opened the door to her. And it was thus that Lucilla made her
     first bold step out of the limits of Grange Lane for the good of society, and secured at once
     several important personal advantages, and the great charm of those Thursday evenings which
     made so entire a revolution in the taste and ideas of Carlingford.</t:p>
</t:div>