<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>The second of her Thursday evenings found Miss Marjoribanks, though secure, perhaps more
     anxious than on the former occasion. The charm of the first novelty was gone, and Lucilla did
     not feel quite sure that her subjects had the good sense to recognise all the benefits which
     she was going to confer upon them. "It is the second time that counts," she said in confidence
     to Mrs Chiley. "Last Thursday they wanted to see the drawing-room, and they wanted to know what
     sort of thing it was to be. Dear Mrs Chiley, it is to-night that is the test," said Lucilla,
     giving a nervous pressure to her old friend's hand; at least a pressure that would have
     betokened the existence of nerves in any one else but Miss Marjoribanks, whose magnificent
     organisation was beyond any suspicion of such weakness. But, nevertheless, Mrs Chiley, who
     watched her with grandmotherly interest, was comforted to perceive that Lucilla, as on the
     former occasion, had strength of mind to eat her dinner. "She wants a little support, poor
     dear," the old lady said in her heart; for she was a kinder critic than the younger matrons,
     who felt instinctively that Miss Marjoribanks was doing what they ought to have done. She took
     her favourite's arm in hers as they went upstairs, and gave Mr Cavendish a kindly nod as he
     opened the door for them. "He will come and give you his assistance as soon as ever he can get
     away from the gentlemen," said Mrs Chiley, in her consolatory tone; "but, good gracious,
     Lucilla, what is the matter?" The cause of this exclamation was a universal hum and rustle as
     of many dresses and many voices; and, to tell the truth, when Miss Marjoribanks and her
     companion reached the top of the stairs, they found themselves lost in a laughing crowd, which
     had taken refuge on the landing. "There is no room, Lucilla. Lucilla, everybody in Carlingford
     is here. Do make a little room for us in the drawing-room," cried this overplus of society. If
     there was an enviable woman in Carlingford at that moment, it certainly was Miss Marjoribanks,
     standing on the top of her own stairs, scarcely able to penetrate through the throng of her
     guests. Her self-possession did not forsake her at this supreme moment. She grasped Mrs Chiley
     once again with a little significant gesture which pleased the old lady, for she could not but
     feel that she was Lucilla's only <t:hi>confidante</t:hi> in her brilliant but perilous undertaking.
      "<t:hi>They</t:hi> will not be able to get in when they come upstairs," said Miss Marjoribanks;
     and whether the faint inflection in her voice meant exultation or disappointment, her old
     friend could not tell.</t:p>
<t:p>But the scene changed when the rightful sovereign entered the gay but disorganised dominion
     where her subjects attended her. Before any one knew how it was done, Miss Marjoribanks had
     re-established order, and, what was still more important, made room. She said, "You girls have
     no business to get into corners. The corners are for the people that can talk. It is one of my
     principles always to flirt in the middle of the company," said Lucilla; and again, as happened
     so often, ignorant people laughed and thought it a <t:hi>bon mot</t:hi>. But it is needless to
     inform the more intelligent persons who understand Miss Marjoribanks, that it was by no means a
      <t:hi>bon mot</t:hi>, but expressed Lucilla's convictions with the utmost sincerity.</t:p>
<t:p>Thus it happened that the second Thursday was more brilliant and infinitely more gratifying
     than the first had been. For one thing, she felt sure that it was not to see the new furniture,
     nor to criticise this new sort of entertainment, but with the sincerest intention of enjoying
     themselves, that all the people had come; and there are moments when the egotism of the public
     conveys the highest compliment that can be paid to the great minds which take in hand to rule
     and to amuse it. The only drawback was, that Barbara Lake did not show the same modesty and
     reticence as on the former occasion. Far from being sensibly silent, which she had been so
     prudent as to be on Miss Marjoribanks's first Thursday, she forgot herself so far as to occupy
     a great deal of Mr Cavendish's valuable time, which he might have employed much more usefully.
     She not only sang by herself when he asked her, having brought some music with her unseen by
     Lucilla, but she kept her seat upon the stool before the piano ever so long afterwards,
     detaining him, and, as Miss Marjoribanks had very little doubt, making an exhibition of
     herself: for Barbara, having received one good gift from nature, had been refused the other,
     and could not talk. When Lucilla, arrested in the midst of her many occupations, heard her
     protégée's voice rising alone, she stopped quite short with an anxiety which it was touching to
     behold. It was not the jealousy of a rival cantatrice which inspired Miss Marjoribanks's
     countenance, but the far broader and grander anxiety of an accomplished statesman, who sees a
     rash and untrained hand meddling with his most delicate machinery. Lucilla ignored everything
     for the moment—her own voice, and Mr Cavendish's attentions, and every merely secondary and
     personal emotion. All these details were swallowed up in the fear that Barbara would not acquit
     herself as it was necessary for the credit of the house that she should acquit herself; that
     she should not sing well enough, or that she should sing too much. Once more Miss Marjoribanks
     put her finger upon the pulse of the community as she and they listened together. Fortunately,
     things went so far well that Barbara sang her very best, and kept up her prestige: but it was
     different in the second particular; for, unluckily, the contralto knew a great many songs, and
     showed no inclination to stop. Nothing remained for it but a bold <t:hi>coup</t:hi>, which Lucilla
     executed with all her natural coolness and success.</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear Barbara," she said, putting her hands on the singer's shoulders as she finished her
     strain, "that is enough for to-night. Mr Cavendish will take you downstairs and get you a cup
     of tea; for you know there is no room to-night to serve it upstairs." Thus Miss Marjoribanks
     proved herself capable of preferring her great work to her personal sentiments, which is
     generally considered next to impossible for a woman. She did what perhaps nobody else in the
     room was capable of doing: she sent away the gentleman who was paying attention to her, in
     company with the girl who was paying attention to him; and at that moment, as was usual when
     she was excited, Barbara was splendid, with her crimson cheeks, and the eyes blazing out from
     under her level eyebrows. This Miss Marjoribanks did, not in ignorance, but with a perfect
     sense of what she was about. It was the only way of preventing her Evening from losing its
     distinctive character. It was the Lamp of sacrifice which Lucilla had now to employ, and she
     proved herself capable of the exertion. But it would be hopeless to attempt to describe the
     indignation of old Mrs Chiley, or the unmitigated amazement of the company in general, which
     was conscious at the same time that Mr Cavendish was paying attention to Miss Marjoribanks, and
     that he had been flirting in an inexcusable manner with Miss Lake. "My dear, I would have
     nothing to do with that bold girl," Mrs Chiley said in Lucilla's ear. "I will go down and look
     after them if you like. A girl like that always leads the gentlemen astray, you know. I never
     liked the looks of her. Let me go downstairs and look after them, my dear. I am sure I want a
     cup of tea."</t:p>
<t:p>"You shall have a cup of tea, dear Mrs Chiley," said Miss Marjoribanks—"some of them will
     bring you one; but I can't let you take any trouble about Barbara. She had to be stopped, you
     know, or she would have turned us into a musical party; and as for Mr Cavendish, he is the best
     assistant I have. There are so few men in Carlingford who can flirt," said Lucilla regretfully.
     Her eyes fell as she spoke upon young Osmond Brown, who was actually at that moment talking to
     Mr Bury's curate, with a disregard of his social duties painful to contemplate. Poor Osmond
     started when he met Miss Marjoribanks's reproachful eye.</t:p>
<t:p>"But then I don't know how," said the disconcerted youth,—and he flushed, poor boy, being
     only eighteen, and not much more than a schoolboy. As for Lucilla, who had no intention of
     putting up with that sort of thing, she sent off the curate summarily for Mrs Chiley's cup of
     tea.</t:p>
<t:p>"I did not mean you, my dear Osy," she said, in her motherly tone. "When you are a little
     older we shall see what you can do; but you are not at all disagreeable for a boy," she added
     encouragingly, and took Osmond's arm as she made her progress down the room with an indulgence
     worthy of her maturer years; and even Mrs Centum and Mrs Woodburn and the Miss Browns, who
     were, in a manner, Lucilla's natural rivals, could not but be impressed with this evidence of
     her powers. They were like the Tuscan chivalry in the ballad, who could scarce forbear a cheer
     at the sight of their opponent's prowess. Perhaps nothing that she could have done would have
     so clearly demonstrated the superiority of her genius to her female audience as that bold step
     of stopping the music, which began to be too much, by sending off the singer downstairs under
     charge of Mr Cavendish. To be sure the men did not even find out what it was that awoke the
     ladies' attention; but then, in delicate matters of social politics, one never expects to be
     understood by <t:hi>them</t:hi>.</t:p>
<t:p>Barbara Lake, as was to be expected, took a very long time over her cup of tea; and even when
     she returned upstairs she made another pause on the landing, which was still kept possession of
     by a lively stream of young people coming and going. Barbara had very little experience, and
     she was weak enough to believe that Mr Cavendish lingered there to have a little more of her
     society all to himself; but to tell the truth, his sentiments were of a very different
     description. For by this time it must be owned that Barbara's admirer began to feel a little
     ashamed of himself. He could not but be conscious of Lucilla's magnanimity; and, at the same
     time, he was very well aware that his return with his present companion would be watched and
     noted and made the subject of comment a great deal more amusing than agreeable. When he did
     take Barbara in at last, it was with a discomfited air which tickled the spectators beyond
     measure. And as his evil luck would have it, notwithstanding the long pause he had made on the
     landing, to watch his opportunity of entering unobserved, Miss Marjoribanks was the first to
     encounter the returning couple. They met full in the face, a few paces from the door—exactly,
     as Mrs Chiley said, as if it had been Mr and Mrs Cavendish on their wedding visit, and the lady
     of the house had gone to meet them. As for the unfortunate gentleman, he could not have looked
     more utterly disconcerted and guilty if he had been convicted of putting the spoons in his
     pocket, or of having designs upon the silver tea-service. He found a seat for his companion
     with all the haste possible; and instead of lingering by her side, as she had anticipated, made
     off on the instant, and hid himself like a criminal in the dark depths of a group of men who
     were talking together near the door. These were men who were hopeless, and good for nothing but
     to talk to each other, and whom Miss Marjoribanks tolerated in her drawing-room partly because
     their wives, with an excusable weakness, insisted on bringing them, and partly because they
     made a foil to the brighter part of the company, and served as a butt when anybody wanted to be
     witty. As for Lucilla, she made no effort to recall the truant from the ranks of the
     Incurables. It was the only vengeance she took upon his desertion. When he came to take leave
     of her, she was standing with her hand in that of Mrs Chiley, who was also going away. "I
     confess I was a little nervous this evening," Miss Marjoribanks was saying. "You know it is
     always the second that is the test. But I think, on the whole, it has gone off very well. Mr
     Cavendish, you promised to tell me the truth; for you know I have great confidence in your
     judgment. Tell me sincerely, do you think it has been a pleasant evening?" Lucilla said, with a
     beautiful earnestness, looking him in the face.</t:p>
<t:p>The guilty individual to whom this question was addressed felt disposed to sink into the
     earth, if the earth, in the shape of Mr Holden's beautiful new carpet, would but have opened to
     receive him; but, after all, that was perhaps not a thing to be desired under the
     circumstances. Mr Cavendish, however, was a man of resources, and not disposed to give up the
     contest without striking a blow in his own defence.</t:p>
<t:p>"Not so pleasant as last Thursday," he said. "I am not fit to be a lady's adviser, for I am
     too sincere; but I incline to think it is the third that is the test," said the future M.P.;
     and Lucilla made him, as Mrs Chiley remarked, the most beautiful curtsey; but then nothing
     could be more delightful than the manner in which that dear girl behaved through the whole
     affair.</t:p>
<t:p>"If everybody would only help me as you do!" said Miss Marjoribanks. "Good-night; I am so
     sorry you have not enjoyed yourself. But then it is such a consolation to meet with people that
     are sincere. And I think, on the whole, it has gone off very well for the second," said
     Lucilla, "though I say it that should not say it." The fact was, it had gone off so well that
     the house could hardly be cleared of the amiable and satisfied guests. A series of the most
     enthusiastic compliments were paid to Lucilla as she stood in state in the middle of the room,
     and bade everybody good-bye. "Next Thursday," she said, with the benevolent grace of an
     acknowledged sovereign. And when they were all gone, Miss Marjoribanks's reflections, as she
     stood alone in the centre of her domains, were of a nature very different from the usual
     reflections which the giver of a feast is supposed to make when all is over. But then, as
     everybody is aware, it was not a selfish desire for personal pleasure, nor any scheme of
     worldly ambition, which moved the mind of Lucilla. With such motives it is only natural that
     the conclusion, "All is vanity," should occur to the weary entertainer in the midst of his
     withered flowers and extinguished lights. Such ideas had nothing in common with the enlightened
     conceptions of Miss Marjoribanks. Perhaps it would be false to say that she had suffered in the
     course of this second Thursday, or that a superior intelligence like Lucilla's could permit
     itself to feel any jealousy of Barbara Lake; but it would be vain to deny that she had been
      <t:hi>surprised</t:hi>. And any one who knows Miss Marjoribanks will acknowledge that a great deal
     was implied in that confession. But then she had triumphed over the weakness, and triumphantly
     proved that her estimate of the importance of her work went far beyond the influence of mere
     personal feeling. In these circumstances Lucilla could contemplate her withered flowers with
     perfect calmness, without any thought that all was vanity. But then the fact was, Miss
     Marjoribanks was accomplishing a great public duty, and at the same time had the unspeakable
     consolation of knowing that she had proved herself a comfort to her dear papa. The Doctor, it
     is true, after looking on for a little with a half-amused consciousness that his own assistance
     was totally unnecessary, had gradually veered into a corner, and from thence had finally
     managed to escape downstairs to his beloved library. But then the sense of security and
     tranquillity with which he established himself at the fire, undisturbed by the gay storm that
     raged outside, gave a certain charm to his retirement. He rubbed his hands and listened, as a
     man listens to the wind howling out of doors, when he is in shelter and comfort. So that, after
     all, Lucilla's sensation of having accomplished her filial duties in the most effective manner
     was to a certain extent justified, while at the same time it is quite certain that nobody
     missed Dr Marjoribanks from the pleasant assembly upstairs.</t:p>
</t:div>