
Chapter XXXV
It was the very day after the marriage, and two or three days after this conversation, that
     Mr Cavendish left Carlingford. He went to spend the winter in Italy, which had long been "a
     dream" of his, as he explained to some of the young ladies—most of whom had the same "dream,"
     without the enviable power of carrying it out. He made very brief and formal adieux to Lucilla,
     to the extreme amazement of all the surrounding world, and then disappeared, leaving—just at
     that moment after the excitement of the marriage was over, when Grange Lane stood most in need
     of somebody to rouse its drooping spirits—a wonderful blank behind him. Lucilla said much less
     about her feelings on this occasion than she was in the habit of doing, but there could be no
     doubt that she felt it, and felt it acutely. And the worst of it was, that it was she who was
     universally blamed for the sudden and unexplained departure of the most popular man in
     Carlingford. Some people thought he had gone away to escape from the necessity of proposing to
     her; and some of more friendly and charitable disposition believed with Mrs Chiley that Lucilla
     had refused him; and some, who were mostly outsiders and of a humble class, were of opinion
     that Miss Marjoribanks had exercised all her influence to send Mr Cavendish out of the way of
     Barbara Lake. It was with this impression that Rose made her way one of those foggy autumn
     mornings through the fallen leaves with which the garden was carpeted, to see if any
     explanation was to be got from Lucilla. The art-inspectors from Marlborough House had just paid
     their annual visit to Carlingford, and had found the Female School of Design in a condition
     which, as they said in their report, "warranted the warmest encomiums," and Rose had also won a
     prize for her veil in the exhibition at Kensington of ornamental art. These were triumphs which
     would have made the little artist overwhelmingly happy, if they had not been neutralised by
     other circumstances; but as it was, they only aggravated the difficulties of the position in
     which she found herself. She came to Lucilla in a bonnet—a circumstance which of itself was
     solemn and ominous; for generally that portentous article of dress, which was home-made, and
     did not consist with cheerful dispositions, was reserved by Rose for going to church; and her
     soft cheeks were pale, and the hazel eyes more dewy than usual, though it was rain, and not
     dew, that had been falling from them during those last painful days.
"I am ashamed to ask you such a question," said Rose; "but I want you to tell me, Lucilla, if
     you know why Mr Cavendish has gone away. She will not come and ask you herself, or rather I
     would not let her come; for she is so passionate, one does not know what she might do. You have
     behaved a little strange, Lucilla," said the straightforward Rose. "If he cared for her, and
     she cared for him, you had no right to come and take him away."
"My dear, I did not take him away," said Miss Marjoribanks. "I had to talk to him about
     some—business; that was all. It is disgraceful of Barbara to bother you about it, who are only
     a baby and oughtn't to know anything——"
"Lucilla!" cried Rose, with flashing eyes, "I am seventeen, and I will not put up with it any
     longer. It is all your fault. What right had you to come and drag us to your great parties? We
     are not as rich as you, nor as fine, but we have a rank of our own," cried the little artist.
     "You have a great deal more money, but we have some things that money cannot buy. You made
     Barbara come and sing, and put things into her head; and you made me come, though I did not
     want to. Why did you ask us to your parties, Lucilla? It is all your fault!"
Lucilla was in a subdued state of mind, as may have been perceived, and answered quite
     meekly. "I don't know why you should all turn against me like this," she said, more sadly than
     surprised. "It is unkind of you to say it was my fault. I did not expect it from you; and when
     I have so many vexations——" Miss Marjoribanks added. She sat down as she spoke, after being
     repulsed by Rose, with an air of depression which was quite unusual to her; for to be blamed
     and misunderstood on all sides was hard for one who was always working in the service of her
     fellow-creatures, and doing everything for the best.
As for Rose, her heart smote her on the instant. "Have you vexations, Lucilla?" she
     said, in her innocence. It was the first time such an idea had entered into her mind.
"I don't think I have anything else," said Lucilla; though even as she said it she began to
     recover her spirits. "I do all I can for my friends, and they are never pleased; and when
     anything goes wrong it is always my fault."
"Perhaps if you were not to do so much——" Rose began to say, for she was in her way a wise
     little woman; but her heart smote her again, and she restrained the truism, and then after a
     little pause she resumed her actual business. "I am ashamed to ask you, but do you know where
     Mr Cavendish is, Lucilla?" said Rose. "She is breaking her heart because he has gone away."
"Did he never go to say good-bye nor anything?" asked Miss Marjoribanks. She was sorry, for
     it was quite the contrary of the advice she had given, but still it would be wrong to deny that
     Mr Cavendish rose higher in Lucilla's opinion when she heard it. "I don't know any more than
     everybody knows. He has gone to Italy, but he will come back, and I suppose she can wait," Miss
     Marjoribanks added, with perhaps a touch of contempt. "For my part, I don't think she will
     break her heart."
"It is because you do not know her," said Rose, with some indignation—for at seventeen a
     broken heart comes natural. "Oh, Lucilla, it is dreadful, and I don't know what to do!" cried
     the little artist, changing her tone. "I am a selfish wretch, but I cannot help it. It is as
     good as putting an end to my Career; and just after my design has been so successful—and when
     papa was so proud—and when I thought I might have been a help. It is dreadful to think of
     oneself when her heart is breaking; but I shall have to give up everything; and I—I can't help
     feeling it, Lucilla," cried Rose, with a sudden outburst of tears.
All this was sufficiently unintelligible to Miss Marjoribanks, who was not the least in
     anxiety about Barbara's breaking heart. "Tell me what is the matter, and perhaps we can do
     something," said Lucilla, forgetting how little her past exertions had been appreciated; and
     Rose, with equal inconsistency, dried her tears at the sound of Miss Marjoribanks's reassuring
     voice.
"I know I am a wretch to be thinking of myself," she said. "She cannot be expected to stay
     and sacrifice herself for us, after all she has suffered. She has made up her mind and
     advertised in the Times, and nothing can change it now. She is going out for a
     governess, Lucilla."
"Going for a—what?" said Miss Marjoribanks, who could not believe her ears.
"For a governess," said Rose calmly; for though she had been partly brought up at Mount
     Pleasant, she had not the elevated idea of an instructress of youth which might have been
     expected from a pupil of that establishment. "She has advertised in the Times," Rose
     added, with quiet despair, "with no objections to travel. I would do anything in the world for
     Barbara, but one can't help thinking of oneself sometimes, and there is an end of my Career."
     When she had said this she brushed the last tear off her eyelashes, and sat straight up, a
     little martyr and heroic victim to duty. "Her eye, though fixed on empty space, beamed keen
     with honour"; but still there was a certain desperation in the composure with which Rose
     regarded, after the first outburst, the abandonment of all her hopes.
"She is a selfish thing," said Lucilla indignantly; "she always was a selfish thing. I should
     like to know what she can teach anybody? If I were you and your papa, I certainly would not let
     her go away. I don't see any reason in the world why you should give in to her and let her stop
     your—your Career, you know; why should you? I would not give in to her for one moment, if I
     were your papa and you."
"Why should I?" said Rose; "because there is nobody else to do anything, Lucilla. Fleda and
     Dreda are such two little things; and there are all the boys to think of, and poor papa. It is
     of no use asking why. If I don't do it, there will be nobody to do it," said Rose, with big
     tears coming to her eyes. Her Career was dear to her heart, and those two tears welled up from
     the depths; but then there would be nobody else to do it—a consideration which continually
     filters out the people who are good for anything out of the muddy current of the ordinary
     world.
"And your pretty drawings, and the veil, and the School of Design!" cried Lucilla. "You dear
     little Rose, don't cry. It never can be permitted, you know. She cannot teach anything, and
     nobody will have her. She is a selfish thing, though she is your sister; and if I were your
     papa and you——"
"It would be no good," said Rose. "She will go, whatever anybody may say. She does
     not care," said the little martyr, and the two big tears fell, making two big round blotches
     upon the strings of that bonnet which Lucilla had difficulty in keeping her hands off. But when
     she had thus expressed her feelings, Rose relented over her sister. "She has suffered so much
     here; how can any one ask her to sacrifice herself to us?" said the young artist mournfully.
     "And I am quite happy," said Rose—"quite happy; it makes all the difference. It is her
      heart, you know, Lucilla; and it is only my Career."
And this time the tears were dashed away by an indignant little hand. Barbara's heart, if she
     had such an organ, had never in its existence cost such bitter drops. But as for Lucilla, what
     could she do? She could only repeat, "If I was your papa and you," with a melancholy sense that
     she was here balked and could do no more. For even the aid of Miss Marjoribanks was as nothing
     against dead selfishness and folly, the two most invincible forces in the world. Instead of
     taking the business into her own hands, and carrying it through triumphantly as she had
     hitherto been in the habit of doing, Lucilla could only minister to the sufferer, and keep up
     her courage, and mourn over the Career thus put in danger. Barbara's advertisement was in the
     newspapers, and her foolish mind was made up; and the hope that nobody would have her was a
     forlorn hope, for somebody always does have the incapable people, as Miss Marjoribanks was well
     aware. And the contralto had been of some use in Grange Lane and a little in Grove Street, and
     it would be difficult, either in the one sphere or the other, to find any one to fill her
     place. It was thus amid universal demolition that Christmas approached, and Miss Marjoribanks
     ended the first portion of her eventful career.
