
Chapter XXIX
Mr Cavendish was led back to his own house that evening by General Travers, whose claim of
     acquaintance was too decided to be rejected. He never knew very well what passed between the
     moment when Miss Marjoribanks began to expound to him the urgent necessity that he should
     confide in her, and the moment in which he found himself in his own house, admitted eagerly by
     the surprised and anxious servants, and conducted by the energetic soldier. That he had taken
     leave of Lucilla at her own door, that he had watched her white dress sweep away into the dark
     garden with a faint sense that it was his only remaining protector who thus left him, and that
     after that he had smoked a horrible cigar with Mr Centum, and been accompanied home by the old
     acquaintance, who had turned up at so unlucky a moment,—was all that the poor man was aware of.
     And yet it is to be supposed that on the whole he behaved himself very much like other people,
     since General Travers had no distinct idea that his company was undesirable, or that his
     cordial recognition was anything but welcome. The General, indeed, took it as quite natural,
     under the circumstances, that Cavendish should be a little confused. A man who is no longer a
     very young man, and has a character to support, does not care to be found mooning with the
     object of his affections on a summer evening, like a boy of twenty; and General Travers was
     perfectly aware that he had thus a very good joke against Cavendish. "It is worth a man's while
     to set up a bachelor establishment in the country," the General said. "By Jove! I wish I could
     do it. It makes a fellow feel Arcadian, and ready for anything;" and for his own part he was
     very ready to seize upon his former acquaintance, a man who belonged to his club, and had a
     chance to know what he was talking about. "As for Charlie Centum," the soldier said, "what
     between business and matrimony, he has grown the greatest guy imaginable; and I can't go off
     directly, you know; and then there's always this business about the depot. It's immense luck to
     find you here, Cavendish," General Travers added, with flattering cordiality; and if poor Mr
     Cavendish was not grateful, it certainly was not his friend's fault. He led the way into his
     house with a glum countenance and a sinking heart, though fortunately the latter was not
     visible. It was a very nice house, fitted up with all that luxury of comfort which a man who
     has, as Mrs Centum said, "only himself to look to," can afford to collect around him. Mr
     Cavendish had only himself, and he had made his habitation perfect, though, on the whole, he
     did not pass a very great deal of his time at home. He had some nice pictures and a good
     library, though he was not particularly given to the arts; and he had an admirable cellar, as
     all the gentlemen owned in Carlingford, though, for his own part, he was very moderate in that
     point, and did not give himself any airs on the subject. Mr Centum, on the contrary, was one of
     the men who talk about vintages, and raise expectations never to be carried out. And General
     Travers could not but feel the force of the contrast as he sat deep into the night, and "talked
     over everything," with the man who by that time he felt convinced was one of his best
     friends.
As for Mr Cavendish, it would be very difficult to describe his feelings. He had been
     knocking about in all sorts of poor places, making clandestine visits to his sister, and
     hovering round the more than suburban simplicity of Grove Street, and the sense of being once
     more enveloped and surrounded by all that was pleasant to the eye and comfortable to the outer
     man was wonderfully consolatory and agreeable. But his mind was in a dreadfully harassed
     condition all the same. He was preoccupied to the last degree, wondering what Miss Marjoribanks
     really knew, and how far he had betrayed himself, and to what extent it would be safe, as she
     herself said, to confide in Lucilla; and at the same time he was obliged to listen to and show
     a certain interest in the General's stories, and to make now and then a painful effort of mind
     to recall some of the mutual friends referred to, whose names and persons had in the meantime
     slipped out of his memory. All the babble of the club, which General Travers felt must be so
     refreshing to the ears of a rusticated member, fell as flat upon Mr Cavendish, whose mind was
     full of other matters, as if it had been the merest old woman's gossip, which, to be sure, it
     slightly resembled in some points. The gallant General made himself so agreeable that he nearly
     drove the unfortunate man out of his senses, and, when he had exhausted all other means of
     aggravation, returned with fresh zest to the sentimental circumstances in which, as he
     supposed, he had found his companion out.
"Very sensible I call it," said General Travers. "To be candid, I don't call her strictly
     handsome, you know; she's too big for that—and I don't suppose she's of any family to speak of;
     though perhaps you don't mind that trifling circumstance; but a woman that will dress well and
     light up well, and knows how to give a man a capital dinner, by Jove! and no doubt has a pretty
     little bit of money into the bargain—I respect your taste, Cavendish," said the friendly
     critic, with effusion; and somehow this applause irritated its recipient more than all that had
     gone before.
"I am sure I am much obliged to you," said Mr Cavendish, "though, unfortunately, I don't
     merit your approbation. Miss Marjoribanks is a great friend of mine, but she wouldn't have me,
     and I don't mean to ask her. At the same time, she has very good connections; and that is not
     the way to talk of a girl of twenty. She is worth a dozen of your fast young ladies," said the
     sufferer, with some heat. He was not in the least in love with Lucilla, and indeed had a
     certain dread of her at this present moment; but he could not forget that she had once stood by
     him in his need—and, besides, he was glad of any subject on which he could contradict his
     visitor. "I dare say her family is better than either yours or mine. Scotch, you know," said Mr
     Cavendish, trying to laugh. As for the General, he leaned back on his chair with an indulgent
     air, and stroked his mustache.
"Beg your pardon—meant no offence," he said. "For my part, I don't see that it matters, if a
     woman is good-looking and has something, you know. For instance, there was a pretty little
     thing—a charming little thing—Lake, or something like that——"
"Ah!" said Mr Cavendish. It was a frightful want of self-control; but he had been a long time
     at full strain, and he could not help it. It did not occur to him, for the moment, that nobody
     in his senses would have applied the term "little thing" to Barbara; and, after all the slow
     aggravation that he had been submitting to, the idea of this insolent soldier interfering in
     Grove Street was beyond his power of endurance. As for the General, the tone of this
     exclamation was such that he too turned round on his chair, and said, "Yes?" with equally
     unmistakable meaning, startled, but ready for the emergency, whatever it might be.
Thus the two looked at each other for a second, friends in the ordinary acceptation of the
     word, and yet, perhaps, on the eve of becoming enemies. Mr Cavendish had, up to that moment,
     pretty nearly forgotten Barbara Lake. It was a piquant sort of occupation when he had nothing
     else to do, and when the world, according to his morbid fancy, was on the eve of turning its
     back upon him—but from the moment when he had said between his teeth "Confound these women!"
     and had felt the excitement of the approaching crisis, Barbara, and her crimson cheeks, and her
     level eyebrows, and her contralto, had gone altogether out of his mind. At the same time, it is
     quite true that a man may feel himself at liberty to forget a woman when other matters of more
     immediate interest are absorbing his attention, and yet be driven furious by the idea suddenly
     presented to him that somebody else, who has nothing earthly to do with it, is about to
     interfere. Mr Cavendish, however, recovered himself while the General sat staring at him, and
     began to see how ridiculous his defiance was.
"Well?—go on. I did not say anything," he said, and lighted another cigar. Yet he did not
     face his companion as a friendly listener should, but began to beat measure to an irritating
     imaginary air on the table, with a certain savage energy by moments, as if he were beating time
     on the General's head.
"Then why do you stop a fellow short like that?" said General Travers; "I was going to tell
     you of some one I saw the other day in the house of your—your friend, you know. She was under
     Miss Marjoribanks's wing, that was how I saw her—and I hope you are not playing the gay
     deceiver, my friend;—a little thing, round-faced, hazel-eyed—a little soft rosebud sort of
     creature," said the General, growing eloquent. "By Jove! Cavendish, I hope you don't mean to
     make yourself disagreeable. These sort of looks, you know——"
"It was Rose, I suppose," said Mr Cavendish, relieved in a moment; and, to tell the truth, he
     could not help laughing. The more eloquent and angry the General grew, the more amused and
     contemptuous grew his entertainer. He was so tickled by the position of affairs, that he
     actually forgot his anxieties for the moment. "No doubt it was Rose," he repeated, and laughed;
     Rose! what anybody could see in that little dragon! And then the contrast between the soldier,
     who prided himself on his knowledge of the world, and liked to talk of his family and position,
     to the annoyance of those who had none, and the amusement of those who happen to possess these
     valuable qualifications—and the mistress of the Female School of Design, filled Mr Cavendish
     with amusement: perhaps all the more because he himself was in a similar scrape. As for General
     Travers, he was as much disposed to be angry as, a moment before, Mr Cavendish had been.
"It might be Rose," he said, "or Lily either, for anything I can tell; but there is nothing
     laughable in it that I can see. You seem to be perfectly au courant, at all
     events—which I hope is quite satisfactory to Miss Marjoribanks," said the soldier; and then he
     resumed, after a disagreeable little pause, "they tell me that everybody meets at the Doctor's
     on Thursdays. I suppose I shall see you there. Thursday, ain't it? to-morrow?" He looked as he
     spoke, with what seemed to his victim an insulting consciousness, in poor Cavendish's face.
     But, in reality, the General did not mean to be insulting, and knew nothing whatever of the
     horrible internal pang which rent his companion when it was thus recalled to him that it
      was to-morrow—a fact which, up to this moment, had not occurred to the unfortunate.
     To-morrow; and not even to-morrow—to-day—for by this time it was two o'clock in the morning,
     and the unwelcome intruder was wasting the little time he had for deciding what he should do.
     Once more his own personal anxieties, which he had put aside for a moment at the sudden dictate
     of jealousy, surged over everything, and swallowed up all lesser sensations. To-morrow!—and by
     this time everybody knew that he was in Carlingford, and he could not stay away from the weekly
     assembly without attracting general attention to himself, and throwing open the flood-gates of
     suspicion. What was he to do? should he turn his back on the enemy once for all, and run away
     and break off his connection with Carlingford? or should he dare everything and face the
     Archdeacon, and put his trust in Lucilla, as that high-minded young woman had invited him to
     do? With these thoughts in his mind, it may be supposed that Mr Cavendish gave but a very
     mingled attention to the babble of his visitor, who found the wine and the cigars so good, and
     perhaps had begun to be a little moved out of his ordinary lucidity by their effect.
"You've got a nice little house, Cavendish," said the General, "but it's too small for a
     married man, my boy. These women are the very deuce for turning a man out of his comfortable
     quarters. You'll have to go in for boudoirs and those sort of things; and, by George! you'll be
     an ass if you do, with a snug little box like this to retire into," said the philosophical
     warrior; and poor Cavendish smiled a ghastly smile, with the strongest inclination all the time
     to take him by the collar and turn him out of doors. But then he was a warrior and a
     general officer, and a member of the same club, and six feet high—all which particulars, not to
     speak of the sacred rights of hospitality, made it somewhat difficult to carry this idea
     out.
"Don't you think Centum will be sitting up for you?" he said mildly; "it's past two o'clock;
     and it's Thursday morning," the victim added, with a sigh. The last words were an involuntary
     utterance of his own despair, but fortunately they struck General Travers's vein of humour,
     which happened to be lively at the moment, and worked the desired but unexpected result. The
     General laughed loud and long, and declared that he respected a man who was above-board, and
     meant to look respectable for Miss Marjoribanks's sake; and then he poured a mighty libation to
     Lucilla, and took an affectionate leave of her supposed lover. The General made a great
     commotion in the decorous quiet of Grange Lane when he knocked at Mr Centum's door. Though it
     was nearly three o'clock in the morning, nothing but his inherent dread of a woman would have
     prevented him from knocking up the banker to share his hilarity; but Mrs Centum, in her
     nightcap, peaceably asleep as she was at the moment, daunted the soul of the gallant soldier;
     and naturally his recollection was not very perfect next day. "I had something very funny to
     tell you; but, by Jove! I forget what it was!" General Travers said next morning when he met
     his host at breakfast; and thus one bad joke at least was spared. But Mr Cavendish shut his
     door upon his departing guest, without any sense, poor fellow, of having done or said anything
     in the least funny. He said, "Thank Heaven!" with a kind of groan of relief when his
     troublesome visitor was gone. And then he went back again into his library, where they had been
     sitting. Perhaps he had never fully appreciated before the comfort of everything, the handsome
     house which he had enjoyed so long without thinking anything of it, and all the pleasant
     luxurious accessories of life. He had been doing without them for a week or two, and he had not
     liked it; and yet at that moment it seemed to Mr Cavendish that he could rather be content to
     lose them all at a stroke, to make it known in Carlingford that he was ruined and had lost his
     fortune, than that Carlingford should find out that he was not, after all, one of the
     Cavendishes, nor the person it took him for. But, alas! all his fortune could not bring reality
     to these pretensions, nor hinder the exposure to which he looked forward with such horror. It
     is true that he was an adventurer, but he was not a base one; nor had he done anything
     dishonourable either to gain his fortune or to captivate the good opinion of society, which had
     become so important to him. But there are actual crimes that would be sooner forgiven to a man
     than the folly of having permitted himself to be considered one of the Cavendishes, and having
     set his heart on making a figure in that mild provincial world. Mr Cavendish knew enough of
     human nature to know that a duchess or a lord-chamberlain would forgive more readily than Mr
     and Mrs Centum any such imposition upon them, and intrusion into their exclusive circle. And
     then his sister, who could not run away! For her sake it seemed to him that he had better rush
     off at once, and sell his house and furniture and horses, and give up Carlingford. As he
     thought of that, all the advantages of Carlingford came upon him stronger than ever. Perhaps a
     man who has always been used to be recognised as one of the members of a local aristocracy,
     would not have seen anything half so precious as Mr Cavendish saw in the fact of being
     everywhere known and acknowledged as a constituent part of Grange Lane;—recognised by the
     county people, and by the poor people, and pointed out as he passed by one and another to any
     stranger who might happen to be so ignorant as not to know Mr Cavendish. To people who are not
     used to it, there is a charm in this universal acknowledgment. And then he had more need of it
     than most men have; and, when Carlingford signed his patent of gentility, and acknowledged and
     prized him, it did an infinite deal more than it had any intention of doing. To keep its regard
     and recognition he would have done anything, given up the half or three parts, or even, on
     emergency, all he had. Perhaps he had an undue confidence in the magnanimity of society, and
     was too sure that in such a case it would behave with a grandeur worthy of the occasion; but
     still he was quite right in thinking that it could forgive the loss of his fortune sooner than
     his real offence. And now it was Thursday morning, the day upon which he must either fight or
     flee. He too had laughed at Miss Marjoribanks's evenings in his time, and thought of Thursday
     lightly as Lucilla's day; but there was nothing in the least amusing in the prospect of that
     assembly now.
When a man has thoughts like these to entertain him, nothing can be more useless than to go
     to bed, although in ordinary circumstances, at three o'clock in the morning, that is about the
     only thing one can do. Poor Mr Cavendish, however, was not quite free to act as he thought
     proper. He had been a long time away from home, and he did not feel himself in a position to
     shock his servants' feelings with impunity. He went to his room, accordingly, like a martyr,
     carrying all his difficulties with him, and these unpleasant companions naturally made a night
     of it when they had him all to themselves. When sheer fatigue and exhaustion procured him a
     moment's sleep, it was only getting deeper and deeper into trouble: for then it was the
     Archdeacon who had planted a heavy foot on his neck, or General Travers, who, with still more
     fatal force, had found out the way to Grove Street. When Mr Cavendish awoke, he said to
     himself, "Confound these women!" with more fervour than ever; but, at the same time, he swore a
     mighty oath to himself that he would horsewhip the fellow who ventured to come in his way.
     Barbara Lake might be no great things, but at least it was to him, and no one else, that she
     belonged. Such was the complication that afforded him a little outlet for his temper in the
     midst of the dreadful difficulties of his position, and the question which was constantly
     renewing itself in his thoughts, as to whether he should go or stay. The idea of presenting
     himself in the centre of society in Miss Marjoribanks's drawing-room, and being met by the
     Archdeacon, and held up to public contempt there and then, with all the world looking on, and
     even Travers, who would carry the narrative out of Carlingford, was something too horrible to
     be contemplated; and yet how was he to escape? He was still in this state of mind, driven
     backwards and forwards by every new wind, when the morning came, and when Miss Marjoribanks's
     note was put into his hand.
For the truth was, that, after long consideration, Lucilla had determined that the matter was
     one which could not be permitted to stand over. She was of too energetic a temperament to let
     things linger on in an uncertain way when they could be made an end of, and brought to a
     conclusion; and then, as nobody can predict what sudden and unexpected turn human affairs may
     take, it was always possible that, if Miss Marjoribanks did not make an end of the business
     dramatically, and to the satisfaction of everybody concerned, it might be found some fine day
     to have resolved itself by means of some one of those illegitimate and incomplete expedients
     which abound in ordinary life. It was with this view that Miss Marjoribanks took the step of
     writing to Mr Cavendish. She had written in the sacred retirement of her own maiden chamber,
     when all the world was still; perhaps at the moment when General Travers was, as he would
     himself have vulgarly called it, "chaffing" Cavendish about the beautiful and disinterested
     friendship which united him to the young sovereign of Grange Lane. But naturally such poor
     raillery was far from the virginal thoughts of Lucilla at that retired and sacred hour; and we
     may venture to add that the elevating influence of the maiden's bower in which she composed it,
     and of that tranquil moment of meditation and solitude, breathed in every line, and gave force
     to every sentiment of the letter which Mr Cavendish tore open with an excited hand. Perhaps he
     was too anxious and curious to give it the solemn perusal which it ought to have received.

"My dear Mr Cavendish,—It was very unlucky that we should have been interrupted
      this evening at such an important moment, when I had so much to say to you. But I think the
      best thing I can do is to write, feeling quite sure that when you know all, you cannot
       possibly mistake my motives. Everybody has retired, and I am quite alone, and the
       silence[2] seems to me full of meaning when I think that
      the fate of a person for whom I have so great a regard may be hanging upon it. I might be
      afraid of writing to you so frankly, if I did not feel quite sure that you would appreciate my
      intention.
"Dear Mr Cavendish, it is not the Archdeacon who has said anything. He does not know it
       is you; therefore, of course, he could not say anything directly bearing upon you. But
      then, you know, if he were to meet you by hazard, as he is sure to do some day—and for my part
      I rather think he is fond of Grove Street—you would be exposed at once, and everything would
      be lost, for we all know the prejudices that exist in Carlingford. I have another plan of
      operations to propose to you, which I feel quite sure is for your good, and also naturally for
      the good of anybody to whom you may intend to unite your fortunes. I feel quite sure that it
      is far safer to adopt a bold resolution, and to have it over at once. Come to dinner
      to-morrow. If you may happen to find an enemy, you will find also an unlooked-for friend; and,
      so far as I am concerned, you know that you may calculate on my support. I do not
      wonder at your being anxious about it; but if you will only have full confidence in me and a
      little in yourself, believe me it will be all over in a night. If there had ever been anything
      between you and me, as these stupid people suppose, I might have felt hesitation in writing to
      you like this; but when I know a thing to be right, I hope I will never be afraid to do it. I
      have been called upon to do many things that are not common for girls of my age, and perhaps
      that is why I made up my mind at once to set this all straight for you. Once more I repeat,
      dear Mr Cavendish, have confidence in me. Come to-morrow evening as if nothing had happened;
      and take my word for it that all will go well.—Your friend,
"Lucilla Marjoribanks.
"P.S.—If you would like to come and talk it over with me to-morrow, I shall be at
      home till twelve o'clock; but unless it will be a satisfaction to your own mind, it is not
      necessary for me, for I have all my plans laid."
It would be quite out of the question to attempt any explanation of Mr Cavendish's feelings
     when he read this letter. His utter bewilderment, his terror, his rage, his final helpless
     sense that it would be utterly hopeless for him, or half a dozen men, to enter the field
     against this curious complication of unknown friends and open enemies and generous protectors,
     took away from him the last remnant of courage. He did not know what to do or to think. He
     swallowed his coffee with a sense of despair, and sent the rest of his breakfast away untasted;
     thus betraying, without intending it, his emotions to his kitchen. "It stands to reason as
     there's a cause for it," Mr Cavendish's domestics concluded in committee of the whole house;
     and surely, if ever man had good reason for not eating his breakfast, it was he. When he had
     gone over it all again till his head had grown utterly confused and his thoughts were all
     topsy-turvy, Mr Cavendish took a sudden resolution. He went upstairs and changed his dress with
     a certain solemnity. He made a toilette more careful than if he were going, as he once had
     gone, to propose. It was like Nelson going into gala uniform for a battle. And then he went out
     to discover, if possible, what was coming to him. The difference was, that in this battle no
     honour, but only a possible salvage of reputation and fortunate escape, was to be gained.
