
Chapter XV
This event was of far too much importance in the limited world of Grange Lane to pass over
     without some of the many commentaries which were going on upon the subject coming to the ears
     of Miss Marjoribanks, who was the person principally concerned. As for the Doctor, as we have
     already said, he was so far lost to a sense of his paternal duties as to chuckle a little
     within himself over the accident that had happened to Lucilla. It had done her no harm, and Dr
     Marjoribanks permitted himself to regard the occurrence in a professional point of view, as
     supplying a little alterative which he could scarcely administer himself; for it is well known
     that physicians are seldom successful in the treatment of their own families. He was more
     jocose than usual at breakfast for some days following, and, on the morning of the next
     Thursday, asked if everybody was to come as usual, with a significance which did not escape the
     young mistress of the house.
"You know best, papa," she said cheerfully, as she poured him out his coffee: "if there is
     anybody who is ill and can't come, it must be your fault—but I did not hear that any one was
     ill."
"Nor I," said the Doctor, with a quiet laugh; and he could not help thinking it would be good
     sport to see Cavendish come into the drawing-room all by himself without any support, and make
     his appearance before Miss Marjoribanks, and do his best to be agreeable, with an awful
     consciousness of his bad behaviour, and nobody sufficiently benevolent to help him out. The
     Doctor thought it would serve him right, but yet he was not sufficiently irritated nor
     sufficiently sympathetic to lose any of the humour of the situation; and it was with a little
     zest, as for something especially piquant, that he looked forward to the evening. As for Miss
     Marjoribanks, she too recognised the importance of the occasion. She resolved to produce that
     evening a new plat, which had occupied a corner of her busy mind for some time past.
     It was a crisis which called for a new step in advance. She sat down by the window after
     breakfast with various novel combinations floating in her creative brain; and while she was
     revolving these ideas in her mind, Nancy came in with more than her usual briskness. It is true
     that Lucilla had her household well in hand, and possessed the faculty of government to a
     remarkable extent; but still, under the best of circumstances, it was a serious business to
     propose a new dish to Nancy. Dr Marjoribanks's factotum was a woman of genius in her way, and
     by no means unenlightened or an enemy of progress; but then she had a weakness common to many
     persons of superior intelligence and decided character. When there was anything new to be
     introduced, Nancy liked to be herself the godmother of the interesting novelty; for, to be
     sure, it was her place, and Miss Lucilla, though she was very clever, was not to be expected to
     understand what came in best with the other dishes for a dinner. "I ain't one as goes just upon
     fish and flesh and fowl, like some as call themselves cooks," Nancy said. "If I have a failing,
     it's for things as suits. When it's brown, make it brown, and don't be mean about the
     gravy-beef—that's my principle; and when it ain't brown, mind what you're a-doing of—and don't
     go and throw a heap of entrys and things at a gentleman's head without no 'armony. I always
     says to Miss Lucilla as 'armony's the thing; and when I've set it all straight in my mind, I
     ain't one as likes to be put out," Nancy would add, with a gleam in her eye which betokened
     mischief. Miss Marjoribanks was much too sensible not to be aware of this peculiarity; and
     accordingly she cleared her throat with something as near nervousness as was possible to
     Lucilla before she opened her lips to propose the innovation. Miss Marjoribanks, as a general
     rule, did not show much nervousness in her dealings with her prime minister, any more than in
     her demeanour towards the less important members of society; and consequently Nancy remarked
     the momentary timidity, and a flash of sympathy and indignation took the place of her usual
     impulse of defiance.
"I heard as master said, there was some gentleman as wasn't a-coming," said Nancy. "Not as
     one makes no difference in a dinner; but I allays likes to know. I don't like no waste, for my
     part. I ain't one as calk'lates too close, but if there's one thing as I hates like poison,
     it's waste. I said as I would ask, for Thomas ain't as correct as could be wished. Is it one
     less than usual, Miss Lucilla?" said Nancy; and it was Lucilla's fault if she did not
     understand the profound and indignant sympathy in Nancy's voice.
"Oh, no; it is just the usual number," said Miss Marjoribanks. "It was only a joke of
     papa's—they are all just as usual——" And here Lucilla paused. She was thinking of the dish she
     wanted, but Nancy thought she was thinking of Mr Cavendish, who had treated her so badly. She
     studied the countenance of her young mistress with the interest of a woman who has had her
     experiences, and knows how little They are to be depended upon. Nancy murmured "Poor
     dear!" under her breath, almost without knowing it, and then a brilliant inspiration came to
     her mind. Few people have the gift of interfering successfully in such cases, but then to offer
     consolation is a Christian duty, especially when one has the confidence that to give
     consolation is in one's power.
"Miss Lucilla, I would say as you've been doing too much, if anybody was to ask me," said
     Nancy, moved by this generous impulse—"all them practisings and things. They're well enough for
     young ladies as ain't got nothing else to do; but you as has such a deal in your hands——If
     there was any little thing as you could fancy for dinner," said Nancy, in her most bland
     accents; "I've set it all down as I thought would be nicest, allays if you approves, Miss
     Lucilla; but if there was any little thing as you could fancy——" "Poor dear, it's all as we can
     do," she murmured to herself. The faithless could not be brought back again; but Ariadne might
     at least have any little thing she could fancy for dinner, which, indeed, is a very general
     treatment of such a case on the part of perplexed sympathisers who do not know what to say.
Lucilla was so excited for the moment by this unusual evidence of her own good fortune, that
     she had almost spoiled all by sitting straight up and entering with her usual energy into the
     discussion—but instinct saved Miss Marjoribanks from this mistake. She lost no time in taking
     advantage of the opportunity, and instead of having a fight with Nancy, and getting a reluctant
     consent, and still more reluctant execution of the novelty, Lucilla felt that she was doing
     that excellent woman a favour by naming her new dish. Nancy approved so thoroughly as to be
     enthusiastic. "I always said as she had a deal of sense," she said afterwards triumphantly.
     "There ain't one young lady in a hundred as knows what's good for her, like Miss Lucilla." But
     notwithstanding this fervent declaration of approval, Nancy, softened as she was, could not but
     linger, when all was concluded, to give a little advice.
"I wouldn't worrit myself with all them practisings, Miss Lucilla, if I was you," said her
     faithful retainer. "They're a deal too much for you. I've took the liberty, when all was
     cleaned up, to go on the stair and listen a bit, and there ain't nothing to equal it when
     you're a-singing by yourself. I don't think nothing of them duets—and as for that bold-faced
     brazen thing——"
"Oh, Nancy, hush!" said Lucilla; "Miss Lake has a beautiful voice. If she does not look quite
     like a lady, it is not her fault, poor thing. She has no mamma to set her right, you know. She
     is the best assistant I have—she and Mr Cavendish," said Lucilla sweetly; and she gave Nancy a
     look which moved the faithful servant almost to tears, though she was not addicted to that
     weakness. Nancy retired with the most enthusiastic determination to exert herself to the utmost
     for the preparation of the little dish which Lucilla fancied. "But I wouldn't worrit about them
     duets," she said again, as she left the room. "I wouldn't, not if I was you, Miss Lucilla,
     asking pardon for the liberty: as for having no mamma, you have no mamma yourself, and you the
     young lady as is most thought upon in Carlingford, and as different from that brazen-faced
     thing, with her red cheeks——"
"Hush, oh hush, Nancy," Lucilla said, as she sank back in her chair; but Miss Marjoribanks,
     after all, was only human, and she was not so distressed by these unpolished epithets as she
     might or perhaps ought to have been. "Poor Barbara! I wish she could only look a little bit
     like a lady," she said to herself; and so proceeded with her preparations for the evening. She
     had all her plans matured, and she felt quite comfortable about that evening which all her
     friends were thinking would be rather trying for Lucilla. To tell the truth, when a thing
     became rather trying, Lucilla's spirits rose. Mr Cavendish's desertion was, perhaps, on the
     whole, more than compensated for by the exhilaration of a difficulty to be encountered. She too
     began to forecast, like her father, the possibilities of the evening, and to think of Mr
     Cavendish coming in to dinner when there was nobody to support him, and not even a crowd of
     people to retire among. Would he run the risk of coming, under the circumstances? or, if he
     came, would he prostrate himself as he had done on a previous occasion, and return to his
     allegiance? This question roused Lucilla to a degree of energy unusual even to her who was
     always energetic. It was then that the brilliant idea struck her of adjourning to the garden in
     the evening—a practice which was received with such enthusiasm in Carlingford, where the
     gardens were so pretty. She put on her hat directly and went downstairs, and called the
     gardener to consult him about it; and it was thus that she was employed when Mrs Chiley rang
     the bell at the garden gate. If it had been anybody else in Carlingford, Lucilla would have led
     her back again to the house, and said nothing about the subject of her conference with the
     gardener; for it is always best, as all judicious persons are aware, not to forestall these
     little arrangements which make so agreeable a surprise at the moment; but then Mrs Chiley was
     Miss Marjoribanks's special confidant. The old lady had her face full of business that bright
     morning. She listened to what her young friend proposed, but without hearing it, and said. "Oh,
     yes, my dear, I am sure it will be charming," without the very least notion what it was she
     applauded. "Let us go in and sit down a moment, for I have something to say to you, Lucilla,"
     Mrs Chiley said; and when they had reached the drawing-room and shut the door, the Colonel's
     wife gave her favourite a kiss, and looked anxiously in her face. "You have not been to see me
     since Monday," said Mrs Chiley. "I am sure you are not well, or you could not have stayed away
     so long; but if you did not feel equal to going out, why did you not send for me, Lucilla, my
     poor dear?" Though Miss Marjoribanks's thoughts at that moment were full of the garden, and not
     in the least occupied with those more troublesome matters which procured for her Mrs Chiley's
     sympathy, she placed the kind old lady in the most easy chair, and sat down by her, as Mrs
     Chiley liked to see a young creature do. Lucilla's affairs were too important to be trusted to
     a young confidante of her own age; but even a person of acknowledged genius like Miss
     Marjoribanks is the better of some one to whom she can open up her breast.
"Dear Mrs Chiley!" said Lucilla, "I am quite well, and I meant to have come to see you
     to-day."
"My poor dear!" said Mrs Chiley again. "You say you are quite well for you have such a
     spirit; but I can see what you have been going through. I don't understand how you can keep on,
     and do so much. But it was not that that brought me here. There is some one coming to
     Carlingford that I want you to meet, Lucilla. He is a relation of Mary Chiley's husband, and as
     she does not get on very well with them, you know, I think it is our duty to be civil. And they
     say he is a very nice man; and young—enough," said Mrs Chiley, with a look of some anxiety,
     pausing to see the effect produced upon Lucilla by her words.
Miss Marjoribanks had not, as she once confessed, a very vivid sense of humour, but she
     laughed a little, in spite of herself, at the old lady's anxious look. "Don't be sorry for me,"
     she said; "I told you that fortunately my affections were not engaged. I don't want any new
     gentleman introduced to me. If that was what I was thinking of, I never need have come
     home," Lucilla said, with a little dignity; and yet, to be sure, she was naturally curious to
     know who the new man, who was very nice and young—enough, could be; for such apparitions were
     not too plentiful in Carlingford; and it did not seem in reason that an individual of this
     interesting description could come out of Colonel Chiley's house.
"My dear, he is a clergyman," said Mrs Chiley, putting her hand on Miss Marjoribanks's arm,
     and speaking in a half whisper; "and you know a nice clergyman is always nice, and you need not
     think of him as a young man unless you like. He has a nice property, and he is Rector of
     Basing, which is a very good living, and Archdeacon of Stanmore. He has come here to hold a
     visitation, you know; and they say that if Carlingford was made into a bishopric, he is almost
     sure to be the first bishop; and you know a bishop, or even an archdeacon, has a very nice
     position. I want to be civil to him for Mary Chiley's sake, who is not on such terms as we
     could wish with her husband's friends; and then I suppose he will have to be a great deal in
     Carlingford, and I should like him to form a good impression. I want you and your dear good
     papa to come and meet him; and then after that—but one thing is enough at a time," the old lady
     said, breaking off with a nod and a smile. She too had brought her bit of consolation to
     Lucilla; and it was a kind of consolation which, when administered at the right moment, is
     sometimes of sovereign efficacy, as Mrs Chiley was aware.
"I am sure papa will be very happy," said Lucilla; "and, indeed, if you like, I shall be very
     glad to ask him here. If he is a friend of yours, that is quite enough for me. It is very nice
     to know a nice clergyman; but as for being a young man, I can't see how that matters. If I had
     been thinking of that, I need never—but I should think papa would like to meet him;
     and you know it is the object of my life to please papa."
"Yes, my poor dear," said the Colonel's wife, "and he would be hard-hearted indeed if he was
     not pleased; but still we must consider you a little, Lucilla. You do everything for other
     people, and you never think of yourself. But I like to see you with nice people round you, for
     my part," Mrs Chiley added—"really nice people, and not these poor-spirited, ungrateful——"
"Hush, hush!" said Lucilla; "I don't know such nice people anywhere as there are in
     Carlingford. Some people are never pleased with their neighbours, but I always get on so well
     with everybody. It is my good luck, you know; and so long as I have you, dear Mrs Chiley——"
"Ah, Lucilla!" said the old lady, "that is very kind of you—and you could not have anybody
     that is fonder of you than I am; but still I am an old woman, old enough to be your
     grandmother, my dear—and we have your future interests to think of. As for all the vexations
     you have had, I think I could find it in my heart to turn that ungrateful creature to the door.
     Don't let her come here any more. I like your voice a great deal better when you are singing by
     yourself—and I am sure the Archdeacon would be of my opinion," said Mrs Chiley, with a
     confidence which was beautiful to behold. It was true she had not seen her new hero as yet, but
     that only left her so much more free to take the good of him and his probable sentiments; for
     to persons of frank and simple imagination a very little foundation of fact is enough to build
     upon.
"Dear Mrs Chiley, it is so nice of you to be vexed," said Lucilla, who thought it as well not
     to enter into any further argument. "Papa will be delighted, I am sure, and I can come in the
     evening. The Colonel likes to have only six people, and you will be three to start with, so
     there can't be any room for me at dinner; and you know I don't mind about dinner. I shall come
     in the evening and make tea for you—and if you think he would like to come next Thursday——"
     said Lucilla graciously. This was how it was eventually settled. Mrs Chiley went home again
     through Grange Lane in the sunshine, with that little old-womanish hobble which Mrs Woodburn
     executed with such precision, perfectly satisfied with her success, and indulging herself in
     some pleasant visions. To be sure, a nice clergyman is always nice to know, even though nothing
     more was to come of it; and a new man in the field of such distinguished pretensions, would be
     Lucilla's best defence against any sort of mortification. As for Miss Marjoribanks herself, she
     was thinking a great deal more of the new details for the approaching evening than of anything
     else more distant, and consequently less important; but, on the whole, she was by no means
     displeased to hear of the Archdeacon. In such a work as hers, a skilful leader is always on the
     outlook for auxiliaries; and there are circumstances in which a nice clergyman is almost as
     useful to the lady of the house as a man who can flirt. To be sure, now and then there occurs a
     rare example in which both these qualities are united in one person; but even in the most
     modest point of view, if he was not stupid or obstinately Low-Church, there was nothing to
     despise in the apparition of the Archdeacon thus suddenly blown to her very door. While she had
     the seats placed in the garden (not too visibly, but shrouded among the shrubs and round the
     trunks of the trees), and chose the spot for a little illumination, which was not to be
     universal, like a tea-garden, but concentrated in one spot under the big lime-tree, Lucilla
     permitted herself to speculate a little about this unknown hero. She did not so much ask
     herself if he would be dark or fair, according to the usage of young ladies, as whether he
     would be High or Broad. But, however, that question, like various others, was still hidden in
     the surrounding darkness.
This was how Mrs Chiley did her best to cheer up Lucilla in the discouragement from which she
     supposed her young friend to be suffering. It was perhaps a loftier expedient in one way than
     Nancy's desire that she should have something she would fancy for dinner; but then there could
     not be any doubt as to the kindness which prompted both suggestions; and, after all, it is not
     what people do for you, but the spirit in which they do it, which should be taken into
     consideration, as Lucilla most justly observed.
