
Chapter XXXIII
The Archdeacon stood before the fireplace with Dr Marjoribanks and a host of other gentlemen.
     Mr Beverley's countenance was covered with clouds and darkness. He stood, not with the careless
     ease of a man amusing himself, but drawn up to his full height and breadth, a formidably
     muscular Christian, in a state of repression and restraint, which it was painful, and at the
     same time pleasing to see. The Berserker madness was upon him; and yet such are the restraints
     of society, that a young woman's eye was enough to keep him down—Lucilla's eye, and the
     presence of a certain number of other frivolous creatures in white muslin, and of some old
     women, as he irreverently called them, who were less pleasant, but not more imposing. He was an
     Archdeacon, and a leading man of his party, whose name alone would have conferred importance
     upon any "movement," and whom his bishop himself—not to speak of the clergy whom he charged in
     his visitation addresses like a regiment of cavalry—stood a little in awe of. Yet such are the
     beneficial restraints of society, that he dared not follow his natural impulses, nor even do
     what he felt to be his duty, for fear of Miss Marjoribanks, which was about the highest
     testimony to the value of social influence that could be given. At the same time, it was but
     natural that under such circumstances the Archdeacon should feel a certain savage wrath at the
     bond that confined him, and be more indignant than usual at the false and tyrannical
     conventionalism called society. And it was at this moment, of all times in the world, that
     General Travers, like a half-educated brute as (according to Mr Beverley's ideas) he was, took
     the liberty of calling his attention to what the soldier called "a lot of pretty girls." "And
     everything admirably got up, by Jove!" he added; not having the remotest idea what effect so
     simple an observation might produce.
"Yes, it is admirably got up," said the Archdeacon, with a snarl of concealed ferocity. "You
     never said anything more profoundly true. It is all got up, the women, and the decorations, and
     the gaiety, and all this specious seeming. And these are creatures made in the image of God!"
     said the Broad-Churchman—"the future wives and mothers of England. It is enough to make the
     devils laugh and the angels weep!"
It may be supposed that everybody was stricken with utter amazement by this unlooked-for
     remark. Dr Marjoribanks, for his part, took a pinch of snuff, which, as a general rule, he only
     did at consultations, or in the face of a difficulty; and as for the unlucky soldier who had
     called it forth, there can be no doubt that a certain terror filled his manly bosom; for he
     naturally felt as if he must have said something extraordinary to call forth such a
     response.
"I never was accused before of saying anything profoundly true," the General said, and he
     grew pale. "I didn't mean it, I'm sure, if that is any justification. Where has Cavendish
     vanished to, I wonder?" the soldier added, looking round him, scared and nervous—for it was
     evident that his only policy was to escape from society in which he was thus liable to commit
     himself without knowing how.
"Female education is a monstrous mistake," said Mr Beverley—"always has been, and, so far as
     I can see, always will be. Why should we do our best to make our women idiots? They are bad
     enough by nature. Instead of counterbalancing their native frivolity by some real
     instruction——good heavens!" The critic paused. It was not that his emotions were too much for
     him; it was because the crowd opened a moment, and afforded him a glimpse of a figure in black
     silk, with the lace for which Miss Marjoribanks had stipulated falling softly over a head which
     had not quite lost its youthful grace. He gave a glance round him to see if the coast was
     clear. Lucilla was out of the way at the other end of the room, and he was free. He made but
     one stride through the unconscious assembly which he had been criticising so severely, and all
     but knocked down little Rose Lake, who was not looking at the Archdeacon, though she stood
     straight in his way. He might have stepped over her head without knowing it, so much was he
     moved. All the gay crowd gave way before him with a cry and flutter; and Lucilla, for her part,
     was out of the way!
But there are moments when to be out of the way is the highest proof of genius. Miss
     Marjoribanks had just had a cup of tea brought her, of which she had great need, and her face
     was turned in the other direction, but yet she was aware that the Archdeacon had passed like a
     Berserker through those ranks which were not the ranks of his enemies. She felt without seeing
     it that the "wind of his going" agitated his own large coat tails and heavy locks, and made a
     perfect hurricane among the white muslin. Lucilla's heart beat quicker, and she put down her
     tea, though she had so much need of it. She could not swallow the cordial at such a moment of
     excitement. But she never once turned her head, nor left off her conversation, nor betrayed the
     anxiety she felt. Up to this time she had managed everything herself, which was comparatively
     easy; but she felt by instinct that now was the moment to make a high effort and leave things
     alone. And it may be added that nothing but an inherent sense of doing the right thing under
     the circumstances could have inspired Miss Marjoribanks to the crowning achievement of keeping
     out of the way.
When Mr Beverley arrived in front of the two people who were seated together in the recess of
     the window, he made no assault upon them, as his manner might have suggested. On the contrary,
     he placed himself in front of them, with his back to the company, creating thus a most
     effectual moral and physical barrier between the little nook where his own private vengeance
     and fate were about to be enacted, and the conventional world which he had just been
     denouncing. The Archdeacon shut the two culprits off from all succour, and looked down upon
     them, casting them into profound shade. "I don't know what combination of circumstances has
     produced this meeting," he said, "but the time was ripe for it, and I am glad it has happened,"
     and it was with dry lips and the calmness of passion that he spoke.
Mrs Mortimer gave a little cry of terror, but her companion, for his part, sat quite dumb and
     immovable. The moment had arrived at last, and perhaps he too was glad it had come. He sat
     still, expecting to see the earth crumble under his feet, expecting to hear the humble name he
     had once borne proclaimed aloud, and to hear ridicule and shame poured upon the impostor who
     had called himself one of the Cavendishes. But it was no use struggling any longer. He did not
     even raise his eyes, but sat still, waiting for the thunderbolt to fall.
But to tell the truth, the Archdeacon, though a torrent of words came rushing to his lips,
     felt at a difficulty how to begin. "I don't understand how it is that I find you here with the
     man who has ruined your prospects," he said, with a slight incoherence; and then he changed the
     direction of his attack. "But it is you with whom I have to do," he said; "you, sir, who
     venture to introduce yourself into society with—with your victim by your side. Do you not
     understand that compassion is impossible in such a case, and that it is my duty to expose you?
     You have told some plausible story here, I suppose, but nothing can stand against the facts. It
     is my duty to inform Dr Marjoribanks that it is a criminal who has stolen into his house and
     his confidence—that it is a conspirator who has ventured to approach his daughter—that it
     is——"
"A criminal? a conspirator?" said Mr Cavendish, and he looked in his accuser's face with an
     amazement which, notwithstanding his rage, struck the Archdeacon. If he had called him an
     impostor, the culprit would have quailed and made no reply. But the exaggeration saved him.
     After that first look of surprise, he rose to his feet and confronted the avenger, who saw he
     had made a blunder without knowing what it was. "You must be under some strange mistake," he
     said. "What do you accuse me of? I know nothing about crime or conspiracy. Either you are
     strangely mistaken, or you have forgotten what the words mean."
"They are words which I mean to prove," said the Archdeacon; but there can be no doubt that
     his certainty was diminished by the surprise with which his accusation was received. It checked
     his first heat, and it was with a slightly artificial excitement that he went on, trying to
     work himself up again to the same point. "You who worked yourself into a wretched old man's
     confidence, and robbed an unoffending woman," said Mr Beverley; and then in spite of himself he
     stopped short; for it was easier to say such things to a woman, who contradicted without giving
     much reason, than to a man who, with an air of the utmost astonishment, stood regarding his
     accuser in the face.
"These are very extraordinary accusations," said Mr Cavendish. "Have you ever considered
     whether you had any proof to support them?" He was not angry to speak of, because he had been
     entirely taken by surprise, and because at the same time he was unspeakably relieved, and felt
     that the real danger, the danger which he had so much dreaded, was past and over. He recovered
     all his coolness from the moment he found out that it was not a venial imposition practised
     upon society, but a social crime of the ugliest character, of which he was accused. He was
     innocent, and he could be tranquil on that score. "As for robbing Mrs Mortimer," he added with
     a little impatience, "she knows, on the contrary, that I have always been most anxious and
     ready to befriend her——"
"To befriend——Her!" cried the Archdeacon, restored to all his first impetuosity. He could not
     swear, because it was against his cloth and his principles; but he said, "Good heavens!" in a
     tone which would have perfectly become a much less mild expletive. "It is better we should
     understand each other thoroughly," he said. "I am not in a humour for trifling. I consider it
     is her fortune which enables you to make an appearance here. It is her money
     you are living upon, and which gives you position, and makes you presume as—as you are
     doing—upon my forbearance. Do you think it possible that I can pass over all this and let you
     keep what is not yours? If you choose to give up everything, and retire from Carlingford, and
     withdraw all your pretensions——It is not for my part," said Mr Beverley, with solemnity, taking
     breath, "to deal harshly with a penitent sinner. It is my duty, as a clergyman, to offer you at
     least a place of repentance. After that——"
But he was interrupted once more. Mrs Mortimer made her faint voice heard in a remonstrance.
     "Oh, Charles, I always told you—I had no right to anything!" cried the terrified widow; but
     that was not what stopped the Archdeacon. It was because his adversary laughed that he stopped
     short. No doubt it was the metallic laugh of a man in great agitation, but still Mr Beverley's
     ear was not fine enough at that moment to discriminate. He paused as a man naturally pauses at
     the sound of ridicule, still furious, yet abashed, and half conscious of a ludicrous aspect to
     his passion—and turned his full face to his antagonist, and stood at bay.
"It is a modest request, certainly," Mr Cavendish said. "Give up all I have and all I am, and
     perhaps you will forgive me! You must think me a fool to make such a proposal; but look here,"
     said the accused energetically; "I will tell you the true state of affairs, if for once you
     will listen. I do it, not for my sake, nor for your sake, but for the sake of—of the women
     involved," he added hastily; and it was well for him that, instead of looking at the shrinking
     widow beside him as he said so, his eye had been caught by the eager eye of his sister, who was
     watching from her corner. With that stimulus he went on, calming himself down, and somehow
     subduing and imposing upon the angry man by the mere act of encountering him fairly and openly.
     "I will tell you what are the actual circumstances, and you can see the will itself if you will
     take the trouble," said the defendant, with a nervous moderation and self-restraint, in which
     there was also a certain thrill of indignation. "The old man you speak of might have left his
     money to a more worthy person than myself, but he never meant to leave it to his grand-niece;
     and she knew that. She was neither his companion nor his nurse. There was nothing between them
     but a few drops of blood. For my part, I gave him——but, to be sure, it would not interest you
     to know how I spent my youth. You came upon the scene like—a man in a passion," Mr Cavendish
     said, with an abrupt laugh, which this time was more feeble, and proved that his composure was
     giving way, "and misjudged everything, as was natural. You are doing the same again, or trying
     to do it. But you are a clergyman, and when you insult a man——"
"I am ready to give him satisfaction," said the Broad-Churchman hotly; and then he made a
     pause, and that sense of ridicule which is latent in every Englishman's mind, came to the
     Archdeacon's aid. He began to feel ashamed of himself, and at the same time his eye caught his
     own reflection in a mirror, and the clerical coat which contrasted so grotesquely with his
     offer of "satisfaction." Mr Beverley started a little, and changed his tone. "This has lasted
     long enough," he said, in his abrupt imperious way. "This is not the place nor the
     time for such a discussion. We shall meet elsewhere," the Archdeacon added austerely, with a
     significance which it is impossible to describe. His air and his words were full of severe and
     hostile meaning, and yet he did not know what he meant any more than Mr Cavendish did, who took
     him at his word, and retired, and made an end of the interview. Whatever the Archdeacon meant,
     it was his adversary who was the victor. He went off, threading his way through the
     curious spectators with a sense of relief that almost went the length of ecstasy. He might have
     been walking on his head for anything he knew. His senses were all lost and swallowed up in the
     overwhelming and incredible consciousness of safety. Where were they to meet elsewhere? With
     pistols in a corner of Carlingford Common, or perhaps with their fists alone, as Mr Beverley
     was Broad-Church? When a man has been near ruin and has escaped by a hair-breadth, he may be
     permitted to be out of his wits for a few minutes afterwards. And the idea of fighting a duel
     with a dignitary of the Church so tickled Mr Cavendish, that he had not the prudence to keep it
     to himself. "You will stand by me if he calls me out?" he said to General Travers as he passed;
     and the air of utter consternation with which the warrior regarded him, drove Mr Cavendish into
     such agonies of laughter, that he had to retire to the landing-place and suffocate himself to
     subdue it. If any man had said to him that he was hysterical, the chances are that it was he
     who would have called that man out, or at least knocked him down. But he had to steal
     downstairs afterwards and apply to Thomas for a cordial more potent than tea; for naturally,
     when a man has been hanging over an abyss for ever so long, it is no great wonder if he loses
     his head and balance when he suddenly finds himself standing on firm ground, and feels that he
     has escaped.
As for the Archdeacon, when the other was gone, he sat down silently on his abandoned chair.
     He was one of the men who take pride in seeing both sides of a question; and to tell the truth,
     he was always very candid about disputed points in theology, and ready to entertain everybody's
     objection; but it was a different thing when the matter was a matter of fact. He put down his
     face into his hands, and tried to think whether it was possible that what he had just heard
     might be the true state of the case. To be sure, the widow who was seated half fainting by his
     side had given him the same account often enough, but somehow it was more effective from the
     lips of a man who confronted him than from the mild and weeping woman whom he loved better than
     anything else in the world, but whose opinion on any earthly (or heavenly) subject had not the
     weight of a straw upon him. He tried to take that view of it; and then it occurred to him that
     nothing was more ludicrous and miserable than the position of a man who goes to law without
     adequate reason, or without proof to maintain his cause. Such a horrible divergence from
     everything that was just and right might be, as that the well-known and highly-esteemed
     Archdeacon Beverley might be held up for the amusement and edification of the country in a
      Times leader, which was a martyrdom the Archdeacon would have rather liked than
     otherwise in a worthy cause, but not for a wretched private business connected with money. He
     sighed as he pondered, feeling, as so many have felt, the difficulties which attend a good
     man's progress in this life—how that which is just is not always that which is expedient, and
     how the righteous have to submit to many inconveniences in order that the adversary may have no
     occasion to blaspheme. In this state of mind a man naturally softens towards a tender and
     wistful sympathiser close at hand. He sighed once more heavily, and lifted his head, and took
     into his own a soft pale hand which was visible near him among the folds of black silk.
"So you too have been brought into it, Helen," the Archdeacon said pathetically; "I did not
     expect to see you here."
"It was Lucilla," said Mrs Mortimer timidly; "it was not any wish of mine. Oh, Charles! if
     you would let me speak. If you will but forget all this, and think no more about it; and I will
     do my best to make you a——" Here the poor woman stopped short all at once. What she meant to
     have said was, that she would make him a good wife, which nature and truth and the
     circumstances all prompted her to say—as the only possible solution to the puzzle. But when she
     had got so far, the poor widow stopped, blushing and tingling all over, with a sense of shame,
     more overwhelming than if she had done a wicked action. It was nothing but pure honesty and
     affection that prompted her to speak; and yet, if it had been the vilest sentiment in human
     nature, she would not have been so utterly ashamed. "That was not what I meant to say!" she
     cried, with sharp and sudden wretchedness; and was not the least ashamed of telling a downright
     lie instead.
But, to tell the truth, the Archdeacon was paying no particular attention. He had never loved
     any other woman; but he was a little indifferent as to what innocent nonsense she might please
     to say. So that her confusion and misery, and even the half offer of herself which occasioned
     these feelings, were lost upon him. He kept her hand and caressed it in the midst of his own
     thoughts, as if it was a child's head he was patting. "My poor Helen," he said, coming back to
     her when he found she had stopped speaking, "I don't see why you should not come, if this sort
     of thing is any pleasure to you; but afterwards——" he said reflectively. He went to that sort
     of thing often himself, and rather liked it, and did not think of any afterwards; but perhaps
     the case of a weak woman was different, or perhaps it was only that he happened to be after his
     downfall in a pathetic and reflective state of mind.
"Afterwards?" said Mrs Mortimer. She did not take the word in any religious or philosophical,
     but in its merest matter-of-fact meaning, and she was sadly hurt and wounded to see that he had
     not even noticed what she said, much as she had been ashamed of saying it. She drew away her
     hand with a quick movement of despite and mortification, which filled Mr Beverley with
     surprise. "Afterwards I shall go back to my little house and my school, and shut myself in, and
     never, never come back again, you may be sure," said the widow, with a rush of tears to her
     eyes. Why they did not fall, or how she kept herself from fainting—she who fainted so
     easily—she never, on reviewing the circumstances, could tell; and Miss Marjoribanks always
     attributed it to the fact that she was absent, and there was no eau-de-Cologne on the
     table. But whatever the cause might be, Mrs Mortimer did not faint; and perhaps there never was
     anything so like despair and bitterness as at that moment in her mild little feminine soul.
"Never come back again?" said the Archdeacon, rousing up a little; and then he put out his
     large hand and took back the other, as if it had been a pencil or a book that he had lost. All
     this, let it be known, was well in the shadow, and could not be seen by the world in general to
     teach the young people a bad lesson. "Why should not you come back? I am going away too," said
     Mr Beverley; and he stopped short, and resisted the effort his prisoner made to withdraw. Oddly
     enough at that moment his Rectory rose suddenly before him as in a vision—his Rectory, all
     handsome and sombre, without a soul in it, room after room uninhabited, and not a sound to be
     heard, except that of his own foot or his servant's. It was curious what connection there could
     be between that and the garden, with its four walls, and the tiny cottage covered with
     wistaria. Such as it was, it moved the Archdeacon to a singular, and, considering the place and
     moment, rather indecorous proceeding. Instead of contenting himself with the resisting hand, he
     drew the widow's arm within his as they sat together. "I'll tell you what we must do, Helen,"
     he said confidentially—"we must go back to Basing together, you and I. I don't see the good of
     leaving you by yourself here. You can make what alterations you like when you get to the
     Rectory; and I shall let that—that person alone, if you wish it, with his ill-gotten gear. He
     will never come to any good," said the Archdeacon, with some satisfaction; and then he added in
     a parenthesis, as if she had expressed some ridiculous doubt on the subject, "Of course I mean
     that we should be married before we go away." It was in this rapid and summary manner that the
     whole business was settled. Naturally his companion had nothing to say against such a
     reasonable arrangement. She had never contradicted him in her life about anything but one
     thing; and that being set aside, there was no possible reason why she should begin now.
