<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XXI</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>It was thus that Mr Cavendish, without particularly meaning it, impressed upon two
     interesting and amiable young women on the same day the conviction that he was about to
     propose, without in either case realising that expectation. After this last exploit he went
     home with his head more confused, and his will more undecided, than ever. For he had one of
     those perverse minds which cling to everything that is forbidden; and the idea that he ought
     not to have gone near Barbara Lake, and that he ought not to see her again, made him more
     anxious to seek her out and follow her than he had ever been before. If such a thing had been
     permissible in England as that a man might marry one wife for his liking and another for his
     interests, the matter might have been compromised by proposing to them both; and there cannot
     be a doubt that Lucilla, in such a case, would very soon have triumphed over her handsome,
     sullen, passionate rival. But then such a way of conciliating a man with himself does not exist
     in the British Islands, and consequently was not to be thought of. And to be sure, every time
     he came to think of it, Mr Cavendish saw more and more clearly what a fool he would be to marry
     Barbara, who was evidently so ready to marry him. The same thing could not with any confidence
     be predicated of Miss Marjoribanks, though, if she were to accept him, and her father were to
     consent, nothing could be better for his interests. All this he felt, and yet an unconquerable
     reluctance kept him back. His history was not quite spotless, and there were chapters in it
     which he thought it would kill him to have brought before the public of Carlingford; but still
     he was far from being a bad fellow in his way. And down at the bottom of his heart, out of
     everybody's sight, and unacknowledged even by himself, there was one little private nook full
     of gratitude to Lucilla. Though he scarcely knew what was passing at the moment, he knew, when
     he came to think of it, that she had saved him from the effects of his first panic at the
     unexpected appearance of Mr Beverley. Perhaps it was partly this consciousness that made him so
     embarrassed in her presence; and he could not find it in his heart, with this sense of
     gratitude, to deceive her, and say he loved her, and ask her to marry him. To be sure, if Mr
     Cavendish had been a very acute observer, he might have felt that Lucilla was quite able to
     take care of herself in such an emergency, and was at the least a match for him, however
     seductive he might appear to others; but then, few people are acute observers in a matter so
     entirely personal to themselves.</t:p>
<t:p>He felt furious with himself as he went home, and thought how foolish he had been ever to go
     near Barbara Lake in the present position of affairs; and yet he could not help feeling that it
     was more delightful to him to see the colour blaze into her cheeks, and the song rise like a
     bird from her full crimson lips, and that flush of excitement and triumph come from her eyes,
     than it could have been in any case to have been admitted to the same degree of intimacy with
     Lucilla, who was not in the least intoxicated by his presence. Thus the unfortunate man was
     torn asunder, not so much by love and duty, as by inclination and interest, though the
     inclination was not strong enough to have allowed of any great sacrifice, nor the interest
     sufficiently certain to have repaid the exertion. This only made it the more difficult to
     decide; and in his circumstances, and with the panic that pursued him, he did not feel it
     possible to adopt the only wise policy that remained to him, and wait.</t:p>
<t:p>As Mr Cavendish was thus making his way home, horribly vexed and annoyed with himself, and
     avoiding Grange Lane as if the plague was in it, Miss Marjoribanks sat in her drawing-room
     alone, and thought the matter over. Certainly she had not expected him that evening, but still,
     when she heard ten o'clock strike, and felt that his coming now absolutely impossible, she was
     a little—not exactly disappointed, but annoyed at herself for having felt a sort of
     expectation. Lucilla was not a person to hide her sentiments, or even to conceal a fact which
     was disagreeable to her <t:hi>amour propre</t:hi>. She had too thorough and well-founded a
     confidence in the natural interest of the world in all belonging to her to do that; so when ten
     o'clock had done striking, she opened her blotting-book and took one of her pretty sheets of
     paper, with L<t:hi>ucilla</t:hi> on it in delicate
     rose-tinted letters, the L very large, and the concluding letters very small, and dashed off
     her note to Mrs Chiley. The Miss Blounts' at Mount Pleasant had been one of the very first
     establishments to forsake the handwriting which was all corners, in favour of the bold running
     hand of the present female generation; and it was accordingly in a very free and
     strongly-characterised manuscript, black with much ink, that Miss Marjoribanks wrote:</t:p>
<t:quote>
<t:p>"<t:hi>Dearest Mrs Chiley</t:hi>,—I never expected him to come, and he has not. I dare say he
      never meant it. I am so glad. It was Providence that sent you at that particular moment
      to-day.—Always in haste, with fond love, your most truly affectionate</t:p>
<t:p>"<t:hi>Lucilla</t:hi>."</t:p></t:quote>
<t:p>And when she had sent Thomas with this note, Miss Marjoribanks felt her mind relieved. Not
     that it had been much distressed before, but when she had put it in black and white, and
     concluded upon it, her satisfaction was more complete; and no such troublous thoughts as those
     which disturbed the hero of this day's transactions—no such wild tears as poured from the eyes
     of Barbara Lake—interfered with the maidenly composure of Lucilla's meditations.
     Notwithstanding all that people say to the contrary, there is a power in virtue which makes
     itself felt in such an emergency. Miss Marjoribanks could turn from Mr Cavendish, who had thus
     failed to fulfil the demands of his position, to the serene idea of the Archdeacon, with that
     delightful consciousness of having nothing to reproach herself with, which is balm to a
     well-regulated mind. She had done her duty, whatever happened. She had not injudiciously
     discouraged nor encouraged the possible Member for Carlingford; and at the same time she was
     perfectly free to turn her attention to the possible Bishop; and neither in one case nor the
     other could anybody say that she had gone a step too far, or committed herself in any way
     whatsoever. While these consoling reflections were passing through Lucilla's mind, Dr
     Marjoribanks came upstairs, as had grown to be his custom lately. Sometimes he took a cup of
     tea, though it was against his principles, and sometimes he only sat by while his daughter had
     hers, and amused himself with her chat before he went to bed. He was later than usual to-night,
     and naturally the tea-tray had disappeared some time before. As for Lucilla, she did not for a
     moment permit her own preoccupation to interfere with the discharge of her immediate duty,
     which was unquestionably to be amusing and agreeable, and a comfort to her dear papa.</t:p>
<t:p>"So you had Cavendish here to-day?" said the Doctor. "What brought him here? What has he been
     doing? Since you and he are on such good terms, I hope he gave you an account of where he has
     been."</t:p>
<t:p>"He has been nursing a sick friend on—the Continent," said Lucilla, with that largeness of
     geographical expression which is natural to the insular mind. "Who are Mr Cavendish's friends,
     papa?" added Miss Marjoribanks, with confiding simplicity; and it was beautiful to see how the
     daughter looked up into her father's face, with that angelic confidence in his knowledge on all
     subjects which is so rarely to be met with in the present generation. But it was not a question
     to which the Doctor found it easy to respond.</t:p>
<t:p>"Who are his friends?" said Dr Marjoribanks. "He's one of the Cavendishes, they say. We have
     all heard that. I never knew he had any friends; which is, after all, next best to having very
     good ones," said the philosophical old Scotchman; and there, as it appeared, he was quite
     content to let the matter drop.</t:p>
<t:p>"I like to know who people belong to, for my part," said Lucilla. "The Archdeacon, for
     example, one knows all about his friends. It's a great deal nicer, you know, papa. Not that it
     matters in the least about the Cavendishes——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Well, I should have thought not, after the way you made an end of him," said the Doctor. "I
     hope he doesn't mean to begin that nonsense over again, Lucilla. He is a good fellow enough,
     and I don't mind asking him to my house; but it is quite a different thing to give him my
     daughter. He spends too much money, and I can't see what real bottom he has. It may all flare
     up and come to nothing any day. Nobody can have any certainty with an expensive fellow like
     that," said Dr Marjoribanks. "There is no telling where he draws his income from; it isn't from
     the land, and it isn't from business; and if it's money in the Funds——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Dear papa," said Lucilla, "if he had the Bank of England, it would not make any difference
     to me. I am not going to swindle you, after you have had the drawing-room done up, and
     everything. I said ten years, and I mean to keep to it,—if nothing very particular happens,"
     Miss Marjoribanks added prudently. "Most likely I shall begin to go off a little in ten years.
     And all I think of just now is to do my duty, and be a little comfort to you."</t:p>
<t:p>Dr Marjoribanks indulged in a faint "humph!" under his breath, as he lighted his candle; for,
     as has been already said, he was not a man to feel so keenly as some men might have felt the
     enthusiasm of filial devotion which beautified Lucilla's life. But at the same time he had that
     respect for his daughter's genius, which only experience could have impressed upon him; and he
     did not venture, or rather he did not think it necessary, to enter into any further
     explanations. Dr Marjoribanks did not in the least degree share the nervousness of Mr
     Cavendish, who was afraid of deceiving Lucilla. As for her father, he felt a consoling
     conviction that she was quite able to conduct her own affairs, and would do him no discredit in
     any engagements she might form. And at the same time he was amused by the idea that he might be
     swindled in respect to the drawing-room, if she married at this early moment. He took it for
     wit, when it was the most solid and sensible reality; but then, fortunately, the points in
     which he misapprehended her redounded as much to Lucilla's credit, as those in which he seized
     her meaning clearest, so that on every side there was something to be gained.</t:p>
<t:p>And when Miss Marjoribanks too retired to her maidenly chamber, a sentiment of general
     content and satisfaction filled her mind. It is true that for the moment she had experienced a
     natural womanly vexation to see a proposal nipped in the bud. It annoyed her not so much on
     personal as on general principles; for Lucilla was aware that nothing could be more pernicious
     to a man than when thus brought to the very point to be thrown back again, and never permitted
     to produce that delicate bloom of his affections. It was like preventing a rose from putting
     forth its flowers, a cruelty equally prejudicial to the plant and to the world. But when this
     pang of wounded philanthropy was over, Miss Marjoribanks felt in her heart that it was
     Providence that had sent Mrs Chiley at that special moment. There was no telling what
     embarrassments, what complications she might not have got into, had Mr Cavendish succeeded in
     unbosoming himself. No doubt Lucilla had a confidence that, whatever difficulties there might
     have been, she would have extricated herself from them with satisfaction and even
      <t:hi>éclat</t:hi>, but still it was better to avoid the necessity. Thus it was with a serene
     conviction that "whatever is, is best," that Miss Marjoribanks betook herself to her peaceful
     slumbers. There are so many people in the world who hold, or are tempted to hold, an entirely
     different opinion, that it is pleasant to linger over the spectacle of a mind so perfectly well
     regulated. Very different were the sentiments of Mr Cavendish, who could not sleep for the
     ghosts that kept tugging at him on every side; and those of Barbara Lake, who felt that for her
     too the flower of her hero's love had been nipped in the bud. But, to be sure, it is only
     natural that goodness and self-control should have the best of it sometimes even in this
     uncertain world.</t:p>
</t:div>