
Chapter IX
It was not till Miss Marjoribanks had surmounted to a certain extent the vexation caused her
     by her unlucky confidence in Tom, that that unhappy young man took the step which Lucilla had
     so long dreaded, but which she trusted to her own genius to hinder him from carrying into
     execution. Miss Marjoribanks had extricated herself so triumphantly from the consequences of
     that unhappy commencement of her very charming luncheon-parties, that she had begun to forget
     the culpability of her cousin. She had defeated the Rector in his benevolent intentions, and
     she had taken up his protégée just at the moment when Mr Bury was most disgusted with the
     unfortunate woman's weakness. Poor Mrs Mortimer, to be sure, had fainted, or had been near
     fainting, at the most inopportune moment, and it was only natural that the Rector should be
     annoyed; but as for Lucilla, who was always prompt in her actions, and whose good nature and
     liberality were undoubted, she found her opportunity in the failure of Mr Bury's scheme. After
     the Rector had gone away, Miss Marjoribanks herself conducted the widow home; and by this time
     Mrs Mortimer's prospects were beginning to brighten under the active and efficient patronage of
     her new friend. This being the case, Lucilla's good humour was perfectly restored, and she had
     forgiven Tom his maladroitness. "He cannot help it, you know," she said privately to old Mrs
     Chiley: "I suppose some people are born to do ridiculous things." And it was indeed as if he
     had intended to give a practical illustration of the truth of this conclusion that Tom chose
     the particular moment he did for driving Miss Marjoribanks to the extremity of her patience.
     The upholsterers were in the house, and indeed had just finished putting up the pictures on the
     new paper in the drawing-room (which was green, as Lucilla had determined it should be, of the
     most delicate tint, and looked, as she flattered herself, exactly like silk hangings); and Mr
     Holden himself waited with a certain complaisance for Miss Marjoribanks's opinion of the
     effect. He had no doubt on the subject himself; but he was naturally impressed, as most people
     were, with that confidence in Lucilla's judgment which so much facilitates the operations of
     those persons who are born to greatness. It was precisely at this moment that his evil genius
     persuaded Tom Marjoribanks to interrupt Thomas, who was carrying Mr Holden's message to his
     young mistress, and to shut the library door upon the external world. Lucilla had taken refuge
     in the library during the renovation of the drawing-room; and she was aware that this was Tom's
     last day at Carlingford, and had no intention of being unkind to him. To tell the truth, she
     had at the bottom of her heart a certain regard and impulse of protection and patronage towards
     Tom, of which something might have come had the unlucky fellow known how to manage. But, at the
     same time, Miss Marjoribanks was aware that things must be approaching a crisis upstairs, and
     was listening intently to the movements overhead, and wondering why she was not sent for. This
     was the moment of all others at which Tom thought fit to claim a hearing; and the state of
     Lucilla's feelings may be easily imagined when she saw him plant himself by her side, with his
     face alternately red and white, and all the signs of a desperate resolution in his countenance.
     For the first time in her life a certain despair took possession of Miss Marjoribanks's mind.
     The sounds had suddenly ceased upstairs, as if the artists were making a pause to contemplate
     the effect of their completed work—which indeed was precisely the case—and at the same time
     nobody came to call her, important though the occasion was. She made a last effort to
     emancipate herself before it was too late.
"Ring, please, Tom," she said; "I want to know if they have finished upstairs. I am so sorry
     you are going away; but you know it is one of my principles never to neglect my duty. I am sure
     they must be waiting for me—if you would only be kind enough to ring."
"Lucilla," said Tom, "you know I would do anything in the world you liked to tell me; but
     don't ask me to ring just now: I am going to leave you, and there is something I must say to
     you, Lucilla," said the young man, with agitation. Miss Marjoribanks was seated near the
     window, and she had a moral certainty that if any of the Browns happened to be in that
     ridiculous glass-house where they did their photography, they must have a perfectly good view
     of her, with Tom in the background, who had placed himself so as to shut her into the recess of
     the window. This, coupled with the evidence of her senses that the workmen up stairs had ceased
     their work, and that a slow footstep traversing the floor now and then was all that was
     audible, drove Lucilla to despair.
"Yes," she said, temporising a little, which was the only thing she could do, "I am sure I am
     very sorry; but then, you know, with the house in such a condition! Next time you come I shall
     be able to enjoy your society," said the designing young woman; "but at present I am
      so busy. It is one of my principles, you know, that things are never rightly done if
     the lady of the house does not pay proper attention. They are sure to make some dreadful
     mistake upstairs if I don't look after them. I shall see you again before you go."
"Lucilla, don't be so cruel!" cried the unlucky Tom, and he caught her hand though they were
     at the window; "do stop a moment and listen to me. Lucilla! what does it matter about furniture
     and things when a man's heart is bursting?" cried the unfortunate lover; and just at that
     moment Miss Marjoribanks could see that the curtain was drawn aside a little—ever so little—in
     the glass-house. She sat down again with a sigh, and drew her hand away, and prepared herself
     to meet her fate with heroism at least.
"What in the world can you have been doing?" said Lucilla innocently; "you used always to
     tell me, you know, when you got into any difficulty, and I am sure if I can be of any use to
     you, Tom——But as for furniture and things, they matter a great deal, I assure you, to people's
     happiness; and then, you know, it is the object of my life to be a comfort to dear papa."
When she said this, Miss Marjoribanks settled herself again in the recess of the window, so
     that the Miss Browns could command a full view if they chose; for Lucilla's courage was of the
     highest order, and nothing, except, perhaps, a strategical necessity of profound importance,
     would have moved her to retreat before an enemy. As for Tom, he was bewildered, to start with,
     by this solemn repetition of her great purpose.
"I know how good you are, Lucilla," he said, with humility; "but then my uncle, you know—I
     don't think he is a man to appreciate——Oh, Lucilla! why should you go and sacrifice to him the
     happiness of your life?"
"Tom," said Miss Marjoribanks, with some solemnity, "I wish you would not talk to me of
     happiness. I have always been brought up to believe that duty was happiness; and everybody has
     known for a long time what was the object of my life. As for poor papa, it is the worse for him
     if he does not understand; but that does not make any difference to my duty," said the devoted
     daughter. She gave a little sigh as she spoke, the sigh of a great soul, whose motives must
     always remain to some extent unappreciated; and the sight of her resignation and beautiful
     perseverance overwhelmed her unlucky suitor; for indeed, up to this moment, Lucilla still
     entertained the hope of preventing Tom from, as she herself described it, "saying the very
     words," which, to be sure, are awkward words to hear and to say.
"Lucilla, when you are so good to my uncle, you ought to have a little pity on me," said Tom,
     driven to the deepest despondency. "How do you think I can bear it, to see you getting
     everything done here, as if you meant to stay all your life—when you know I love you?" said the
     unfortunate young man; "when you know I have always been so fond of you, Lucilla, and always
     looked forward to the time——; and now it is very hard to see you care so little for me."
"Tom," said Miss Marjoribanks, with indignant surprise, "how can you say I care
     little for you? you know I was always very fond of you, on the contrary. I am sure I always
     stood your friend at home, whatever happened, and never said a word when you broke that pretty
     little pearl ring I was so fond of, and tore the scarf that my aunt gave me. I wonder, for my
     part, how you can be so unkind as so say so. We have always been the very best friends in the
     world," said Lucilla, with an air of injury. "I always said at school I liked you the best of
     all my cousins; and I am very fond of all my cousins." Miss Marjoribanks concluded, after a
     little pause, "It is so unkind to tell me that I don't care for you."
Poor Tom groaned within himself as he listened. He did not know what to answer to Lucilla's
     aggrieved yet frank confession. Naturally it would have been much less displeasing to Tom to
     understand that she hated him, and never desired to see him any more. But Miss Marjoribanks was
     far from entertaining any such unchristian sentiments. She even began to forget her anxiety
     about what was going on upstairs in that delightful sense of power and abundant resources with
     which she was mastering the present difficulty. She reflected in herself that though it was
     excessively annoying to be thus occupied at such a moment, still it was nearly as important to
     make an end of Tom as to see that the pictures were hung rightly; for, to be sure, it was
     always easy to return to the latter subject. Accordingly, she drew her chair a little nearer to
     the window, and regarded Tom with a calm gaze of benevolent interest which was in perfect
     accordance with the sentiments she had just expressed; a look in which a gentle reproach was
     mingled. "I have always been like a sister to you," said Lucilla; "how can you be so unkind as
     to say I don't care?"
As for the unhappy Tom, he got up, as was natural, and took a little walk in front of the
     table, as a young man in trouble is apt to do. "You know very well that is not what I mean,
     Lucilla," he said disconsolately. "It is you who are unkind. I don't know why it is that ladies
     are so cruel; I am not such a snob as to persecute anybody. But what is the good of pretending
     not to know what I mean?"
"Tom, listen!" cried Miss Marjoribanks, rising in her turn; "I feel sure they must have
     finished. There is Mr Holden going through the garden. And everybody knows that hanging
     pictures is just the thing of all others that requires a person of taste. If they have spoiled
     the room, it will be all your fault."
"Oh, for Heaven's sake never mind the room!" said Tom. "I never thought you would have
     trifled with a man, Lucilla. You know quite well what I mean; you know it isn't a—a new thing,"
     said the lover, beginning to stammer and get confused. "You know that is what I have been
     thinking of all along, as soon as ever I had anything to live on. I love you, Lucilla; you know
     I love you! how can you trifle with me so?"
"It is you who are trifling," said Miss Marjoribanks, "especially when you know I have really
     something of importance to do. You can come upstairs with me if you like. Of course we all love
     each other. What is the good of being relations otherwise?" said Lucilla calmly; "it is such a
     natural thing, you know. I suppose it is because you are going away that you are so
     affectionate to-day. It is very nice of you, I am sure; but, Tom, I feel quite certain you have
     not packed your things," Miss Marjoribanks added, in an admonitory tone. "Come along with me
     upstairs."
And by this time Lucilla's curiosity was beginning again to get the upper hand. If she only
     could have escaped, it would have been impossible for her cousin to have renewed the
     conversation; and luckily he was to leave Carlingford the same evening; but then a man is
     always an inconsequent creature, and not to be calculated on. This time, instead of obeying as
     usual, Tom—having, as Miss Marjoribanks afterwards described (but only in the strictest
     confidence), "worked himself up to it"—set himself directly in her way, and seized upon both
     her hands.
"Lucilla," cried the unlucky fellow, "is it possible that you really have misunderstood me
     all this time? Do you mean to say that you don't know? Oh, Lucilla, listen just five minutes.
     It isn't because I am your cousin. I wish to Heaven I was not your cousin, but some one you had
     never seen before. I mean I want you to consent to—to—to—marry me, Lucilla. That is what I
     mean. I am called to the bar, and I can work for you, and make a reputation. Lucilla, listen to
     what I have to say."
Miss Marjoribanks left her hands in his with a calmness which froze poor Tom's heart in his
     breast. She did not even take the trouble to draw them away. "Have you gone out of your senses,
     Tom?" she asked, in her sensible way; and she lifted her eyes to the face of the poor young
     fellow who was in love, with an inquiring look, as if she felt a little anxious about him. "If
     you have any feeling as if fever was coming on," said Lucilla, "I think you should go upstairs
     and lie down a little till papa comes in. I heard there had been some cases down about the
     canal. I hope it is not the assizes that have been too much for you." When Miss Marjoribanks
     said this, she herself took fast hold of Tom's hands with a motherly grasp to feel if they were
     hot, and looked into his eyes with a certain serious inspection, which, under the
     circumstances, poor fellow! was enough to drive him out of the little rationality he had
     left.
Tom was so far carried away by his frenzy, that he gave her a little shake in his impatience.
     "You are trying to drive me mad, Lucilla!" cried the young man. "I have got no fever. It is
     only you who are driving me out of my senses. This time you must hear me. I will not let you go
     till you have given me an answer. I am called to the bar, and I have begun my Career," said
     Tom, making a pause for breath. "I knew you would have laughed at me when I was depending on my
     mother; but now all that is over, Lucilla. I have loved you as long as I can remember; and I
     always thought—that you—cared for me a little. If you will have me, there is nothing I could
     not do," said Tom, who thoroughly believed what he was saying; "and if you will not have me, I
     will not answer for the consequences. If I go off to India, or if I go to the bad——"
"Tom," said Lucilla solemnly, and this time she drew away her hands, "if you ever want to get
     married, I think the very best thing you can do is to go to India. As for marrying just now at
     your age, you know you might as well jump into the sea. You need not be vexed," said Miss
     Marjoribanks, in her motherly way. "I would not speak so if I was not your best friend. As for
     marrying me, you know it is ridiculous. I have not the least intention of marrying anybody. If
     I had thought of that, I need never have come home at all. As for your going to the bad, I am
     not afraid of that. If I were to let you carry on with such a ridiculous idea, I should never
     forgive myself. It would be just as sensible to go into a lunatic asylum at once. It is very
     lucky for you that you said this to me," Lucilla went on, "and not to one of the girls
     that think it great fun to be married. And if I were you, Tom, I would go and pack my things.
     You know you are always too late; and don't jump on your portmanteau and make such a dreadful
     noise if it won't shut, but ring the bell for Thomas. You know we are to dine at half-past five
     to-day, to give you time for the train."
These were the last words Tom Marjoribanks heard as Lucilla left the room. She ran up to the
     drawing-room without losing a minute, and burst in upon the vacant place where Mr Holden had
     stood so long waiting for her. To be sure, Miss Marjoribanks's forebodings were so far
     fulfilled that the St Cecilia, which she meant to have over the piano, was hung quite in the
     other corner of the room, by reason of being just the same size as another picture at the
     opposite angle, which the workmen, sternly symmetrical, thought it necessary to "match." But,
     after all, that was a trifling defect. She stood in the middle of the room, and surveyed the
     walls, well pleased, with a heart which kept beating very steadily in her bosom. On the whole,
     perhaps, she was not sorry to have had it out with Tom. So far as he was personally concerned,
     Miss Marjoribanks, being a physician's daughter, had great faith in the vis
     medicatrix, and was not afraid for her cousin's health or his morals, as a less
     experienced woman might have been. If she was angry with anybody, it was with herself, who had
     not taken sufficient precautions to avoid the explanation. "But, after all, everything is for
     the best," Lucilla said to herself, with that beautiful confidence which is common to people
     who have things their own way; and she devoted her mind to the St Cecilia, and paid no more
     attention to Tom. It was not till more than an hour after that a succession of dreadful thumps
     was not only heard but felt throughout the house. It was Tom, but he was not doing any harm to
     himself. He was not blowing out his brains or knocking his head against the wall. He was only
     jumping on his portmanteau, notwithstanding that Lucilla had warned him against such a
     proceeding—and in his state of mind the jumps were naturally more frantic than usual. When
     Lucilla heard it, she rang the bell, and told Thomas to go and help Mr Tom with his packing;
     from which it will be seen that Miss Marjoribanks bore no grudge against her cousin but was
     disposed to send him forth in friendship and peace.
