<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XI</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>"You have never told us who your unknown was," said Mr Cavendish. "I suppose she is
     professional. Carlingford could not possibly possess two such voices in private life."</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, I don't know about two such voices," said Miss Marjoribanks; "her voice suits mine, you
     know. It is always a great thing to find two voices that suit. I never would choose to have
     professional singers, for my part. You have to give yourself up to music when you do such a
     thing; and that is not my idea of society. I am very fond of music," said Lucilla—"excessively
     fond of it; but then everybody is not of my opinion—and one has to take so many things into
     consideration. For people who give one party in the year it does very well—but then I hate
     parties: the only pleasure in society is when one's friends come to see one without any
     ado."</t:p>
<t:p>"In white frocks, <t:hi>high</t:hi>," said Mrs Woodburn, who could not help assuming Lucilla's
     manner for the moment, even while addressing herself; but as the possibility of such a
      <t:hi>lèse-majesté</t:hi> did not even occur to Miss Marjoribanks, she accepted the observation in
     good faith.</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes; I hate a grand toilette when it is only a meeting of friends," she said—"for the girls,
     you know; of course you married ladies can always do what you like. You have your husbands to
     please," said Lucilla. And this was a little hard upon her satirist, for, to tell the truth,
     that was a particular of domestic duty to which Mrs Woodburn did not much devote herself,
     according to the opinion of Grange Lane.</t:p>
<t:p>"But about the contralto," said Mr Cavendish, who had come to call on Miss Marjoribanks under
     his sister's wing, and desired above all things to keep the peace between the two ladies, as
     indeed is a man's duty under such circumstances. "You are always statesmanlike in your views;
     but I cannot understand why you let poor little Molly Brown carry on her chirping when you had
     such an astonishing force in reserve. She must have been covered with confusion, the poor
     little soul."</t:p>
<t:p>"Nothing of the sort," said Mrs Woodburn, pursuing her favourite occupation as usual. "She
     only said, 'Goodness me! how high Lucilla goes! Do you like that dreadfully high music?' and
     made little eyebrows." To be sure, the mimic made Miss Brown's eyebrows, and spoke in her
     voice, so that even Lucilla found it a little difficult to keep her gravity. But then Miss
     Marjoribanks was defended by her mission, and she felt in her heart that, representing public
     interest as she did, it was her duty to avoid all complicity in any attack upon an individual;
     and consequently, to a certain extent, it was her duty also to put Mrs Woodburn down.</t:p>
<t:p>"Molly Brown has a very nice little voice," said Lucilla, with most disheartening gravity. "I
     like to hear her sing, for my part—the only thing is that she wants cultivation a little. It
     doesn't matter much you know, whether or not you have a voice to begin with. It is cultivation
     that is the thing," said Miss Marjoribanks deliberately. "I hope you <t:hi>really</t:hi> thought it
     was a pleasant evening. Of course everybody said so to me; but then one can never put any faith
     in that. I have said it myself ever so many times when I am sure I did not mean it. For myself,
     I don't give any importance to the first evening. Anybody can do a thing once, you know; the
     second and the third, and so on—that is the real test. But I hope you thought it pleasant so
     far as it went."</t:p>
<t:p>"It was a great deal more than pleasant," said Mr Cavendish; "and as for your conception of
     social politics, it is masterly," the future M.P. added, in a tone which struck Lucilla as very
     significant; not that she cared particularly about Mr Cavendish's meaning, but still, when a
     young man who intends to go into Parliament congratulates a young lady upon her statesmanlike
     views, and her conception of politics, it must be confessed that it looks a little particular;
     and then, if that was what he meant, it was no doubt Lucilla's duty to make up her mind.</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, you know, I went through a course of political economy at Mount Pleasant," she said,
     with a laugh. "One of the Miss Blounts was dreadfully strong-minded. I wonder, for my part,
     that she did not make me literary; but fortunately I escaped that."</t:p>
<t:p>"Heaven be praised!" said Mr Cavendish. "I think you ought to be Prime Minister. That
     contralto of yours is charming raw material; but if I were you I would put her through an
     elementary course. She knows how to sing, but she does not know how to move; and as for
     talking, she seems to expect to be insulted. If you make a pretty-behaved young lady out of
     that, you will beat Adam Smith."</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, I don't know much about Adam Smith," said Miss Marjoribanks. "I think Miss Martha
     thought him rather old-fashioned. As for poor Barbara, she is only a little shy, but that will
     soon wear off. I don't see what need she has to talk—or to move either, for that matter. I
     thought she did very well indeed for a girl who never goes into society. Was it not clever of
     me to find her out the very first day I was in Carlingford? It has always been so difficult to
     find a voice that went perfectly with mine."</t:p>
<t:p>"For my part, I think it was a great deal more than clever," said Mr Cavendish; for Mrs
     Woodburn, finding herself unappreciated, was silent and making notes. "It was a stroke of
     genius. So her name is Barbara? I wonder if it would be indiscreet to ask where Mademoiselle
     Barbara comes from, or if she belongs to anybody, or lives anywhere. My own impression is that
     you mean to keep her shut up in a box all the week through, and produce her only on the
     Thursday evenings. I have a weakness for a fine contralto. If she had been existing in an
     ordinary habitation like other people in Carlingford, I should have heard her, or heard of her.
     It is clear to me that you keep her shut up in a box."</t:p>
<t:p>"Exactly," said Lucilla. "I don't mean to tell you anything about her. You may be sure, now I
     have found her out, I mean to keep her for myself. Her box is quite a pretty one, like what
     Gulliver had somewhere. It is just time for lunch, and you are both going to stay, I hope; and
     there is poor Mary Chiley and her husband coming through the garden. What a pity it is he is
     such a goose!"</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes; but you know she never would take her uncle's advice, my dear," said the incorrigible
     mimic, putting on Mrs Chiley's face; "and being an orphan, what could anybody do? And then she
     does not get on with <t:hi>his</t:hi> family. By the way," Mrs Woodburn said, falling into her
     natural tone—"I wonder if anybody ever does get on with her husband's family?" The question was
     one which was a little grave to herself at the moment; and this was the reason why she returned
     to her identity—for there was no telling how long the Woodburns, who had come for Christmas,
     meant to stay. "I shall be quite interested to watch <t:hi>you</t:hi>, Lucilla, when it comes to be
     your turn, and see how you manage," she went on, with a keen look at Miss Marjoribanks; and Mr
     Cavendish laughed. He too looked at her, and Lucilla felt herself in rather a delicate
     position: not that she was agitated, as might have been the case had the future M.P. for
     Carlingford "engaged her affections," as she herself would have said. Fortunately these young
     affections were quite free as yet; but nevertheless Miss Marjoribanks felt that the question
     was a serious one, as coming from the sister of a gentleman who was undeniably paying her
     attention. She did not in the least wish to alarm a leading member of a family into which it
     was possible she might enter; and then at the same time she intended to reserve fully all her
     individual rights.</t:p>
<t:p>"I always make it a point never to shock anybody's prejudices," said Miss Marjoribanks. "I
     should do just the same with <t:hi>them</t:hi> as with other people; all you have to do is to show
     from the first that you mean to be good friends with everybody. But then I am so lucky: I can
      <t:hi>always</t:hi> get on with people," said Lucilla, rising to greet the two unfortunates who
     had come to Colonel Chiley's to spend a merry Christmas, and who did not know what to do with
     themselves. And then they all went downstairs and lunched together very pleasantly. As for Mr
     Cavendish, he was "quite devoted," as poor Mary Chiley said, with a touch of envy. To be sure,
     her trousseau was still in its full glory; but yet life under the conditions of marriage was
     not nearly such fun as it had been when she was a young lady, and had some one paying attention
     to her: and she rather grudged Lucilla that climax of existence, notwithstanding her own
     superior standing and dignity as a married lady. And Mrs Woodburn too awoke from her study of
     the stupid young husband to remark upon her brother's behaviour: she had not seen the two
     together so often as Mrs Chiley had done, and consequently this was the first time that the
     thought had occurred to her. She too had been born "one of the Cavendishes," as it was common
     to say in Carlingford, with a certain imposing yet vague grandeur—and she was a little shocked,
     like any good sister, at the first idea. She watched Lucilla's movements and looks with a quite
     different kind of attention after this idea struck her, and made a rapid private calculation as
     to who Dr Marjoribanks's connections were, and what he would be likely to give his daughter; so
     that it is evident that Lucilla did not deceive herself, but that Mr Cavendish's attentions
     must have been marked indeed.</t:p>
<t:p>This was the little cloud which arose, as we have said, no bigger than a man's hand, over
     Miss Marjoribanks's prosperous way. When the luncheon was over and they had all gone, Lucilla
     took a few minutes to think it over before she went out. It was not that she was unduly
     flattered by Mr Cavendish's attentions, as might have happened to an inexperienced young woman;
     for Lucilla, with her attractions and genius, had not reached the mature age of nineteen
     without receiving the natural homage of mankind on several clearly-defined occasions. But then
     the present case had various features peculiar to itself, which prevented Lucilla from crushing
     it in the bud, as she had meant to do with her cousin's ill-fated passion. She had to consider,
     in the first place, her mission in Carlingford, which was more important than anything else;
     but though Miss Marjoribanks had vowed herself to the reorganisation of society in her native
     town, she had not by any means vowed that it was absolutely as Miss Marjoribanks that she was
     to accomplish that renovation. And then there was something in the very idea of being M.P. for
     Carlingford which moved the mind of Lucilla. It was a perfectly ideal position for a woman of
     her views, and seemed to offer the very field that was necessary for her ambition. This was the
     reason, of all others, which made her less careful to prevent Mr Cavendish from "saying the
     words" than she had been with Tom. To be sure, it would be a trial to leave the drawing-room
     after it had just been furnished so entirely to her liking—not to say to her complexion; but
     still it was a sacrifice which might be made. It was in this way that Miss Marjoribanks
     prepared herself for the possible modifications which circumstances might impose. She did not
     make any rash resolution to resist a change which, on the whole, might possibly be "for the
     best," but prepared herself to take everything into consideration, and possibly to draw from it
     a superior good: in short, she looked upon the matter as a superior mind, trained in sound
     principles of political economy, might be expected to look upon the possible vicissitudes of
     fortune, with an enlightened regard to the uses of all things, and to the comparative values on
     either side.</t:p>
<t:p>Barbara Lake, as it happened, was out walking at the very moment when Miss Marjoribanks sat
     down to consider this question. She had gone to the School of Design to meet Rose, with an
     amiability very unusual in her. Rose had made such progress, after leaving Mount Pleasant,
     under her father's care, and by the help of that fine feeling for art which has been mentioned
     in the earlier part of this history, that the charge of the female pupils in the School of
     Design had been confided to her, with a tiny little salary, which served Mr Lake as an excuse
     for keeping his favourite little daughter with him. Nothing could be supposed more unlike
     Barbara than her younger sister, who just came up to her shoulder, and was twice as serviceable
     and active and "nice," according to the testimony of all the children. Barbara had led her
     father a hard life, poor man! the time that Rose was at Mount Pleasant; but now that his
     assistant had come back again, the poor drawing-master had recovered all his old spirits. She
     was just coming out of the School of Design, with her portfolio under her arm, when Barbara met
     her. There were not many pupils, it is true, but still there were enough to worry poor Rose,
     who was not an imposing personage, and who was daily wounded by the discovery that after all
     there are but a limited number of persons in this world, especially in the poorer classes of
     the community, and under the age of sixteen, who have a feeling for art. It was utterly
     inconceivable to the young teacher how her girls could be so clever as to find out each a
     different way of putting the sublime features of the Belveder Apollo out of drawing, and she
     was still revolving this difficult problem when her sister joined her. Barbara, for her part,
     was occupied with thoughts of a hero much more interesting than he of Olympus. She was flushed
     and eager, and looking very handsome under her shabby bonnet; and her anxiety to have a
      <t:hi>confidante</t:hi> was so great that she made a dart at Rose, and grasped her by the arm
     under which she was carrying her portfolio, to the great discomposure of the young artist. She
     asked, with a little anxiety, "What is the matter? is there anything wrong at home?" and made a
     rapid movement to get to the other side.</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, Rose," said Barbara, panting with haste and agitation, "only fancy; I have just seen
     him. I met him right in front of Masters's, and he took off his hat to me. I feel in such a
     way—I can scarcely speak."</t:p>
<t:p>"Met—who?" said Rose—for she was imperfect in her grammar, like most people in a moment of
     emergency; and, besides, she shared to some extent Miss Marjoribanks's reluctance to shock the
     prejudices of society, and was disturbed by the idea that somebody might pass and see Barbara
     in her present state of excitement, and perhaps attribute it to its true cause.</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, you stupid little thing!" said Barbara, giving her "a shake" by her disengaged arm. "I
     tell you, <t:hi>him</t:hi>!—the gentleman I met at Lucilla Marjoribanks's. He looked as if he was
     quite delighted to see me again; and I am sure he turned round to see where I was going. He
     couldn't speak to me, you know, the first time; though indeed I shouldn't be the least
     surprised if he had followed—at a distance, you know, only to see where I live," said Barbara,
     turning round and searching into the distance with her eager eyes. But there was nobody to be
     seen in the street, except some of Rose's pupils lingering along in the sunshine, and very
     probably exchanging similar confidences. Barbara turned back again with a touch of
     disappointment. "I am quite sure he will find out before long; and don't forget I said so," she
     added, with a little nod of her head.</t:p>
<t:p>"I don't see what it matters if he found out directly," said Rose. "Papa would not let
     anybody come to our house that he did not approve of; and then, you know, he will never have
     anything to say to people who are patronising. I don't want to hear any more about your fine
     gentleman. If you were worried as I am, you would think much more of getting home than of
     anybody bowing to you in the street. One of the gentlemen from Marlborough House once took off
     his hat to me," said Rose, with a certain solemnity. "Of course I was pleased; but then I knew
     it was my design he was thinking of—my Honiton flounce, you know. I suppose this other one must
     have thought you had a pretty voice."</t:p>
<t:p>This time, however, it was an angry shake that Barbara gave to her sister. "I wish you would
     not be such a goose," she said; "who cares about your Honiton flounce? He took off his hat
     because—because he admired me, I suppose—and then it was a great deal more than just taking off
     his hat. He gave me such a look! Papa has no sense, though I suppose you will blaze up when I
     say so. He ought to think of us a little. As for patronising, I should soon change that, I can
     tell you. But then papa thinks of nothing but paying his bills and keeping out of debt, as he
     says—as if everybody was not in debt; and how do you suppose we are ever to get settled in
     life? It would be far more sensible to spend a little more, and go into society a little, and
     do us justice. Only think all that that old Doctor is doing for Lucilla; and there are four of
     us when the little ones grow up," said Barbara, in a tone of injury. "I should like to know
     what papa is thinking of? If mamma had not died when she did——"</t:p>
<t:p>"It was not poor mamma's fault," said Rose. "I dare say she would have lived if she could for
     all our sakes. But then you have always taken a false view of our position, Barbara. We are a
     family of <t:hi>artists</t:hi>," said the little mistress of the School of Design. She had pretty
     eyes, very dewy and clear, and they woke up under the excitement of this proud claim. "When
     papa is appreciated as he deserves, and when Willie has <t:hi>made a name</t:hi>" said Rose, with
     modest confidence, "things will be different. But the true strength of our position is that we
     are a family of artists. We are everybody's equal, and we are nobody's equal. We have a rank of
     our own. If you would only remember this, you would not grudge anything to Lucilla
     Marjoribanks; and then I am sure she has been very kind to you."</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, bother!" said the unfeeling Barbara. "You do nothing but encourage papa with your
     nonsense. And I should like to know what right Lucilla Marjoribanks has to be kind to me? If I
     am not as good as she, it is a very strange thing. I should never take the trouble to think
     about <t:hi>him</t:hi> if it was not that Lucilla believes he is paying her attention—that is the
     great fun. It would be delicious to take him from her, and make game of her and her kindness.
     Goodness! there he is again. I felt sure that he would try to find out the house."</t:p>
<t:p>And Barbara crimsoned higher than ever, and held Rose fast by the arm, and called her
     attention by the most visible and indeed tangible signs to the elegant apparition, like any
     other underbred young woman. As for Rose, she was a little gentlewoman born, and had a horror
     unspeakable of her sister's bad manners. When Mr Cavendish made a movement as if to address
     Barbara, it was the pretty gray eyes of Rose lifted to his face with a look of straightforward
     surprise and inquiry which made him retire so hastily. He took off his hat again more
     respectfully than before, and pursued his walk along Grove Street, as if he had no ulterior
     intention in visiting that humble part of the town. As for Barbara, she held Rose faster than
     ever, and almost pinched her arm to make her listen. "I knew he was trying to find out the
     house," she said, in an exultant whisper. "And Lucilla thinks he is paying her attention!" For
     the fact was, that when Miss Marjoribanks took to being kind to Barbara, she conferred upon the
     contralto at the same moment a palpable injury and grievance, which was what the
     drawing-master's daughter had been looking for, for several years of her life. And naturally
     Lucilla, who was at this moment thinking it all over under the soft green shadows from her new
     hangings, was deprived of the light which might have been thrown on her reflections, had she
     seen what was going on in Grove Street. The conditions of humanity are such that even a woman
     of genius cannot altogether overstep them. And Lucilla still continued to think that Mr
     Cavendish was paying her attention, which, indeed, was also the general opinion in Grange
     Lane.</t:p>
</t:div>