<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XXVIII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>Lucilla prepared her toilette the next evening, to take tea with the Lakes, with greater care
     than she would have spent upon a party of much greater pretensions. She was, to be sure,
     dressed as usual in the white dress, <t:hi>high</t:hi>, which she had brought into fashion in
     Carlingford; but then that simple evening toilette required many adjuncts which were not
     necessary on other occasions, seeing that this time she was going to walk to her destination,
     and had in her mind the four distinct aims of pleasing Rose, of dazzling Barbara, of imposing
     upon Mr Cavendish, and, finally, of being, as always, in harmony with <t:hi>herself</t:hi>. She was
     as punctual to the hour and minute of her engagement as if she had been a queen; and, indeed,
     it was with a demeanour as gracious that she entered the little house in Grove Street, where,
     naturally, there had been also sundry preparations made for her visit. Mr Lake himself, who had
     postponed his usual walk, and was taking his tea an hour later than usual, received his young
     visitor with all the suavity natural to him; and as for Barbara, she did the honours with a
     certain suppressed exultation and air of triumph, which proved to Lucilla that her plan was
     indeed an inspiration of genius. As for Rose, it would be impossible to describe what were her
     sensations. Her faith still failed her at that momentous hour. She was sceptical of Lucilla,
     and naturally of all the world, and regarded everybody with jealous scrutiny and expectation
     and distrust, as was natural to a young conspirator. She was profoundly excited and curious to
     know what Miss Marjoribanks meant to do; and at the same time she did not believe in Miss
     Marjoribanks, and was almost disposed to betray and interfere with her, if such treachery had
     been possible. It was Rose Lucilla specially came to visit, and yet Rose was the only one who
     was cool to her, and did not seem fully to appreciate her condescension; but then, happily,
     Miss Marjoribanks was magnanimous, and at the same time had a purpose to support her, which was
     much more comprehensive and of larger application than anything that had entered into the mind
     of Rose Lake.</t:p>
<t:p>"I am proud to see you in my house, Miss Marjoribanks," said Mr Lake. "I have always
     considered your excellent father one of my best friends. I am not able to give my children the
     same advantages, but I have always brought them up not to have any false pride. We have no
     wealth; but we have some things which cannot be purchased by wealth," said the drawing-master,
     with mild grandeur; and he looked round upon the walls of his parlour, which were hung with his
     own drawings, and where one of Willie's held the place of honour. In all Carlingford there was
     no other house that enjoyed a similar distinction; and, consequently, it was with a delicious
     sense of chivalrous deference yet equality that the exceptional man of Grove Street received
     the young sovereign of Grange Lane.</t:p>
<t:p>"I am so glad to come, Mr Lake," said Lucilla. "It is so nice to be among such old friends;
     and, besides that, you know there never was any voice that suited mine like Barbara's; and that
     dear old Rose was always my pet at Mount Pleasant. I should have come long ago if anybody had
     ever asked me," said Miss Marjoribanks. And as for Mr Lake, he was so overpowered by this
     implied reproach upon his hospitality that he scarcely knew how to reply.</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear Miss Marjoribanks, if you have not been asked it has been from no want of—of
     goodwill," said Mr Lake anxiously. "I do not know what the girls can have been thinking of. You
     see Rose's genius takes another line; and Barbara, naturally, has a great many things to think
     of; but in the future, I hope——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, yes; I shall come without being asked," said Lucilla. And when the tea came it was all
     she could do to keep herself quiet, and remember that she was a visitor, and not take it out of
     the incapable hands of Barbara, who never gave her father the right amount of sugar in his tea.
     To tell the truth, Barbara's thoughts were occupied by a very different subject; and even Rose
     had but little attention to spare for her papa's comforts at that special moment. But Lucilla's
     larger mind embraced everything. She sat with her very fingers itching to cut the
     bread-and-butter for him, and give him a cup of tea as he liked it; and asked herself, with
     indignation, what was the use of that great creature, with her level eyebrows and her crimson
     bloom, who could not take the trouble to remember that three lumps was what Mr Lake liked. Miss
     Marjoribanks had never taken tea with him before; but his second cup, had she dispensed it,
     would have been exactly to his taste—which was a thing Barbara had not learned to make it in
     all these years. No wonder that a certain sense of contemptuous indignation arose for one
     moment, even in the calm and impartial bosom of genius. Perhaps Rose would not have done much
     better; but then Rose was good for something else, which was always a set-off on the other
     side. Thus it will be seen that Lucilla had a respect for use, even of a kind which in her own
     person she did not much appreciate, as became a person of a truly enlightened mind; but a
     creature who was of no earthly good irritated her well-regulated spirit; for, to be sure, the
     possession of a fine contralto (which is, at the same time, not fine enough to be made use of
     professionally) is not a matter of sufficient moment in this world to excuse a young woman for
     not knowing how to give her father a comfortable cup of tea.</t:p>
<t:p>It was nearly nine o'clock before Mr Lake went out for his walk, and by that time it was
     almost dark, and the lamp outside was lighted, which was not far from the door. Lucilla had
     taken a seat near the window, with the view of witnessing everything; and it cannot be denied
     that she felt a little excited when Barbara went out of the room after her father, leaving Rose
     alone with her guest. Miss Marjoribanks's heart gave a beat or two the more in the first
     minute, though before the next had passed it had fallen into its usual measure. There were no
     candles as yet in the parlour, and Grove Street—or at least the bit of it which lay before the
     window, lighted by the lamp outside, and relieved against a little square of bluish-green sky
     which intervened between Miss Hemmings's house and that of old Mr Wrangle on the opposite
     side—was very clear to the interested spectator. There was nobody visible but an organ-man, who
     was grinding a popular melody very dolorously out of his box, in what Rose would have called
     the middle distance; and beyond, Miss Jane Hemmings looking out of the long staircase window,
     and three little boys in different attitudes below,—that is, if one did not count a tall figure
     which, perhaps with the view of listening to the music of the organ, was coming and going in a
     limited circuit round the light of the lamp.</t:p>
<t:p>"How convenient it is to have the lamp so near," said Lucilla. "Oh, don't light any candles,
     please; it is so nice to sit in the dark. Where is Barbara, I wonder? Let us have some music,
     and put down that dreadful organ. I hope she has not gone out. And where are you, you sulky
     little Rose?"</t:p>
<t:p>"She has gone upstairs," said Rose, who began to feel all the enormity of her conduct in thus
     betraying her sister. "I hate sitting in the dark. I hate being a spy; come in from the window,
     Lucilla, now you are here——"</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear Rose," said Miss Marjoribanks, "I think you forget a little. For my part I do not
     understand what being a spy means. Barbara knows very well I am here. I should scorn to take an
     advantage of anybody, for my part. If she does not bring him past the very window, and under my
     eyes—Ah, yes, that is just what I thought," said Lucilla, with gentle satisfaction. But by this
     time poor little Rose had roused herself into an innocent fury.</t:p>
<t:p>"What is just as you thought?" said Rose, laying an impatient grasp on Miss Marjoribanks's
     arm. "Come in from the window, Lucilla, this moment—this moment! Oh, me, to think it should be
     my doing! Oh, Lucilla, don't be so mean and shabby and wretched. I tell you to come in—come in
     directly! If you do not shut the window, and come and sit here in the corner, I will never,
     never speak to you again!"</t:p>
<t:p>Miss Marjoribanks, as was natural, took no notice of this childish fury. She was sitting just
     where she had been sitting all the evening, within sight of the street lamp and the
     organ-grinder, and Miss Jane Hemmings at the staircase window;—just where Barbara had placed
     her, and where that young woman calculated on finding her, when she made a promenade of triumph
     up the partially lighted street by the side of her clandestine suitor. Perhaps Barbara had seen
     Miss Jane as well, and knew that public opinion was thus watching over her; but at all events
     she was not at all ashamed of herself, or indignant at being spied upon. On the contrary, it
     was a kind of apotheosis for Barbara, only second to the grand and crowning triumph which would
     be accomplished in Carlingford Church under the shadow of that veil of real Brussels, which
     grew more and more real every day. Thus neither the actors in the drama, nor the principal
     spectator, were in the smallest degree disturbed by horror or shame or sense of guilt,
     excepting always the fanciful little Rose, who suffered for everybody; who could have wished
     that the earth would open and swallow up Barbara and her lover; who could have slaughtered
     Lucilla on the spot, and given herself over to any kind of torture for her treachery. Naturally
     nobody paid any sort of attention to Rose. Barbara, for her part, took her admirer's arm in the
     twilight with a swelling of exultation, which the gaining of the very highest prize in the
     department of ornamental art could scarcely have conveyed to the bosom of the little artist;
     and Lucilla put back her small assailant softly with her hand, and smoothed down her ruffled
     plumes.</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear, it is Miss Hemmings that is spying," said Lucilla; "and poor Barbara would be so
     disappointed if I were to go away from the window. Have patience just a little longer—there's a
     dear. It is all exactly as I thought."</t:p>
<t:p>And then there followed a pause, which was a terrible pause for Rose. The organ-grinder
     stopped his doleful ditty, and there was scarcely any sound to be heard in the street except
     the footsteps approaching and retiring, the measured tread of two people occupied with each
     other, going now more slowly, now more quickly, as the humour seized them, or as their
     conversation grew in interest; even the sound of their voices came by times to the
     auditors—Barbara's with an occasional laugh or tone of triumph, and the other deeper, with
     which Rose had but little acquaintance, but which was perfectly known to Lucilla. All this
     time, while her companion sat panting in the dark corner, Miss Marjoribanks was looking to the
     joints of her harness, and feeling the edge of her weapons. For, after all, it was no small
     enterprise upon which she was going forth. She was going to denounce the faithless knight to
     his face, and take him out of the hands of the enchantress; but then she herself meant to take
     him in hand, and show him his true dangers, and vindicate his honour. A more disinterested
     enterprise was never undertaken by any knight-errant. Yet, at the same time, Lucilla could not
     help entertaining a certain involuntary contempt for the man who had deserted her own standard
     to put himself under that of Barbara Lake, and who was being paraded up and down here without
     knowing it, to gratify the vanity of his new sovereign, and make an exhibition of his weakness.
     Lucilla would have been more than mortal if she had not felt the difference between her own
     rule, which would have been all to his good, and the purely egotistical sway of Barbara; and
     even in her magnanimous mind, it was impossible that pity itself should not be mingled with a
     certain disdain.</t:p>
<t:p>She sat quite still for so long that Barbara grew intoxicated with her triumph. "It is
     perhaps the last time," Lucilla said to herself, with a movement of compassion; and the breadth
     of her human sympathy was such that she waited till the very latest moment, and let the deluded
     young woman have the full enjoyment of her imaginary victory. Then Miss Marjoribanks rose with
     a certain solemnity, and put on her hat, and gave an unappreciated kiss to Rose, who kept in
     her corner. "Good-night; I am going," said Lucilla. The words were simple enough, but yet they
     rang in Rose's ears like the signal of a conspiracy. When the calm leader of the expedition
     went forth, sensible of the importance of her mission, but tranquil as great minds always are
     in a moment of danger, Rose got up too and followed, trembling in every limb. She was capable
     of having thrown herself upon the spears in her own person in a sudden <t:hi>élan</t:hi> of
     indignation and passion; but she was not capable of waiting till the right moment, and meeting
     her antagonists in reasonable combat. Miss Marjoribanks went out deliberately, without any
     unnecessary haste, sweeping into the dusky twilight with her virginal white draperies. It was a
     very ordinary scene, and yet, even in the midst of her excitement, Rose could not help
     observing involuntarily its pictorial qualities—if only any painter could have transferred to
     his canvas the subdued musical hum of surrounding life, the fragrance of the mignonette, and
     the peaceful stillness of the summer night. The sky shone out green-blue, lambent and wistful,
     from the vacant space between Miss Hemmings's and Mr Wrangle's, and there were the dusky
     twilight shadows below, and the yellow gleam of the lamp, and Barbara's exulting, triumphant
     figure, and the white robes of the avenging angel. Rose could not have observed all this if she
     had not been stilled into a kind of breathless awe by the solemn character of the situation,
     which struck her as being somehow like one of Millais's pictures. As for the lovers, they had
     just turned at the moment that Miss Marjoribanks came out, and consequently met her straight in
     the face, as she stood suave and smiling at the little garden door.</t:p>
<t:p>"It <t:hi>is</t:hi> Mr Cavendish," said Lucilla; "I am so glad; I have been hoping and trying to
     see you for ever so long; and as soon as ever I heard you talking I felt sure it was your
     voice."</t:p>
<t:p>This was the greeting she addressed to Barbara Lake's lover. For his part he stood before
     her, growing red and growing pale, struck dumb by the unlooked-for meeting, and with such a
     sense of being ashamed of himself as never before had entered his mind, though, no doubt, he
     had done worse actions in his day. Even Barbara had not calculated upon this open encounter;
     and instead of giving him any assistance, as was a woman's duty in such a case, she only tossed
     her head, and giggled with an embarrassment which was more pride than shame. As for Mr
     Cavendish, he would have liked to disappear under the pavement, if it had been possible. For
     once he and Rose were agreed. If a gulf had opened before him, he would have jumped into it
     without ever pausing to ask himself why. And yet all the time Miss Marjoribanks was looking as
     placid as if she had been in her own drawing-room, and expecting his reply to her friendly
     observations. When he realised that he ought to say something, Mr Cavendish felt that he had as
     much need to wipe his forehead as ever the Archdeacon had. He turned hot and cold, and felt his
     mind and his tongue frozen, and could not find a word to say. With a sudden horror he woke up,
     like one of Comus's revellers, and found himself changed into the likeness of the creature he
     consorted with. If he had found an ass's head on his shoulders, he could not have felt more
     startled and horrified than when he heard himself, in the imbecility of the moment, giggle like
     Barbara, and answer to Lucilla's remark, "Oh! yes, it was my voice."</t:p>
<t:p>"I am very sorry to separate you from Barbara," said Miss Marjoribanks; "but she is at home,
     you know, and I want so much to talk to you. Barbara, good-night; I want Mr Cavendish to walk
     home with me. Rose, don't stand in the garden and catch cold; thank you, dear, for such a
     pleasant evening," said Lucilla, pressing another kiss upon her little friend's unwilling
     cheek. When she had done this, she put out her hand to Barbara, and passed her, sweeping her
     white garments through the narrow gateway. She took Mr Cavendish's arm as if he had been a
     young brother come to fetch her. "Let us go round by the chapel," said Miss Marjoribanks, "I
     have so much to say to you. Be sure to practise for Thursday, Barbara, and bid your papa
     good-night for me." This was how she carried off Mr Cavendish finally out of Barbara's very
     fingers, and under her very eyes.</t:p>
<t:p>When the two sisters were left standing together at the door, they could do nothing but stare
     at each other in the extremity of their amazement. Rose, for her part, remained but a moment,
     and then, feeling by far the guiltiest and most miserable of the whole party, ran upstairs to
     her own room and cried as if her heart would break. Barbara, on the contrary, who was past
     crying, stood still at the door, and watched Lucilla's white dress disappearing on the way to
     Grange Lane with indescribable emotions. A young woman cannot call the police, or appeal to the
     crier, when it is her lover whom she has lost: but to see him carried off by the strong hand—to
     watch him gradually going away and disappearing from her eyes—to hear his steps withdrawing
     into the distance—was such a trial as few are called upon to bear. She stood and looked after
     him, and could not believe her eyes. And then it was all so sudden—an affair of a moment.
     Barbara could not realise how the world had turned round, and this revolution had been
     effected;—one minute she had been leaning on his arm triumphant, making a show and exhibition
     of him in the pride of her heart, though he did not know it; and the next was not she standing
     here watching him with a blank countenance and a despairing heart, while Lucilla had pounced
     upon him and carried him off in her cruel grasp? The blow was so sudden, that Barbara stood
     speechless and motionless till the two departing figures had vanished in the darkness. Would he
     come back again to-morrow, or was he gone for ever and ever? Such were the thoughts of the
     forsaken maiden, as she stood paralysed under this sudden change of fortune, at her father's
     door. If some cruel spectator had thrown into the fire that Brussels veil with which her
     imagination had so long played, and Barbara had stood heart-struck, watching the filmy tissue
     dissolve into ashes before her eyes, her sense of sudden anguish could not have been more
     acute. Yet, after all, Barbara's pangs were nothing to those of Mr Cavendish, as he felt Miss
     Marjoribanks's light touch on his arm, and felt his doomed feet turn in spite of himself in the
     most dangerous direction, and became conscious that he was being led beyond all possibility of
     resistance, back to Grange Lane and to his fate.</t:p>
<t:p>To be sure it was dark, which was one consolation; but it was not dark enough to conceal
     Lucilla's white dress, nor the well-known form and lineaments of the young monarch of Grange
     Lane, in whose company nobody could pass unobserved. Mr Cavendish could have faced danger by
     sea and land with the average amount of courage; but the danger of the walk down the little
     street, which afterwards led to St Roque's, and up the embowered stillness of Grange Lane, was
     more than he was equal to. He could not be sure of making a single step by these garden-walls
     without meeting somebody who knew him—somebody whose curiosity might ruin him in Carlingford;
     or even without the risk of encountering in the face of that arch-enemy, who would not go away,
     and whose presence had banished him from the place. It may be supposed that, under these
     terrible circumstances, Mr Cavendish's thoughts of Barbara, who had got him into this scrape,
     were far from lover-like. He was a man universally popular among ladies, and who owed a great
     deal of the social consideration which he prized so highly to this fact; and yet the most
     gentle sentiment in his mind at that moment, was a "Confound these women!" which he breathed to
     himself, all low and deep, as he went slowly along by Lucilla's side. As for Miss Marjoribanks,
     her thoughts were of a very much more serious description than anything her unlucky escort was
     thinking of, and a minute or two passed in silence before she could make up her mind to
     speak.</t:p>
<t:p>"I have been thinking a great deal about you lately, and wishing very much to see you," said
     Lucilla. "Did not Mrs Woodburn tell you?—I think I should have written to you had I known your
     address."</t:p>
<t:p>"And I am sure you would have made me the happiest of men," said the victim, with rueful
     politeness. "What had I done to deserve such a privilege? But my sister did not tell me; she
     left me to hear it from your own——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a certain solemnity, interrupting him; "I have been
     thinking a great deal—and <t:hi>hearing</t:hi> a great deal about you, Mr Cavendish." When she had
     said this Lucilla sighed, and her sigh found a terrible echo in her hearer's bosom. She knew
     that he turned green in the darkness as he gave an anxious look at her. But he was too much
     alarmed to give her an opportunity of studying his face.</t:p>
<t:p>"<t:hi>Hearing</t:hi> of me," he said, and tried to laugh; "what have my kind friends been
     saying?" and for one moment the sufferer tried to delude himself that it was some innocent
     gossip about Barbara which might be circulating in Grange Lane.</t:p>
<t:p>"Hush," said Lucilla, "don't laugh, please; for I want to have a very serious talk. I have
     been hearing about you from some very, very old friends, Mr Cavendish—not anything about
      <t:hi>this</t:hi>, you know," Miss Marjoribanks added, waving her hand in the direction of Grove
     Street. And then Barbara Lake and everything connected with her vanished like a shadow from the
     unfortunate man's mind. It was horribly ungrateful on his part, but it was, as Miss
     Marjoribanks would have said, just what might have been expected, and how They always behave.
     He had no longer any time or patience for the object which had been giving occupation and
     interest to his solitude. He woke up in a moment, and gave a passing curse to his folly, and
     faced the real danger as he best could.</t:p>
<t:p>"You must be making a mistake, Miss Marjoribanks," he said, with some bitterness; "it should
     have been, very, very old enemy. I know who it is. It is that Archdeacon you ladies make such a
     fuss about. It is he who has been telling lies about me," said Mr Cavendish. He breathed a deep
     hard breath as he spoke, and the blood came back to his face. Perhaps for the first moment he
     felt satisfied, and breathed freer after it was over; but at the same time it was very dreadful
     to him to feel that he was found out, and that henceforth Grange Lane would shut its doors and
     avert its countenance. "If you take his word for it, I may give in at once," he continued,
     bitterly. "A parson will say anything; they are as bad as—as women." This the poor man said in
     his despair, because he did not know what he was saying; for in reality he knew that women had
     been his best friends, and that he had still a chance, if the judgment was to rest with
     them.</t:p>
<t:p>"You are very ungrateful to say so," said Miss Marjoribanks, "but it is only because you are
     excited, I suppose. No, Mr Cavendish, it was not the Archdeacon; on the contrary, it was a
     lady, and she said nothing but good of you," said Lucilla; and then there was a pause. As for
     Mr Cavendish, it would be altogether impossible to describe the state of his mind. He was like
     a man suddenly reprieved, but giddy with the shock, and feeling the halter still round his
     neck, and knowing that he had himself undermined the ground on which he was standing. It was
     Lucilla who supported him in the shock of the moment, for all his self-command could not keep
     him from a momentary shiver and stagger when he found that things were not so bad as he
     thought.</t:p>
<t:p>"A lady, and she said nothing but good!" he muttered, under his breath; and then he made an
     effort to recover himself. "Pardon me, I cannot guess who my unknown friend may be. It is very
     soothing to one's feelings to be spoken well of by a lady," said Mr Cavendish, and he laughed
     again in a discordant unsteady way. Lucilla regarded him through all these fluctuations with
     natural pity, and at the same time with the calmness of a knowledge which was aware of all and
     had nothing more to discover; and at the end Mr Cavendish perceived her calm, and the absence
     of wonder and curiosity in her face, and began to perceive that he had something very serious
     to deal with—more serious even than he had at first supposed.</t:p>
<t:p>"I am going to tell you all about it," said Miss Marjoribanks, "but in the meantime wait a
     minute and let me speak to you. I have something very serious to say."</t:p>
<t:p>It was for this they stopped short at the foot of Grange Lane just where the land was already
     parcelled out for St Roque's. What Lucilla was going to say was too important to be spoken
     while walking, and she withdrew her hand from Mr Cavendish's arm. They were both so much
     absorbed that they did not see anybody coming, nor indeed had any attention to spare for
     external affairs. The blood had deserted Mr Cavendish's face, and he was once more green with
     anxiety and inquietude. He stood facing her, feeling that the crisis of his fate had come, and
     not knowing whether it was absolute despair or a faint dawning of hope that possessed him. If
     he had been the most passionate of lovers, and if she had held in her hands the dreadful
     alternative between rapture and misery, there could not have been a more rapt and absorbing
     attention in Mr Cavendish's face.</t:p>
<t:p>"I want to tell you, first of all, that you must have confidence in me," said Lucilla;
     "you—must—have confidence in me. We can do nothing without that. I know everything, Mr
     Cavendish," Miss Marjoribanks added compassionately—"<t:hi>everything</t:hi>; but nobody else knows
     it. I hope I can arrange everything if it is left in my hands. This is what I wanted to tell
     you first of all. Before everything, you must have confidence in me."</t:p>
<t:p>What Mr Cavendish might have answered to this solemn appeal it would be vain to imagine; for
     the truth was, he was stopped before he could utter a word. He was stopped and seized by the
     hand, and greeted with a frankness which was, perhaps, all the more loud and cordial from what
     appeared to the new-comer the comic character of the situation. "It <t:hi>is</t:hi> Cavendish, by
     Jove!" the intruder exclaimed, waving his hand to some people who were coming on behind him. "I
     beg a thousand pardons for disturbing you, my dear fellow; but they all talk about you so, that
     I was determined to make sure it was you. Good heavens, Miss Marjoribanks!" General Travers
     added, taking off his hat. It was Mr and Mrs Centum who were coming down behind him—she with a
     light shawl thrown over her head, tempted out by the beauty of the evening; and Lucilla saw in
     a moment the consequences of this encounter, and how it would be over all Carlingford before
     to-morrow morning that she and Mr Cavendish were betrothed at the very least. Miss Marjoribanks
     had all her wits about her, as ever, fortunately for both.</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes, it is me," she said calmly; "I have been taking tea with the Lakes, and I made Mr
     Cavendish give me his arm home. He did not like being found out, to be sure, but he could not
     help himself; and we all know about that," Lucilla added, with a smile, taking once more the
     unfortunate man's arm. "Oh, yes, we all know," said Mrs Centum, with a laugh; but yet,
     notwithstanding, everybody felt sure that it was all Lucilla's cleverness, and that Barbara
     Lake was a myth and fiction. And it was thus, with Miss Marjoribanks leaning on his arm, and
     General Travers, in all the warmth of renewed friendship, guarding him on the other side, that
     Mr Cavendish, whose head was in a whirl of excitement, and who did not know what he was doing,
     was led back in triumph past Colonel Chiley's very door, where the Archdeacon was lying in wait
     to crunch his bones, back from all his aberrations into the very heart of Grange Lane.</t:p>
</t:div>