<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter II</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>Dr Marjoribanks was so far from feeling the lack of his daughter's powers of consolation,
     that he kept her at Mount Pleasant for three years longer, during which time it is to be
     supposed he managed to be comfortable after a benighted fashion—good enough for a man of fifty,
     who had come to an end of his illusions. To be sure, there were in the world, and even in
     Carlingford, kind women, who would not have objected to take charge of the Doctor and his
     "establishment," and be a comfort to him; but, on the whole, it was undeniable that he managed
     tolerably well in external matters, and gave very good men's dinners, and kept everything in
     perfect order, so far as it went. Naturally the fairer part of existence was left out
     altogether in that grim, though well-ordered house; but then he was only a man and a doctor,
     and knew no better; and while the feminine part of Grange Lane regarded him with natural pity,
     not only for what he lacked, but for a still more sad defect, his total want of perception on
     the subject, their husbands and fathers rather liked to dine with the Doctor, and brought home
     accounts of sauces which were enough to drive any woman to despair. Some of the ladies of
     Grange Lane—Mrs Chiley, for example, who was fond of good living herself, and liked, as she
     said, "a little variety"—laid siege to the Doctor, and did their best to coax his receipts out
     of him; but Dr Marjoribanks knew better than that. He gave all the credit to his cook, like a
     man of sense; and as that functionary was known in Carlingford to be utterly regardless and
     unprincipled in respect to gravy-beef, and the materials for "stock," or "consommé," as some
     people called it, society was disinclined to exert its ordinary arts to seduce so great an
     artiste from the kitchen of her indulgent master. And then there were other ladies who took a
     different tone. "Dr Marjoribanks, poor man, has nothing but his table to take up his mind,"
     said Mrs Centum, who had six children; "I never heard that the heart could be nourished upon
     sauces, for my part; and for a man who has his children's future to think of, I must say I am
     surprised at you, Mr Centum." As for young Mrs Woodburn, her reply was still more decisive,
     though milder in its tone. "Poor cook! I am so sorry for her," said the gentle young matron.
     "You know you always like something for breakfast, Charles; and then there is the children's
     dinner, and our lunch, and the servants' dinner, so that the poor thing is worn out before she
     comes to what <t:hi>you</t:hi> call the great event of the day; and you know how angry you were
     when I asked for a kitchen-maid for her, poor soul." The consequence of all this was, that Dr
     Marjoribanks remained unrivalled in Grange Lane in this respect at least. When rumours arose in
     Carlingford of a possible second marriage for the Doctor—and such rumours naturally arose three
     or four times in the course of the three years—the men of Grange Lane said, "Heaven forbid!"
     "No wife in the world could replace Nancy," said Colonel Chiley, after that fervent aspiration,
     "and none could put up with her;" while, on the other side, there were curious speculations
     afloat as to the effect upon the house, and especially the table, of the daughter's return.
     When a young woman comes to be eighteen it is difficult to keep her at school; and though the
     Doctor had staved off the danger for the moment, by sending Lucilla off along with one of her
     schoolfellows, whose family was going abroad, to make orthodox acquaintance with all the Swiss
     mountains, and all the Italian capitals, still that was plainly an expedient for the moment;
     and a new mistress to the house, which had got along so well without any mistress, was
     inevitable. So that it cannot be denied Miss Marjoribanks's advent was regarded in Carlingford
     with as much interest and curiosity as she could have wished. For it was already known that the
     Doctor's daughter was not a mild young lady, easy to be controlled; but, on the contrary, had
     all the energy and determination to have her own way, which naturally belonged to a girl who
     possessed a considerable chin, and a mouth which could shut, and tightly curling tawny tresses,
     which were still more determined than she was to be arranged only according to their
     inclination. It was even vaguely reported that some passages-of-arms had occurred between Miss
     Marjoribanks and the redoubtable Nancy during the short and uncertain opportunities which were
     afforded by holidays; and the community, accordingly, regarded as an affair of almost municipal
     importance Lucilla's final return home.</t:p>
<t:p>As for the young lady herself, though she was at school, she was conscious of having had a
     career not without importance, even during these three years of pupilage. Since the day when
     she began to read political economy with Miss Martha Blount, who, though the second sister, was
     the directing spirit of the establishment, Lucilla had exercised a certain influence upon the
     school itself which was very satisfactory. Perhaps her course might be a little deficient in
     grace, but grace, after all, is but a secondary quality; and, at all events, Miss Marjoribanks
     went straight forward, leaving an unquestionable wake behind her, and running down with
     indifference the little skiffs in her way. She was possessed by nature of that kind of egotism,
     or rather egoism, which is predestined to impress itself, by its perfect reality and good
     faith, upon the surrounding world. There are people who talk of themselves, and think of
     themselves, as it were, under protest, and with depreciation, not actually able to convince
     themselves that anybody cares; but Lucilla, for her part, had the calmest and most profound
     conviction that, when she discussed her own doings and plans and clevernesses, she was bringing
     forward the subject most interesting to her audience as well as to herself. Such a conviction
     is never without its fruits. To be sure, there were always one or two independent spirits who
     revolted; but for the crowd, it soon became impressed with a profound belief in the creed which
     Miss Marjoribanks supported so firmly. This conviction of the importance and value of her own
     proceedings made Lucilla, as she grew older, a copious and amusing conversationalist—a rank
     which few people who are indifferent to, or do not believe in, themselves can attain to. One
     thing she had made up her mind to as soon as she should return home, and that was to
     revolutionise society in Carlingford. On the whole, she was pleased with the success of the
     Doctor's dinners, though a little piqued to think that they owed nothing to herself; but
     Lucilla, whose instinct of government was of the true despotic order, and who had no objection
     to stoop, if by that means she could conquer, had no such designs against Nancy as were
     attributed to her by the expectant audience in Carlingford. On the contrary, she was quite as
     much disposed as her father was to take Nancy for prime-minister; for Miss Marjoribanks, though
     too much occupied with herself to divine the characteristic points of other people, had a
     sensible and thorough belief in those superficial general truths which most minds acquiesce in,
     without taking the trouble to believe. She knew, for example, that there was a great difference
     between the brilliant society of London, or of Paris, which appears in books, where women have
     generally the best of it, and can rule in their own right; and even the very best society of a
     country town, where husbands are very commonly unmanageable, and have a great deal more of
     their own way in respect to the houses they will or will not go to, than is good for that
     inferior branch of the human family. Miss Marjoribanks had the good sense to see and appreciate
     these details; and she knew that a good dinner was a great attraction to a man, and that, in
     Carlingford at least, when these refractory mortals were secured, the wives and daughters would
     necessarily follow. Besides, as is not uncommon with women who are clever women, and aware of
     the fact, Miss Marjoribanks preferred the society of men, and rather liked to say so. With all
     these intentions in her mind, it may be imagined that she received coolly enough the invitation
     of her friend to join in the grand tour, and the ready consent given by her father when he
     heard of it. But even the grand tour was a tool which Lucilla saw how to make use of. Nowadays,
     when people go everywhere, an untravelled woman would find it so much the harder to keep up the
      <t:hi>rôle</t:hi> of a leader of society to which she had devoted herself; and she felt to the
     depth of her heart the endless advantage to her future conversation of the experiences to be
     acquired in Switzerland and Italy. But she rejected with scorn the insinuation of other
     accidents that might occur on the way.</t:p>
<t:p>"You will never come back again, Lucilla," said one of her companions; "you will marry some
     enchanting Italian with a beautiful black beard, and a voice like an angel; and he'll sing
     serenades to you, and do all sorts of things: oh, how I wish I was you!"</t:p>
<t:p>"That may be," said Miss Marjoribanks, "but I shall never marry an Italian, my dear. I don't
     think I shall marry anybody for a long time. I want to amuse myself. I wonder, by the way, if
     it would improve my voice to take lessons in Italy. Did I ever tell you of the Italian nobleman
     that was so very attentive to me that Christmas I spent at Sissy Vernon's? He was very
     handsome. I suppose they really are all very handsome—except, of course, the Italian masters;
     but I did not pay any attention to him. My object, dear, and you know it, is to return home as
     well educated as possible, to be a comfort to dear papa."</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes, dear Lucilla," said the sympathetic girl, "and it is so good of you; but do tell me
     about the Italian nobleman—what did he look like—and what did he say?"</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, as for what he said, that is quite a different matter," said Lucilla; "but it is not
     what they say, but the way they say it, that is the fun. I did not give him the least
     encouragement. As for that, I think a girl can always stop a man when she does not care for
     him. It depends on whether you intend him to commit himself or not," Miss Marjoribanks
     continued, and fixed her eyes meditatively, but intently, upon her friend's face.</t:p>
<t:p>"Whether I intend?—oh, goodness, Lucilla! how can you speak so? as if I ever intended
     anything," said her companion, confused, yet flattered, by the possibility; to which the elder
     sage answered calmly, with all the composure in the world.</t:p>
<t:p>"No, I never supposed you did; I was thinking of myself," said Lucilla, as if, indeed that
     was the only reasonable subject of thought. "You know I have seen a good deal of the world, one
     way and another, with going to spend the holidays, and I could tell you quantities of things.
     It is quite astonishing how much experience one gets. When I was at Midhurst, at Easter, there
     was my cousin Tom, who was quite ridiculous; I declare he nearly brought things to an
     explanation, Fanny—which, of course, of all things in the world I most wanted to avoid."</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, but why, Lucilla?" cried Fanny, full of delight and wonder; "I do so want to know what
     they say when they make—explanations, as you call them. Oh, do tell me, Lucilla, why?"</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear," said Miss Marjoribanks, "a cousin of my own! and only twenty-one, and reading for
     the bar! In the first place, my aunt would never have forgiven me, and I am very fond of my
     aunt. It's so nice to like all one's relations. I know some girls who can't bear theirs. And
     then a boy not much older than myself, with nothing but what his mother pleases! Fortunately he
     did not just say the words, so I escaped that time; but, of course, I could understand
     perfectly what he meant."</t:p>
<t:p>"But, oh, Lucilla, tell me the words," cried the persistent questioner; "do, there's a
     darling! I am quite sure you have heard them—and I should so like to know exactly what they
     say;—do they go down on their knees?—or do they try to take your hand as they always do in
     novels?—or what do they do?—Oh, Lucilla, tell me, there's a dear!"</t:p>
<t:p>"Nonsense," said Lucilla; "I only want you to understand that I am not likely to fall into
     any danger of that sort. My only ambition, Fanny, as I have told you often, is to go home to
     Carlingford and be a comfort to dear papa."</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes," said Fanny, kissing her devoted companion, "and it is so good of you, dear; but then
     you cannot go on all your life being a comfort to dear papa," said the intelligent girl,
     bethinking herself, and looking again with some curiosity in Lucilla's face.</t:p>
<t:p>"We must leave that to Providence," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a sense of paying a
     compliment to Providence in entrusting it with such a responsibility. "I have always been
     guided for the best hitherto," she continued, with an innocent and unintentional profanity,
     which sounded solemn to her equally innocent companion, "and I don't doubt I shall be so till
     the end."</t:p>
<t:p>From which it will be perceived that Miss Marjoribanks was of the numerous class of
     religionists who keep up civilities with heaven, and pay all the proper attentions, and show
     their respect for the divine government in a manner befitting persons who know the value of
     their own approbation. The conversation dropped at this point; for Lucilla was too important a
     person to be left to the undivided possession of an inquisitive innocent like Fanny Middleton,
     who was only sixteen, and had never had even a flirtation in her own person. There were no
     Carlingford girls at Mount Pleasant, except poor little Rose Lake, the drawing-master's second
     daughter, who had been received on Dr Marjoribanks's recommendation, and who heard the little
     children their geography and reading, and gave them little lessons in drawing, by way of paying
     for her own education; but then Rose was entirely out of Miss Marjoribanks's way, and could
     never count for anything in her designs for the future. The girls at Mount Pleasant were good
     girls on the whole, and were rather improved by the influence of Lucilla, who was extremely
     good-natured, and, so long as her superiority was duly acknowledged, was ready to do anything
     for anybody—so that Rose Lake was not at all badly off in her inferior position. She could be
     made useful too, which was a great point in her favour; and Miss Marjoribanks, who possessed by
     nature some of the finest qualities of a ruler, instinctively understood and appreciated the
     instruments that came to her hand. As for Rose, she had been brought up at the School of Design
     in Carlingford, of which, under the supervision of the authorities who, in those days,
     inhabited Marlborough House, Mr Lake was the master. Rose was the pride of the school in the
     peaceable days before her mother died; she did not know much else, poor child, except novels,
     but her copies "from the round" filled her father with admiration, and her design for a
     Honiton-lace flounce, a spirited composition of dragons' tails and the striking plant called
     teazle, which flourishes in the neighbourhood of Carlingford (for Mr Lake had leanings towards
     Preraphaelitism), was thought by the best judges to show a wonderful amount of feeling for art,
     and just missed being selected for the prize. A girl with such a talent was naturally much
     appreciated in Mount Pleasant. She made the most charming design for Miss Marjoribanks's
     handkerchief—"Lucilla," in Gothic characters, enclosed in a wreath of forget-me-nots, skilfully
     combined with thistle-leaves, which Rose took great pains to explain were so much better
     adapted to ornamentation than foliage of a less distinct character; and the young draftswoman
     was so charmed by Lucilla's enthusiastic admiration, that she volunteered to work the design in
     the cambric, which was a much more serious matter. This was on the eve of Miss Marjoribanks's
     final departure from school. She was to spend a year abroad, to the envy of all whom she left
     behind; but for herself Lucilla was not elated. She thought it very probable that she would
     ascend Mont Blanc as far as the Grands Mulets at least, and, of course, in spring, go up
     Vesuvius, having got through the Carnival and Miserere and all the balls in Rome; but none of
     these things moved her out of her usual composure. She took it all in the way of business, as
     she had taken her French and her German and her singing and her political economy. As she
     stepped into the steamboat at Dover which was to convey her to scenes so new, Lucilla felt more
     and more that she who held the reorganisation of society in Carlingford in her hands was a
     woman with a mission. She was going abroad as the heir-apparent went to America and the Holy
     Land, to complete her education, and fit herself, by an examination of the peculiarities of
     other nations, for an illustrious and glorious reign at home.</t:p>
</t:div>