<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XIV</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>It was thus that Miss Marjoribanks went through all the preliminary stages, and succeeded
     finally in making a triumph out of what would certainly have been a defeat, and a humbling
     defeat, for anybody else. She was much too sensible to deceive herself on the subject, or not
     to be aware that to have a gentleman who was paying attention to her withdrawn from her side in
     this open manner in the sight of all the world, was as trying an accident as can happen to a
     woman. Fortunately, as Lucilla said, her affections were not engaged; but then, apart from the
     affections, there are other sentiments which demand consideration. Everybody in Carlingford
     knew that Mr Cavendish had been paying her a great deal of attention, and the situation was one
     which required the most delicate skill to get through it successfully. Besides, Miss
     Marjoribanks's circumstances were all the more difficult, since up to this moment she had been
     perfectly sincere and natural in all her proceedings. Policy had been constantly inspired and
     backed by nature in the measures Lucilla had taken for the organisation and welfare of her
     kingdom, and even what people took for the cleverest calculation was in reality a succession of
     happy instincts, by means of which, with the sovereignty of true genius, Miss Marjoribanks
     managed to please everybody by having her own way. A little victory is almost necessary to
     begin with, and it is a poor nature that does not expand under the stimulus of victory; but now
     the young reformer had come to the second stage. For, to be sure, that sort of thing cannot
     last for ever; and this Lucilla, with the natural prevision of a ruling mind, had foreseen from
     the beginning. The shape in which she had feared defeat, if a nature so full of resources could
     ever be said to fear, was that of a breakdown, when all the world was looking to her for
     amusement, or the sudden appearance of a rival entertainer in Carlingford with superior powers:
     though the last was but a dim and improbable danger, the first was quite possible, and might
     have arrived at any moment. Miss Marjoribanks was much too sensible not to have foreseen this
     danger in all its shapes, and even in a kind of way to have provided against it. But
     Providence, which had always taken care of her, as Lucilla piously concluded, had spared her
     the trial in that form. Up to this moment it had always providentially happened that all the
     principal people in Carlingford were quite well and disengaged on the "evening." To be sure,
     the ladies had headaches, and the married gentlemen now and then were out of temper in Grange
     Lane as in other less favoured places; but these social accidents had been mercifully averted
     on Thursdays, perhaps by means of some special celestial agency, perhaps only through that
     good-luck which had been born with Lucilla. Not in this vulgar and likely manner was the trial
     of her strength to come.</t:p>
<t:p>But when she was at the height of her success, and full in the eye of the world, and knew
     that everybody was remarking her, and that from the sauces for which the Doctor's table was
     once so famed, but which even Colonel Chiley no longer thought of identifying as Dr
     Marjoribanks's, to the fashion of the <t:hi>high</t:hi> white frock in which Lucilla had taught the
     young ladies of Carlingford to appear of an evening, she was being imitated on every hand,—at
     that moment, when an ordinary person would have had her head turned, and gone wild with too
     much success, Miss Marjoribanks suddenly saw her dragon approaching her. Just then, when she
     could not put on a new ribbon, or do her hair in a different style, without all Carlingford
     knowing of it—at that epoch of intoxication and triumph the danger came, sudden, appalling, and
     unlooked for. If Lucilla was staggered by the encounter, she never showed it, but met the
     difficulty like a woman of mettle, and scorned to flinch. It had come to be summer weather when
     the final day arrived upon which Mr Cavendish forgot himself altogether, and went over to the
     insidious enemy whom Miss Marjoribanks had been nourishing in her bosom. Fifty eyes were upon
     Lucilla watching her conduct at that critical moment—fifty ears were on the strain to divine
     her sentiments in her voice, and to catch some intonation at least which should betray her
     consciousness of what was going on.</t:p>
<t:p>But if Miss Marjoribanks's biographer has fitly discharged his duty, the readers of this
     history will have no difficulty in divining that the curiosity of the spectators got no
     satisfaction from Lucilla. Many people even supposed she had not remarked anything, her
     composure was so perfect. No growing red or growing pale, no harsh notes in her voice, nor
     evidence of distracted attention, betrayed that her mind was elsewhere while she was attending
     to her guests; and yet, to be sure, she saw, just as other people did, that Barbara, all
     flushed and crimson, with her eyes blazing under their sullen brows, stood in a glow of triumph
     at the open window, with Mr Cavendish in devoted attendance—a captive at her chariot-wheels.
     Matters had been progressing to this point for some time; but yet the two culprits had never
     before showed themselves so lost to all sense of propriety. Instead of fainting or getting
     pale, or showing any other symptoms of violent despite, Lucilla went upon her airy way,
     indirectly approaching this point of interest. She went up and chatted with them, and ordered
     Mr Cavendish to find a chair for Barbara. "What can you be thinking of to let her stand so near
     the window? If she were to catch cold and lose her voice, what should we all do?" said Lucilla;
     and she established the two in the most commodious corner before she left them. "Take care she
     does not go back again into the draught," were her parting words, and even the culprits
     themselves could do nothing but stare at each other with consternation and shame.</t:p>
<t:p>This was all the notice Lucilla took of what was going on. If she was affronted, or if she
     was wounded, nobody found it out; and when Mrs Chiley offered the tribute of her indignation
     and sympathy, it has already been recorded how her young friend responded to her. "Fortunately
     my affections never were engaged," Lucilla said, and no doubt that was a great advantage; but
     then, as we have said, there are other things besides affections to be taken into account when
     the woman whom you have been kind to snaps up the man who has been paying attention to you, not
     only before your eyes, but before the eyes of all the world. The result of her masterly conduct
     on this occasion was that her defeat became, as we have said, a triumph for Miss Marjoribanks.
     To be sure, it is to be hoped that, in the sweets of their mutual regard, the two criminals
     found compensation for the disapproval of the spectators; but nothing could be more marked than
     the way in which Carlingford turned its cold shoulder on its early favourite. "I never imagined
     Cavendish was such a fool," Mr Centum said, who was a man of few words; "if he likes that style
     of philandering, it is nothing to me, but he need not make an idiot of himself." As for Mr
     Woodburn, he, as was natural, inflicted vicarious punishment upon his wife. "It must be all
     your fault," he growled, when he was taking her home, and had her at his mercy, with that logic
     peculiar to a married man; "you ought to tell him he's making an ass of himself. Why the deuce
     do you let him go on with that tomfoolery? He'll lose all his chances in life, and then, I
     hope, you'll be satisfied. You women can never see an inch before your own noses!" cried the
     uncivil husband; which, it must be confessed, was rather hard upon poor Mrs Woodburn, who had
     nothing to do with it, and had indeed calculated upon perfecting her sketch of Barbara in the
     quietness of the walk home; for as everybody lived in Grange Lane, carriages were not necessary
     for Miss Marjoribanks's guests. They flitted out and in, in the moonlight, with pretty scarfs
     thrown over their heads and laced handkerchiefs tied under their chins, and made Grange Lane
     between the two straight lines of garden-wall like a scene in a masquerade.</t:p>
<t:p>While Mr Cavendish was thus suffering by deputy the contempt of his former admirers, Lucilla,
     by herself in the abandoned drawing-room, was thinking over the evening with a severe but on
     the whole satisfactory self-examination. After the first shock, which she had encountered with
     so much courage, Miss Marjoribanks was rather grateful than otherwise to Providence, which had
     brought the necessary trial upon her in this form. If it had been a breakdown and humiliating
     failure instead, how different would her sensations have been! and Lucilla was quite conscious
     that such a thing might have occurred. It might have occurred to her, as it had done to so many
     people, to see Thursday come round with a failure of all that made Thursday agreeable. Lady
     Richmond might have had her influenza that day, and little Henry Centum his sudden attack,
     which had kept his mother in conversation ever since, and Mrs Woodburn one of her bad
     headaches; and as for the Miss Browns, there was nothing in the world but Lucilla's habitual
     good fortune which prevented them from having blacked their fingers with their photography to
     such an extent as to make them perfectly unpresentable. Or, to turn to another chapter of
     accidents, the last duet, which Barbara had insisted upon singing without proper practice,
     might have broken down utterly. None of these things had happened, and Lucilla drew a long
     breath of gratitude as she thought how fortunate she had been in all these particulars. To be
     sure, it was necessary to have a trial of one kind or other; and the modest but intense
     gratification of having stood the test, diffused itself like a balm through her bosom. No doubt
     she would have felt, like most people, a certain pleasure in snubbing Barbara; but then there
     is, on the other hand, a sweetness in sacrificing such impulses to the sacred sense of duty and
     the high aims of genius which is still more attractive to a well-regulated mind. Miss
     Marjoribanks herself put out the candles, and went to her own room with that feeling of having
     acquitted herself satisfactorily which many people think to be the highest gratification of
     which the mind is capable. After all, it was by no means certain that Mr Cavendish would be
     M.P. for Carlingford. Mr Chiltern might live for twenty years, or he even might get better,
     which was more unlikely; or supposing him to be comfortably disposed of, nobody could say with
     any certainty that some man unknown at present in Carlingford might not start up all of a
     sudden and gain the most sweet voices of the shopkeepers, who were the majority of the
     community, and quite outnumbered Grange Lane. It was thus that Lucilla consoled herself as she
     went meditative but undaunted to her maiden rest.</t:p>
<t:p>While all this was going on, Dr Marjoribanks remained an amused spectator, and chuckled a
     little quietly, without saying anything to anybody, over the turn affairs had taken. The Doctor
     knew all about everybody in Carlingford, and he had never been an enthusiast in favour of Mrs
     Woodburn's brother, notwithstanding that the young man had been received so warmly into society
     as one of the Cavendishes. Perhaps Dr Marjoribanks being Scotch, and having a turn for
     genealogy, found the description a little vague; but at all events there can be no doubt that
     he laughed to himself as he retired from the scene of his daughter's trial. The Doctor possibly
     thought, in a professional point of view, that a little discipline of this description would be
     useful to Lucilla. Perhaps he thought it would be good for her to find out that—though she had
     managed to slip the reins out of his hands, and get the control of affairs with a skill which
     amused the Doctor, and made him a little proud of her abilities, even though he was himself the
     victim—she could not go on always unchecked in her triumphant career, but must endure like
     other people an occasional defeat. No doubt, had Lucilla been really worsted, paternal feeling
     would have interposed, and Dr Marjoribanks would to some extent have suffered in her suffering;
     but then the case was different, and nobody required, as it turned out, to suffer for Lucilla.
     The Doctor was pleased she had shown so much spirit, and pleased to see how entirely she had
     discomfited her antagonists, and turned the tables upon the "young puppy," in whom he had no
     confidence; and withal Dr Marjoribanks chuckled a little in his secret heart over the event
     itself, and concluded that it would do Lucilla good. She had vanquished Nancy, and by a skilful
     jerk taken the reins out of his own experienced hands. He was aware that he had been on the
     whole very wisely governed since his abdication, but yet he was not sorry that the young
     conqueror should feel herself human; so that nobody except Mrs Chiley felt that mingled rage
     and disappointment with which Barbara Lake had hoped to inspire Lucilla's bosom; and Mrs
     Chiley, so to speak, had nothing to do with it. As for Barbara herself, she returned home in a
     state of mingled spite and exultation and disgust, which filled her sister with amazement.</t:p>
<t:p>"She is such an actor, you know," Barbara said; "she never will give in to let you know how
     she is feeling—not if she can help it; but for all that she must have felt it. Nobody could
     help feeling it, though she carried it off so well. I knew how it would be, as soon as I had on
     a dress that was fit to be seen."</t:p>
<t:p>"What is it that she could not help feeling?" said Rose. "I suppose it is Lucilla you
     mean?"</t:p>
<t:p>"I should like to know what right she had to be kind to me," cried Barbara, all glowing in
     her sullen but excited beauty; "and invite me there, and introduce me in her grand way, as if
     she was any better than I am! And then to look at all her India muslins; but I knew it would be
     different as soon as I had a decent dress," said the contralto, rising up to contemplate
     herself in the little mirror over the mantelpiece.</t:p>
<t:p>This conversation took place in Mr Lake's little parlour, where Rose had been waiting for her
     sister, and where Barbara's white dress made an unusual radiance in the dim and
     partially-lighted room. Rose herself was all shrouded up in her morning dress, with her pretty
     round arms and shoulders lost to the common view. She had been amusing herself as she waited by
     working at a corner of that great design which was to win the prize on a later occasion.
     Readers of this history who have studied the earlier chapters will remember that Rose's tastes
     in ornamentation were very clearly defined for so young a person. Instead of losing herself in
     vague garlands of impossible flowers, the young artist clung with the tenacity of first love to
     the thistle leaf, which had been the foundation of her early triumphs. Her mind was full of it
     even while she received and listened to Barbara; whether to treat it in a national point of
     view, bringing in the rose and shamrock, which was a perfectly allowable proceeding, though
     perhaps not original—or whether she should yield to the "sweet feeling" which had been so
     conspicuous in her flounce, in the opinion of the Marlborough House gentlemen—or whether, on
     the contrary, she should handle the subject in a boldly naturalistic way, and use her spikes
     with freedom,—was a question which occupied at that moment all Rose's faculties. Even while she
     asked Barbara what the subject was on which Lucilla might be supposed to be excited, she was
     within herself thinking out this difficult idea—all the more difficult, perhaps, considering
     the nature of the subject, since the design in this case was not for a flounce, in which broad
     handling is practicable, but for a veil.</t:p>
<t:p>"I wish you would not talk in that foolish way," said Rose; "nobody need be any better than
     you, as you say. To be sure, we don't live in Grange Lane, nor keep a carriage; but I wish you
     would recollect that these are only accidental circumstances. As for dress, I don't see that
     you require it; our position is so clearly defined; we are a family of——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, for goodness gracious sake, do be quiet with your family of artists!" cried Barbara.
     "Speak for yourself, if you please. I am not an artist, and never will be, I can tell you.
     There are better places to live in than Grange Lane; and as for keeping a carriage, I would
     never call a little bit of a brougham a carriage, if it was me. Lucilla made believe to take no
     notice, but she did not deceive me with that. She was as disappointed as ever she could be—I
     dare say now she's sitting crying over it. I never would have cared one straw if I had not
     wanted to serve Lucilla out!" cried the contralto, with energy. She was still standing before
     the glass pulling her black hair about into new combinations, and studying the effect; and as
     for Rose, she too looked up, and, seeing her sister's face reflected in the glass, made the
     discovery that there was something like grimace in the countenance, and paused in the midst of
     her meditations with her pencil in her hand.</t:p>
<t:p>"Don't put yourself out of drawing," said Rose; "I wish you would not do that so often. When
     the facial angle is disturbed to that extent——But about Lucilla, I think you are excessively
     ungrateful. Gratitude is not a servile sentiment," said the little Preraphaelite, with a rising
     colour. "It is a slavish sort of idea to think any one has done you an injury by being kind to
     you. If that is the sort of thing you are going to talk of, I think you had better go to
     bed."</t:p>
<t:p>"Then I will, and I shan't tell you anything," said Barbara angrily—"you are so
     poor-spirited. For my part, do you think I'd ever have gone to help Lucilla and sing for her,
     and all that sort of thing, if it had not been to better myself? Nor I wouldn't have thought of
      <t:hi>him</t:hi> just at first, if it hadn't been to spite <t:hi>her</t:hi>. And I've done it too. I'd
     just like to look in at her room window and see what she's about. I dare say she is crying her
     eyes out, for all her looking as if she took no notice. I know better than to think she doesn't
     care. And, Rose, he's such a dear," said Barbara, with a laugh of excitement. To be sure, what
     she wanted was to be Mrs Cavendish, and to have a handsome house and a great many nice dresses;
     but at the same time she was young, and Mr Cavendish was good-looking, and she was a little in
     love, in her way, as well.</t:p>
<t:p>"I don't want to hear any more about it," said Rose, who was so much moved as to forget even
     her design. "I can't think how it is you have no sense of honour, and you one of the Lakes. I
     would not be a traitor for a dozen Mr Cavendishes!" cried Rose, in the force of her
     indignation. "He must be a cheat, since you are a traitor. If he was a true man he would have
     found you out."</t:p>
<t:p>"You had better be quiet, Rose," said Barbara; "you may be sure I shall never do anything for
     you after we are married, if you talk like that; and then you'll be sorry enough."</t:p>
<t:p>"After you are married! has he asked you to marry him?" cried Rose. She pushed away her
     design with both her hands in the vehemence of her feelings, and regarded her sister with eyes
     which blazed, but which were totally different in their blazing from those which burned under
     Barbara's level eyebrows. It was too plain a question to have a plain answer. Barbara only
     lighted her candle in reply, and smiled and shook her head.</t:p>
<t:p>"You don't suppose I am going to answer after your insulting ways," she said, taking up her
     candle; and she swept out of the room in her white dress with a sense of pleasure in leaving
     this grand point unsettled. To be sure, Mr Cavendish had not yet asked that important question;
     but then the future was all before them, and the way clear. As for Rose, she clenched her
     little fists with a gesture that would have been too forcible for any one who was not an
     artist, and a member of a family of artists. "To think she should be one of us, and not to know
     what honour means," said Rose; "and as for this man, he must be a cheat himself, or he would
     find her out."</t:p>
<t:p>This was how Mr Cavendish's defection from Lucilla took place; and at the same time it is a
     satisfaction to know that the event was received by everybody very much as little Rose Lake
     received it. And as for Miss Marjoribanks, if Barbara could have had the malicious satisfaction
     of looking in at the window, she would have been mortified to find that right-minded young
     woman sleeping the sleep of the just and innocent, and enjoying repose as profound and
     agreeable as if there had been no Mr Cavendish in the world, not to speak of
     Carlingford;—which, to be sure, was a result to be greatly attributed to Lucilla's perfect
     health, and entire satisfaction with herself.</t:p>
</t:div>