
Chapter XXX
It is possible that some people may think Mr Cavendish's emotions too acute for all the
     danger to which he was exposed; but no doubt every alarm gets intensified when a man broods on
     it, and thinks of nothing else for weeks at a time. All that he had to do at the present moment
     was to walk into Carlingford by the most frequented way, and to go up Grange Lane, where every
     house was open to him, and where nobody was so great a favourite as he. There were as many
     chances in his favour that he would not in that friendly neighbourhood encounter his one enemy,
     as there is for every man who goes into action that the bullet which is predestined to strike
     somebody will not be directed to him; but then Mr Cavendish had not the excitement of personal
     conflict, nor the kind of security which is given by sharing a risk with a great many other
     people. And to see everything smiling and serene around, and yet to know that the most deadly
     danger may arrive to you at any innocent opening, or round the first street-corner, is a kind
     of risk which naturally tells upon the nerves more than a more open peril. Mr Cavendish met Dr
     Marjoribanks, and the Doctor was good enough to stop his brougham and keep him in conversation
     for five minutes with his back to the foe, if foe there was approaching; and then he met Mrs
     Chiley, who all but kissed him, and was so glad to see him again, and so pleased that he was in
     time to make acquaintance with the Archdeacon, and so sure that Lucilla would be quite happy
     now he had come back. "Perhaps I ought not to say so, but I know she has missed you,"
     said the injudicious old lady; and she took both his hands and held the miserable man in a kind
     of pillory, from whence he gazed with despairing eyes over her shoulder, feeling sure that now
     was the fatal moment, and that his enemy must be coming. But fortune still favoured
     him, as it happened. He had the presence of mind to say, "I am going to call on Miss
     Marjoribanks;" and Mrs Chiley dropped his hands on the instant as if they burned her, and
     patted him on the arm and sent him away. "She is sure to be in just now, and I am so glad; and,
     my dear, you need not mind me, for I am both your friends," Mrs Chiley said. But when he was
     delivered from that danger, something still more formidable awaited the unfortunate man. He
     could not believe his eyes at first, nor conceive it possible that Fate would have such a spite
     against him; but there was no mistaking the crumpled dress, any more than the straight eyebrows
     and flashing oblique glances that had already found him out. Of all the horrible chances in the
     world, it was Barbara—Barbara, who had a right to think he had deserted her on the previous
     night, and with whom his next interview could not be otherwise than stormy—who thus appeared
     like a lion in his way. When he saw what awaited him, Mr Cavendish lost courage. His heart sank
     down into unfathomable depths. He did not know what he could say to her to shorten the
     inevitable interview, nor how he could escape, nor how hinder her from discovering that it was
     Lucilla he was going to see; and he had no longer any doubt in his mind that while he was thus
     engaged the Archdeacon must inevitably appear. If he had had time to think of ordinary
     subjects, he would have been sufficiently annoyed at the idea of an interview with Barbara in
     broad daylight on the sacred soil of Grange Lane, where all the world could or might be
     spectators; but such a merely prudential sentiment was entirely swallowed up to-day in much
     more urgent considerations. He would have been content just now, in the horror of the moment,
     to plight his troth to Barbara by way of getting rid of her, and leaving his path clear; but he
     could not stop her or himself from advancing, and dared not give any vent to the panic which
     was consuming his soul.
"Oh, I am sure I never thought of seeing you here, Mr Cavendish," said Barbara, with a toss
     of her head. She would have done a great deal to secure her wavering lover, but she could not
     be amiable at a moment when she had him at a disadvantage. "Perhaps you are going to see Miss
     Marjoribanks," said the foolish young woman. To tell the truth, she did not suspect him of any
     such treachery; but her heart was beating louder than usual, and she had the best position of
     the two, or thought she had, and chose what she supposed the most aggravating thing to say.
But it is always hard to tell what a man may do when he is in a state of despair. Mr
     Cavendish looked her in the face with the composure of desperation, though she did not know
     that. All that he was able to think of was how to get rid of her soonest, and to be able to
     continue his way. "Yes, I am going to see Miss Marjoribanks," he said, with a face which
     extremity rendered stolid and impassible. As for poor Barbara, her colour changed in a moment.
     The very least that she had a right to expect was that he should have asked her pardon, put
     himself at her feet; and her mingled spite and humiliation and mortification at this response
     were beyond telling. Her cheeks blazed with sudden rage, her passion was so furious that she
     actually did what he wanted and stood out of his way, and made him an imperious sign to pass on
     and leave her. But even then she did not expect to be taken at her word. When Mr Cavendish took
     off his hat in that heartless way and passed on, Barbara stood aghast, not able to believe her
     senses. Had he really passed and left her, she who had done so much for him? Had he actually
     gone over to her adversary before her very eyes? She stood stock-still when he left her, gazing
     after him, blazing with rage and despite, and scarcely able to keep herself from shrieking out
     the torrent of reproaches and vituperations that were in her mind. She made no attempt whatever
     to hide her wrath or jealous curiosity from any eyes that might be there to see; but to be sure
     she had, as her sister said, no proper pride. If Mr Cavendish had carried out his intentions,
     the chances are that Barbara, driven desperate, would have rushed after him, and found some
     means of breaking in upon his interview with Lucilla; but after all this badgering, he had not
     the courage to carry out his intentions. He looked down the long sunshiny line of Grange Lane
     with a sickening sense that any of these doors might open at any moment, and his fate rush out
     upon him. There was not a soul to be seen, but that only made it all the more likely to poor Mr
     Cavendish's distempered fancy that somebody was coming. He had not even a single thought at
     leisure to give to Barbara, and never asked himself whether or not she was standing watching
     him. All his senses and faculties were engaged forecasting what might happen to him before he
     could reach Dr Marjoribanks's house. He was approaching it from the lower end of Grange Lane,
     and consequently had everything to risk; and when Mr Centum's door opened, and all the nurses
     and all the children poured out, the unfortunate man felt his heart jump, and drop again, if
     possible, lower than ever. It was this that drove him, instead of going on to Lucilla, to take
     refuge in his sister's house, where the door happened to be open. He rushed in there, and took
     breath, and was safe for the instant. But Barbara, for her part, watching him, divined none of
     Mr Cavendish's reasons. Her heart too gave a jump, and her wrath cooled down miraculously. No
     doubt it was a little impatience at being questioned which had made him answer as he did. He
     had not gone to Lucilla—he had not deserted her standard, who had always met him half-way, and
     done so much for him. Barbara calmed down as she saw him enter at Mrs Woodburn's door. After
     having thus witnessed his safe exit, she felt at liberty to go back and return to her own
     affairs, and prepare her toilette for the evening; for it moved her very little less than Mr
     Cavendish to know that it was Thursday, and that there was no telling what might happen that
     night.
As for the hero of all this commotion, he went and buried himself in Mrs Woodburn's back
     drawing-room, and threw himself on the sofa in the dark corner, and wiped his forehead like the
     Archdeacon. It was not his fault if events had overwhelmed him. If he had not met in succession
     Dr Marjoribanks and Mrs Chiley and Barbara, he would have gone right to Lucilla without
     stopping to question himself further—but he could not bear all this accumulation. Panic had
     seized upon him, and this panic wrought more effectually than all argument. It was so terrible
     to live under such a shadow, that he felt it must be put an end to. If only he were left at
     rest for this moment, he felt that he could make up his mind to take the perilous leap at
     night, and dare everything. "It can't be worse than ruin," he said to himself, and tried not to
     think that for his sister it might be something even worse than ruin. But the first thing of
     all was to get a little rest in the meantime, and hide himself, and forget the nightmare that
     was seated on his shoulders. When Mrs Woodburn came to him in haste, and saw his careful dress
     and pale looks, she was frightened for the moment. She thought it possible for one second that
     despair had driven him out of his wits, and that there might be, for anything she could tell, a
     little bottle of prussic acid in his waistcoat pocket. That was her first idea, and her second
     was that he was going to carry out at last his most wise and laudable resolution of proposing
     to Miss Marjoribanks, and that it was this—naturally a serious and hazardous enterprise—which
     made him look so pale.
"Harry, if you are going to Lucilla——!" said Mrs Woodburn; "wait and rest yourself a little,
     and I will get you a glass of wine. Keep still; there's some Tokay," said the anxious sister.
     "Don't you go and worry yourself. You shall see nobody. I'll bring it you with my own
     hand."
"Oh, confound the Tokay!" said Mr Cavendish. "I know what Woodburn's Tokay is—if that
     mattered. Look here, I want to speak to you. I was going to Lucilla, but I'm not up to
     it. Oh, not in the way you think! Don't be a fool like everybody. I tell you she wouldn't have
     me, and I won't ask her. Read this, which is much more to the purpose," Mr Cavendish added,
     taking out Miss Marjoribanks's letter. He watched her, while she read it, with that sense of
     contempt and superiority which a man naturally feels who has advanced much beyond the point in
     any special matter at which his interlocutor is still stationary. He even smiled at her cry of
     horror and amazement, and found the agitation she showed ridiculous. "Don't make a row about
     it," he said, regaining his colour as his sister lost hers. "It's all right. I can't ask
     Lucilla Marjoribanks to have me after that, but I mean to put my trust in her, as she says. I
     was going to ask her to explain; but after all, on thinking of it, I don't see the good of
     explanations," said Mr Cavendish, with lofty tranquillity. "The fact is, she is right, Nelly,
     and, stand or fall, we'll have it out to-night."
But Mrs Woodburn was scarcely in a condition to reply, much less to give any advice. "Oh,
     good heavens! what does she know?" cried the trembling woman. "What do you suppose she can
     know? She gave me a dreadful fright, coming and asking about you and your name. And then she
     never was a great friend of mine—and if she should say anything to Woodburn! Oh, Harry, go
     away, go away, and don't face her. You know you slighted her, and she is laying a snare for us.
     Oh, Harry, go away! She can't do you much harm, but she could ruin me, and any little peace I
     have! Woodburn would never—never forgive—he would be frantic, you know. It has always been he
     that made a fuss about the Cavendishes—and, good heavens! to be in a girl's power, and she one
     that you have slighted, Harry! Oh, for Heaven's sake, for pity's sake, if you care anything for
     me——"
"Hold your tongue, Nelly," said Mr Cavendish. "Don't make a row. What on earth is the use of
     Heaven's-saking? I tell you I am going to make an end of it. If I were to run away now, it
     would turn up again at some other corner, and some other moment. Give me a pen and a bit of
     paper. I will write a note, and say I am coming. I don't want any explanations. If it's all a
     mistake, so much the better; but I'm going to face it out to-night."
It was some time before Mrs Woodburn recovered her senses; but in the meantime her brother
     wrote Lucilla his note, and in sight of his sister's agitation felt himself perfectly composed
     and serene and manful. It even made him complaisant to feel the difference that there was, when
     the emergency really arrived at last, between his own manly calm and her womanish panic. But
     then it was for herself that she was afraid, lest her husband should find out that she was not
     one of the Cavendishes. "You must have been giving yourself airs on the subject," Mr Cavendish
     said, as he fastened up his note. "I never was so foolish as that, for my part;" and naturally
     the more he admired his own steadiness and courage, the steadier and more courageous he grew—or
     at least so he felt for the moment, with her terror before his eyes.
"If you do go," said Mrs Woodburn at last, "oh, Harry, for goodness' sake, mind that you deny
      everything. If you confess to anything, it will all be proved against you; don't
     allow a single thing that's said to you. It is a mistaken identity, you know—that is what it
     is; there was a case in the papers just the other day. Oh, Harry, for Heaven's sake don't be
     weak!—deny everything; you don't know anything about it—you don't know what they mean—you can't
     understand——"
"It is I that have to do it, Nelly," said Mr Cavendish, more and more tranquil and superior.
     "You must let me do it my way;" and he was very kind and reassuring to her in his composure.
     This was how things ought to be; and it was astonishing how much he gained in his own mind and
     estimation by Mrs Woodburn's panic. Being the stronger vessel, he was of course superior to all
     that. But somehow when he had got back to his own house again, and had no longer the spectacle
     of his sister's terror before him, the courage began to ooze out of Mr Cavendish's
     finger-points; he tried hard to stimulate himself up to the same point, and to regain that
     lofty and assured position; but as the evening approached, matters grew rather worse than
     better. He did not turn and flee, because flight, in the present alarmed and touchy state of
     public opinion, would have equally been destruction; and nobody could answer for it how far, if
     he failed to obey her, Miss Marjoribanks's discretion might go. And thus the eventful evening
     fell, and the sun went down, which was to Mr Cavendish as if it might be the last sun he should
     ever (metaphorically) see—while, in the meantime, all the other people dressed for dinner as if
     nothing was going to happen, and as if it was merely a Thursday like other Thursdays, which was
     coming to Grange Lane.
