<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter VIII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>The evening passed off in a way which, if Miss Marjoribanks had been an ordinary woman, would
     have altogether obliterated from her mind all recollection of the failure at lunch. To speak
     first of the most important particular, the dinner was perfect. As for the benighted men who
     had doubted Lucilla, they were covered with shame, and, at the same time, with delight. If
     there had been a fault in Dr Marjoribanks's table under the ancient régime, it lay in a certain
     want of variety, and occasional over-abundance, which wounded the feelings of young Mr
     Cavendish, who was a person of refinement. To-night, as that accomplished critic remarked,
     there was a certain air of feminine grace diffused over everything—and an amount of doubt and
     expectation, unknown to the composed feastings of old, gave interest to the meal. As for the
     Doctor, he found Mrs Chiley, at his right hand, not so great a bore as he expected. She was a
     woman capable of appreciating the triumphs of art that were set before her; and had indeed been
     trained to as high a pitch of culture in this respect as perhaps is possible to the female
     intelligence; and then her pride and delight in being admitted to a participation in those
     sacred mysteries was beyond expression. "My dear Lucilla, I feel exactly as if I was going to
     be made a freemason; and as if your dear good papa had to blindfold me, and make me swear all
     sorts of things before he took me downstairs," she said, as they sat together waiting for the
     commencement of the ceremony; and when the two ladies returned to the drawing-room, Mrs Chiley
     took Lucilla in her arms and gave her a kiss, as the only way of expressing adequately her
     enthusiasm. "My love," said the Colonel's wife, "I never realised before what it was to have a
     genius. You should be very thankful to Providence for giving you such a gift. I have given
     dinners all my life—that is, all my married life, my dear, which comes to almost the same
     thing, for I was only a baby—but I never could come up to anything like that," said Mrs Chiley,
     with tears in her eyes. As for Miss Marjoribanks, she was so satisfied with her success that
     she felt at liberty to tranquillise her old friend.</t:p>
<t:p>"I am sure you always give very nice dinners," she said; "and then, you know, the Colonel has
     his favourite dishes—whereas, I must say for papa, he is very reasonable for a man. I am so
     glad you are pleased. It is very kind of you to say it is genius, but I don't pretend to
     anything but paying great attention and studying the combinations. There is nothing one cannot
     manage if one only takes the trouble. Come here to this nice easy-chair—it is so comfortable.
     It is so nice to have a little moment to ourselves before they come upstairs."</t:p>
<t:p>"That is what I always say," said Mrs Chiley; "but there are not many girls so sensible as
     you, Lucilla. I hear them all saying it is so much better French fashion. Of course, I am an
     old woman, and like things in the old style."</t:p>
<t:p>"I don't think it is because I am more sensible," said Miss Marjoribanks, with modesty. "I
     don't pretend to be better than other people. It is because I have thought it all over, you
     know—and then I went through a course of political economy when I was at Mount Pleasant,"
     Lucilla said tranquilly, with an air of having explained the whole matter, which much impressed
     her hearer. "But for all that, something dreadful happened to-day. Tom brought in one of his
     friends with him, you know, and Miss Bury was here, and they talked—I want to tell you, in case
     she should say something, and then you will know what to believe. I never felt so dreadfully
     ashamed in my life—they talked——"</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear! not anything improper, I hope," cried the old lady, in dismay.</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, no," said Lucilla; "but they began laughing about some people having no souls, you
     know—as if there could be anybody without a soul—and poor Miss Bury nearly fainted. You may
     think what a dreadful thing it was for me."</t:p>
<t:p>"My dear child, if that was all," said Mrs Chiley, reassured—"as for everybody having a soul,
     I am sure I cannot say. You never were in India, to be sure; but Miss Bury should have known
     better than to faint at a young man's talk, and frighten you, my poor dear. She ought to be
     ashamed of herself, at her age. Do you think Tom has turned out clever?" the old lady
     continued, not without a little finesse, and watching Lucilla with a curious eye.</t:p>
<t:p>"Not in the very least," said Miss Marjoribanks calmly; "he is just as awkward as he used to
     be. It is dreadful to have him here just now, when I have so many things to do—and then he
     would follow me about everywhere if I would let him. A cousin of that sort is always in the
     way."</t:p>
<t:p>"I am always afraid of a cousin, for my part," said Mrs Chiley; "and talking of that, what do
     you think of Mr Cavendish, Lucilla? He is very nice in himself, and he has a nice property; and
     some people say he has a very good chance to be member for Carlingford when there is an
     election. I think that is just what would suit you."</t:p>
<t:p>"I could not see him for the lamp," said Lucilla; "it was right between us, you know—but it
     is no use talking of that sort of thing just now. Of course, if I had liked, I never need have
     come home at all," Miss Marjoribanks added, with composure; "and, now I have come home, I have
     got other things to think of. If papa is good, I will not think of leaving him for ten
     years."</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, yes; I have heard girls say that before," said Mrs Chiley; "but they always changed
     their minds. You would not like to be an old maid, Lucilla; and in ten years——"</t:p>
<t:p>"I should have begun to go off a little, no doubt," said Miss Marjoribanks. "No, I can't say
     I wish to be an old maid. Can they be coming upstairs already, do you think? Oh, it is Tom, I
     suppose," said Lucilla, with a little indignation. But when <t:hi>They</t:hi> did make their
     appearance, which was at a tolerably early period—for a return to the drawing-room was quite a
     novelty for Dr Marjoribanks's friends, and tempted them accordingly—Miss Marjoribanks was quite
     ready to receive them. And just before ten o'clock, when Mrs Chiley began to think of going
     home, Lucilla, without being asked, and without indeed a word of preface, suddenly went to the
     piano, and before anybody knew, had commenced to sing. She was a great deal too sensible to go
     into high art on this occasion, or to electrify her father's friends with her newly-acquired
     Italian, or even with German, as some young ladies do. She sang them a ballad out of one of
     those treasures of resuscitated ballads which the new generation had then begun to dig out of
     the bowels of the earth. There was not, to tell the truth, a great deal of music in it, which
     proved Lucilla's disinterestedness. "I only sang it to amuse you," she said, when all the world
     crowded to the piano; and for that night she was not to be persuaded to further exertions. Thus
     Miss Marjoribanks proved to her little public that power of subordinating her personal tastes
     and even her vanity to her great object, which more than anything else demonstrates a mind made
     to rule. "I hope next time you will be more charitable, and not tantalise us in this way," Mr
     Cavendish said, as he took his leave; and Lucilla retired from the scene of her triumph,
     conscious of having achieved entire success in her first appearance in Carlingford. She laid
     her head upon her pillow with that sweet sense of an approving conscience which accompanies the
     footsteps of the benefactors of their kind. But even Miss Marjoribanks's satisfaction was not
     without its drawbacks. She could not get out of her mind that unhappy abortive luncheon and all
     its horrors; not to speak of the possibility of her religious principles being impugned, which
     was dreadful in itself ("for people can stand a man being sceptical, you know," Miss
     Marjoribanks justly observed, "but everybody knows how unbecoming it is in a woman—and me who
     have such a respect for religion!"); there remained the still more alarming chance that Miss
     Bury, who was so narrow-minded, might see something improper in the presence of the two young
     men at Lucilla's maidenly table; for, to be sure, the Rector's sister was altogether incapable
     of grasping the idea that young men, like old men and the other less interesting members of the
     human family, were simple material for Miss Marjoribanks's genius, out of which she had a great
     result to produce. This was the dread that overshadowed the mind of Lucilla as she composed
     herself to rest after her fatigues. When she slept the sleep of the innocent, it still pursued
     her into her dreams. She dreamed that she stood at the altar by the side of the member for
     Carlingford, and that Mr Bury, with inflexible cruelty, insisted upon marrying her to Tom
     Marjoribanks instead; and then the scene changed, and instead of receiving the salutations of
     Mr Cavendish as M.P. for the borough, it was the amusing man, in the character of the defeated
     candidate, who grinned and nodded at her, and said from the hustings that he would never forget
     the luncheon that had been his first introduction to Carlingford. Such was the nightmare that
     pursued Lucilla even into the sphere of dreams.</t:p>
<t:p>When such a presentiment takes possession of a well-balanced mind like that of Miss
     Marjoribanks, it may be accepted as certain that something is likely to follow. Lucilla did her
     best to disarm fate, not only by the sweetest submission and dutifulness to the Doctor and his
     wishes, but by a severe disregard of Tom, which drove that unhappy young man nearly desperate.
     Far from saying anything about luncheon, she even ignored his presence at breakfast, and
     remained calmly unconscious of his empty cup, until he had to ask for some coffee in an injured
     and pathetic voice, which amused Dr Marjoribanks beyond description. But even this did not
     prove sufficient to propitiate the Fates. When They were gone—and it may be well to say that
     Lucilla used this pronoun to signify <t:hi>the gentlemen</t:hi>, in greater or smaller number as it
     might happen—and she had finished all her arrangements, Miss Marjoribanks decided upon going to
     Grove Street to pay Barbara Lake a visit, and practise some duets, which was certainly as
     innocent an occupation for her leisure as could be desired. She was putting on her hat with
     this object when the bell in the garden rang solemnly, and Lucilla, whose curiosity conquered
     her good manners for the moment, hastening to the window, saw Mr Bury himself enter the garden,
     accompanied by a black figure in deep and shabby mourning. All the tremors of the night rushed
     back upon her mind at the sight. She felt that the moment had arrived for a trial of her
     courage very different from the exertions which had hitherto sufficed her. Nothing but the most
     solemn intentions could have supported the Rector in that severe pose of his figure and
     features, every line in which revealed an intention of being "faithful"; and the accompanying
     mute in black, whose office the culprit could not divine, had a veil over her face, and wore a
     widow's dress. Miss Marjoribanks, it is true, was not a woman to be discouraged by appearances,
     but she felt her heart beat as she collected all her powers to meet this mysterious assault.
     She took off her hat with an instinctive certainty that, for this morning at least, the duet
     was impracticable, when she heard Mr Bury's steady step ascending the stairs; but,
     notwithstanding, it was with a perfectly cheerful politeness that she bade him welcome when he
     came into the room. "It is so good of you to come," Lucilla said; "you that have so much to do.
     I scarcely could believe it when I saw you come in: I thought it must be for papa."</t:p>
<t:p>"I did hope to find Dr Marjoribanks," said the Rector, "but as he is not at home, I thought
     it best to come to you. This is Mrs Mortimer," said Mr Bury, taking the chair Lucilla had
     indicated with a certain want of observance of his companion which betrayed to the keen
     perceptions of Miss Marjoribanks that she was a dependant of some kind or other. The Rector was
     a very good man, but was Evangelical, and had a large female circle who admired and swore by
     him; and, consequently, he felt it in a manner natural that he should take his seat first, and
     the place that belonged to him as the principal person present; and then, to be sure, his
     mission here was for Mrs Mortimer's as well as Miss Marjoribanks's "good." After this
     introduction, the figure in black put up its veil, and revealed a deprecating woman, with a
     faint sort of pleading smile on her face. Probably she was making believe to smile at the
     position in which she found herself; but anyhow she took her seat humbly on another chair at a
     little distance, and waited, as Lucilla did, for the next golden words that it might please the
     Rector to say.</t:p>
<t:p>"My sister told me what happened yesterday," said Mr Bury. "She is very sorry for you, Miss
     Marjoribanks. It is sad for you to be left alone so young, and without a mother, and exposed
     to—to temptations which it is difficult to withstand at your age. Indeed, at all ages, we have
     great occasion to pray not to be led into temptation; for the heart of man is terribly
     deceitful. After hearing what she had to say, I thought it best to come up at once this morning
     and talk to Dr Marjoribanks. I am sure his natural good sense will teach him that you ought not
     to be left alone in the house."</t:p>
<t:p>"I do not see how papa can help it," said Lucilla. "I am sure it is very sad for him as well;
     but since dear mamma died there has been nobody but me to be a comfort to him. I think he
     begins to look a little cheerful now," Miss Marjoribanks continued, with beautiful simplicity,
     looking her adversary in the face. "Everybody knows that to be a comfort to him is the object
     of my life."</t:p>
<t:p>"That is a very good feeling," said the Rector, "but it does not do to depend too much upon
     our feelings. You are too young to be placed in a position of so much responsibility, and open
     to so much temptation. I was deeply grieved for Dr Marjoribanks when his partner in life was
     taken from him; but my dear Miss Lucilla, now you have come home, who stand so much in need of
     a mother's care, we must try to find some one to fill her place."</t:p>
<t:p>Lucilla uttered a scream of genuine alarm and dismay; and then she came to herself, and saw
     the force of her position. She had it in her power to turn the tables on the Rector, and she
     did not hesitate, as a weaker woman might have done, out of consideration for anybody's
     feelings. "Do you mean you have found some one for him to marry?" she asked, with a look of
     artless surprise, bending her earnest gaze on Mr Bury's face.</t:p>
<t:p>As for the Rector, he looked at Lucilla aghast, like a man caught in a trap. "Of course not,
     of course not," he stammered, after his first pause of consternation; and then he had to stop
     again to take breath. Lucilla kept up the air of amazement and consternation which had come
     naturally at the first, and had her eyes fixed on him, leaning forward with all the eager
     anxiety natural to the circumstances, and the unfortunate clergyman reddened from the edge of
     his white cravat to the roots of his gray hair. He was almost as sensitive to the idea of
     having proposed something improper as his sister could have been, though indeed, at the worst,
     there would have been nothing improper in it had Dr Marjoribanks made up his mind to another
     wife.</t:p>
<t:p>"It is very dreadful for me that am so young to go against <t:hi>you</t:hi>" said Lucilla; "but
     if it is <t:hi>that</t:hi>, I cannot be expected to take any part in it—it would not be natural. It
     is the great object of my life to be a comfort to papa; but if that is what you mean, I could
     not give in to it. I am sure Miss Bury would understand me," said Miss Marjoribanks; and she
     looked so nearly on the point of tears, that the Rector's anxious disclaimer found words for
     itself.</t:p>
<t:p>"Nothing of the kind, my dear Miss Lucilla—nothing of the kind," cried Mr Bury; "such an idea
     never came into my mind. I cannot imagine how I could have said anything—I can't fancy what put
     such an idea——Mrs Mortimer, you are not going away?"</t:p>
<t:p>Lucilla had already seen with the corner of her eye that the victim had started violently,
     and that her heavy veil had fallen over her face—but she had not taken any notice, for there
     are cases in which it is absolutely necessary to have a victim. By this time, however, the poor
     woman had risen in her nervous, undecided way.</t:p>
<t:p>"I had better go—I am sure I had better go," she said hurriedly, clasping together a pair of
     helpless hands, as if they could find a little strength in union. "Miss Marjoribanks will
     understand you better, and you will perhaps understand Miss Marjoribanks——"</t:p>
<t:p>"Oh, sit down, sit down," said Mr Bury, who was not tolerant of feelings. "Perhaps I
     expressed myself badly. What I meant to say was, that Mrs Mortimer, who has been a little
     unfortunate in circumstances—sit down, pray—had by a singular providence just applied to me
     when my sister returned home yesterday. These things do not happen by chance, Lucilla. We are
     taken care of when we are not thinking of it. Mrs Mortimer is a Christian lady for whom I have
     the greatest respect. A situation to take the superintendence of the domestic affairs, and to
     have charge of you, would be just what would suit her. It must be a great anxiety to the Doctor
     to leave you alone, and without any control, at your age. You may think the liberty is pleasant
     at first, but if you had a Christian friend to watch over and take care of you——What is the
     matter?" said the Rector, in great alarm. It was only that the poor widow who was to have
     charge of Lucilla, according to his benevolent intention, looked so like fainting, that Miss
     Marjoribanks jumped up from her chair and rang the bell hastily. It was not Lucilla's way to
     lose time about anything; she took the poor woman by the shoulders and all but lifted her to
     the sofa, where she was lying down with her bonnet off when the Rector came to his senses. To
     describe the feelings with which Mr Bury contemplated this little <t:hi>entr'acte</t:hi>, which was
     not in his programme, would be beyond our powers. He went off humbly and opened the window when
     he was told to do so, and tried to find the eau-de-Cologne on the table; while Thomas rushed
     downstairs for water at a pace very unlike his usual steady rate of progress. As for Lucilla,
     she stood by the side of her patient quite self-possessed, while the Rector looked so foolish.
     "She will be all right directly," Miss Marjoribanks was saying; "luckily she never went right
     off. When you don't go right off, lying down is everything. If there had been any one to run
     and get some water she would have got over it; but luckily I saw it in time." What possible
     answer Mr Bury could make to this, or how he could go on with his address in sight of the
     strange turn things had taken, it would have been hard to say. Fortunately for the moment he
     did not attempt it, but walked about in dismay, and put himself in the draught (with his
     rheumatism), and felt dreadfully vexed and angry with Mrs Mortimer, who, for her part, now she
     had done with fainting, manifested an inclination to cry, for which Mr Bury in his heart could
     have whipped her, had that mode of discipline been permitted in the Church of England. Lucilla
     was merciful, but she could not help taking a little advantage of her victory. She gave the
     sufferer a glass of water, and the eau-de-Cologne to keep her from a relapse, and whispered to
     her to lie quiet; and then she came back and took her seat, and begged the Rector not to stand
     in the draught.</t:p>
<t:p>"I don't think she is strong," said Miss Marjoribanks confidentially, when she had wiled the
     disconcerted clergyman back to her side, "her colour changes so; she never would be able for
     what there is to do here, even if papa would consent to think of it. For my part I am sure I
     should be glad of a little assistance," said Lucilla, "but I never like to give false hopes,
     and I don't think papa would consent;—she looks nice if she was not so weak, poor thing!—and
     there are such quantities of things to be done here: but if you wish it, Mr Bury, I will speak
     to papa," said Miss Marjoribanks, lifting her eyes, which were so open and straightforward, to
     the Rector's face.</t:p>
<t:p>To tell the truth, he did not in the least know what to say, and the chances are he would not
     have been half so vexed and angry, nor felt in so unchristian a disposition with the poor woman
     on the sofa, had he meant to do her harm instead of good. "Yes, I should be glad if you would
     mention it to Dr Marjoribanks," he said, without very well knowing what he said; and got up to
     shake hands with Lucilla, and then recollected that he could not leave his protégée behind him,
     and hesitated, and did not know what to do. He was really grateful, without being aware of it,
     to Miss Marjoribanks, when once again she came to his aid.</t:p>
<t:p>"Please, leave her a little," said Lucilla, "and I can make acquaintance with her, you know,
     in case papa should be disposed to think of it;—she must lie still till it quite wears off. I
     would ask you to stay to lunch if I was not afraid of wasting your precious time——"</t:p>
<t:p>Mr Bury gave a little gasp of indignation, but he did not say anything. On the whole, even
     though smarting under the indignity of being asked to lunch, as his sister had been, when
     probably there might be a repetition of the scene of yesterday, he was glad to get safely out
     of the house, even at the risk of abandoning his enterprise. As for a woman in want of a
     situation, who had so little common sense as to faint at such a critical moment, the Rector was
     disposed to wash his hands of her; for Mr Bury, "like them all," as Lucilla said, was horribly
     frightened by a faint when he saw one, and afterwards pretended to disbelieve it, and called it
     one of the things which a little self-command could always prevent. When he was gone Miss
     Marjoribanks felt the full importance of her victory; and then, though she had not hesitated to
     sacrifice this poor woman when it was necessary to have a victim, that moment was over, and she
     had no pleasure in being cruel; on the contrary, she went and sat by her patient, and talked,
     and was very kind to her; and after a while heard all her story, and was more comforting than
     the Rector could have been for his life.</t:p>
<t:p>"I knew it would hurt your feelings," Miss Marjoribanks said candidly, "but I could not do
     anything else—and you know it was Mr Bury's fault; but I am sure if I can be of any use to
     you——" It was thus that Lucilla added, without knowing it, another complication to her
     fortunes; but then, to be sure, clear-sighted as she was, she could not see into the future,
     nor know what was to follow. She told the Doctor in the evening with the greatest faithfulness,
     and described how Mr Bury looked, and that she had said she did not think papa would be
     disposed to think of it; and Dr Marjoribanks was so much entertained that he came upstairs to
     hear the end, and took a cup of tea. It was the third night in succession that the Doctor had
     taken this step, though it was against his principles; and thus it will be seen that good came
     out of evil in a beautifully distinct and appropriate way.</t:p>
</t:div>