<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XVII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>The arrival of Mr Archdeacon Beverley in Carlingford was, for many reasons, an event of
     importance to the town, and especially to society, which was concerned in anything that drew
     new and pleasant people to Grange Lane. For one thing, it occurred at the time when that first
     proposal of elevating Carlingford into a bishopric, in order to relieve the present bishop of
     the district of a part of his immense diocese, had just been mooted; and supposing this
     conception to be ever carried out, nobody could have been more eligible as first bishop than
     the Archdeacon, who was in the prime of life, and a very successful clergyman. And then, not to
     speak of anything so important, his presence was a great attraction to the country clergy,
     especially as he had come to hold a visitation. Notwithstanding all this, it is impossible to
     deny that Mrs Chiley, his hostess, and even Miss Marjoribanks herself, regarded the manner of
     his first appearance with a certain displeasure. If he had only had the good sense to stay at
     home, and not come to seek his entertainers! To be sure it is awkward to arrive at a house and
     find that everybody is out; but still, as Mrs Chiley justly observed, the Archdeacon was not a
     baby, and he might have known better. "Coming to you the very first night, and almost in his
     travelling things, to take the cream off everything," the old lady said, with tears of vexation
     in her eyes; "and after that, what have we to show him in Carlingford, Lucilla?" As for Miss
     Marjoribanks, she was annoyed, but she knew the wealth of her own resources, and she was not in
     despair, like her old friend. "They never know any better," she said sympathetically. "Dear Mrs
     Chiley, there was nothing else to be expected; but, at the same time, I don't think things are
     so very bad," said Lucilla; for she had naturally a confidence in herself of which even Mrs
     Chiley's admiring faith fell short.</t:p>
<t:p>The Archdeacon himself took it quite cheerfully, as if it was the most natural thing in the
     world. "I have no doubt it was a very pleasant party, if one could have got the key-note," he
     said, in his Broad-Church way, as if there was nothing more to be said on the subject, and
     Lucilla's Thursday was the merest ordinary assembly. For there could be no doubt that he was
     Broad-Church, even though his antecedents had not proclaimed the fact. He had a way of talking
     on many subjects which alarmed his hostess. It was not that there was anything objectionable in
     what he said—for, to be sure, a clergyman and an archdeacon may say a great many things that
     ordinary people would not like to venture on,—but still it was impossible to tell what it might
     lead to; for it is not everybody who knows when to stop, as Mr Beverley in his position might
     be expected to do. It was the custom of good society in Carlingford to give a respectful
     assent, for example, to Mr Bury's extreme Low-Churchism—as if it were profane, as it certainly
     was not respectable, to differ from the Rector—and to give him as wide a field as possible for
     his missionary operations by keeping out of the way. But Mr Beverley had not the least regard
     for respectability, nor that respect for religion which consists in keeping as clear of it as
     possible; and the way in which he spoke of Mr Bury's views wounded some people's feelings.
     Altogether, he was, as Mrs Chiley said, an anxious person to have in the house; for he just as
     often agreed with the gentlemen in their loose ways of thinking, as with the more correct
     opinions by which the wives and mothers who had charge of Their morality strove hard to keep
     them in the right way; and that was the reverse of what one naturally expected from a
     clergyman. He was very nice, and had a nice position; and, under all the circumstances, it was
     not only a duty to pay attention to him, but a duty from which results of a most agreeable
     character might spring; but still, though she could not be otherwise than kind, it would be
     impossible to say that it was out of personal predilection that Mrs Chiley devoted herself to
     her guest. She admitted frankly that he was not like what clergymen were in her time. For one
     thing, he seemed to think that every silly boy and girl ought to have an opinion and be
     consulted, as if they had anything to do with it—which was just the way to turn their heads,
     and make them utterly insupportable. On the whole, perhaps, the old lady was more charitable to
     Mary Chiley, and understood better how it was that she, brought up in sound Church principles,
     did not get on so well as might be desired with her husband's family, after a week of the
     Archdeacon. And yet he was a delightful person, and full of information, as everybody admitted;
     and if Carlingford should be erected into a bishopric, as would be only right—and if Mr
     Beverley should happen to be appointed bishop, as was highly probable—then it would be a
     pleasure to think that one had been kind to him. At the same time, it must be owned that he
     showed a great want of tact in coming to Miss Marjoribanks's Thursday on the night of his
     arrival, and thus brushing, as it were, the very cream off his introduction to Grange Lane. And
     Mrs Chiley still sighed a little over Mr Cavendish, and thought within herself that it was not
     his fault, but that designing, artful creature, who was enough to lead any man wrong. For it
     was very clear to the meanest capacity that nobody could ever call the Archdeacon "my dear,"
     as, with all his faults, it had been possible to call Mr Cavendish. And by this line of thought
     Mrs Chiley was led to regret Mr Cavendish, and to wonder what had become of him, and what
     family affairs it could be that had taken him so suddenly away.</t:p>
<t:p>A great many people in Carlingford were at that moment occupied by the same wonders and
     regrets. Some people thought he was frightened to find how far he had gone with <t:hi>that</t:hi>
     Miss Lake, and had left town for a little to be out of the way; and some thought he must have
     been speculating, and have lost money. To tell the truth, it was very strange that he should
     have disappeared so suddenly,—just at the moment, too, when old Mr Chiltern had one of his bad
     attacks of bronchitis, which Dr Marjoribanks himself had admitted might carry him off any day.
     Nothing could be more important to the future interests of young Cavendish than to be on the
     spot at this critical moment, and yet he had disappeared without telling anybody he was going,
     or where he was going, which was on the whole a perfectly unexplainable proceeding. His very
     servants, as had been ascertained by some inquiring mind in the community, were unaware of his
     intention up to the very last moment; and certainly he had not said good-bye to anybody before
     leaving Dr Marjoribanks's garden on that Thursday evening. Mr Woodburn, who was not a person of
     very refined perceptions, was the only man who found his disappearance quite natural. "After
     making such a deuced ass of himself, by George! what could the fellow do?" said his
     brother-in-law, who naturally enjoyed the discomfiture of so near a connection; and this was no
     doubt a providential circumstance for Mrs Woodburn, who was thus saved from the necessity of
     explaining or accounting for her brother's unexpected disappearance; but it failed to satisfy
     the general community, who did not think Mr Cavendish likely to give in at the first blow even
     of so distinguished an antagonist as Miss Marjoribanks. Some of the more charitable inhabitants
     of Grange Lane concluded that it must be the sudden illness of some relative which had called
     him away; but then, though he was well known to be one of the Cavendishes, neither he nor his
     sister ever spoke much of their connections; and, on the whole, public opinion fluctuated
     between the two first suggestions—which seemed truest to nature at least, whether or not they
     might be fully corroborated by fact—which were, either that Mr Cavendish had taken fright, as
     he might very naturally have done, at the advanced state of his relations with Barbara Lake; or
     that he had speculated, and lost money. In either case his departure would have been natural
     enough, and need not, perhaps, have been accomplished with quite so much precipitation; but
     still such a community as that in Grange Lane was in circumstances to comprehend how a young
     man might take fright and leave home, either because of losing a lot of money, or getting
     entangled with a drawing-master's daughter.</t:p>
<t:p>The immediate result, so far as society was concerned, was one for which people did not know
     whether to be most glad or sorry. Mrs Woodburn, who kept half the people in Grange Lane in
     terror of their lives, seemed to have lost all her inspiration now her brother was away. She
     did not seem to have the heart to take off anybody, which was quite a serious matter for the
     amusement of the community. To be sure, some people were thankful, as supposing themselves
     exempted from caricature; but then unfortunately, as has been said, the people who were most
     afraid for Mrs Woodburn were precisely those who were unworthy of her trouble, and had nothing
     about them to give occupation to her graphic powers. As for Miss Marjoribanks, who had supplied
     one of the mimic's most effective studies, she was much disturbed by the failure of this
     element of entertainment. "I have always thought it very strange that I never had any sense of
     humour," Lucilla said; "but it would not do, you know, if all the world was like me; and
     society would be nothing if everybody did not exert themselves to the best of their abilities."
     There was a mournful intonation in Lucilla's voice as she said this; for, to tell the truth,
     since Mr Cavendish's departure she had been dreadfully sensible of the utter absence of any man
     who could flirt. As for Osmond Brown and the other boys of his age, it might be possible to
     train them, but at the best they were only a provision for the future, and in the meantime Miss
     Marjoribanks could not but be sensible of her loss. She lamented it with such sincerity that
     all the world thought her the most perfect actress in existence. "I have nothing to say against
     any of you," Lucilla would say, contemplating with the eye of an artist the young men of Grange
     Lane who were her raw material. "I dare say you will all fall in love with somebody sooner or
     later, and be very happy and good for nothing; but you are no assistance in any way to society.
     It is Mr Cavendish I am sighing for," said the woman of genius, with the candour of a great
     mind; and even Mrs Woodburn was beguiled out of her despondency by a study so unparalleled. All
     this time, however, Lucilla had not forgotten the last look of her faithless admirer as he
     faced round upon her when Mr Archdeacon Beverley came into the room. She too, like everybody
     else, wondered innocently why Mr Cavendish had gone away, and when he was coming back again;
     but she never hinted to any one that the Archdeacon <t:hi>had</t:hi> anything to do with it; for
     indeed, as she said to herself, she had no positive evidence except that of a look that the
     Archdeacon had anything to do with it. By which it will be seen that Miss Marjoribanks's
     prudence equalled her other great qualities. It would be wrong to say, however, that her
     curiosity was not excited, and that in a very lively way; for the vague wonder of the public
     mind over a strange fact, could never be compared in intensity to the surprise and curiosity
     excited by something one has actually seen, and which gives one, as it were, a share in the
     secret,—if indeed there was a secret, which was a matter upon which Lucilla within herself had
     quite made up her mind.</t:p>
<t:p>As for the Archdeacon, the place which he took in society was one quite different from that
     which had been filled by Mr Cavendish, as, indeed, was natural. He was one of those men who are
     very strong for the masculine side of Christianity; and when he was with the ladies, he had a
     sense that he ought to be paid attention to, instead of taking that trouble in his own person.
     Miss Marjoribanks was not a woman to be blind to the advantages of this situation, but still,
     as was to be expected, it took her a little time to get used to it, and to make all the use of
     it which was practicable under the circumstances—which was all the more difficult since she was
     not in the least "viewy" in her own person, but had been brought up in the old-fashioned
     orthodox way of having a great respect for religion, and as little to do with it as possible,
     which was a state of mind largely prevalent in Carlingford. But that was not in the least Mr
     Beverley's way.</t:p>
<t:p>It was when Lucilla's mind was much occupied by this problem that she received a visit quite
     unexpectedly one morning from little Rose Lake, who had just at that time a great deal on her
     mind. For it may easily be supposed that Mr Cavendish's sudden departure, which bewildered the
     general public who had no special interest in the matter, must have had a still more
     overwhelming effect upon Barbara Lake, who had just been raised to the very highest pinnacle of
     hope, closely touching upon reality, when all her expectations collapsed and came to nothing in
     a moment. She would not believe at first that it could be true; and then, when it was no longer
     possible to resist the absolute certainty of Mr Cavendish's departure, her disappointment found
     vent in every kind of violence—hysterics, and other manifestations of unreason and self-will.
     Rose had been obliged to leave the Female School of Design upon her papa's overburdened
     shoulders, and stay at home to nurse her sister. Perhaps the little artist was not the best
     person to take care of a sufferer under such circumstances; for she was neither unreasonable
     nor self-willed to speak of, though perhaps a little opinionative in her way—and could not be
     brought to think that a whole household should be disturbed and disordered, and a young woman
     in good health retire to her room, and lose all control of herself, because a young man, with
     whom she had no acquaintance three months before, had gone out of town unexpectedly. Perhaps it
     was a want of feeling on the part of the unsympathetic sister. She gave out that Barbara was
     ill, and kept up a most subdued and anxious countenance downstairs, for the benefit of the
     children and the maid-of-all-work, who represented public opinion in Grove Street; but when
     Rose went into her sister's room, where Barbara kept the blinds down, and had her face swollen
     with crying, it was with a very stern countenance that her little mentor regarded the invalid.
     "I do not ask you to have a sense of duty," Rose said, with a certain fine disdain, "but at
     least you might have a proper pride." This was all she took the trouble to say; but it must be
     admitted that a great deal more to the same effect might be read in her eyes, which were
     generally so dewy and soft, but which could flash on occasion. And then as the week drew on
     towards Thursday, and all her representations proved unavailing to induce Barbara to get up and
     prepare herself for her usual duties, the scorn and vexation and impatience with which the
     dutiful little soul met her sister's sullen determination that "she was not able" to fulfil her
     ordinary engagements, roused Rose up to a great resolution. For her own part she was one of the
     people who do not understand giving in. "What do you mean by lying there?" she said, pounding
     Barbara down small and cutting her to pieces with infallible good sense and logic; "will that
     do any good? You would try to look better than usual, and sing better than usual, if you had
     any proper pride. I did not fall ill when my flounce was passed over at the exhibition. I made
     up my mind that very evening about the combination for my veil. I would die rather than give in
     if I were you."</t:p>
<t:p>"Your flounce!" sobbed Barbara—"oh, you unfeeling insensible thing!—as if your h-heart had
     anything to do with—that. I only went to s-spite Lucilla—and I won't go—no more—oh, no more—now
     he's been and deserted me. You can't understand my feelings—g-go away and leave me alone."</t:p>
<t:p>"Barbara," said Rose, with solemnity, "I would forgive you if you would not be mean. I don't
     understand it in one of <t:hi>us</t:hi>. If Mr Cavendish has gone away, it shows that he does not
     care for you; and you would scorn him, and scorn to show you were thinking of him, if you had
     any proper pride."</t:p>
<t:p>But all the answer Barbara gave was to turn away with a jerk of annoyance the old easy-chair
     in which she was lying buried, with her hands thrust up into her black hair, and her eyes all
     red; upon which Rose left her to carry out her own resolution. She was prompt in all her
     movements, and she wasted no time on reconsideration. She went down into Grange Lane, her
     little head erect, and her bright eyes regarding the world with that air of frank recognition
     and acknowledgment which Rose felt she owed as an artist to her fellow-creatures. They were all
     good subjects more or less, and the consciousness that she could draw them and immortalise them
     gave her the same sense of confidence in their friendliness, and her own perfect command of the
     situation, as a young princess might have felt whose rank protected her like an invisible
     buckler. Rose, too, walked erect and open-eyed, in the confidence of <t:hi>her</t:hi> rank, which
     made her everybody's equal. It was in this frame of mind that she arrived at Dr Marjoribanks's
     house, and found Lucilla, who was very glad to see her. Miss Marjoribanks was pondering deeply
     on the Archdeacon at that moment, and her little visitor seemed as one sent by heaven to help
     her out. For to tell the truth, though Lucilla understood all about Mr Cavendish, and men of
     his description, and how to manage them, and take full use of their powers, even her commanding
     intelligence felt the lack of experience in respect to such a case as that of the Archdeacon,
     who required a different treatment to draw him out. She was thinking it over intently at the
     moment of Rose's arrival, for Lucilla was not a person to give up the advantages of a novel
     position because she did not quite understand it. She felt within herself that there was no
     doubt a great effect might be produced if she could but see how to do it. And it was Thursday
     morning, and there was no time to lose.</t:p>
<t:p>"I came to speak to you about Barbara," said Rose. "She is not fit to come out this morning.
     I told her it was very ungrateful not to make an effort after you had been so kind; but I am
     sorry to say she has not a strong sense of duty; and I don't think she would be able to sing or
     do anything but look stupid. I hope you will not think very badly of her. There are some people
     who can't help giving in, I suppose," said Rose, with an impatient little sigh.</t:p>
<t:p>"And so this is you, you dear little Rose!" said Lucilla, "and I have never seen you before
     since I came home—and you always were such a pet of mine at Mount Pleasant! I can't think why
     you never came to see me before; as for me, you know, I never have any time. Poor papa has
     nobody else to take care of him, and it always was the object of my life to be a comfort to
     papa."</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes," said Rose, who was a straightforward little woman, and not given to compliments. "I
     have a great deal to do too," she said; "and then all my spare moments I am working at my
     design. Papa always says that society accepts artists for what they can give, and does not
     expect them to sacrifice their time," Rose continued, with her little air of dignity. Miss
     Marjoribanks knew very well that society was utterly unconscious of the existence of the Lake
     family; but then there is always something imposing in such a perfectly innocent and superb
     assumption as that to which the young Preraphaelite had just given utterance; and it began to
     dawn upon Lucilla that here was another imperfectly understood but effective instrument lying
     ready to her hand.</t:p>
<t:p>"I should like to see your design," said Miss Marjoribanks graciously. "You made such a
     pretty little wreath for the corner of my handkerchief—don't you remember?—all frogs' legs and
     things. It looked so sweet in the old satin stitch. What is the matter with poor Barbara? I
     felt sure she would catch cold and lose her voice. I shall tell papa to go and see her. As for
     to-night, it will be a dreadful loss to be sure, for I never could find a voice that went so
     well with mine. But if you are sure she can't come——"</t:p>
<t:p>"When people have not a sense of duty," said Rose, with an indignant sigh, "nor any proper
     pride,——Some are so different. Barbara ought to have been some rich person's daughter, with
     nothing to do. She would not mind being of no use in the world. It is a kind of temperament I
     don't understand," continued the little artist. All this, it is true, was novel to Miss
     Marjoribanks, who had a kind of prejudice in favour of the daughters of rich persons who had
     nothing to do; but Lucilla's genius was broad and catholic, and did not insist upon
     comprehending everything. She gave Rose a sudden scrutinising look, and measured her mentally
     against the gap she had to fill. No doubt it was an experiment, and might fail signally; but
     then Miss Marjoribanks was always at hand to cover deficiencies, and she had that confidence in
     herself and her good fortune which is necessary to everybody who greatly dares.</t:p>
<t:p>"You must come yourself this evening, you dear old Rose," said Lucilla. "You know I always
     was fond of you. Oh, yes, I know you can't sing like Barbara. But the Archdeacon is coming, who
     understands about art; and if you would like to bring your design——My principle has always
     been, that there should be a little of everything in society," said Miss Marjoribanks. "I dare
     say you will feel a little strange at first with not knowing the people, but that will soon
     pass off—and you <t:hi>must</t:hi> come."</t:p>
<t:p>When she had said this, Lucilla bestowed upon little Rose a friendly schoolfellow kiss,
     putting her hands upon the little artist's shoulders, and looking her full in the face as she
     did so. "I am sure you can talk," said Miss Marjoribanks. She did not say "Go away now, and
     leave me to my arrangements;" but Rose, who was quick-witted, understood that the salute was a
     dismissal, and she went away accordingly, tingling with pride and excitement and pleasure and a
     kind of pain. The idea of practically exemplifying, in her own person, the kind of demeanour
     which society ought to expect from an artist had not occurred to Rose; but destiny having
     arranged it so, she was not the woman to withdraw from her responsibilities. She said to
     herself that it would be shabby for her who was known to have opinions on this subject, to
     shrink from carrying them out; and stimulated her courage by recourse to her principles, as
     people do who feel themselves bound to lay sacrifices on the altar of duty. Notwithstanding
     this elevated view of the emergency, it must be admitted that a sudden thought of what she
     would wear had flushed to Rose's very finger-tips, with a heat and tingle of which the little
     heroine was ashamed. For it was Thursday morning, and there was not a moment to be lost.
     However, after the first thrill which this idea had given her, Rose bethought herself once more
     of her principles, and stilled her beating heart. It was not for her to think of what she was
     to put on, she who had so often proclaimed the exemption of "a family of artists" from the
     rules which weigh so hard upon the common world. "We have a rank of our own," she said to
     herself, but with that tremor which always accompanies the transference of a purely theoretical
     and even fantastic rule of conduct into practical ground—"We are everybody's equal, and we are
     nobody's equal—and when papa begins to be appreciated as he ought to be, and Willie has made a
     Name——" This was always the point at which Rose broke off, falling into reverie that could not
     be expressed in words; but she had no leisure to remark upon the chance "compositions" in the
     street, or the effects of light and shade, as she went home. A sudden and heavy responsibility
     had fallen upon her shoulders, and she would have scorned herself had she deserted her
     post.</t:p>
</t:div>