<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter XIII</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>It was thus that the reign of Miss Marjoribanks became gradually established and confirmed in
     Carlingford. It would be unnecessary to enter into detail, or to redouble instances of that
     singular genius which made itself so fully felt to the furthest limits of society, and which
     even indeed extended those limits miraculously beyond the magic circle of Grange Lane.
     Lucilla's powers beguiled not only the Powells and Sir John Richmond's family, who were, as
     everybody knows, fully entitled to be called county people, and came only on the Thursdays when
     there was moonlight to light them home, which was not so much to be wondered at, since county
     society in those parts was unusually heavy at that period; but even, what was more
     extraordinary, Miss Marjoribanks made a lodgment in the enemy's country on the other side, and
     made a capture, of all people in the world, of John Brown, who lived in his father's big old
     house at the <t:hi>town</t:hi> end of George Street, and had always laughed in his cynical way at
     the pretensions of Grange Lane. But then Lucilla had, as all the ladies admitted, an influence
     over "the gentlemen," of which, as was natural, they were slightly contemptuous, even if
     perhaps envious, to some extent, of the gift. For everybody knows that it requires very little
     to satisfy the gentlemen, if a woman will only give her mind to it. As for Miss Marjoribanks
     herself, she confessed frankly that she did her best to please Them. "For you know, after all,
     in Carlingford, one is obliged to take them into consideration," she said, with a natural
     apology. "So many of you poor dear people have to go where they like, and see the people they
     want you to see," Miss Marjoribanks added, fluttering her maiden plumes with a certain
     disdainful pity in the very eyes of Mrs Centum and Mrs Woodburn, who were well aware, both of
     them, at the bottom of their hearts, that but for Dr Marjoribanks's dinners, their selfish
     mates would find infinite objections to the Thursday evening, which was now an institution in
     Carlingford. And Lucilla knew it just as well as they did, which gave a certain sense of
     condescension and superiority to her frankness. "I never pretend I don't try to please them,"
     Miss Marjoribanks said; and the matrons found themselves worsted as usual; for, to be sure, it
     was not for <t:hi>Them</t:hi>, but for the good of the community in general, that Lucilla exerted
     herself so successfully.</t:p>
<t:p>Nothing, indeed, could have proved more completely the disinterested character of Miss
     Marjoribanks's proceedings than her behaviour in respect to Mr Cavendish. After the bold and
     decisive action taken by Lucilla on the first occasion when the flirtation between him and
     Barbara Lake became apparent, the misguided young man returned to a better frame of mind;
     perhaps out of admiration for her magnanimity, perhaps attracted by her indifference, as is the
     known and ascertained weakness of the gentlemen. And perhaps also Mr Cavendish was ashamed of
     himself, as, in Mrs Chiley's opinion at least, he had so much reason to be. Anyhow, whatever
     the cause, he behaved himself with the profoundest decorum for several weeks in succession, and
     treated the contralto with such overwhelming politeness as reduced poor Barbara out of her
     momentary exultation into the depths of humiliation and despair. Mr Cavendish was Lucilla's
     right hand for that short but virtuous period, and fully justified Miss Marjoribanks's opinion,
     which was founded at once upon reflection and experience, that to have a man who can flirt is
     next thing to indispensable to a leader of society; that is to say, if he is under efficient
     discipline, and capable of carrying out a grand conception. Everything went on delightfully so
     long as this interval lasted, and Lucilla herself did not disdain to recompense her faithful
     assistant by bestowing upon him various little privileges, such as naturally appertain to a
     subject whose place is on the steps of the throne. She took him into her confidence, and made
     him to a certain extent a party to her large and philanthropic projects, and even now and then
     accepted a suggestion from him with that true candour and modesty which so often accompany
     administrative genius. While this continued, kind old Mrs Chiley kept caressing them both in
     her old-womanly way. She even went so far as to call Mr Cavendish "my dear," as if he had been
     a grandson of her own, and took her afternoon drive in her little brougham past his house with
     a genial sense of prospective property through Lucilla, which was wonderfully pleasant. To be
     sure there was not very much known in Carlingford about his connections; but then everybody was
     aware that he was one of the Cavendishes, and the people who are not content with that must be
     hard indeed to please. As for Mrs Woodburn, she, it was true, continued to "take off" Miss
     Marjoribanks; but then, as Mrs Chiley justly remarked, she was a woman who would take off the
     Archbishop of Canterbury or the Virgin Mary, if she had the opportunity; and there was no fear
     but Lucilla, if once married, would soon bring her to her senses; and then Mr Chiltern grew
     more and more feeble, and was scarcely once in a fortnight in his place in Parliament, which
     was a sacrifice of the interests of the borough dreadful to contemplate. And thus it was in the
     interests of Lucilla, notwithstanding that ladies are not eligible for election under such
     circumstances, that Mrs Chiley carried on a quiet little canvass for the future M.P.</t:p>
<t:p>All this lasted, alas! only too short a time. After a while the level eyebrows and flashing
     eyes and magnificent voice of Barbara Lake began to reassert their ancient power. Whatever may
     be the predisposition of the Cavendishes in general, this particular member of the race was
     unable to resist these influences. Barbara had managed to persuade Rose to persuade her father
     that it was necessary for her to have a new dress; and Mr Lake was more persuadable than usual,
     being naturally pleased to be complimented, when he went to give his lessons, on his daughter's
     beautiful voice. "Her talent has taken another development from <t:hi>ours</t:hi>," he said, with
     his little air of dignity, "but still she has the artist temperament. All my children have been
     brought up to love the beautiful;" and this argument had, of course, all the more effect upon
     him when repeated by his favourite daughter. "And then Barbara has such a noble head," said
     Rose; "when nobody is looking at her she always makes a fine composition. To be sure, when she
     is observed she gets awkward, and puts herself out of drawing; but that is not to be wondered
     at. I don't want her to be fine, or to imitate the Grange Lane people; but then, you know,
     papa, you always say that we have a rank of our own, being a family of artists," said Rose,
     holding up her little head with a pretty arrogance which delighted the father both in a
     paternal and a professional point of view. "If one could only have made a study of her at that
     moment," he said to himself regretfully; and he consented to Barbara's dress.</t:p>
<t:p>As for the contralto, whose sentiments were very different from those of her father and
     sister, she watched over the making of the robe thus procured with a certain jealous care which
     nobody unacquainted with the habits of a family of artists could understand. Barbara's talent
     was not sufficiently developed to permit of her making it herself; but she knew already by sad
     experience that Rose's views of what was picturesque in costume were peculiar, and not always
     successful. And then it was only a new dress to Rose, whereas to Barbara it was a supreme
     effort of passion and ambition and jealousy and wounded <t:hi>amour propre</t:hi>. Mr Cavendish had
     paid a great deal of attention to her, and she had naturally entertained dreams of the wildest
     and most magnificent character—of riding in her carriage, as she would herself have said, and
     dressing as nobody else dressed in Carlingford, and becoming the great lady of the town, and
     eclipsing utterly Lucilla Marjoribanks, who had been so impertinent as to patronise her. Such
     had been Barbara's delicious dreams for a whole fortnight; and then Mr Cavendish, who had taken
     her up, put her down again, and went away from her side, and delivered himself over, heart and
     soul, to the service of Lucilla. Barbara had no intellect to speak of, but she had what she
     called a heart—that is to say, a vital centre of inclinations and passions, all of which were
     set in motion by that intense force of self-regard which belongs to some of the lower
     organisations. Thus she arrayed herself, not in simple muslin, but in all the power of
     fascination which a strong will and fixed purpose can add to beauty. And in her excitement, and
     with the sense she had that this was her opportunity, and that advancement and grandeur
     depended upon the result of her night's work, her level eyebrows, and flushing cheeks, and
     black intense eyes, rose almost into positive beauty. There was nobody in the room to compare
     with her when she stood up to sing on that memorable evening. The Miss Browns, for example,
     were very pretty, especially Lydia, who was afterwards married to young Richmond, Sir John's
     eldest son; and they were much <t:hi>nicer</t:hi> girls, and far more engaging than Barbara Lake,
     who was not even a lady, Mrs Chiley said. But then her determination, though it was a poor
     enough thing in itself, gave a certain glow and passion to her coarser beauty.</t:p>
<t:p>When she stood up to sing, the whole room was struck with her appearance. She had her new
     dress on, and though it was only white muslin like other people's, it gave her the air of a
     priestess inspired by some approaching crisis, and sweeping forward upon the victim who was
     ready to be sacrificed. And yet the victim that night was far from being ready for the
     sacrifice. On the contrary, he had been thinking it all over, and had concluded that prudence
     and every other reasonable sentiment were on the other side, and that in many ways it would be
     a very good thing for him if he could persuade Miss Marjoribanks to preside over and share his
     fortunes. He had made up his mind to this with all the more certainty that he was a man
     habitually prone to run off after everything that attracted him, in direct opposition to
     prudence—an inclination which he shared with his sister, who, as everybody knew, had ruined
     poor Mr Woodburn's fortunes by "taking off," before his very face, the only rich uncle in the
     Woodburn family. Mr Cavendish, with this wise resolution in his mind, stood up in the very path
     of the contralto as she followed Miss Marjoribanks to the piano, and, confident in his
     determination, even allowed himself to meet her eye—which was rash, to say the least of it.
     Barbara flashed upon him as she passed a blaze of intense oblique lightning from under her
     level brows—or perhaps it was only that straight black line which made it look oblique—and then
     went on to her place. The result was such as might have been anticipated from the character of
     the man. Barbara was in richer voice than ever before, and all but obliterated even Lucilla,
     though she too was singing her best; and thus poor Mr Cavendish again fell into the snare. That
     very night the flirtation, which had already created so much talk, was resumed with more energy
     than ever; and Barbara took Miss Marjoribanks's place at the piano, and sang song after song in
     a kind of intoxication of triumph. This, to be sure, was visible only to a small portion of the
     guests who crowded Lucilla's drawing-room. But the result was soon so visible that all
     Carlingford became aware of it. The hero wavered so much that the excitement was kept up for
     many weeks; but still from the first nobody could have any reasonable doubt as to how it was to
     end.</t:p>
<t:p>And it was while this process of seduction was going on that the character of Miss
     Marjoribanks revealed itself in all its native grandeur. Lucilla had various kind friends round
     her to advise her, and especially old Mrs Chiley, whose indignation went beyond all bounds. "My
     dear, I would never let her enter my door again—never!" cried the old lady; "I told you long
     ago I never could bear her looks—you know I warned you, Lucilla. As for her singing, what does
     it matter? You have a much prettier voice than she has: everybody knows that a soprano is
     perfect by itself, but a contralto is only a <t:hi>second</t:hi>," Mrs Chiley said, with mingled
     wrath and satisfaction; "and, my dear, I should never let her enter my house again, if it was
     me."</t:p>
<t:p>"Dear Mrs Chiley," said Lucilla, who was now, as usual, equal to the occasion, "it is so nice
     of you to be vexed. You know I would do anything to please you;—but, after all, there are
     thousands and thousands of gentlemen, and it is not so easy to find a voice that goes with
     mine. All my masters always said it was a quite peculiar second I wanted; and suppose Barbara
     is foolish, that is not to say I should forget <t:hi>my</t:hi> duties," Miss Marjoribanks added,
     with a certain solemnity; "and then, you know, she has no mother to keep her right."</t:p>
<t:p>"And neither have you, my poor dear," said Mrs Chiley, kissing her protégée. As for Lucilla,
     she accepted the kiss, but repressed the enthusiasm of partisanship with which her cause was
     being maintained.</t:p>
<t:p>"I have <t:hi>you</t:hi>," she said, with artless gratitude; "and then I am different," added
     Lucilla. Nothing but modesty of the most delicate description could have expressed the fact
     with such a fine reticence. No doubt Miss Marjoribanks was different; and she proved her
     superiority, if anybody could have doubted it, by the most beautiful behaviour. She took no
     more notice of the unprincipled flirtation thus set agoing under her very eyes, than if Mr
     Cavendish and Barbara Lake had been two figures in gingerbread. So far as anybody knew, not
     even a flying female shaft from Lucilla's bow, one of those dainty projectiles which the best
     of women cast forth by times, had ever been directed against the ungrateful young person who
     had made so unprincipled a use of her admittance into Grange Lane; and the faithless gallant
     had not even the gratification of feeling that Lucilla was "cool" to him. Whether this singular
     self-denial cost Miss Marjoribanks any acute sufferings, nobody could tell, but Mrs Chiley
     still marked with satisfaction that Lucilla, poor dear, was able to eat her dinner, of which
     she had so much need to support her strength; and after she had eaten her dinner Miss
     Marjoribanks would go upstairs and show herself just as usual. She was in perfect voice, and
     neither lost her colour, nor grew thin, nor showed any of those external signs of a
     disappointment in love with which most people are familiar. "It might have been different, you
     know, if my affections had been engaged," she said to her sole and sympathising counsellor; and
     Mrs Chiley, who had had a great deal of experience in girls, became more and more of opinion
     that such sense was all but superhuman.</t:p>
<t:p>Meantime the tide of public opinion ran very high in Carlingford against Mr Cavendish, who
     had been so popular a little while before. If it had been one of the Miss Browns, or a niece of
     the Colonel's, or indeed anybody in Grange Lane, people might have passed over it—but one of Mr
     Lake the drawing-master's daughters! The only person indifferent was Mrs Woodburn, who ought to
     have known better; but then she was thoughtless, like her brother, and liked it all the better,
     on the whole, that he should transfer those attentions which he had been paying to Miss
     Marjoribanks, and which in that quarter must have come to something, to a little harmless
     amusement with Barbara, who, after all, was very handsome, and had by times a little air of
     obdurate stupidity which captivated the mimic. As for anything coming of <t:hi>that</t:hi>, Mrs
     Woodburn rejected the idea with a simplicity which was perfectly consistent with her insight
     into other people's weaknesses. She could put on Barbara's stolid defiant look, and even make
     her eyebrows square, and give something of an oblique gleam to her eyes, with the most perfect
     skill and mastery of the character, and at the same time be just as stolid as Barbara in
     respect to what was going on at her very hand, and to the consequences which must follow. She
     did not want her brother to marry Miss Marjoribanks, and yet she could not have said a word
     against so unexceptionable a match; and accordingly it was quite a satisfaction to her to see
     him turned aside in so perfectly legitimate a manner. She added to her repertory a sketch of
     Barbara at the moment when, yielding to Mr Cavendish's entreaties, she seated herself at the
     piano "for just one song"; and being perfectly successful in the representation, Mrs Woodburn
     took no further care about the matter. To be sure, the hero was sufficiently experienced in
     such matters to know how to get out of it when it should be the proper time.</t:p>
<t:p>Thus the affair progressed which was to have far more serious consequences than these
     thoughtless persons dreamed of. Barbara ascended again to the heights of exultation and
     enchantment. Perhaps she was even a little in love; for, after all, she was young, and grateful
     to the man who thus distinguished her from the world. Yet, on the whole, it is to be feared
     that his house and his position in society, and the prospect of unlimited millinery, were more
     to her than Mr Cavendish. All these details were not perhaps contemplated by himself as he
     devoted himself to the handsome contralto. He had not begun to dream, as Barbara had done for a
     long time, of the wedding breakfast and the orange blossoms, or even of furnishing a new
     drawing-room handsomer than Miss Marjoribanks's, and giving parties which should be real
     parties and not mere Thursdays. None of these imaginations occupied Mr Cavendish as he followed
     Barbara's glowing cheeks and flashing eyes to his undoing. But then if he did not mean it she
     meant it; and, after all, there are occasions in which the woman's determination is the more
     important of the two. So that, taking everything into consideration, there can be no doubt that
     it was very fortunate that Lucilla's affections were not engaged. She behaved as nobody else in
     Carlingford was capable of behaving, and very few people anywhere, according to Mrs Chiley's
     admiring belief. It was not for a vulgar antagonist like Barbara Lake to touch Lucilla. The way
     in which she asked her to lunch and went on practising duets with her was angelical—it brought
     the tears to Mrs Chiley's eyes; and as for the domestic traitor whom Miss Marjoribanks thus
     contrived to warm in her magnanimous bosom, she was sometimes so full of spite and
     disappointment that she could neither eat her lunch nor go on with her singing. For, to be
     sure, the dearest climax of her triumph was wanting so long as Lucilla took no notice; and so
     far from taking any notice, Miss Marjoribanks was sweeter and more friendly than usual in her
     serene unconsciousness. "I am so afraid you have caught cold," Lucilla would say; "if you don't
     feel clear in your lower notes, we can pass over this passage, you know, for to-day. You must
     see papa before you go away, and he will order you something; but, my dear Barbara, you must
     take care." And then Barbara could have eaten her fingers instead of the gloves which she kept
     biting in her vexation. For, to tell the truth, if Miss Marjoribanks was not jealous, the
     victory was but half a victory after all.</t:p>
</t:div>