<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter VI</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>Tom Marjoribanks arrived that night, according to the Doctor's expectation. He arrived, with
     that curious want of adaptation to the circumstances which characterised the young man, at an
     hour which put Nancy entirely out, and upset the equanimity of the kitchen for twenty-four
     hours at least. He came, if any one can conceive of such an instance of carelessness, by the
     nine o'clock train, just as they had finished putting to rights downstairs. After this, Miss
     Marjoribanks's conclusion that the fact of the Carlingford assizes occurring a day or two after
     her arrival, when as yet she was not fully prepared to take advantage of them, was <t:hi>so</t:hi>
     like Tom, may be partially understood. And of course he was furiously hungry, and could have
     managed perfectly to be in time for dinner if he had not missed the train at Didcot Junction,
     by some wonderful blunder of the railway people, which never could have occurred but for his
     unlucky presence among the passengers. Lucilla took Thomas apart, and sent him downstairs with
     the most conciliatory message. "Tell Nancy not to put herself about, but to send up something
     cold—the cold pie, or anything she can find handy. Tell her I am <t:hi>so</t:hi> vexed, but it is
     just like Mr Tom; and he never knows what he is eating," said Miss Marjoribanks. As for Nancy,
     this sweetness did not subdue her in the least. She said, "I'll thank Miss Lucilla to mind her
     own business. The cold pie is for master's breakfast. I ain't such a goose as not to know what
     to send upstairs, and that Tummas can tell her if he likes." In the meantime the Doctor was in
     the drawing-room, much against his will, with the two young people, spinning about the room,
     and looking at Lucilla's books and knick-knacks on the tables by way of covering his
     impatience. He wanted to carry off Tom, who was rather a favourite, to his own den downstairs,
     where the young man's supper was to be served; but, at the same time, Dr Marjoribanks could not
     deny that Lucilla had a right to the greetings and homage of her cousin. He could not help
     thinking, on the whole, as he looked at the two, what a much more sensible arrangement it would
     have been if he had had the boy, instead of his sister, who had been a widow for ever so long,
     and no doubt had spoiled her son, as women always do; and then Lucilla might have passed under
     the sway of Mrs Marjoribanks, who no doubt would have known how to manage her. Thus the Doctor
     mused, with that sense of mild amazement at the blunders of Providence, which so many people
     experience, and without any idea that Mrs Marjoribanks would have found a task a great deal
     beyond her powers in the management of Lucilla. As for Tom, he was horribly hungry, having
     found, as was to be expected, no possible means of lunching at Didcot; but, at the same time,
     he was exhilarated by Lucilla's smile, and delighted to think of having a week at least to
     spend in her society. "I don't think I ever saw you looking so well," he was saying; "and you
     know my opinion generally on that subject." To which Lucilla responded in a way to wither all
     the germs of sentiment in the bud.</t:p>
<t:p>"What subject?" she said; "my looks? I am sure they can't be interesting to you. You are as
     hungry as ever you can be, and I can see it in your eyes. Papa, he is famishing, and I don't
     think he can contain himself any longer. Do take him downstairs, and let him have something to
     eat. For myself," Lucilla continued, in a lower tone, "it is my duty that keeps me up. You know
     it has always been the object of my life to be a comfort to papa."</t:p>
<t:p>"Come along, Tom," said the Doctor. "Don't waste your time philandering when your supper is
     ready." And Dr Marjoribanks led the way downstairs, leaving Tom, who followed him, in a state
     of great curiosity to know what secret oppression it might be under which his cousin was
     supported by her duty. Naturally his thoughts reverted to a possible rival—some one whom the
     sensible Doctor would have nothing to say to; and his very ears grew red with excitement at
     this idea. But, notwithstanding, he ate a very satisfactory meal in the library, where he had
     to answer all sorts of questions. Tom had his tray at the end of the table, and the Doctor, who
     had, according to his hospitable old-fashioned habit, taken a glass of claret to "keep him
     company," sat in his easy-chair between the fire and the table, and sipped his wine, and
     admired its colour and purity in the light, and watched with satisfaction the excellent meal
     his nephew was making. He asked him all about his prospects, and what he was doing, which Tom
     replied to with the frankest confidence. He was not very fond of work, nor were his abilities
     anything out of the common; but at the present moment Tom saw no reason why he should not gain
     the Woolsack in time; and Dr Marjoribanks gave something like a sigh as he listened, and
     wondered much what Providence could be thinking of not to give <t:hi>him</t:hi> the boy.</t:p>
<t:p>Lucilla meantime was very much occupied upstairs. She had the new housemaid up nominally to
     give her instructions about Mr Tom's room, but really to take the covers off the chairs, and
     see how they looked when the room was lighted up; but the progress of decay had gone too far to
     stand that trial. After all, the chintz, though none of the freshest, was the best. When the
     gentlemen came upstairs, which Tom, to the Doctor's disgust, insisted on doing, Lucilla was
     found in the act of pacing the room—pacing, not in the sentimental sense of making a little
     promenade up and down, but in the homely practical signification, with a view of measuring,
     that she might form an idea how much carpet was required. Lucilla was tall enough to go through
     this process without any great drawback in point of grace—the long step giving rather a
     tragedy-queen effect to her handsome but substantial person and long, sweeping dress. She
     stopped short, however, when she saw them, and withdrew to the sofa, on which she had
     established her throne; and there was a little air of conscious pathos on her face as she sat
     down, which impressed her companions. As for Tom, he instinctively felt that it must have
     something to do with that mystery under which Lucilla was supported by her duty; and the
     irrelevant young man conceived immediately a violent desire to knock the fellow down; whereas
     there was no fellow at all in the case, unless it might be Mr Holden, the upholsterer, whose
     visits Miss Marjoribanks would have received with greater enthusiasm at this moment than those
     of the most eligible eldest son in England. And then she gave a little pathetic sigh.</t:p>
<t:p>"What were you doing, Lucilla?" said her father,—"rehearsing Lady Macbeth, I suppose. At
     least you looked exactly like it when we came into the room."</t:p>
<t:p>"No, papa," said Lucilla sweetly; "I was only measuring to see how much carpet we should
     want; and that, you know, and Tom's coming, made me think of old times. You are so much
     downstairs in the library that you don't feel it; but a lady has to spend her life in the
     drawing-room—and then I always was so domestic. It does not matter what is outside, I always
     find my pleasure at home. I cannot help if it has a little effect on my spirits now and then,"
     said Miss Marjoribanks, looking down upon her handkerchief, "to be always surrounded with
     things that have such associations——"</t:p>
<t:p>"What associations?" said the amazed Doctor. To be sure, he had forgotten his wife; but it
     was four years ago, and he had got used to her absence from her favourite sofa; and, on the
     whole, in that particular, had acquiesced in the arrangements of Providence. "Really, Lucilla,
     I don't know what you mean."</t:p>
<t:p>"No, papa," said Miss Marjoribanks, with resignation. "I know you don't, and that is what
     makes it so sad. But talking of new carpets, you know, I had such an adventure to-day that I
     must tell you—quite one of <t:hi>my</t:hi> adventures—the very luckiest thing. It happened when I
     was out walking; I heard a voice out of a house in Grove Street, just the <t:hi>very</t:hi> thing
     to go with my voice. That is not a thing that happens every day," said Lucilla, "for all the
     masters have always told me that my voice was something quite by itself. When I heard it,
     though it was in Grove Street, and all the people about, I could have danced for joy."</t:p>
<t:p>"It was a man's voice, I suppose," suggested Tom Marjoribanks, in gloomy tones; and the
     Doctor added, in his cynical way:</t:p>
<t:p>"It's a wonderful advantage to be so pleased about trifles. What number was it? For my part,
     I have not many patients in Grove Street," said Dr Marjoribanks. "I would find a voice to suit
     you in another quarter, if I were you."</t:p>
<t:p>"Dear papa, it's such a pity that you don't understand," said Lucilla compassionately. "It
     turned out to be Barbara Lake; for, of course, I went in directly, and found out. I never heard
     a voice that went so well with mine." If Miss Marjoribanks did not go into raptures over the
     contralto on its own merits, it was not from any jealousy, of which, indeed, she was incapable,
     but simply because its adaptation to her own seemed to her by far its most interesting quality,
     and indeed almost the sole claim it had to consideration from the world.</t:p>
<t:p>"Barbara Lake?" said the Doctor. "There's something in that. If you can do her any good or
     get her teaching or anything—I have a regard for poor Lake, poor little fellow! He's kept up
     wonderfully since his wife died; and nobody expected it of him," Dr Marjoribanks continued,
     with a momentary dreary recollection of the time when the poor woman took farewell of her
     children, which indeed was the next day after that on which his own wife, who had nobody in
     particular to take farewell of, faded out of her useless life.</t:p>
<t:p>"Yes," said Lucilla, "I mean her to come here and sing with me; but, then, one needs to
     organise a little first. I am nineteen—how long is it since you were married, papa?"</t:p>
<t:p>"Two-and-twenty years," said the Doctor abruptly. He did not observe the strangeness of the
     question, because he had been thinking for the moment of his wife, and perhaps his face was a
     trifle graver than usual, though neither of his young companions thought of remarking it. To be
     sure he was not a young man even when he married; but, on the whole, perhaps something more
     than this perfect comfort and respectability, and those nice little dinners, had seemed to
     shine on his horizon when he brought home his incapable bride.</t:p>
<t:p>"Two-and-twenty years!" exclaimed Lucilla. "I don't mind talking before Tom, for he is one of
     the family. The things are all the same as they were when mamma came home, though, I am sure,
     nobody would believe it. I think it is going against Providence, for my part. Nothing was ever
     intended to last so long, except the things the Jews, poor souls! wore in the desert, perhaps.
     Papa, if you have no objection, I should like to choose the colours myself. There is a great
     deal in choosing colours that go well with one's complexion. People think of that for their
     dresses, but not for their rooms, which are of so much more importance. I should have liked
     blue, but blue gets so soon tawdry. I think," said Miss Marjoribanks, rising and looking at
     herself seriously in the glass, "that I have enough complexion at present to venture upon a
     pale spring green."</t:p>
<t:p>This little calculation, which a timid young woman would have taken care to do by herself,
     Lucilla did publicly, with her usual discrimination. The Doctor, who had looked a little grim
     at first, could not but laugh when he saw the sober look of care and thought with which Miss
     Marjoribanks examined her capabilities in the glass. It was not so much the action itself that
     amused her father, as the consummate ability of the young revolutionary. Dr Marjoribanks was
     Scotch, and had a respect for "talent" in every development, as is natural to his nation. He
     did not even give his daughter that credit for sincerity which she deserved, but set it all to
     the score of her genius, which was complimentary, certainly, in one point of view; but the fact
     was that Lucilla was perfectly sincere, and that she did what was natural to her under guidance
     of her genius, so as always to be in good fortune, just as Tom Marjoribanks, under the guidance
     of his, brought discredit even upon those eternal ordinances of English government which fixed
     the time of the Carlingford assizes. Lucilla was quite in earnest in thinking that the colour
     of the drawing-room was an important matter, and that a woman of sense had very good reason for
     suiting it to her complexion—an idea which accordingly she proceeded to develop and
     explain.</t:p>
<t:p>"For one can change one's dress," said Miss Marjoribanks, "as often as one likes—at least as
     often, you know, as one has dresses to change; but the furniture remains the same. I am always
     a perfect guy, whatever I wear, when I sit against a red curtain. You men say that a woman
     always knows when she's good-looking, but I am happy to say <t:hi>I</t:hi> know when I look a guy.
     What I mean is a delicate pale green, papa. For my part, I think it wears just as well as any
     other colour; and all the painters say it is the very thing for pictures. The carpet, of
     course, would be a darker shade; and as for the chairs, it is not at all necessary to keep to
     one colour. Both red and violet go beautifully with green, you know. I am sure Mr Holden and I
     could settle all about it without giving you any trouble."</t:p>
<t:p>"Who told you, Lucilla," said the Doctor, "that I meant to refurnish the house?" He was even
     a little angry at her boldness, but at the same time he was so much amused and pleased in his
     heart to have so clever a daughter, that all the tones that could produce terror were softened
     out of his voice. "I never heard that was a sort of thing a man had to do for his daughter,"
     said Dr Marjoribanks; "and I would like to know what I should do with all that finery when you
     get married—as I suppose you will by and by—and leave me alone in the house?"</t:p>
<t:p>"Ah, that is the important question," said Tom. As usual, it was Tom's luck; but then, when
     there did happen to be a moment when he ought to be silent, the unfortunate fellow could not
     help but speak.</t:p>
<t:p>"Perhaps I may marry some time," said Miss Marjoribanks, with composure; "it would be
     foolish, you know, to make any engagements; but that will depend greatly upon how you behave,
     and how Carlingford behaves, papa. I give myself ten years here, if you should be very good. By
     twenty-nine I shall be going off a little, and perhaps it may be tiring, for anything I can
     tell. Ten years is a long time, and naturally, in the meantime, I want to look as well as
     possible. Stop a minute; I forgot to put down the number of paces for the length. Tom, please
     to do it over again for me; of course, your steps are a great deal longer than mine."</t:p>
<t:p>"Tom is tired," said the Doctor; "and there are no new carpets coming out of my pockets.
     Besides, he's going to bed, and I'm going downstairs to the library. We may as well bid you
     good-night."</t:p>
<t:p>These words, however, were addressed to deaf ears. Tom, as was natural, had started
     immediately to obey Lucilla, as he was in duty bound; and the old Doctor looked on with a
     little amazement and a little amusement, recognising, with something of the surprise which that
     discovery always gives to fathers and mothers, that his visitor cared twenty times more for
     what Lucilla said than for anything that his superior wisdom could suggest. He would have gone
     off and left them as a couple of young fools, if it had not occurred to him all at once that
     since this sort of thing had begun, the last person in the world that he would choose to see
     dancing attendance on his daughter was Tom Marjoribanks. Oddly enough, though he had just been
     finding fault with Providence for not giving him a son instead of a daughter, he was not at all
     delighted nor grateful when Providence put before him this simple method of providing himself
     with the son he wanted. He took a great deal too much interest in Tom Marjoribanks to let him
     do anything so foolish; and as for Lucilla, the idea that, after all her accomplishments, and
     her expensive education, and her year on the Continent, she should marry a man who had nothing,
     disgusted the Doctor. He kept his seat accordingly, though he was horribly bored by the
     drawing-room and its claims, and wanted very much to return to the library, and get into his
     slippers and his dressing-gown. It was rather a pretty picture, on the whole, which he was
     regarding. Lucilla, perhaps, with a view to this discussion, had put on green ribbons on the
     white dress which she always wore in the evening, and her tawny curls and fresh complexion
     carried off triumphantly that difficult colour. Perhaps a critical observer might have said
     that her figure was a little too developed and substantial for these vestal robes; but then
     Miss Marjoribanks was young, and could bear it. She was standing by, not far from the fire, on
     the other side from the Doctor, looking on anxiously, while Tom measured the room with his long
     steps. "I never said you were to stride," said Lucilla; "take moderate steps, and don't be so
     silly. I was doing it myself famously if you had not come in and interrupted me. It is
     frightful to belong to a family where the men are so stupid," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a
     sigh of real distress; for, to be sure, the unlucky Tom immediately bethought himself to take
     small steps like those of a lady, which all but threw him on his well-formed though meaningless
     nose. Lucilla shook her head with an exasperated look, and contracted her lips with disdain, as
     he passed her on his ill-omened career. Of course he came right up against the little table on
     which she had with her own hand arranged a bouquet of geraniums and mignonette. "It is what he
     always does," she said to the Doctor calmly, as Tom arrived at that climax of his fate; and the
     look with which she accompanied these words, as she rang the bell smartly and promptly,
     mollified the Doctor's heart.</t:p>
<t:p>"I can tell you the size of the room, if that is all you want," said Dr Marjoribanks. "I
     suppose you mean to give parties, and drive me out of my senses with dancing and singing.—No,
     Lucilla, you must wait till you get married—that will never do for me."</t:p>
<t:p>"Dear papa," said Lucilla sweetly, "it is so dreadful to hear you say <t:hi>parties</t:hi>.
     Everybody knows that the only thing I care for in life is to be a comfort to you; and as for
     dancing, I saw at once that was out of the question. Dancing is all very well," said Miss
     Marjoribanks thoughtfully; "but it implies quantities of young people—and young people can
     never make what <t:hi>I</t:hi> call society. It is <t:hi>Evenings</t:hi> I mean to have, papa. I am
     sure you want to go downstairs, and I suppose Tom would think it civil to sit with me, though
     he is tired; so I will show you a good example, and Thomas can pick up the table and the
     flowers at his leisure. Good-night, papa," said Lucilla, giving him her round fresh cheek to
     kiss. She went out of the room with a certain triumph, feeling that she had fully signified her
     intentions, which is always an important matter; and shook hands in a condescending way with
     Tom, who had broken his shins in a headlong rush to open the door. She looked at him with an
     expression of mild despair, and shook her head again as she accorded him that sign of amity.
     "If you only would look a little where you are going," said Miss Marjoribanks;—perhaps she
     meant the words to convey an allegorical as well as a positive meaning, as so many people have
     been found out to do—and then she pursued her peaceful way upstairs. As for the Doctor, he went
     off to his library rubbing his hands, glad to be released, and laughing softly at his nephew's
     abashed looks. "She knows how to put <t:hi>him</t:hi> down at least," the Doctor said to himself,
     well pleased; and he was so much amused by his daughter's superiority to the vulgar festivity
     of parties, that he almost gave in to the idea of refurnishing the drawing-room to suit
     Lucilla's complexion. He rubbed his hands once more over the fire, and indulged in a little
     laugh all by himself over that original idea. "So it is Evenings she means to have?" said the
     Doctor; and, to be sure, nothing could be more faded than the curtains, and there were bits of
     the carpet in which the pattern was scarcely discernible. So that, on the whole, up to this
     point there seemed to be a reasonable prospect that Lucilla would have everything her own
     way.</t:p>
</t:div>