<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head><t:hi>Chapter the Last</t:hi></t:head>
<t:p>This was the hardest personal encounter which Miss Marjoribanks was subjected to; but when
     the news circulated in Grange Lane there was first a dead pause of incredulity and amazement,
     and then such a commotion as could be compared to nothing except a sudden squall at sea. People
     who had been going peaceably on their way at one moment, thinking of nothing, were to be seen
     the next buffeted by the wind of Rumour and tossed about on the waves of Astonishment. To speak
     less metaphorically (but there are moments of emotion so overwhelming and unprecedented that
     they can be dealt with only in the language of metaphor), every household in Grange Lane, and
     at least half of the humbler houses in Grove Street, and a large proportion of the other
     dwellings in Carlingford, were nearly as much agitated about Lucilla's marriage as if it had
     been a daughter of their own. Now that he was recalled to their minds in such a startling way,
     people began to recollect with greater and greater distinctness that "there was once a cousin,
     you know," and to remember him in his youth, and even in his boyhood, when he had been much in
     Carlingford. And by degrees the Grange Lane people came to see that they knew a great deal
     about Tom, and to remind each other of the abrupt end of his last visit, and of his going to
     India immediately after, and of many a little circumstance in Lucilla's looks and general
     demeanour which this <t:hi>dénouement</t:hi> seemed to make plain.</t:p>
<t:p>Lady Richmond, though she was a little annoyed about Mr Ashburton's disappointment, decided
     at once that it was best to ignore that altogether, and was quite glad to think that she had
     always said there must be somebody. "She bore up a great deal too well against all her little
     disappointments," she said, when discussing the matter. "When a girl does that one may be
     always sure there is somebody behind—and you know I always said, when she was not just talking
     or busy, that there was a preoccupation in Lucilla's eye." This was a speech which Mrs
     Woodburn, as might have been expected, made a great deal of—but, notwithstanding, it had its
     effect in Grange Lane. Going back upon their recollections, most people were able to verify the
     fact that Miss Marjoribanks had borne her little disappointments very well, and that there was
     sometimes a preoccupation in her eye. The first was beyond dispute; and as for the second, it
     was a thing which did not require a very great stretch of imagination to suppose—and the
     unexpected sensation of finding at last a distinct bit of romance to round off Lucilla's
     history, was pleasant to most people. If she had married Mr Ashburton, it would have been (so
     far as anything connected with Miss Marjoribanks could be) a commonplace conclusion. But now
     she had upset everybody's theories, and made an altogether original and unlooked-for ending for
     herself, which was a thing to have been expected from Lucilla, though nobody could have
     foreseen the special turn which her originality would take.</t:p>
<t:p>And nothing could have come in more appropriately after the election, when people felt the
     blank of ordinary existence just beginning to settle down upon them again. It kept all
     Carlingford in conversation for a longer time than might be supposed in these busy days; for
     there was not only the fact itself, but what <t:hi>they</t:hi> were to do, and where they were to
     go, to be discussed. And then Tom himself began to be visible about Grange Lane; and he had
     heaps of Indian things among his baggage, and recollected so affectionately the people he used
     to know, and dispensed his curiosities with such a liberal hand, that the heart of Carlingford
     was touched. He had a way of miscalculating distances, as has been said, and exercised some
     kind of magnetic influence upon all the little tables and unsteady articles of furniture, which
     somehow seemed to fall if he but looked at them. But, on the other hand, John Brown, who had in
     hand the sale of Marchbank, found him the most straightforward and clear-headed of clients. The
     two had all the preliminaries arranged before any other intending purchaser had time to turn
     the matter over in his mind. And Tom had the old brick house full of workmen before anybody
     knew it was his. When the summer had fairly commenced he went over and lived there, and saw to
     everything, and went so far as to fit up the drawing-room with the same well-remembered tint of
     pale green which had been found ten years ago to suit so well with Lucilla's complexion. It was
     perhaps a little hazardous to repeat the experiment, for green, as everybody knows, is a very
     trying colour; but it was a most touching and triumphant proof that to Tom, at least, Lucilla
     was as young as ever, and had not even begun to go off. It was Mr Holden who supplied
     everything, and he was naturally proud of the trust thus reposed in him, and formed the very
     highest opinion of his customer; and it was probably from his enthusiasm on this subject that
     might be traced the commencement of that singular revolution of sentiment in Grange Lane, which
     suddenly woke up all in an instant without knowing how, to recognise the existence of Mr
     Marjoribanks, and to forget the undue familiarity which had ventured upon the name of Tom.</t:p>
<t:p>When Lucilla went over in the most proper and decorous way, under the charge of Aunt Jemima,
     to see her future home, the sight of the village at Marchbank was sweet to her eyes. That it
     was not by any means sweet to any other sense did but enhance Miss Marjoribanks's satisfaction.
     "A year after this!" she said to herself, and her bosom swelled; for to realise clearly how
     much she had it in her power to do for her fellow-creatures was indeed a pleasure. It occupied
     her a great deal more than the gardens did, which Tom was arranging so carefully, or even than
     the kitchen, which she inspected for the information of Nancy; for at that time the
     drawing-room was not fitted up. Lucilla's eyes went over the moral wilderness with the
     practical glance of a statesman, and, at the same time, the sanguine enthusiasm of a
     philanthropist. She saw of what it was capable, and already, in imagination, the desert
     blossomed like a rose before her beneficent steps, and the sweet sense of well-doing rose in
     her breast. And then to see Tom at Marchbank was to see his qualities. He was not a man of
     original mind, nor one who would be likely to take a bold initiative. Considering all the
     circumstances, that was a gift which was scarcely to be wished for; but he had a perfect genius
     for carrying out a suggestion, which, it need scarcely be added, was a faculty that,
     considering the good fortune which Providence had so long reserved for him, made his character
     as near perfect as humanity permits. Lucilla felt, indeed, as she drove away, that approbation
     of Providence which a well-regulated mind, in possession of most things which it desires, might
     be expected to feel. Other delusive fancies <t:hi>had</t:hi> one time and another swept across her
     horizon; but after all there could be no doubt that only thus could she have been fitly mated,
     and full development afforded to all the resources of her spirit. As the carriage passed the
     Firs she sighed and put down her veil with a natural sentiment; but still she felt it was for
     the best. The Member for Carlingford must be a busy man, occupied about his own affairs, and
     with little leisure for doing good to his fellow-creatures except in a parliamentary way. "And
     there are members for counties as well," Lucilla, in the depths of her soul, said to herself.
     Then there rose up before her a vision of a parish saved, a village reformed, a county
     reorganised, and a triumphant election at the end, the recompense and crown of all, which
     should put the government of the country itself, to a certain extent, into competent hands.
     This was the celestial vision which floated before Miss Marjoribanks's eyes as she drove into
     Carlingford, and recollected, notwithstanding occasional moments of discouragement, the
     successful work she had done, and the good she had achieved in her native town. It was but the
     natural culmination of her career that transferred her from the town to the county, and held
     out to her the glorious task of serving her generation in a twofold way, among the poor and
     among the rich. If a momentary sigh for Grange Lane, which was about to lose her, breathed from
     her lips, it was sweetened by a smile of satisfaction for the county which was about to gain
     her. The lighter preface of life was past, and Lucilla had the comfort of feeling that its
     course had been full of benefit to her fellow-creatures; and now a larger sphere opened before
     her feet, and Miss Marjoribanks felt that the arrangements of Providence were on the whole full
     of discrimination, and that all was for the best, and she had not lived in vain.</t:p>
<t:p>This being the case, perhaps it is not necessary to go much further into detail. Mr Ashburton
     never said anything about his disappointment, as might have been expected. When he did mention
     that eventful day at all, he said that he had happened accidentally to be calling on Miss
     Marjoribanks the day her cousin came home, and saw at once the state of affairs; and he sent
     her a very nice present when she was married. After all, it was not her fault. If Providence
     had ordained that it was to be Tom, how could Lucilla fly in the face of such an ordinance?
     and, at the same time, there was to both parties the consoling reflection, that whatever might
     happen to them as individuals, the best man had been chosen for Carlingford, which was an
     abiding benefit to all concerned.</t:p>
<t:p>Under all the circumstances, it was to be looked for that Miss Marjoribanks's spirits should
     improve even in her mourning, and that the tenacity with which she clung to her father's house
     should yield to the changed state of affairs. This was so much the case, that Lucilla took
     heart to show Mrs Rider all over it, and to point out all the conveniences to her, and even,
     with a sigh, to call her attention to the bell which hung over the Doctor's bedroom door. "It
     breaks my heart to hear it," Miss Marjoribanks said; "but still Dr Rider will find it a great
     convenience." It was a very nice house; and so the new Doctor's wife, who had not been used to
     anything so spacious, was very willing to say; and instead of feeling any grudge against the
     man who was thus in every respect to take her father's place, so sweet are the softening
     influences of time and personal well-being, that Lucilla, who was always so good-natured, made
     many little arrangements for their comfort, and even <t:hi>left the carpets</t:hi>, which was a
     thing nobody could have expected of her, and which Aunt Jemima did not scruple to condemn.
     "They are all fitted," Lucilla said, "and if they were taken up they would be spoiled; and
     besides, we could have no use for them at Marchbank." It was a very kind thing to do, and
     simplified matters very much for the Riders, who were not rich. But Aunt Jemima, in the
     background, could not but pull Lucilla's sleeve, and mutter indistinct remarks about a
     valuation, which nobody paid any particular attention to at the moment, as there were so many
     things much more important to think of and to do.</t:p>
<t:p>And the presents that came pouring in from every quarter were enough to have made up for
     twenty carpets. Lucilla got testimonials, so to speak, from every side, and all Carlingford
     interested itself, as has been said, in all the details of the marriage, as if it had been a
     daughter of its own. "And yet it is odd to think that, after all, I shall never be anything but
     Lucilla Marjoribanks!" she said, in the midst of all her triumphs, with a certain pensiveness.
     If there could be any name that would have suited her better, or is surrounded by more touching
     associations, we leave it to her other friends to find out; for at the moment of taking leave
     of her, there is something consoling to our own mind in the thought that Lucilla can now suffer
     no change of name. As she was in the first freshness of her youthful daring, when she rose like
     the sun upon the chaos of society in Carlingford, so is she now as she goes forth into the
     County to carry light and progress there. And in this reflection there is surely comfort for
     the few remaining malcontents, whom not even his own excellent qualities, and Lucilla's
     happiness, can reconcile to the fact that after all it was Tom.</t:p>
</t:div>