<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fern's Hollow,
                              by Hesba Stretton.</title><author>Stretton, Hesba [pseud Sara Smith]
                         (1832-1911).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER XV.
RENEWED CONFLICT.
'I'm a murderer, Miss Anne,' said Martha, with a look of settled despair upon
                         her face, on the evening of the next day.
She had been sitting all the weary hours since morning with her face buried
                         in her hands, hearing and heeding no one, until Miss Anne came and sat down
                         beside her, speaking to her in her own kind and gentle tones. Upon a table
                         in the corner of the cabin lay the little form of the dead child, covered
                         with a white cloth. The old grandfather was crouching over the fire,
                         moaning and laughing by turns; and Stephen was again absent, rambling upon
                         the snowy uplands.
'And for murderers there is pardon,' said Miss Anne softly.
'Oh, I never thought I wanted pardon,' cried Martha; 'I always felt I'd done
                         my duty better than any of the girls about here. But I've killed little
                         Nan; and now I remember how cross I used to be when nobody was nigh, till
                         she grew quite timmer-some of me. Everybody knows I've murdered her; and
                         now it doesn't signify how bad I am. I shall never get over that.'
'Martha,' said Miss Anne, 'you are not so guilty of the child's death as my
                         uncle, who ought to have had the pit bricked over safely when it was no
                         longer in use. But you say you never thought you wanted pardon. Surely you
                         feel your need of it now.'
'But God will never forgive me now,' replied Martha hopelessly; 'I see how
                         wicked I have been, but the chance is gone by. God will not forgive me now;
                         nor Stephen.'
'We will not talk about Stephen,' said Miss Anne; 'but I will tell you about
                         God. When He gave His commandments to mankind that they might obey them, He
                         proclaimed His own name at the same time. Listen to His name, Martha: "The
                         Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in
                         goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity,
                         transgression, and sin." If you would not go to Him for mercy when you did
                         not feel your need of it, He was keeping it for you against this time;
                         saving and treasuring it up for you, "that He might show the exceeding
                         riches of His grace in His kindness towards us, through Christ Jesus." He
                         is waiting to pardon your iniquity, for Christ's sake. Do you wish to be
                         forgiven now? Do you feel that you are a sinful girl, Martha?'
'I have thought of nothing else all day long,' whispered Martha; 'I have
                         helped to kill little Nan by my sins.'
'Yes,' said Miss Anne mournfully; 'if, like Stephen, you had opened your
                         heart to the gentle teaching of the Holy Spirit, if you had looked to
                         Jesus, trusted in Him, and followed Him, this grief would not have come
                         upon you and upon all of us. For Bess would not have persuaded you to leave
                         your own duties, and little Nan would have been alive still.'
'Oh, I knew I'd killed her!' cried a voice behind them; and, looking round,
                         Miss Anne saw that the door had been softly opened, and Bess had crept in
                         unheard. Her face was swollen with weeping, and she stood wringing her
                         hands, as she cast a fearful glance at the white-covered table in the
                         corner.
'Come here, Bess,' said Miss Anne; and the girl crept to them, and sat down
                         on the ground at their feet. Miss Anne talked long with them about little
                         Nan's death, until they shed many tears in true contrition of heart for
                         their sinfulness; and when they appeared to feel their own utter
                         helplessness, she explained to them, in such simple and easy language as
                         Bess could understand, how they could obtain salvation through faith in the
                         Lord Jesus Christ. After which they all knelt down; and Miss Anne prayed
                         earnestly for the weeping and heart-broken girls, who, as yet, hardly knew
                         how they could frame any prayers for themselves.
When Miss Anne left the cabin the night was quite dark but the snow which lay
                         unmelted on the mountains showed their outlines plainly with a pale
                         gleaming of light though the sky was overcast with more snow-clouds. Her
                         heart was full of sadness for Stephen, who was wandering, no one knew
                         whither, among the snowdrifts on the solitary plains. She knew that he must
                         be passing through a terrible trial and temptation, but she could do
                         nothing for him; her voice could not reach him, nor her eye tell him by a
                         silent look how deeply she felt for him. Yet Miss Anne knew who it is that
                         possesseth 'the shields of the earth,' and in her earnest thanksgiving to
                         God for Martha and Bess Thompson, she prayed fervently that the boy might
                         be shielded and sheltered in his great sorrow, and that when he was tried
                         he might come forth as gold.
All the day long, Stephen, instead of going to his work in the pit, had been
                         rambling, without aim or purpose, over the dreary uplands; here and there
                         stretching himself upon the wiry heath, where the sun had dried away the
                         snow, and hiding his face from the light, while he gave way to an anguish
                         of grief, and broke the deep silence with a loud and very bitter cry. It
                         was death, sudden death, he was lamenting. Only yesterday morning little
                         Nan was clinging strongly to his neck, and covering his face with merry
                         kisses; and every now and then he felt as if he was only dreaming, and he
                         started down towards home, as though he could not believe that those tender
                         arms were stiffened and that rosy mouth still in death. But before he could
                         run many paces the truth was borne in upon his aching heart that she was
                         surely dead; and never more in this life would he see and speak to her, or
                         listen to her lisping tongue. Little Nan, dearest of all earthly
                         things,—perhaps dearer to him in the infancy of his Christian life than the
                         Saviour Himself,—was removed from him so far that she was already a
                         stranger, and he knew nothing of her.
Towards evening he found himself, in his aimless wandering, drawing near to
                         Fern's Hollow, where she had lived. The outer shell of the new house was
                         built up, the three rooms above and below, with the little dairy and
                         coal-shed beside them, and Stephen, even in his misery, was glad of the
                         shelter of the blank walls from the cutting blast of the north wind; for he
                         felt that he could not go home to the cabin where the dead child—no longer
                         darling little Nan—was lying. Poor Stephen! He sat down on a heap of bricks
                         upon the new hearth, where no household fire had ever been kindled; and,
                         while the snow-flakes drifted in upon him unheeded, he buried his face
                         again in his hands, and went on thinking, as he had been doing all day. He
                         would never care to come back now to Fern's Hollow. No! he would get away
                         to some far-off country, where he should never more hear the master's name
                         spoken. Let him keep the place, he thought, and let it be a curse to him,
                         for he had bought it with a child's blood. If the law gave him back Fern's
                         Hollow, it would not avenge little Nan's death; and he had no power. But
                         the master was a murderer; and Stephen knelt down on the desolate hearth,
                         where no prayer had ever been uttered, and prayed God that the sin and
                         punishment of murder might rest upon his enemy.
Was it consolation that filled Stephen's heart when he rose from his knees?
                         It seemed as if his spirit had grown suddenly harder, and in some measure
                         stronger. He did not feel afraid now of going down to the cabin, where the
                         little lifeless corpse was stretched out; and he strode away down the hill
                         with rapid steps. When the thought of Martha, and his grandfather, and Miss
                         Anne crossed his mind, it was with no gentle, tender emotion, but with a
                         strange feeling that he no longer cared for them. All his love was gone
                         with little Nan. Only the thought of the master, and the terrible reckoning
                         that lay before him, sent a thrill through his heart. 'I shall be there at
                         the judgment,' he muttered half aloud, looking up to the cold, cloudy sky,
                         almost as if he expected to see the sign of the coming of the Lord. But
                         there was no sign there; and, after gazing for a minute or two, he turned
                         in the direction of the cabin, where he could see a glimmer of the light
                         within through the chinks of the door and shutter.
Bess and Martha were still sitting hand in hand as Miss Anne had left them;
                         but they both started up as Stephen entered, pale and ghastly from his long
                         conflict with grief and temptation on the hills. He was come home
                         conquered, though he did not know it; and the expression of his face was
                         one of hatred and vengeance, instead of sorrow and love. He bade Black Bess
                         to be off out of his sight in a voice so changed and harsh, that both the
                         girls were frightened, and Martha stole away tremblingly with her. He was
                         alone then, with his sleeping grandfather on the bed, and the dead child
                         lying in the corner, from which he carefully averted his eyes; when there
                         came a quiet tap at the door, and, before he could answer, it was slowly
                         opened, and the master stepped into the cabin. He stood before the boy,
                         looking into his white face in silence, and when he spoke his voice was
                         very husky and low.
'My lad,' he said, 'I'm very sorry for you; and I'll have the pit bricked
                         over at once. It had slipped my memory, Stephen; but Martha knew of it, and
                         she ought to have taken better care of the child. It is no fault of mine;
                         or it is only partly my fault, at any rate. But, whether or no, I'm come to
                         tell you I'm willing to bear the expenses of the funeral in reason; and
                         here's a sovereign for you besides, my lad.'
The master held out a glittering sovereign in his hand, but Stephen pushed it
                         away, and, seizing his arm firmly, drew him, reluctant as he was, to the
                         white-covered table in the corner. There was no look of pain upon the pale,
                         placid little features before them; but there was an awful stillness, and
                         all the light of life was gone out of the open eyes, which were fixed into
                         an upward gaze. The Bible, which Stephen had not looked for that morning,
                         had been used instead of a cushion, and the motionless head lay upon
                         it.
'That was little Nan yesterday,' said Stephen hoarsely; 'she is gone to tell
                         God all about you. You robbed us of our own home; and you've been the death
                         of little Nan. God's curse will be upon you. It's no use my cursing; I can
                         do nothing; but God can punish you better than me. A while ago I thought
                         I'd get away to some other country where I'd never hear of you; but I'll
                         wait now, if I'm almost clemmed to death, till I see what God will do at
                         you. Take your money. You've robbed me of all I love, but I won't take from
                         you what you love. I'll only wait here till I see what God can do.'
He loosed his grasp then, and opened the door wide. The master muttered a few
                         words indistinctly, but he did not linger in the cabin beside that awful
                         little corpse. The night had already deepened into intense darkness; and
                         Stephen, standing at the door to listen, thought, with a quick tingling
                         through all his veins, that perhaps the master would himself fall down the
                         open pit. But no, he passed on securely; and Martha, coming in shortly
                         afterwards, ventured to remark that she had just brushed against the master
                         in the lane, and wondered where he was going to at that time of night.
Miss Anne came to see Stephen the next day; but, though he seemed to listen
                         to her respectfully, she felt that she had lost her influence over him; and
                         she could do nothing for him but intercede with God that the Holy Spirit,
                         who only can enter into our inmost souls and waken there every memory,
                         would in His own good time recall to Stephen's heart all the lessons of
                         love and forgiveness he had been learning, and enable him to overcome the
                         evil spirit that had gained the mastery over him.
All the people in Botfield wished to attend little Nan's funeral, but Stephen
                         would not consent to it. At first he said only Tim and himself should
                         accompany the tiny coffin to the churchyard at Longville; but Martha
                         implored so earnestly to go with them, that he was compelled to relent. The
                         coffin was placed in a little cart, drawn by one of the hill-ponies, and
                         led slowly by Tim; while Stephen and Martha walked behind, the latter
                         weeping many humble and repentant tears, as she thought sorrowfully of
                         little Nan; but Stephen with a set and gloomy face, and a heart that
                         pondered only upon the calamities that should overtake his enemy.
</div></body></text></TEI>