<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fern's Hollow,
                              by Hesba Stretton.</title><author>Stretton, Hesba [pseud Sara Smith]
                         (1832-1911).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1864</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="23">
CHAPTER XXIII.
THE HOME RESTORED.
Three months later in the year, when the new house at Fern's Hollow was quite
                         finished, with its dairy and coal-shed, and a stable put up at Mr.
                         Lockwood's desire, a large party assembled within the walls. Martha had
                         been diligently occupied all the week in a grand cleaning down; and Tim and
                         Stephen had been equally busy in clearing away the litter left by the
                         builders, and in restoring the garden to some order. They had been obliged
                         to contrive some temporary seats for their visitors, for the old furniture
                         had not yet been brought up from the cinder-hill cabin; and the only
                         painful thoughts Martha had were the misgiving of its extreme scantiness in
                         their house with six rooms. The pasture before the cottage was now securely
                         enclosed, and the wild ponies neighed over the hedge in vain at the sight
                         of the clear, cool pool where they had been used to quench their thirst;
                         and behind the house there was a plantation of tiny fir-trees bending to
                         and fro in the wind, which they were to resist as they grew larger. Every
                         place was in perfect order; and the front room, which was almost grand
                         enough for a parlour, was beautifully decorated with flowers in honour of
                         the expected guests, who had sent word that they should visit Fern's Hollow
                         that afternoon.
They could be seen far away from the window of the upper storey, which,
                         rising above the brow of the hill behind, commanded a wide view of the
                         mountain plains. They were coming on horseback across the almost pathless
                         uplands; dear Miss Anne, with Mr. Lockwood riding beside her; and a little
                         way behind them the lord of the manor and his young wife, who was no other
                         than Miss Lockwood herself. They greeted Stephen and Martha with many
                         smiles and words of congratulation; and when they were seated in the
                         decorated room, with the door and window opened upon the beautiful
                         landscape, Mr. Lockwood bade them come and sit down with them; while Tim
                         helped the groom to put up the horses in the stable.
'My boy,' said Mr. Lockwood, 'our business is finished at last. Mr. Thomas
                         Wyley will not try his right to Fern's Hollow by law; but we have agreed to
                         give him the £15 paid to your grandfather, and also to pay to him all the
                         actual cost of the work done here. Miss Anne and I have had a quarrel on
                         the subject, but she consents that I shall pay that as a mark of my esteem
                         for you, and my old servant your mother. Mr. Danesford intends to make a
                         gift to you of the pasture and plantation, which were an encroachment upon
                         the manor. And now I want you to take my advice into the bargain. Jackson
                         wants to come here, and offers a rent of £20 a year for the place. Will you
                         let him have it till you are old enough to manage it properly yourself,
                         Stephen?'
'Yes, if you please, sir,' replied Stephen, in some perplexity; for he and
                         Martha had quite concluded that, they should come and live there again
                         themselves.
'Jackson will make a tidy little farm of it for you,' continued Mr. Lockwood.
                         'My daughter proposes taking Martha into her service, and putting her into
                         the way of learning dairy-work, and many other things of which she is now
                         ignorant. Are you willing, Martha?'
'Oh yes, sir!' said Martha, with a look of admiration at young Mrs.
                         Danesford.
'In this case, Stephen,' Mr. Lockwood went on, 'you will have a yearly income
                         of £20, and we would like to hear what you will do with it?'
'There's grandfather,' said Stephen diffidently.
'Right, my boy!' cried Mr. Lockwood, with a smile of satisfaction; 'well,
                         Miss Anne thinks he would be very comfortable with Mrs. Thompson, and she
                         would be glad of a little money with him. But he cannot live much longer,
                         Stephen; he is very aged, and the doctor thinks he will hardly get over the
                         autumn. So we had better settle what shall be done after grandfather is
                         gone.'
'Sir,' said Stephen, 'I think Martha should have some good of grandmother's
                         work, if she is only a girl. So hadn't the rent better be saved up for her
                         till I'm old enough to come and manage the farm myself?'
Every face in the room glowed with approbation of Stephen's suggestion; and
                         Martha flushed crimson at the very thought of possessing so much money; and
                         visions of future greatness, more than her grandmother had foreseen, passed
                         before her mind.
'Why, Martha will be quite an heiress!' said Mr. Lockwood. 'So she is
                         provided for, and grandfather. And what do you intend to do with yourself,
                         Stephen, till you come back here?'
'I'm strong enough to go back to the pit,' replied Stephen bravely, though
                         inwardly he shrank from it; but how else could the rent of Fern's Hollow be
                         laid by for Martha? 'Now Miss Anne has raised the wages, I should get eight
                         shillings a week, and more as I grow older. I shall do for myself very
                         nicely, thank you, sir; and maybe I could lodge with grandfather at Mrs.
                         Thompson's.'
'No,' said Miss Anne, in her gentle voice, the sweetest voice in the world to
                         Stephen, now little Nan's was silent; 'Stephen is my dear friend, and he
                         must let me act the part of a friend towards him. I wish to send him to
                         live with a good man whom I know, the manager of one of the great works at
                         Netley, where he may learn everything that will be necessary to become my
                         bailiff. I shall want a true, trustworthy agent to look after my interests
                         here, and in a few years Stephen will be old enough to do this for me. He
                         shall attend a good school for a few hours daily, to gain a fitting
                         education; and then what servant could I find more faithful, more true, and
                         more loving than my dear friend Stephen? He can come back here then, if he
                         chooses, and perhaps have Martha for his housekeeper, in their old home at
                         Fern's Hollow.'
'Oh, Miss Anne!' cried Stephen, 'I cannot bear it! May I really be your
                         servant all my life?' and the boy's voice was lost in sobs.
'Come, Stephen,' said the lord of the manor, 'I want you to show us some of
                         your old haunts on the hills. If Miss Anne had not formed a better plan, I
                         should have proposed making you my gamekeeper; for Jones has been telling
                         me about the grouse last year. By the way, if I had thought it would be any
                         pleasure to you, I should have dismissed him from my service for his share
                         in this business; but I knew you would be for begging him in again, so I
                         only told him pretty strongly what a sneak I thought him.'
They went out then across the uplands, a sunny ramble, to all Stephen's
                         favourite places. And it happened that when they reached the solitary
                         yew-tree near which Snip was buried, all the rest strolled on, and left
                         Stephen and Miss Anne alone. Before them, down at the foot of the
                         mountains, there stretched a wide plain many miles across, beautiful with
                         woods and streams; and on the far horizon there hung a light cloud that was
                         always to be seen there, the index of those great works where Stephen was
                         to dwell for some years. Near to them they could discern, in the clear
                         atmosphere, the spires and towers of the county town, where Black Thompson,
                         who had tempted him on these hills, was now imprisoned for many years; and
                         below, though hidden from their sight, was Botfield and the cinder-hill
                         cabin. A band of bilberry-gatherers was coming down the hill with songs and
                         shouts of laughter; and the frightened flocks of sheep stood motionless on
                         the hillocks, ready to flee away in a moment at their approach. Both Miss
                         Anne and Stephen felt a crowd of thoughts, sorrowful and happy, come
                         thronging to their minds.
'Stephen,' said Miss Anne solemnly, 'our Lord says, "When ye shall have done
                         all those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable
                         servants: we have done that which was our duty to do."'
'Yes, Miss Anne,' said Stephen, looking up inquiringly into his teacher's
                         face.
'My dear boy,' she continued, 'are you taking care to say to yourself, "I am
                         an unprofitable servant"?'
'I have not done all those things which are commanded me,' he said simply and
                         earnestly; 'I've done nothing of myself yet. It's you that have taught me,
                         Miss Anne; and God has helped me to learn. I'm afeared partly of going away
                         to Netley; but if you're not there to keep me right, God is
                         everywhere.'
'Stephen,' Miss Anne said, 'you have forgiven all your enemies: Tim, who is
                         now your friend, and the gamekeeper, Black Thompson, and my poor uncle;
                         when you are saying the Lord's Prayer, do you feel as if you should be
                         satisfied for our Father to forgive you your trespasses in the same measure
                         and in the same manner as you have forgiven their trespasses against
                         you?'
'Oh no!' cried Stephen, in a tone of some alarm.
'Tell me why not.'
'It was a rather hard thing for me,' he said; 'it was very hard at first, and
                         I had to be persuaded to it; and every now and then I felt as if I'd take
                         the forgiveness back. I shouldn't like to feel as if our Father found it a
                         hard thing, or repented of it afterwards.'
'No,' answered Miss Anne. 'He is a God "ready to pardon;" and when He has
                         bestowed forgiveness, His "gifts and calling are without repentance." But
                         there is something more, Stephen. Do you not seem in your own mind to know
                         them, and remember them most, by their unkindness and sins towards you?
                         When you think of Black Thompson, is it not more as one who has been your
                         enemy than one whom you love without any remembrance of his faults? And you
                         recollect my uncle as him who drove you away from your own home, and was
                         the cause of little Nan's death. Their offences are forgiven fully, but not
                         forgotten.'
'Can I forget?' murmured Stephen.
'No,' she replied; 'but do you not see that we clothe our enemies with their
                         faults against us? Should our Father do so, should we stand before Him
                         bearing in His sight all our sins, would that forgiveness content us,
                         Stephen?'
'Oh no!' he cried again. 'Tell me, Miss Anne, what will He do for me besides
                         forgiving me?'
'Look, Stephen,' she replied, pointing to the distant sky where the sun was
                         going down amid purple clouds, and bidding him turn to the grey horizon
                         where the sun had risen in the morning; 'listen: "As far as the east is
                         from the west, so far hath He removed our transgressions from us." And
                         again: "He will turn again, He will have compassion upon us; He will subdue
                         our iniquities; and Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the
                         sea." And again: "For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and
                         their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more." This is the
                         forgiveness of our Father, Stephen.'
'Oh, how different to mine!' cried Stephen, hiding his face in his hands.
'Yet,' said Miss Anne, 'you may claim the promise made to us by our Lord: "If
                         ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive
                         you," in a far richer measure, with infinite long-suffering, and a
                         multitude of tender mercies.'
'Lord, forgive me, for Jesus Christ's sake!' murmured Stephen.
But the dusk was gathering, and the others were returning to them under the
                         old yew-tree, for there was the long ride over the hills to Danesford, and
                         the time for parting was come. The day was done; and on the morrow new work
                         must be entered upon. The path of the commandments had yet to be trodden,
                         step by step, through temptation and conflict, and weakness and weariness,
                         until the end was reached.
Stephen felt something of this as he walked home for the last time to the
                         cinder-hill cabin; and, taking down the old Bible covered with green baize,
                         read aloud to his grandfather and Martha the chapter his father had taught
                         him on his death-bed; bending his head in deep and humble prayer after he
                         had read the last verse: 'Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father in
                         heaven is perfect.'
THE END.
</div></body></text></TEI>