
SCENE I
IT was an August evening, still and cloudy after a day unusually chilly for the time
     of year. Now, about sunset, the temperature was warmer than it had been in the morning, and the
     departing sun was forcing its way through the clouds, breaking up their level masses into
     delicate latticework of golds and greys. The last radiant light was on the wheat-fields under
     the hill, and on the long chalk hill itself. Against that glowing background lay the village,
     already engulfed by the advancing shadow. All the nearer trees, which the daylight had mingled
     in one green monotony, stood out sharp and distinct, each in its own plane, against the hill.
      Each natural object seemed to gain a new accent, a more
     individual beauty, from the vanishing and yet lingering sunlight.
An elderly labourer was walking along the road which led to the village. To his right lay the
     allotment gardens just beginning to be alive with figures, and the voices of men and children.
     Beyond them, far ahead, rose the square tower of the church; to his left was the hill, and
     straight in front of him the village, with its veils of smoke lightly brushed over the trees,
     and its lines of cottages climbing the chalk steeps behind it. His eye as he walked took in a
     number of such facts as life had trained it to notice. Once he stopped to bend over a fence, to
     pluck a stalk or two of oats. He examined them carefully; then he threw back his head and
     sniffed the air, looking all round the sky meanwhile. Yes, the season had been late and harsh,
     but the fine weather was coming at last. Two or three days' warmth now would ripen even the
     oats, let alone the wheat.

Well, he was glad. He wanted the harvest over. It would, perhaps, be his last harvest at
     Clinton Magna, where he had worked, man and boy, for fifty-six years come Michaelmas. His last
     harvest! A curious pleasure stirred the man's veins as he thought of it, a pleasure in expected
     change, which seemed to bring back the pulse of youth, to loosen a little the yoke of those
     iron years that had perforce aged and bent him; though, for sixty-two, he was still hale and
     strong.
Things had all come together. Here was “Muster” Hill, the farmer he had worked for these
     seventeen years, dying of a sudden, with a carbuncle on the neck, and the farm to be given up
     at Michaelmas. He—John Bolderfield—had been working on for the widow; but, in his opinion, she
     was “nobbut a caselty sort of body,” and the sooner she and her children were taken off to
     Barnet, where they were to live with her mother, the less she'd cost them as had the looking
     after her. As for the crops, they wouldn't pay the debts; not they. And there
      was no one after the farm—“nary one”—and didn't seem like to
     be. That would make another farm on Muster Forrest's hands. Well, and a good job. Landlords
     must be “took down;” and there was plenty of work going on the railway just now for those that
     were turned off.
He was too old for the railway, though, and he might have found it hard to get fresh work if
     he had been staying at Clinton. But he was not staying. Poor Eliza wouldn't last more than a
     few days; a week or two at most, and he was not going to keep on the cottage after he'd buried
     her.
Aye, poor Eliza! She was his sister-in-law, the widow of his second brother. He had been his
     brother's lodger during the greater part of his working life, and since Tom's death he had
     stayed on with Eliza. She and he suited each other, and the “worritin' childer” had all gone
     away years since and left them in peace. He didn't believe Eliza knew where any of them were,
     except Mary,
      “married over to Luton”—and Jim, and Jim's Louisa. And a good
     riddance too. There was not one of them knew how to keep a shilling when they'd got one. Still,
     it was a bit lonesome for Eliza now, with no one but Jim's Louisa to look after her.
He grew rather downhearted as he trudged along, thinking. She and he had stuck together “a
     many year.” There would be nobody left for him to go along with when she was gone. There was
     his niece Bessie Costrell and her husband, and there was his silly old cousin Widow Waller. He
     dared say they'd both of them want him to live with them. At the thought a grin crossed his
     ruddy face. They both knew about it—that was what it was. And he wouldn't live
     with either of them, not he. Not yet a bit, anyway. All the same, he had a fondness for Bessie
     and her husband. Bessie was always very civil to him—he chuckled again—and if
     anything had to be done with it, while he was five miles off at Frampton on a job
      of work that had been offered him, he didn't know but he'd as
     soon trust Isaac Costrell and Bessie as anybody else. You might call Isaac rather a fool, what
     with his religion, and “extemp'ry prayin', an' that,” but all the same Bolderfield thought of
     him with a kind of uneasy awe. If ever there was a man secure of the next world it was Isaac
     Costrell. His temper, perhaps, was “nassty,” which might pull him down a little when the last
     account came to be made up; and it could not be said that his elder children had come to much,
     for all his piety. But, on the whole, Bolderfield only wished he stood as well with the powers
     talked about in chapel every Sunday as Isaac did.
As for Bessie, she had been a wasteful woman all her life, with never a bit of money put by,
     and never a good dress to her back. But, “Lor bless yer, there was a many worse folk nor
     Bessie.” She wasn't one of your sour people—she could make you laugh; she had a merry heart.
     Many a pleasant evening had he passed chatting with her and Isaac;
      and whenever they cooked anything good there was always a bite
     for him. Yes, Bessie had been a good niece to him; and if he trusted any one he dared say he'd
     trust them.
“Well, how's Eliza, Muster Bolderfield?” said a woman who passed him in the village
     street.
He replied, and then went his way, sobered again, dreading to find himself at the cottage
     once more, and in the stuffy upper room with the bed and the dying woman. Yet he was not really
     sad, not here at least, out in the air and the sun. There was always a thought in his mind, a
     fact in his consciousness, which stood between him and sadness. It had so stood for a long,
     long time. He walked through the village to-night in spite of Eliza and his sixty years with a
     free bearing and a confident glance to right and left. He knew, and the village knew, that he
     was not as other men.
He passed the village green with its pond, and began to climb a lane leading to the hill. Half-way
      up stood two cottages sideways. Phloxes and marigolds grew
     untidily about their doorways, and straggly roses, starved a little by the chalk soil, looked
     in at their latticed windows. They were, however, comparatively modern and comfortable, with
     two bedrooms above and two living-rooms below, far superior to the older and more picturesque
     cottages in the main street.
John went in softly, put down his straw dinner-bag, and took off his heavy boots. Then he
     opened a door in the wall of the kitchen, and gently climbed the stairs.
A girl was sitting by the bed. When she saw his whitish head and red face emerge against the
     darkness of the stair-hole, she put up her finger for silence.
John crept in and came to look at the patient. His eyes grew round and staring, his colour
     changed.
“Is she a-goin'?” he said, with evident excitement.
Jim's Louisa shook her head. She was rather a
      stupid girl, heavy and round-faced, but she had nursed her
     grandmother well.
“No; she's asleep. Muster Drew's been here, and she dropped off while he was a-talkin' to
     her.”
Mr. Drew was the Congregational minister.
“Did she send for him?”
“Yes; she said she felt her feet a-gettin' cold, and I must run. But I don't believe she's no
     worse.”
John stood looking down, ruefully. Suddenly the figure in the bed turned.
“John,” said a comparatively strong voice which made Bolderfield start—“John, Muster Drew
     says you'd oughter put it in the bank. You'll be a fool if yer don't, 'ee says.”
The old woman's pinched face emerged from the sheets, looking up at him. Bluish patches
     showed here and there on the drawn white skin; there was a great change since the morning, but
     the eyes were still alive.
John was silent a moment, one corner of his
      mouth twitching, as though what she had said struck him in a
     humorous light.
“Well, I don't know as I mind much what 'ee says, 'Liza.”
“Sit down.”
She made a movement with her emaciated hand. John sat down on the chair Louisa gave up to
     him, and bent down over the bed.
“If yer woan't do—what Muster Drew says, John—whatever wull yer do with it?”
She spoke slowly, but clearly. John scratched his head. His complexion had evidently been
     very fair. It was still fresh and pink, and the full cheek hung a little over the jaw. The
     mouth was shrewd, but its expression was oddly contradicted by the eyes, which had on the whole
     a childish, weak look.
“I think yer must leave it to me, 'Liza,” he said at last. “I'll do all for the best.”
“No—yer'll not, John,” said the dying voice. “You'd a done a many stupid things—if I 'adn't
      stopped yer. An' I'm a-goin'. You'll never leave it wi'
     Bessie?”
“An' who 'ud yer 'ave me leave it with? Ain't Bessie my own sister's child?”
An emaciated hand stole out of the bed-clothes and fastened feebly on his arm.
“If yer do, John, yer'll repent it. Yer never were a good one at judgin' folk. Yer doan't
     consider nothin'—an' I'm a-goin'. Leave it with Saunders, John.”
There was a pause. Then John said with an obstinate look—
“Saunders 'as never been a friend o' mine, since 'ee did me out o' that bit o' business with
     Missus Moulsey. An' I don't mean to go makin' friends with him again.”
Eliza withdrew her hand with a long sigh, and her eyelids closed. A fit of coughing shook
     her; she had to be lifted in bed, and it left her gasping and deathly. John was sorely
     troubled, and not only for himself. When she was more at ease
      again, he stooped to her and put his mouth to her ear.
“'Liza, don't yer think no more about it. Did Mr. Drew read to yer? Are yer comfortable in
     yer mind?”
She made a sign of assent, which showed, however, no great interest in the subject. There was
     silence for a long time. Louisa was getting supper downstairs. John, oppressed by the heat of
     the room and tired by his day's work, had almost fallen asleep in his chair, when the old woman
     spoke again.
“John—what 'ud you think o' Mary Anne Waller?”
The whisper was still human and eager.
John roused himself, and could not help an astonished laugh.
“Why, whatever put Mary Anne into your head, 'Liza? Yer never thought anythink o' Mary
     Anne—no more than me.”
Eliza's eyes wandered round the room.

“P'raps—” she said, then stopped, and could say no more. She seemed to become unconscious,
     and John went to call for Louisa.
In the middle of the night John woke with a start, and sat up to listen. Not a sound—but they
     would have called him if the end had come. He could not rest, however, and presently he huddled
     on some clothes and went to listen at Eliza's door. It was ajar, and hearing nothing he pushed
     it open.
Poor Eliza lay in her agony, unconscious, and breathing heavily. Beside her sat the widow,
     Mary Anne Waller, and Louisa, motionless too, their heads bent. There was an end of candle in a
     basin behind the bed, which threw circles of wavering light over the coarse whitewash of the
     roof and on the cards and faded photographs above the tiny mantelpiece.
John crept up to the bed. The two women made a slight movement to let him stand between
     them.

“Can't yer give her no brandy?” he asked, whispering.
Mary Anne Waller shook her head.
“Dr. Murch said we wer'n't to trouble her. She'll go when the light comes—most like.”
She was a little shrivelled woman with a singularly delicate mouth, that quivered as she
     spoke. John and Eliza Bolderfield had never thought much of her, though she was John's cousin.
     She was a widow, and greatly “put upon” both by her children and her neighbours. Her children
     were grown up, and settled—more or less—in the world, but they still lived on her freely
     whenever it suited them; and in the village generally she was reckoned but a poor creature.
However, when Eliza—originally a hard, strong woman—took to her bed with incurable disease,
     Mary Anne Waller came in to help, and was accepted. She did everything humbly; she even let
     Louisa order her about. But before the end, Eliza had come to be restless when she was not
     there.

Now, however, Eliza knew no more, and the little widow sat gazing at her with the tears on
     her cheeks. John, too, felt his eyes wet.
But after half an hour, when there was still no change, he was turning away to go back to
     bed, when the widow touched his arm.
“Won't yer give her a kiss, John?” she said timidly. “She wor a good sister to you.”
John, with a tremor, stooped, and clumsily did as he was told—the first time in his life he
     had ever done so for Mary Anne. Then, stepping as noiselessly as he could on his bare feet, he
     hurried away. A man shares nothing of that yearning attraction which draws women to a death-bed
     as such. Instead, John felt a sudden sickness at his heart. He was thankful to find himself in
     his own room again, and thought with dread of having to go back—for the end. In spite of his
     still vigorous and stalwart body, he was often plagued with nervous fears and fancies. And it
     was years now since he had seen death—he had, indeed, carefully avoided seeing it.

Gradually, however, as he sat on the edge of his bed in the summer dark, the new impression
     died away, and something habitual took its place—that shielding, solacing thought, which was in
     truth all the world to him, and was going to make up to him for Eliza's death, for getting old,
     and the lonesomeness of a man without chick or child. He would have felt unutterably forlorn
     and miserable, he would have shrunk trembling from the shapes of death and pain that seemed to
     fill the darkness, but for this fact, this defence, this treasure, that set him apart from his
     fellows and gave him this proud sense of superiority, of a good time coming in spite of all.
     Instinctively, as he sat on the bed, he pushed his bare foot backwards till his heel touched a
     wooden object that stood underneath. The contact cheered him at once. He ceased to think about
     Eliza, his head was once more full of whirling plans and schemes.
The wooden object was a box that held his money, the savings of a labourer's lifetime. Seventy-one
      pounds! It seemed to him an ocean of gold, never to be
     exhausted. The long toil of saving it was almost done. After the Frampton job, he would begin
     enjoying it, cautiously at first, taking a bit of work now and again, and then a bit of
     holiday.
All the savour of life was connected for him with that box. His mind ran over the constant
     excitements of the many small loans he had made from it to his relations and friends. A
     shilling in the pound interest—he had never taken less and he had never asked more. He had only
     lent to people he knew well, people in the village whom he could look after, and seldom for a
     term longer than three months, for to be parted from his money at all gave him physical pain.
     He had once suffered great anxiety over a loan to his eldest brother of thirty pounds. But in
     the end James had paid it all back. He could still feel tingling through him the passionate joy
     with which he had counted out the recovered sovereigns, with the extra three half-sovereigns of
     interest.

Muster Drew indeed! John fell into an angry inward argument against his suggestion of the
     savings bank. It was an argument he had often rehearsed, often declaimed, and at bottom it all
     came to this—without that box under his bed, his life would have sunk to dulness and
     decrepitude; he would have been merely a pitiful and lonely old man. He had neither wife nor
     children, all for the hoard's sake; but while the hoard was there, to be handled any hour, he
     regretted nothing. Besides, there was the peasant's rooted distrust of offices, and paper
     transactions, of any routine that checks his free will and frightens his inexperience. He was
     still eagerly thinking when the light began to flood into his room, and before he could compose
     himself to sleep the women called him.
But he shed no more tears. He saw Eliza die, his companion of forty years, and hardly felt
     it. What troubled him all through the last scene was the thought that now he should never know
     why she was so set against “Bessie's 'avin' it.”
