<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER III.</head>
<p> Egremont was the younger brother of an English earl, whose nobility being of nearly three
      centuries’ date, ranked him among our high and ancient peers, although its origin was more
      memorable than illustrious. The founder of the family had been a confidential domestic of one
      of the favourites of Henry the Eighth, and had contrived to be appointed one of the
      commissioners for “visiting and taking the surrenders of divers religious houses.” It came to
      pass that divers of these religious houses surrendered themselves eventually to the use and
      benefit of honest Baldwin Greymount. The king was touched with the activity and <pb n="21"/>zeal of his commissioner. Not one of them whose reports were so ample and satisfactory, who
      could baffle a wily prior with more dexterity, or control a proud abbot with more firmness.
      Nor were they well-digested reports alone that were transmitted to the sovereign: they came
      accompanied with many rare and curious articles, grateful to the taste of one who was not only
      a religious reformer but a dilettante; golden candlesticks and costly chalices; sometimes a
      jewelled pix; fantastic spoons and patens, rings for the fingers and the ear; occasionally a
      fair-written and blazoned manuscript—suitable offering to the royal scholar. Greymount was
      noticed; sent for; promoted in the household; knighted; might doubtless have been sworn of the
      council, and in due time have become a minister; but his was a discreet ambition—of an
      accumulative rather than an aspiring character. He served the king faithfully in all domestic
      matters that required an unimpassioned, unscrupulous agent; fashioned his creed and conscience
      according to the royal model in all its <pb n="22"/>freaks; seized the right moment to get
      sundry grants of abbey lands, and contrived in that dangerous age to save both his head and
      his estate.</p>
<p> The Greymount family having planted themselves in the land, faithful to the policy of the
      founder, avoided the public gaze during the troubled period that followed the reformation; and
      even during the more orderly reign of Elizabeth, rather sought their increase in alliances
      than in court favour. But at the commencement of the seventeenth century, their abbey lands
      infinitely advanced in value, and their rental swollen by the prudent accumulation of more
      than seventy years, a Greymount, who was then a county member, was elevated to the peerage as
      Baron Marney. The heralds furnished his pedigree, and assured the world that although the
      exalted rank and extensive possessions enjoyed at present by the Greymounts, had their origin
      immediately in great territorial revolutions of a recent reign, it was not for a moment to be
      supposed, that the remote ancestors of the Ecclesiastical Commissioner <pb n="23"/>of 1530
      were by any means obscure. On the contrary, it appeared that they were both Norman and
      baronial, their real name Egremont, which, in their patent of peerage the family now
      resumed.</p>
<p> In the civil wars, the Egremonts pricked by their Norman blood, were cavaliers and fought
      pretty well. But in 1688, alarmed at the prevalent impression that King James intended to
      insist on the restitution of the church estates to their original purposes, to wit, the
      education of the people and the maintenance of the poor, the Lord of Marney Abbey became a
      warm adherent of “civil and religious liberty,”—the cause for which Hampden had died in the
      field, and Russell on the scaffold,—and joined the other whig lords, and great lay
      impropriators, in calling over the Prince of Orange and a Dutch army, to vindicate those
      popular principles which, somehow or other, the people would never support. Profiting by this
      last pregnant circumstance, the lay Abbot of Marney also in this instance like the other whig
      lords, was careful to maintain, <pb n="24"/>while he vindicated the cause of civil and
      religious liberty, a very loyal and dutiful though secret correspondence with the court of St
      Germains.</p>
<p> The great deliverer King William the Third, to whom Lord Marney was a systematic traitor,
      made the descendant of the Ecclesiastical Commissioner of Henry the Eighth an English earl;
      and from that time until the period of our history, though the Marney family had never
      produced one individual eminent for civil or military abilities, though the country was not
      indebted to them for a single statesman, orator, successful warrior, great lawyer, learned
      divine, eminent author, illustrious man of science, they had contrived, if not to engross any
      great share of public admiration and love, at least to monopolise no contemptible portion of
      public money and public dignities. During the seventy years of almost unbroken whig rule, from
      the accession of the House of Hanover to the fall of Mr Fox, Marney Abbey had furnished a
      never-failing crop of lord privy seals, lord presidents, and lord lieutenants. The <pb n="25"/>family had had their due quota of garters and governments and bishoprics; admirals without
      fleets, and generals who fought only in America. They had glittered in great embassies with
      clever secretaries at their elbow, and had once governed Ireland when to govern Ireland was
      only to apportion the public plunder to a corrupt senate.</p>
<p> Notwithstanding however this prolonged enjoyment of undeserved prosperity, the lay abbots
      of Marney were not content. Not that it was satiety that induced dissatisfaction. The
      Egremonts could feed on. They wanted something more. Not to be prime ministers or secretaries
      of state, for they were a shrewd race who knew the length of their tether, and notwithstanding
      the encouraging example of his grace of Newcastle, they could not resist the persuasion that
      some knowledge of the interests and resources of nations, some power of expressing opinions
      with propriety, some degree of respect for the public and for himself, were not altogether
      indispensable qualifications, even under a Venetian constitution, in <pb n="26"/>an individual
      who aspired to a post so eminent and responsible. Satisfied with the stars and mitres and
      official seals, which were periodically apportioned to them, the Marney family did not aspire
      to the somewhat graceless office of being their distributor. What they aimed at was promotion
      in their order; and promotion to the highest class. They observed that more than one of the
      other great “civil and religious liberty” families,—the families who in one century plundered
      the church to gain the property of the people, and in another century changed the dynasty to
      gain the power of the crown,—had their brows circled with the strawberry leaf. And why should
      not this distinction be the high lot also of the descendants of the old gentleman usher of one
      of King Henry’s plundering vicar-generals? Why not? True it is, that a grateful sovereign in
      our days has deemed such distinction the only reward for half a hundred victories. True it is,
      that Nelson, after conquering the Mediterranean, died only a Viscount! But the house of Marney
      had risen to high rank; counted themselves <pb n="27"/>ancient nobility; and turned up their
      noses at the Pratts and the Smiths, the Jenkinsons and the Robinsons of our degenerate days;
      and never had done anything for the nation or for their honours. And why should they now? It
      was unreasonable to expect it. Civil and religious liberty, that had given them a broad estate
      and a glittering coronet, to say nothing of half-a-dozen close seats in parliament, ought
      clearly to make them dukes.</p>
<p> But the other great whig families who had obtained this honour, and who had done something
      more for it than spoliate their church and betray their king, set up their backs against this
      claim of the Egremonts. The Egremonts had done none of the work of the last hundred years of
      political mystification, during which a people without power or education, had been induced to
      believe themselves the freest and most enlightened nation in the world, and had submitted to
      lavish their blood and treasure, to see their industry crippled and their labour mortgaged, in
      order to maintain an oligarchy, that had neither ancient memories to soften <pb n="28"/>nor
      present services to justify their unprecedented usurpation.</p>
<p> How had the Egremonts contributed to this prodigious result? Their family had furnished
      none of those artful orators whose bewildering phrase had fascinated the public intelligence;
      none of those toilsome patricians whose assiduity in affairs had convinced their unprivileged
      fellow-subjects that government was a science, and administration an art, which demanded the
      devotion of a peculiar class in the state for their fulfilment and pursuit. The Egremonts had
      never said anything that was remembered, or done anything that could be recalled. It was
      decided by the Great Revolution families, that they should not be dukes. Infinite was the
      indignation of the lay Abbot of Marney. He counted his boroughs, consulted his cousins, and
      muttered revenge. The opportunity soon offered for the gratification of his passion.</p>
<p> The situation of the Venetian party in the wane of the eighteenth century had become
      extremely critical. A young king was making often fruitless, but always energetic, struggles
      to <pb n="29"/>emancipate his national royalty from the trammels of the factious dogeship.
      More than sixty years of a government of singular corruption had alienated all hearts from the
      oligarchy; never indeed much affected by the great body of the people. It could no longer be
      concealed, that by virtue of a plausible phrase power had been transferred from the crown to a
      parliament, the members of which were appointed by an extremely limited and exclusive class,
      who owned no responsibility to the country, who debated and voted in secret, and who were
      regularly paid by the small knot of great families that by this machinery had secured the
      permanent possession of the king’s treasury. Whiggism was putrescent in the nostrils of the
      nation; we were probably on the eve of a bloodless yet important revolution; when Rockingham,
      a virtuous magnifico, alarmed and disgusted, resolved to revive something of the pristine
      purity and high-toned energy of the old whig connection; appealed to his “new generation” from
      a degenerate age, arrayed under his banner the generous youth <pb n="30"/>of the whig
      families, and was fortunate to enlist in the service the supreme genius of Edmund Burke.</p>
<p> Burke effected for the whigs what Bolingbroke in a preceding age had done for the tories:
      he restored the moral existence of the party. He taught them to recur to the ancient
      principles of their connection, and suffused those principles with all the delusive splendour
      of his imagination. He raised the tone of their public discourse; he breathed a high spirit
      into their public acts. It was in his power to do more for the whigs than St John could do for
      his party. The oligarchy, who had found it convenient to attaint Bolingbroke for being the
      avowed minister of the English Prince with whom they were always in secret communication, when
      opinion forced them to consent to his restitution, had tacked to the amnesty a clause as
      cowardly as it was unconstitutional, and declared his incompetence to sit in the parliament of
      his country. Burke on the contrary fought the whig fight with a two-edged weapon: he was a
      great writer; as an <pb n="31"/>orator he was transcendent. In a dearth of that public talent
      for the possession of which the whigs have generally been distinguished, Burke came forward
      and established them alike in the parliament and the country. And what was his reward? No
      sooner had a young and dissolute noble, who with some of the aspirations of a Caesar oftener
      realised the conduct of a Catiline, appeared on the stage, and after some inglorious
      tergiversation adopted their colours, than they transferred to him the command which had been
      won by wisdom and genius, vindicated by unrivalled knowledge, and adorned by accomplished
      eloquence. When the hour arrived for the triumph which he had prepared, he was not even
      admitted into the Cabinet, virtually presided over by his graceless pupil, and who, in the
      profuse suggestions of his teeming converse, had found the principles and the information
      which were among the chief claims to public confidence of Mr Fox.</p>
<p> Hard necessity made Mr Burke submit to the yoke, but the humiliation could never be
      forgotten. Nemesis favours genius: the inevitable <pb n="32"/>hour at length arrived. A voice
      like the Apocalypse sounded over England and even echoed in all the courts of Europe. Burke
      poured forth the vials of his hoarded vengeance into the agitated heart of Christendom; he
      stimulated the panic of a world by the wild pictures of his inspired imagination; he dashed to
      the ground the rival who had robbed him of his hard-earned greatness; rended in twain the
      proud oligarchy that had dared to use and to insult him; and followed with servility by the
      haughtiest and the most timid of its members, amid the frantic exultation of his country, he
      placed his heel upon the neck of the ancient serpent.</p>
<p> Among the whig followers of Mr Burke in this memorable defection, among the Devonshires and
      the Portlands, the Spencers and the Fitzwilliams, was the Earl of Marney, whom the whigs would
      not make a duke.</p>
<p> What was his chance of success from Mr Pitt?</p>
<p> If the history of England be ever written by one who has the knowledge and the courage, <pb n="33"/>and both qualities are equally requisite for the undertaking, the world would be more
      astonished than when reading the Roman annals by Niebuhr. Generally speaking, all the great
      events have been distorted, most of the important causes concealed, some of the principal
      characters never appear, and all who figure are so misunderstood and misrepresented, that the
      result is a complete mystification, and the perusal of the narrative about as profitable to an
      Englishman as reading the Republic of Plato or the Utopia of More, the pages of Gaudentio di
      Lucca or the adventures of Peter Wilkins.</p>
<p> The influence of races in our early ages, of the church in our middle, and of parties in
      our modern history, are three great moving and modifying powers, that must be pursued and
      analyzed with an untiring, profound, and unimpassioned spirit, before a guiding ray can be
      secured. A remarkable feature of our written history is the absence in its pages of some of
      the most influential personages. Not one man in a thousand for instance has ever heard of
      Major Wildman: yet he was the soul of English politics in the most eventful period of this
      kingdom, and one most interesting to this age, from 1640 to 1688; and seemed more than once to
      hold the balance which was to decide the permanent form of our government. But he was the
      leader of an unsuccessful party. Even, comparatively speaking, in our own times, the same
      mysterious oblivion is sometimes encouraged to creep over personages of great social
      distinction as well as political importance.</p>
<p> The name of the second Pitt remains, fresh after forty years of great events, a
      parliamentary beacon. He was the Chatterton of politics; the “marvellous boy.” Some have a
      vague impression that he was mysteriously moulded by his great father: that he inherited the
      genius, the eloquence, the state craft of Chatham. His genius was of a different bent, his
      eloquence of a different class, his state craft of a different school. To understand Mr Pitt,
      one must understand one of the suppressed characters of English history, and that is Lord
      Shelburne.</p>
<pb n="35"/>
<p> When the fine genius of the injured Bolingbroke, the only peer of his century who was
      educated, and proscribed by the oligarchy because they were afraid of his eloquence, “the
      glory of his order and the shame,” shut out from Parliament, found vent in those writings
      which recalled to the English people the inherent blessings of their old free monarchy, and
      painted in immortal hues his picture of a patriot king, the spirit that he raised at length
      touched the heart of Carteret, born a whig, yet sceptical of the advantages of that patrician
      constitution which made the Duke of Newcastle, the most incompetent of men, but the chosen
      leader of the Venetian party, virtually sovereign of England. Lord Carteret had many brilliant
      qualities: he was undaunted, enterprising, eloquent; had considerable knowledge of continental
      politics, was a great linguist, a master of public law; and though he failed in his premature
      effort to terminate the dogeship of George the Second, he succeeded in maintaining a
      considerable though secondary position in public life. The young Shelburne married his <pb n="36"/>daughter. Of him it is singular we know less than of his father-in-law, yet from the
      scattered traits some idea may be formed of the ablest and most accomplished minister of the
      eighteenth century. Lord Shelburne, influenced probably by the example and the traditionary
      precepts of his eminent father-in-law, appears early to have held himself aloof from the
      patrician connection, and entered public life as the follower of Bute in the first great
      effort of George the Third to rescue the sovereignty from what Lord Chatham called “the Great
      Revolution families.” He became in time a member of Lord Chatham’s last administration: one of
      the strangest and most unsuccessful efforts to aid the grandson of George the Second in his
      struggle for political emancipation. Lord Shelburne adopted from the first the Bolingbroke
      system: a real royalty, in lieu of the chief magistracy; a permanent alliance with France,
      instead of the whig scheme of viewing in that power the natural enemy of England: and, above
      all, a plan of commercial freedom, the germ of which may be found in the long-maligned
      negotiations <pb n="37"/>of Utrecht, but which in the instance of Lord Shelburne were soon in
      time matured by all the economical science of Europe, in which he was a proficient. Lord
      Shelburne seems to have been of a reserved and somewhat astute disposition: deep and adroit,
      he was however brave and firm. His knowledge was extensive and even profound. He was a great
      linguist; he pursued both literary and scientific investigations; his house was frequented by
      men of letters, especially those distinguished by their political abilities or economical
      attainments. He maintained the most extensive private correspondence of any public man of his
      time. The earliest and most authentic information reached him from all courts and quarters of
      Europe: and it was a common phrase, that the minister of the day sent to him often for the
      important information which the cabinet could not itself command. Lord Shelburne was the first
      great minister who comprehended the rising importance of the middle class; and foresaw in its
      future power a bulwark for the throne against “the Great Revolution families.” Of his
      qualities <pb n="38"/>in council we have no record; there is reason to believe that his
      administrative ability was conspicuous: his speeches prove that, if not supreme, he was
      eminent, in the art of parliamentary disputation, while they show on all the questions
      discussed a richness and variety of information with which the speeches of no statesman of
      that age except Mr Burke can compare.</p>
<p> Such was the man selected by George the Third as his champion against the Venetian party
      after the termination of the American war. The prosecution of that war they had violently
      opposed, though it had originated in their own policy. First minister in the House of Lords,
      Shelburne entrusted the lead in the House of Commons to his Chancellor of the Exchequer, the
      youthful Pitt. The administration was brief, but it was not inglorious. It obtained peace, and
      for the first time since the Revolution introduced into modern debate the legitimate
      principles on which commerce should be conducted. It fell before the famous Coalition with
      which “the Great Revolution families” <pb n="39"/>commenced their fiercest and their last
      contention for the patrician government of royal England.</p>
<p> In the heat of that great strife, the king in the second hazardous exercise of his
      prerogative entrusted the perilous command to Pitt. Why Lord Shelburne on that occasion was
      set aside, will perhaps always remain a mysterious passage of our political history, nor have
      we space on the present occasion to attempt to penetrate its motives. Perhaps the monarch,
      with a sense of the rising sympathies of his people, was prescient of the magic power of youth
      in touching the heart of a nation. Yet it would not be an unprofitable speculation if for a
      moment we paused to consider what might have been the consequences to our country if Mr Pitt
      had been content for a season again to lead the Commons under Lord Shelburne, and have secured
      for England the unrivalled knowledge and dexterity of that statesman in the conduct of our
      affairs during the confounding fortunes of the French revolution. Lord Shelburne was the only
      English minister <pb n="40"/>competent to the task; he was the only public man who had the
      previous knowledge requisite to form accurate conclusions on such a conjuncture: his remaining
      speeches on the subject attest the amplitude of his knowledge and the accuracy of his views:
      and in the rout of Jena, or the agony of Austerlitz, one cannot refrain from picturing the
      shade of Shelburne haunting the cabinet of Pitt, as the ghost of Canning is said occasionally
      to linger about the speaker’s chair, and smile sarcastically on the conscientious mediocrities
      who pilfered his hard-earned honours.</p>
<p> But during the happier years of Mr Pitt, the influence of the mind of Shelburne may be
      traced throughout his policy. It was Lansdowne House that made Pitt acquainted with Dr Price,
      a dissenting minister, whom Lord Shelburne when at the head of affairs courageously offered to
      make his private secretary, and who furnished Mr Pitt, among many other important suggestions,
      with his original plan of the sinking fund. The commercial treaties of ‘87 were struck in the
      same mint, and are <pb n="41"/>notable as the first effort made by the English government to
      emancipate the country from the restrictive policy which had been introduced by the “glorious
      revolution;” memorable epoch, that presented England at the same time with a corn law and a
      public debt. But on no subject was the magnetic influence of the descendant of Sir William
      Petty more decided, than in the resolution of his pupil to curb the power of the patrician
      party by an infusion from the middle classes into the government of the country. Hence the
      origin of Mr Pitt’s famous and long-misconceived plans of parliamentary reform. Was he
      sincere, is often asked by those who neither seek to discover the causes nor are capable of
      calculating the effects of public transactions. Sincere! Why, he was struggling for his
      existence! And when baffled, first by the Venetian party, and afterwards by the panic of
      Jacobinism, he was forced to forego his direct purpose, he still endeavoured partially to
      effect it by a circuitous process. He created a plebeian aristocracy and blended it with the
      patrician oligarchy. He made peers <pb n="42"/>of second-rate squires and fat graziers. He
      caught them in the alleys of Lombard Street, and clutched them from the counting-houses of
      Cornhill. When Mr Pitt in an age of bank restriction declared that every man with an estate of
      ten thousand a-year had a right to be a peer, he sounded the knell of “the cause for which
      Hampden had died on the field, and Sydney on the scaffold.”</p>
<p> In ordinary times the pupil of Shelburne would have raised this country to a state of great
      material prosperity, and removed or avoided many of those anomalies which now perplex us; but
      he was not destined for ordinary times; and though his capacity was vast and his spirit lofty,
      he had not that passionate and creative genius required by an age of revolution. The French
      outbreak was his evil daemon: he had not the means of calculating its effects upon Europe. He
      had but a meagre knowledge himself of continental politics: he was assisted by a very
      inefficient diplomacy. His mind was lost in a convulsion of which he neither could comprehend
      the <pb n="43"/>causes nor calculate the consequences; and forced to act, he acted not only
      violently, but in exact opposition to the very system he was called into political existence
      to combat; he appealed to the fears, the prejudices, and the passions of a privileged class,
      revived the old policy of the oligarchy he had extinguished, and plunged into all the ruinous
      excesses of French war and Dutch finance.</p>
<p> If it be a salutary principle in the investigation of historical transactions to be careful
      in discriminating the cause from the pretext, there is scarcely any instance in which the
      application of this principle is more fertile in results, than in that of the Dutch invasion
      of 1688. The real cause of this invasion was financial. The Prince of Orange had found that
      the resources of Holland, however considerable, were inadequate to sustain him in his
      internecine rivalry with the great sovereign of France. In an authentic conversation which has
      descended to us, held by William at the Hague with one of the prime abettors of the invasion,
      the prince did not disguise his motives; he said, “nothing but such a constitution as you have
      in England can have the credit that is necessary to raise such sums as a great war requires.”
      The prince came, and used our constitution for his purpose: he introduced into England the
      system of Dutch finance. The principle of that system was to mortgage industry in order to
      protect property: abstractedly, nothing can be conceived more unjust; its practice in England
      has been equally injurious. In Holland, with a small population engaged in the same pursuits,
      in fact a nation of bankers, the system was adapted to the circumstances which had created it.
      All shared in the present spoil, and therefore could endure the future burthen. And so to this
      day Holland is sustained, almost solely sustained, by the vast capital thus created which
      still lingers amongst its dykes. But applied to a country in which the circumstances were
      entirely different; to a considerable and rapidly-increasing population; where there was a
      numerous peasantry, a trading middle class struggling into existence; the system <pb n="45"/>of Dutch finance, pursued more or less for nearly a century and a half, has ended in the
      degradation of a fettered and burthened multitude. Nor have the demoralizing consequences of
      the funding system on the more favoured classes been less decided. It has made debt a national
      habit; it has made credit the ruling power, not the exceptional auxiliary, of all
      transactions; it has introduced a loose, inexact, haphazard, and dishonest spirit in the
      conduct of both public and private life; a spirit dazzling and yet dastardly: reckless of
      consequences and yet shrinking from responsibility. And in the end, it has so overstimulated
      the energies of the population to maintain the material engagements of the state, and of
      society at large, that the moral condition of the people has been entirely lost sight of.</p>
<p> A mortgaged aristocracy, a gambling foreign commerce, a home trade founded on a morbid
      competition, and a degraded people; these are great evils, but ought perhaps cheerfully to be
      encountered for the greater blessings of civil and religious liberty. Yet the first would seem
       <pb n="46"/>in some degree to depend upon our Saxon mode of trial by our peers, upon the
      stipulations of the great Norman charters, upon the practice and the statute of Habeas
      Corpus,—a principle native to our common law, but established by the Stuarts; nor in a careful
      perusal of the Bill of Rights, or in an impartial scrutiny of the subsequent legislation of
      those times, though some diminution of our political franchises must be confessed, is it easy
      to discover any increase of our civil privileges. To those indeed who believe that the English
      nation,—at all times a religious and Catholic people, but who even in the days of the
      Plantagenets were anti-papal,—were in any danger of again falling under the yoke of the Pope
      of Rome in the reign of James the Second, religious liberty was perhaps acceptable, though it
      took the shape of a discipline which at once anathematized a great portion of the nation, and
      virtually establishing Puritanism in Ireland, laid the foundation of those mischiefs which are
      now endangering the empire.</p>
<p> That the last of the Stuarts had any other <pb n="47"/>object in his impolitic manoeuvres,
      than an impracticable scheme to blend the two churches, there is now authority to disbelieve.
      He certainly was guilty of the offence of sending an envoy openly to Rome, who, by the bye,
      was received by the Pope with great discourtesy; and her Majesty Queen Victoria, whose
      Protestantism cannot be doubted, for it is one of her chief titles to our homage, has at this
      time a secret envoy at the same court: and that is the difference between them: both ministers
      doubtless working however fruitlessly for the same object: the termination of those terrible
      misconceptions, political and religious, that have occasioned so many martyrdoms, and so many
      crimes alike to sovereigns and to subjects.</p>
<p> If James the Second had really attempted to re-establish Popery in this country, the
      English people, who had no hand in his overthrow, would doubtless soon have stirred and
      secured their “Catholic and Apostolic church,” independent of any foreign dictation; the
      church to which they still regularly profess their adherence; and being a practical people, it
      is possible that they <pb n="48"/>might have achieved their object and yet retained their
      native princes; under which circumstances we might have been saved from the triple blessings
      of Venetian politics, Dutch finance, and French wars: against which, in their happiest days,
      and with their happiest powers, struggled the three greatest of English
      statesmen,—Bolingbroke, Shelburne, and lastly the son of Chatham.</p>
<p> We have endeavoured in another work, not we hope without something of the impartiality of
      the future, to sketch the character and career of his successors. From his death to 1825, the
      political history of England is a history of great events and little men. The rise of Mr
      Canning, long kept down by the plebeian aristocracy of Mr Pitt as an adventurer, had shaken
      parties to their centre. His rapid disappearance from the scene left both whigs and tories in
      a state of disorganization. The distinctive principles of these connexions were now difficult
      to trace. That period of public languor which intervenes between the breaking up of parties
      and the formation of factions now <pb n="49"/>transpired in England. An exhausted sensualist
      on the throne, who only demanded from his ministers repose, a voluptuous aristocracy, and a
      listless people, were content, in the absence of all public conviction and national passion,
      to consign the government of the country to a great man, whose decision relieved the
      sovereign, whose prejudices pleased the nobles, and whose achievements dazzled the
      multitude.</p>
<p> The DUKE OF WELLINGTON brought to the post of first minister immortal fame; a quality of
      success which would almost seem to include all others. His public knowledge was such as might
      be expected from one whose conduct already formed an important portion of the history of his
      country. He had a personal and intimate acquaintance with the sovereigns and chief statesmen
      of Europe, a kind of information in which English ministers have generally been deficient, but
      without which the management of our external affairs must at the best be haphazard. He
      possessed administrative talents of the highest order.</p>
<pb n="50"/>
<p> The tone of the age, the temper of the country, the great qualities and the high character
      of the minister, indicated a long and prosperous administration. The only individual in his
      cabinet who, from a combination of circumstances rather than from any intellectual supremacy
      over his colleagues, was competent to be his rival, was content to be his successor. In his
      most aspiring moments, Mr Peel in all probability aimed at no higher reach; and with youth and
      the leadership of the House of Commons, one has no reason to be surprised at his moderation.
      The conviction that the duke’s government would only cease with the termination of his public
      career was so general, that the moment he was installed in office, the whigs smiled on him;
      political conciliation became the slang of the day, and the fusion of parties the babble of
      clubs and the tattle of boudoirs.</p>
<p> How comes it then that so great a man, in so great a position, should have so signally
      failed? Should have broken up his government, wrecked his party, and so completely <pb n="51"/>annihilated his political position, that, even with his historical reputation to sustain
      him, he can since only re-appear in the councils of his sovereign in a subordinate, not to say
      equivocal, character?</p>
<p> With all those great qualities which will secure him a place in our history not perhaps
      inferior even to Marlborough, the Duke of Wellington has one deficiency which has been the
      stumbling-block of his civil career. Bishop Burnet, in speculating on the extraordinary
      influence of Lord Shaftesbury, and accounting how a statesman, so inconsistent in his conduct
      and so false to his confederates, should have so powerfully controlled his country, observes,
      “HIS STRENGTH LAY IN HIS KNOWLEDGE OF ENGLAND.”</p>
<p> Now that is exactly the kind of knowledge which the Duke of Wellington never possessed.</p>
<p> When the king, finding that in Lord Goderich he had a minister who, instead of deciding,
      asked his royal master for advice, sent for the Duke of Wellington to undertake the
      government, a change in the carriage of his grace was <pb n="52"/>perceived by some who had
      the opportunity to form an opinion on such a subject. If one might venture to use such a word
      in reference to such a man, we might remark, that the duke had been somewhat daunted by the
      selection of Mr Canning. It disappointed great hopes, it baffled great plans, and dispelled
      for a season the conviction that, it is believed, had been long maturing in his grace’s mind;
      that he was the man of the age, that his military career had been only a preparation for a
      civil course not less illustrious; and that it was reserved for him to control for the rest of
      his life undisputed the destinies of a country, which was indebted to him in no slight degree
      for its European pre-eminence. The death of Mr Canning revived, the rout of Lord Goderich
      restored, these views.</p>
<p> Napoleon, at St Helena, speculating in conversation on the future career of his conqueror,
      asked, “What will Wellington do? After all he has done, he will not be content to be quiet. He
      will change the dynasty.”</p>
<p> Had the great exile been better acquainted <pb n="53"/>with the real character of our
      Venetian constitution, he would have known that to govern England in 1820, it was not
      necessary to change its dynasty. But the Emperor, though wrong in the main, was right by the
      bye. It was clear that the energies that had twice entered Paris as a conqueror, and had made
      kings and mediatised princes at Vienna, would not be content to subside into ermined
      insignificance. The duke commenced his political tactics early. The cabinet of Lord Liverpool,
      especially during its latter term, was the hot-bed of many intrigues; but the obstacles were
      numerous, though the appointing fate, in which his grace believed, removed them. The
      disappearance of Lord Castlereagh and Mr Canning from the scene was alike unexpected. The Duke
      of Wellington was at length prime minister, and no individual ever occupied that post more
      conscious of its power, and more determined to exercise it.</p>
<p> This is not the occasion on which we shall attempt to do justice to a theme so instructive
      as the administration of his grace. Treated <pb n="54"/>with impartiality and sufficient
      information, it would be an invaluable contribution to the stores of our political knowledge
      and national experience. Throughout its brief but eccentric and tumultuous annals we see
      continual proof, how important is that knowledge “in which lay Lord Shaftesbury’s strength.”
      In twenty-four months we find an aristocracy estranged, without a people being conciliated;
      while on two several occasions, first, the prejudices, and then the pretensions of the middle
      class, were alike treated with contumely. The public was astonished at hearing of statesmen of
      long parliamentary fame, men round whom the intelligence of the nation had gathered for years
      with confidence, or at least with interest, being expelled from the cabinet in a manner not
      unworthy of Colonel Joyce, while their places were filled by second-rate soldiers, whose very
      names were unknown to the great body of the people, and who under no circumstances should have
      aspired beyond the government of a colony. This administration which commenced in arrogance
      ended in panic. There <pb n="55"/>was an interval of perplexity; when occurred the most
      ludicrous instance extant of an attempt at coalition; subordinates were promoted, while
      negotiations were still pending with their chiefs; and these negotiations, undertaken so
      crudely, were terminated in pique; in a manner which added to political disappointment
      personal offence. When even his parasites began to look gloomy, the duke had a specific that
      was to restore all, and having allowed every element of power to escape his grasp, he believed
      he could balance everything by a beer bill. The growl of reform was heard but it was not very
      fierce. There was yet time to save himself. His grace precipitated a revolution which might
      have been delayed for half a century, and never need have occurred in so aggravated a form. He
      rather fled than retired. He commenced his ministry like Brennus, and finished it like the
      tall Gaul sent to murder the rival of Sylla, but who dropped his weapon before the undaunted
      gaze of his intended victim.</p>
<p> Lord Marney was spared the pang of the <pb n="56"/>catastrophe. Promoted to a high office
      in the household, and still hoping that, by the aid of his party, it was yet destined for him
      to achieve the hereditary purpose of his family, he died in the full faith of dukism;
      worshipping the duke and believing that ultimately he should himself become a duke. It was
      under all the circumstances an euthanasia; he expired leaning as it were on his white wand and
      babbling of strawberry leaves.</p>
</div>