
THE CHURCH MILITANT
When Roshan Khân had joined those two great stabilities, Faith and Love, into one passionate
     desire for Vincent Dering's damnation, he had meant to follow the English etiquette on such
     occasions, and keep his aspiration to himself.
But it had been impossible for him instantly to rejoin the society in which he found himself;
     that is, a society which shared that fundamental crime--which more even than any definite
     jealousy had roused his anger against Captain Dering--of being alien to his creed, his customs,
     his code of conduct towards women. So he had wandered off into the garden again, shadowed by
     old Akbar's incredulity, curiosity, and sympathy; until, partly from sheer impatience, but
     mostly from sheer inherited habit of employing such as Akbar Khân in anything approaching an
     intrigue, he had made a clean breast of the situation.
Even the latter, however, had, as it were, shied at the extreme novelty of the idea when it
     was first mooted; but, by degrees, its vast possibilities of advantage to faithful old
     retainers overpowered his abject terror at the bare idea of Father Narâyan suspecting such a
     thing. The old master, he told himself, was old, indeed! God only knew if he would last a year
     or a day; therefore it would be well to ensure the favour of the new mistress. And there could
     be no harm in sounding her as to what course that favour would follow. One could never tell
     with a woman; and his wicked, experienced old eyes had caught many a hint of Anâri Begum in
     Laila's childhood. Perhaps she had changed since she went to Calcutta. He could but try.
So when, on the morning after the ball, Laila, in obedience to her pious resolve to do
     nothing really wrong, had bidden him--with threats of vengeance if he betrayed the fact of
     their having come at all--remove and return certain trays of clothes and jewels which had been
     smuggled by someone into her room, he had fallen at her feet, confessed falsely that he was the
     offender, and besought her not to impose so unmerited a disgrace on his employer, who had been
     actuated by the ordinary rules of native etiquette which prescribed some recognition of his
     cousin, the head of his family.
Naturally enough, this brought the girl's curiosity, long restless, to his aid; and she sat
     listening to the many things he had to tell her, with that faintly mysterious smile of hers.
     And as she listened, she watched a pigeon, all jewelled about its bosom in rainbow hues, and
     with a dainty little pair of silver jingles about its jasper feet, which was coquetting and
     pirouetting to attract the attention of its neighbours on the wide marble sill of her latticed
     window. For Laila had a room in the upper storey all painted, carved, and set with little
     balconies, which was worthy of any king's favourite. And Father Ninian, mindful lingeringly of
     the fine ladies' boudoirs of his youth in Rome, had filled it, against her return from school,
     with all the prettiest spoils of the palace. Sèvres vases, rare old cabinets, quaint carved
     tables which had been brought thither for the dead Nawabs; treasures that were also,
     inevitably, of the king's-favourite type,--therefore unlike the owner of the room, as she sat
     in her white muslin frock, heavy-eyed, almost sallow, from the last night's dissipation.
"So she--my grandmother, you say--was a dancing-girl--a real dancing-girl?" Even her surprise
     and curiosity were listless. Yet the next moment, while Akbar was protesting the superiority of
     Anâri Begum over all the dancing-girls of his vast experience, she had burst into a sudden
     laugh, uncovered one of the trays with kicks which sent first one, then the other of her bronze
     slippers flying, seized on a pair of silver anklets, and there she was centring a Persian rug
     spread on the marble floor as if she had been born to it. Coquetting, pirouetting, with a
     challenging clash, a half-impudent jerk of the jingles, for all the world like the pigeon on
     the window-sill.
Like something else also; so that old Akbar felt a shiver run through him, lest, after all,
     his first impression should prove right, and this be no more than a simulacrum,--a
     ghost, a changeling, come to possess the usually indifferent lazy Miss-baba. Yet when,
     all of a sudden, she raised her white muslin skirt high in both hands and began to sing, at the
     top of her voice, the wicked little love song which Vincent Dering had sung the first day she
     met him, old Akbar's dread turned to sheer wonder. This was not a ghost, but a devil; reckless,
     unrestrained, with a fling of white arms, a kick of white feet, all held to rhythm by the
     outrageous frivolity of the song, until, with that last staccato note, she threw herself in a
     chair, breathless, gurgling with laughter and sheer mischief.
"Lo! Akbar," she gasped, "my grandmother never danced like that, did she? I don't believe she
     was my grandmother! I believe you are telling stories!"
Akbar looked wise, and thrust out his folded hands in cringing protest. "The most noble says
     true, Anâri Begum never danced thus. But there is the grandfather, Bun-avâtar-sahib
      bahadur, to be accounted for also."
Laila frowned. The reminder brought back the other side of the story, to which she had
     listened so often from her guardian's lips, while her pretended indifference masked a real
     pride. Of her grandfather's gallantry, his good looks, his love of adventure. And of someone
     else, also, who had always had a secret attraction for the girl. That most beautiful woman in
     Rome, the companion of princes, the divine singer, the best, the dearest--
Laila's laughter failed her; she rose, and going over to the window looked out absently,
     startling the pigeon into flight. The sun turned its breast purple, and green, and gold, as it
     fluttered down to renew its pirouetting on a cupola below, just above the river. And below that
     again was the roof of the balcony where she had sat with Vincent. The girl's eyes grew soft.
     She understood now. That best, that dearest, that most beautiful, must have loved her guardian.
     That was the secret of his remembrance. How could one ever forget that one had sat in a balcony
     hand in hand? So content, yet saying so little--only feeling. But he had said some
     things. He had said she was beautiful, that she ought always to wear that dress, and she had
     told him she could not,--that she must send it back--that he must learn to
     like her as much in her ordinary clothes--that he would never see her in that dress again. But,
     after all, why not--if--?
She turned suddenly to the go-between. "There is no need to take them back to-day," she said,
     sharply; "but thou canst tell the person who sent them--he who claims cousinship--that I will
     not keep them, that I know nothing of them; that he must send and take them away."
Akbar, with an inward determination to do nothing so palpably foolish, salaamed down to the
     ground. The Presence, he said, in doing this showed her dignity; it was undoubtedly the right
     course to pursue. But, in the mean time, would the Begum-sahiba--she must excuse a
     tongue which could not always bear with the paltry present, which remembered the facts of the
     past, the possibilities of the future--not temper her noble severity with the usual courtly
     favour? Her cousin's grandmother, a most virtuous princess, sister to the late Nawab, was still
     alive. Her memory of Bun-avatâr-sahib was still so green that doubtless she would be
     able to tell the Begum-sahiba many things of which a mere mean slave could not be
     cognizant. And this most virtuous, most interesting one, had long been anxious to return a
     visit which the Begum-sahiba had graciously paid her, in company with a
      missen-miss--
"What! That funny old fat woman!" interrupted Laila, with a laugh. "That dirty old thing? I
     remember, she did claim to be a relation of the Nawab's. And when I asked her why she
     wore such dirty clothes she was angry, and said she had beautiful ones all tied up in bundles!
     I don't believe she had, though--"
"The dress the Begum-sahiba wore last night is one of them," interrupted Akbar,
     quietly; "it belonged to Anâri Begum, Huzoor, and there are plenty more like it. And
     all are really the Huzoor's; no one else's." Laila looked down on the trays with a new
     interest. "Did it really belong to--to her?" she asked; "and the jewels also?"
"The jewels also. There are plenty of them. And if Anâri Begum was really the
      Begum-sahiba's grandmother, then the jewels are hers by right."
"She can come if she wishes," interrupted Laila, impatiently. "I see thy craft, Akbar, but I
     care not for that. Yet it will be fun to receive her as--as a Begum. And no harm either, since
     the missen ladies receive her, I know, and her like--when they will come! It will be
     at night, of course, to ensure her privacy, so Pidar Narâyan need know nothing. Only"--she
     paused, a change swept over her face, leaving it dimpled, cunning, full of mischief and
     cajolery. "I do naught for naught! If I please thee, thou must please me! If thou art their
     messenger, thou must be mine also; or I tell Pidar Narâyan!"
Akbar-khân's wicked old eyes positively leered approval; he waggled his head and
     chuckled. Wherefore not? Was there a better, more careful messenger in the world than he, or
     one more capable of deft arrangings?
"I want none," she put in with a quick distaste, a shrinking from his manner. "'Tis but to
     take a note to Dering-sahib; he must know somewhat before he comes with the other
      sahib logue this afternoon. There is no arrangement needed, no fuss."
How could there be, she asked herself, as, after the old sinner had gone off, charmed at this
     renewal of a once familiar occupation, she sat on the window-sill looking down on the roof of
     the balcony where she had been so content. For what could be simpler than to make it quite
     clear that you were real, that you did not pretend, that you were not even afraid? That,
     briefly, you were not like Mrs. Smith, who took so much--one could not help seeing that!--and
     gave so little--one could not help seeing that, also! For what was a "Thanks! many, Captain
     Dering," in return for all the trouble he lavished on her?
So it came to pass that when Vincent Dering went to the palace that afternoon, some words
     were haunting heart and brain, as Juliet's words must have haunted Romeo's. No more; no less.
     But they slid into and filled up the blanks between some words of his own which he had spoken
     carelessly, not five minutes before he had first seen Laila, and which came back to his memory
     unbidden. "It isn't altogether despicable to let yourself loose in Paradise without an
      arrière pensée of flaming swords, especially if you can give pleasure to someone else
     thereby! One could play Romeo and Juliet in this garden nicely."
Well, he had played it for an hour or two, swept off his feet by chance. Whether he would
     continue to play it was unsettled till her note came. That ended his vague reluctance, and he
     went over to the palace, eager as any lover could be for the interview she suggested in
      "the old place when it grows dusk, and the people will mostly have gone."
For those of the camp who were bound to follow the Viceroy's whim of riding by the old
     road--the pilgrims' road--while the big camp went round by the longer, easier route, had
     promised to look in on the palace on their way past it, for a cup of tea, a good-by. Since
     already, the functions over, the dream-city had begun to melt away; the Hosts of the
      Lord-sahib were passing on.
"Glory be!" said the Commissioner with heart-felt gratitude, "we've done our worst and leave
     you to take the consequences. That's sound policy. Anyhow, we are ahead of everybody on the
     road to heaven, and the pilgrims will have to swallow the dust of our feet! I wonder how
     they'll like it." He was in wild spirits, like a schoolboy escaped from school; yet as he
     paused to shake hands with Dr. Dillon, he said aside, "Any more cases?"
"Two," said the doctor, laconically, "both dead. It is a bad type."
His hearer's face was unmovable as he turned to Mrs. Smith, who stood close by. "Good-by, my
     dear lady," he said cheerfully, "remember me house is yours if you, or the child, want it.
     Doctor, couldn't you conscientiously recommend change of air to the hills? Couldn't ye swear
     the close proximity to an open canal and a gaol is unwholesome? If ye could, you'd oblige a
     grass-widower, whose wife is at Baden-Baden--or is it Marienbad?--living prodigally, while he
     has to fill himself with husks which no self-respecting swine would eat. Faith, me dear madam,
     I'd bless you if you'd come and kill the cook. It's a woman's work; not a man's."
Dr. Dillon, with a quick look, backed him up instantly. "Certainly. I told Mrs. Smith a long
     time ago that she and Gladys had had enough of Eshwara. Indeed, as her doctor, she would be
     doing me a personal favour if--"
Muriel Smith swept round on him sharply. She was looking her very best, in her very best
     gown; white, mystic, wonderful, with a faint gleam of silver embroidery about waist and hem.
     And she had been obtrusively, unnecessarily friendly with Vincent Dering all the afternoon;
     even now she was standing with him attached to her apron-strings.
"I don't think nervous headaches are dangerous," she said, eying Dr. Dillon coolly. "But
     thanks all the same. I should love to kill somebody; even a cook. Perhaps I may, by and by,
     when all the nice people leave. I'm so sorry you're going, but we are still
     to be quite gay, aren't we, Captain Dering? And that reminds me we have to settle when that
     riding party is to come off. Good-by--good-by!" She waved her hand to the departing
     Commissioner, and carried Vincent Dering off, with a defiant look at the doctor.
He, knowing her, smiled indulgently; but Father Ninian, who had come down to see his guest
     off, looked after her with a wistful pain in his kind old face.
"That is a mistake," he said briefly; then the wistfulness grew into a puzzled look, and he
     added, half to himself, "It need not be, surely; there is something wrong. I can't
     understand--"
Dr. Dillon, catching the end of the remark, gave a cynical laugh and turned on his heel. "No
     one does," he said as he went off. He would not discuss her even with dear old Pidar Narâyan.
     For the rest, though he was keen to get back to his jail, he would wait till she tired of her
     game, and then drive her home himself to her idiot of a husband, who was too busy over his
     blessed search-light to see things that were going on under his very eyes.
Captain Dering, however, was already impatient. It was growing dusk; the shadows were
     claiming the garden bit by bit, and as the glint left the varnished leaves of the orange trees,
     the white flowers stood out like little stars against the gloom and sent a bewildering perfume
     into the darkening air. He could see no hint of Laila anywhere; Laila in that detestable white
     muslin garment which made him long vainly to get rid of the surroundings which suited her so
     ill, drive all that civilized crew from the garden, and claim it as his own--and hers! She must
     have gone to the balcony already. She must be waiting for him. And yet a soft-heartedness for
     this other woman with whom he had been friends, whom for a few days he had imagined he loved
     (it had come to this now) forbade him from leaving her cavalierly. So it was long past
     dusk, and the short Indian twilight was hovering on the edge of night, ere he made his escape;
     and, full of anxiety lest Laila should have lost patience or hope, hurried down to the wide
     archway, and so, by the turn riverwards, to the right, into the balcony. Most girls, he told
     himself, would by this time have taken offence; but she was there.
As he entered, her figure showed dimly against the light beyond.
"I'm afraid I am awfully late," he began, then paused; for, as she turned, there was a faint
     clash of silver, a faint gleam of it too. His heart gave a great throb of glad recognition. It
     was Laila! Laila indeed! the Laila of that dream last night. And she had risked this
     to please him!
"Are you?" she said. "I thought I was late; for this took time; but I
     wanted to be the same--always the same to you, always--always!"
She stretched her hands to him, but he set them aside, took her in his arms, and kissed her
     passionately.
"Yes! Laila! always Laila--my Laila!"
She gave him back his kisses joyfully. "I knew you would come," she said. "Love comes to
     love, you know."
He called her Juliet then, and many another lover's name. She took them all, and gave them
     back again without reserve, until, as they stood there, someone passing outward from the arched
     passage to the garden, paused to listen at the half-heard sound of voices. For Father
     Ninian--who had come down to his own rooms for a pair of foils wherewith to give Lance Carlyon
     a lesson in the "Addio del Marito," until Captain Dering should choose to come out of
     the recesses of the garden and allow of their going back to the Fort together--knew of none
     likely to use, or even to be aware of, the balcony. So he turned thither curiously, then stood
     arrested, so that the clash of the foils on the stone, as he purposely lowered their points,
     came as a warning to those two that they were observed. Laila, with a catlike noiselessness,
     withdrew in a second. She, a yard or two away, in deepest shadow, stood leaning in a careless,
     easy attitude over the balustrade. Her only possibility of escape lay, she felt instinctively,
     in showing no desire to do so. Vincent, for his part, turned to face the old priest, prepared
     to brazen it out; for his blood was running like wild-fire in his veins. Yet scarcely so fast
     as the heart's blood had once leapt, and was even now leaping, in the old man who came forward,
     facing him also. Came forward slowly, shortsightedly, a foil in each hand. If he had held out
     one, bade him take the button off and fight for his life, Vincent Dering would scarcely have
     been surprised, would almost have been pleased. It would have raised him in his own
     self-esteem. For he knew perfectly well he had no right to be there; that, as yet, he was not
     sure of his own footing.
But Pidar Narâyan did not. He paused, as he generally did, a few paces away, a slender,
     straight shadow in black, girt about with that pale sash, on which, and on his pale face, such
     light as there was fell softly. For there was no anger in the latter; only an almost passionate
     regret and pity. Even so, his words startled the young man, who stood prepared for
     defiance.
"Oh! Captain Dering!" he said courteously, "it is you, is it? You have found a pleasant
     place, indeed! But scarcely a very safe one for your companion--" he turned to that faint gleam
     of white and silver in the arched shadow.--"The air grows chill, madam, so close to the river,"
     he continued, his voice taking a tone almost of command, "and you are lightly clad. Will you
     not be wise, and leave us?"
Vincent's surprise had passed by this time into a rush of vexation, almost indignation, for
     he had grasped the old man's mistake. For an instant he felt bound to undeceive him, then the
     impossibility of doing so held him silent, feeling a coward indeed; so, desperately, he could
     only join his voice to Father Ninian's. It seemed the only way out of the impasse.
"Perhaps you had better go--"
Laila did not need more. Already, under cover of the shadow, she had dexterously slipped off
     her silver jingles, lest they should betray what really seemed to her her worst, nay! her only
     offence;--the taking and wearing of Roshan Khân's present. And now, wrapping her veil about her
     like a cloak, gathering her trailing skirts to orthodox length with an appalling presence of
     mind, she was off with just the little uneasy laugh which might well befit the situation.
She left her companion bewildered, yet still facing the old man recklessly. Since he could
     not explain, he did not mean to be hectored. Yet, once again, the old voice took him
     unawares.
"Memory plays strange tricks with us at times," it said slowly, but with a suggestion of the
     fateful, hopeless rhythm of a Greek chorus in it. "She has taken me back, this evening, nearly
     sixty long years. The river before us is the yellow flood of the Tiber, the woman who has just
     left us is the woman I loved--sixty long years ago--I had kissed her, as you have kissed her. I
     had told her I loved her, as you have just told her--and then, like an echo from the river
     below where a boat was moored, came to our ears, the same words, 'I love you.'--They were
     spoken, Captain Dering, by a boy, barely in his teens, to a waiting-maid. The boy was her son.
     She had been married, as they marry them in Italy, almost before her girlhood, and I, the boy's
     tutor, was nearer her age than his father--a better man, too, Captain Dering! But those
     words--'I love you'--parted us once, and for all. They mirrored the truth for us--the truth of
     the love which hides in balconies--in pleasure boats--" he took a step forward, and his whole
     presence changed. He raised his hand, priest to its finger tips. "Let it mirror the truth to
     you also, my son--leave this poor lady to her duty, as I--"
Vincent Dering broke in on him haughtily, his pride in arms, impatience at the falseness of
     his position making him discourteous.
"You don't understand; you are absolutely mistaken--I refuse to explain, but I really must
     ask you not to interfere."
The old man's whole bearing changed again. He drew himself up, and, foils in hand, bowed, as
     fencers do at the salute.
"Were I the lady's husband, sir, I would make you answer. As a priest of God, I must
     warn you that I will speak, if--"
Vincent Dering interrupted him again. "I can't prevent that--but you will wrong us--her at
     any rate--the best, the kindest woman--"
He paused, for Father Ninian had come close, laid a hand on his, and the touch seemed to
     bring silence.
"It is sixty long years, Captain Dering," he said, and his eyes seemed to pierce through the
     darkness, "since I have laid my hand on my fellow-men save in the hope of healing. It was a
     fancy of mine after--after we kissed, and parted. But I touch you as a second self, a
     fellow-sinner; for she too was the best--the kindest--" His old voice failed.
Despite his anger at the whole miserable mistake, Vincent was touched; but despite his
     emotion, his annoyance strengthened.
"Possibly," he broke in, "but I must really refuse to discuss the matter further. Shall we
     end this, sir,--unless--" he gave a reckless laugh and pointed to the foils--"you would like to
     fight it out?"
Once more Father Ninian bowed, as fencers bow in the salute, the priest, the wise counsellor,
     lost in an older entity than these; in the high-born Scotch student, who, for a while, had
     forgotten his vocation to ruffle with the best blood in Italy. "I have not the privilege of
     being the lady's protector," he answered hotly. "If I were,"--He paused, then said courteously,
     "Shall we come upstairs? I came down for these foils in order to teach Mr. Carlyon the thrust
     we spoke of once. 'L'Addio del Marito,' they called it in my youth--I doubt if the
     name has changed now. He will be wondering what has become of me, and--and it!"
As Vincent followed him, he felt a thrill at the savageness of the old man's tone, and told
     himself that here was the Church Militant indeed.
He might have said so with still more reason ten minutes after, when Father Ninian was left
     alone. For the hour proved too late for lessons, and Lance Carlyon--who had been out of sorts
     ever since his walk at dawn with Erda Shepherd--was obliged to give in to dinner, grumbling the
     while, that Vincent was the worst chum he ever came across. Never to be found when he was
     wanted, then turning up when dear old Pidar Narâyan looked as if he could have licked
     creation.
Possibly Lance might have repeated this assertion, also, with greater fervour, could he have
     been witness to Father Ninian's actions, when, his last guest gone, he went to put the foils
     back in the armoury next the chapel.
For he would have seen him, with head bowed over the crossed foils he held, repeating a
      "mea culpa" as he passed the altar; but ere the second foil matched its fellow on the
     armoury wall, he would have seen as pretty a bit of sword-play as could well be seen. Many a
     dexterous turn of wrist, many a quick imaginary parry, many a sharp riposte, following
     each other accurately, as if memory held each attack, each defence of an unseen foe; until
     finally, swift as a flash, would come a falter back, as if from a blow, then a thrust
     forward.
There was a little silver bell--such as men put to a falcon's hood--no bigger than a
     sixpence, shaped like a man's heart, upon the tassel of a resting lance beneath the solitary
     foil. And the tassel swayed gently in the cool river breeze.
Yet at each thrust the heart-shaped bell chimed a feeble protest under the button of the
     foil, making the Church Militant smile cheerfully.
