<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Dombey and Son</title><author>Dickens, Charles (1812-1870)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV
In which some more First Appearances are made on the Stage of these Adventures
THOUGH the offices of Dombey and Son were within the liberties of the City of London, and
     within hearing of Bow Bells, when their clashing voices were not drowned by the uproar in the
     streets, yet were there hints of adventurous and romantic story to be observed in some of the
     adjacent objects. Gog and Magog held their state within ten minutes´ walk; the Royal Exchange
     was close at hand; the Bank of England, with its vaults of gold and silver `down among the dead
     men´ underground, was their magnificent neighbour. Just round the corner stood the rich East
     India House, teeming with suggestions of precious stuffs and stones, tigers, elephants,
     howdahs, hookahs, umbrellas, palm trees, palanquins, and gorgeous princes of a brown complexion
     sitting on carpets, with their slippers very much turned up at the toes. Anywhere in the
     immediate vicinity there might be seen pictures of ships speeding away full sail to all parts
     of the world; outfitting ware-houses ready to pack off anybody anywhere, fully equipped in half
     an hour; and little timber midshipmen in obsolete naval uniforms, eternally employed outside
     the shop doors of nautical instrument-makers in taking observations of the hackney coaches. 
Sole master and proprietor of one of these effigies—of that which might be called,
     familiarly, the woodenest—of that which thrust itself out above the pavement, right leg
     foremost, with a suavity the least endurable, and had the shoe buckles and flapped waistcoat
     the least reconcileable to human reason, and bore at its right eye the most offensively
     disproportionate piece of machinery—sole master and proprietor of that midshipman, and proud of
     him too, an elderly gentleman in a Welsh wig had paid house-rent, taxes, and dues, for more
     years than many a full-grown midshipman of flesh and blood has numbered in his life; and
     midshipmen who have attained a pretty green old age, have not been wanting in the English navy. 
The stock-in-trade of this old gentleman comprised chronometers, barometers, telescopes,
     compasses, charts, maps, sextants, quadrants, and specimens of every kind of instrument used in
     the working of a ship's course, or the keeping of a ship's reckoning, or the prosecuting of a
     ship's discoveries. Objects in brass and glass were in his drawers and on his shelves, which
     none but the initiated could have found the top of, or guessed the use of, or having once
     examined, could have ever got back again into their mahogany nests without assistance.
     Everything was jammed into the tightest cases, fitted into the narrowest corners, fenced up
     behind the most impertinent cushions, and screwed into the acutest angles, to prevent its
     philosophical composure from being disturbed by the rolling of the sea. Such extraordinary
     precautions were taken in every instance to save room, and keep the thing compact; and so much
     practical navigation was fitted, and cushioned, and screwed into every box (whether the box was
     a mere slab, as some were, or something between a cocked hat and a star-fish, as others were,
     and those quite mild and modest boxes as compared with others); that the shop itself, partaking
     of the general infection, seemed almost to become a snug, sea-going, ship-shape concern,
     wanting only good sea-room, in the event of an unexpected launch, to work its way securely to
     any desert island in the world. 
Many minor incidents in the household life of the Ships'Instrument-maker who was proud of his
     little midshipman, assisted and bore out this fancy. His acquaintance lying chiefly among
     ship-chandlers and so forth, he had always plenty of the veritable ships´ biscuit on his table.
     It was familiar with dried meats and tongues, possessing an extraordinary flavour of rope yarn.
     Pickles were produced upon it, in great wholesale jars, with `dealer in all kinds of Ships´
     Provisions´ on the label; spirits were set forth in case bottles with no throats. Old prints of
     ships with alphabetical references to their various mysteries, hung in frames upon the walls;
     the Tartar Frigate under weigh, was on the plates; outlandish shells, seaweeds, and mosses,
     decorated the chimney-piece; the little wainscotted back parlour was lighted by a sky-light,
     like a cabin. 
Here he lived too, in skipper-like state, all alone with his nephew Walter: a boy of fourteen
     who looked quite enough like a midshipman, to carry out the prevailing idea. But there it
     ended, for Solomon Gills himself (more generally called old Sol) was far from having a maritime
     appearance. To say nothing of his Welsh wig, which was as plain and stubborn a Welsh wig as
     ever was worn, and in which he looked like anything but a Rover, he was a slow, quiet-spoken,
     thoughtful old fellow, with eyes as red as if they had been small suns looking at you through a
     fog; and a newly-awakened manner, such as he might have acquired by having stared for three or
     four days successively through every optical instrument in his shop, and suddenly came back to
     the world again, to find it green. The only change ever known in his outward man, was from a
     complete suit of coffee-colour cut very square, and ornamented with glaring buttons, to the
     same suit of coffee-colour minus the inexpressibles, which were then of a pale nankeen. He wore
     a very precise shirt-frill, and carried a pair of first-rate spectacles on his forehead, and a
     tremendous chronometer in his fob, rather than doubt which precious possession, he would have
     believed in a conspiracy against it on the part of all the clocks and watches in the City, and
     even of the very Sun itself. Such as he was, such he had been in the shop and parlour behind
     the little midshipman, for years upon years; going regularly aloft to bed every night in a
     howling garret remote from the lodgers, where, when gentlemen of England who lived below at
     ease had little or no idea of the state of the weather, it often blew great guns. 
It is half-past five o'clock, and an autumn afternoon, when the reader and Solomon Gills
     become acquainted. Solomon Gills is in the act of seeing what time it is by the unimpeachable
     chronometer. The usual daily clearance has been making in the City for an hour or more; and the
     human tide is still rolling westward. `The streets have thinned,´ as Mr. Gills says, `very
     much.´ It threatens to be wet to-night. All the weather-glasses in the ship are in low spirits,
     and the rain already shines upon the cocked hat of the wooden midshipman. 
`Where's Walter, I wonder!´ said Solomon Gills, after he had carefully put up the chronometer
     again. `Here's dinner been ready, half an hour, and no Walter!´ 
Turning round upon his stool behind the counter, Mr. Gills looked out among the instruments
     in the window, to see if his nephew might be crossing the road. No. He was not among the
     bobbing umbrellas, and he certainly was not the newspaper boy in the oilskin cap who was slowly
     working his way along the piece of brass outside, writing his name over Mr. Gills'name with his
     forefinger. 
`If I didn't know he was too fond of me to make a run of it, and go and enter himself aboard
     ship against my wishes, I should begin to be fidgetty,´ said Mr. Gills, tapping two or three
     weather-glasses with his knuckles. `I really should. All in the Downs, eh! Lots of moisture!
     Well! it's wanted.´ 
`I believe,´ said Mr. Gills, blowing the dust off the glass top of a compass-case, `that you
     don't point more direct and due to the back parlour than the boy's inclination does after all.
     And the parlour couldn't bear straighter either. Due north. Not the twentieth part of a point
     either way.´ 
`Halloa, Uncle Sol!´ 
`Halloa, my boy!´ cried the Instrument-maker, turning briskly round. `What! you are here, are
     you?´ 
A cheerful looking, merry boy, fresh with running home in the rain; fair-faced, bright-eyed,
     and curly-haired. 
`Well, Uncle, how have you got on without me all day? Is dinner ready? I'm so hungry.´ 
`As to getting on,´ said Solomon good-naturedly, `it would be odd if I couldn't get on
     without a young dog like you a great deal better than with you. As to dinner being ready, it's
     been ready this half hour and waiting for you. As to being hungry, I am! 
`Come along then, Uncle!´ cried the boy. `Hurrah for the admiral!´ 
`Confound the admiral!´ returned Solomon Gills. `You mean the Lord Mayor.´ 
`No I don't!´ cried the boy. `Hurrah for the admiral!Hurrah for the admiral! For—ward!´ 
At this word of command, the Welsh wig and its wearer were borne without resistance into the
     back parlour, as at the head of a boarding party of five hundred men; and Uncle Sol and his
     nephew were speedily engaged on a fried sole with a prospect of steak to follow. 
`The Lord Mayor, Wally,´ said Solomon, `for ever! No more admirals. The Lord Mayor's
      your admiral.´ 
`Oh, is he though!´ said the boy, shaking his head. `Why, the Sword Bearer's better than him.
     He draws his sword sometimes.´ 
`And a pretty figure he cuts with it for his pains,´ returned the Uncle. `Listen to me,
     Wally, listen to me. Look on the mantel-shelf.´ 
`Why who has cocked my silver mug up there, on a nail?´ exclaimed the boy. 
`I have,´ said his Uncle. `No more mugs now. We must begin to drink out of glasses to-day,
     Walter. We are men of business. We belong to the City. We started in life this morning.´ 
`Well, Uncle,´ said the boy, `I'll drink out of anything you like, so long as I can drink to
     you. Here's to you Uncle Sol, and Hurrah for the—´ 
`Lord Mayor,´ interrupted the old man. 
`For the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, Common Council, and Livery,´ said the boy. `Long life to 'em!´ 
The uncle nodded his head with great satisfaction. `And now,´ he said, `let's hear something
     about the firm.´ 
`Oh! there's not much to be told about the Firm, Uncle,´ said the boy, plying his knife and
     fork. `It's a precious dark set of offices, and in the room where I sit, there's a high fender,
     and an iron safe, and some cards about ships that are going to sail, and an almanack, and some
     desks and stools, and an inkbottle, and some books, and some boxes, and a lot of cobwebs, and
     in one of 'em, just over my head, a shrivelled-up blue-bottle that looks as if it had hung
     there ever so long.´ 
`Nothing else?´ said the uncle. 
`No, nothing else, except an old bird-cage (I wonder how that ever came there!) and
     a coal-scuttle.´ 
`No, bankers´ books, or cheque books, or bills, or such tokens of wealth rolling in from day
     to day?´ said old Sol, looking wistfully at his nephew out of the fog that always seemed to
     hang about him, and laying an unctuous emphasis upon the words. 
`Oh yes, plenty of that I suppose,´ returned his nephew carelessly; `but all that sort of
     thing's in Mr. Carker's room, or Mr. Morfin's, or Mr. Dombey's.´ 
`Has Mr. Dombey been there to-day?´ inquired the Uncle. 
`Oh yes! In and out all day.´ 
`He didn't take any notice of you, I suppose?´ 
`Yes he did. He walked up to my seat—I wish he wasn't so solemn and stiff, Uncle, and said,
     “Oh! you are the son of Mr. Gills the Ships´ Instrument-maker.” “Nephew, Sir,” I said. “I said
     nephew, boy,” said he. But I could take my oath he said Son, uncle.´ 
`You're mistaken I dare say. It's no matter.´ 
`No, it's no matter, but he needn't have been so sharp, I thought. There was no harm in it
     though he did say Son. Then he told me that you had spoken to him about me, and that he had
     found me employment in the House accordingly, and that I was expected to be attentive and
     punctual, and then he went away. I thought he didn't seem to like me much.´ 
`You mean, I suppose,´ observed the Instrument-maker, `that you didn't seem to like him
     much?´ 
`Well, Uncle,´ returned the boy, laughing. `Perhaps so; I never thought of that.´ 
Solomon looked a little graver as he finished his dinner, and glanced from time to time at
     the boy's bright face. When dinner was done, and the cloth was cleared away (the entertainment
     had been brought from a neighbouring eating-house), he lighted a candle, and went down below
     into a little cellar, while his nephew, standing on the mouldy staircase, dutifully held the
     light. After a moment's groping here and there, he presently returned with a very
     ancient-looking bottle, covered with dust and dirt. 
`Why, Uncle Sol!´ said the boy, `what are you about? that's the wonderful Madeira!—there's
     only one more bottle!´ 
Uncle Sol nodded his head, implying that he knew very well what he was about; and having
     drawn the cork in solemn silence, filled two glasses and set the bottle and a third clean glass
     on the table. 
`You shall drink the other bottle, Wally,´ he said, `when you come to good fortune; when you
     are a thriving, respected, happy man; when the start in life you have made to-day shall have
     brought you, as I pray Heaven it may!—to a smooth part of the course you have to run, my child.
     My love to you!´ 
Some of the fog that hung about old Sol seemed to have got into his throat; for he spoke
     huskily. His hand shook too, as he clinked his glass against his nephew's. But having once got
     the wine to his lips, he tossed it off like a man, and smacked them afterwards. 
`Dear Uncle,´ said the boy, affecting to make light of it, while the tears stood in his eyes,
     `for the honour you have done me, et cetera, et cetera. I shall now beg to propose Mr. Solomon
     Gills with three times three and one cheer more. Hurrah! and you'll return thanks, Uncle, when
     we drink the last bottle together; won't you?´ 
They clinked their glasses again; and Walter, who was hoarding his wine, took a sip of it,
     and held the glass up to his eye with as critical an air as he could possibly assume. 
His Uncle sat looking at him for some time in silence. When their eyes at last met, he began
     at once to pursue the theme that had occupied his thoughts, aloud, as if he had been speaking
     all the while. 
`You see, Walter,´ he said, `in truth this business is merely a habit with me. I am so
     accustomed to the habit that I could hardly live if I relinquished it: but there's nothing
     doing, nothing doing. When that uniform was worn,´ pointing out towards the little midshipman,
     `then indeed, fortunes were to be made, and were made. But competition, competition—new
     invention, new invention—alteration, alteration—the world's gone past me. I hardly know where I
     am myself; much less where my customers are.´ 
Never mind 'em, Uncle!´ 
`Since you came home from weekly boarding-school at Peckham, for instance—and that's ten
     days,´ said Solomon, `I don't remember more than one person that has come into the shop.´ 
`Two, Uncle, don't you recollect? There was the man who came to ask for change for a
     sovereign—´ 
`That's the one,´ said Solomon. 
`Why, Uncle! don't you call the women anybody, who came to ask the way to Mile-End Turnpike?´ 
`Oh! it's true,´ said solomon, `I forgot her. Two persons.´ 
`To be sure, they didn't buy anything,´ cried the boy. 
`No. They didn't buy anything,´ said Solomon, quietly. 
`Nor want anything,´ cried the boy. 
`No. If they had, they'd gone to another shop,´ said Solomon, in the same tone. 
`But there were two of 'em, Uncle,´ cried the boy, as if that were a great triumph. `You said
     only one.´ 
`Well, Wally,´ resumed the old man, after a short pause: `not being like the Savages who came
     on Robinson Crusoe's Island, we can't live on a man who asks for change for a sovereign, and a
     woman who inquires the way to Mile-End Turnpike. As I said just now, the world has gone past
     me. I don't blame it; but I no longer understand it. Tradesmen are not the same as they used to
     be, apprentices are not the same, business is not the same, business commodities are not the
     same. Seven-eighths of my stock is old-fashioned. I am an old-fashioned man in an old-fashioned
     shop, in a street that is not the same as I remember it. I have fallen behind the time, and am
     too old to catch it again. Even the noise it makes a long way ahead, confuses me.´ 
Walter was going to speak, but his Uncle held up his hand. 
`Therefore, Wally—therefore it is that I am anxious you should be early in the busy world,
     and on the world's track. I am only the ghost of this business—its substance vanished long ago;
     and when I die, its ghost will be laid. As it is clearly no inheritance for you then, I have
     thought it best to use for your advantage, almost the only fragment of the old connexion that
     stands by me, thought long habit. Some people suppose me to be wealthy. I wish for your sake
     they were right. But whatever I leave behind me, or whatever I can give you, you in such a
     house as Dombey's are in the road to use well and make the most of. Be diligent, try to like
     it, my dear boy, work for a steady independence, and be happy!´ 
`I'll do everything I can, Uncle, to deserve your affection. Indeed I will,´ said the boy,
     earnestly. 
`I know it,´ said Solomon. `I am sure of it,´ and he applied himself to a second glass of the
     old Madeira, with increased relish. `As to the Sea,´ he pursued, `that's well enough in
     fiction, wally, but it won't do in fact: it won't do at all. It's natural enough that you
     should think about it, associating it with all these familiar things; but it won't do, it won't
     do.´ 
Solomon Gills rubbed his hands with an air of stealthy enjoyment, as he talked of the sea,
     though; and looked on the sea-faring objects about him with inexpressible complacency. 
`Think of this wine for instance,´ said old Sol, `which has been to the East Indies and back,
     I'm not able to say how often, and has been once round the world. Think of the pitch-dark
     nights, the roaring winds, and rolling seas:´ 
`The thunder, lightning, rain, hail, storm of all kinds,´ said the boy. 
`To be sure,´ said Solomon,—`that this wine has passed through. Think what a straining and
     creaking of timbers and masts: what a whistling and howling of the gale through ropes and
     rigging:´ 
`What a clambering aloft of men, vying with each other who shall lie out first upon the yards
     to furl the icy sails, while the ship rolls and pitches, like mad!´ cried his nephew. 
`Exactly so,´ said Solomon: `has gone on, over the old cask that held this wine. Why, when
     the charming Sally went down in the—´ 
`In the Baltic Sea, in the dead of the night; five-and-twenty minutes past twelve when the
     captain's watch stopped in his pocket; he lying dead against the main-mast—on the fourteenth of
     February, seventeen forty-nine!´ cried Walter, with great animation. 
`Ay, to be sure!´ cried old Sol, `quite right! Then, there were five hundred casks of such
     wine aboard; and all hands (except the first mate, first lieutenant, two seamen, and a lady, in
     a leaky boat) going to work to stave the casks, got drunk and died drunk, singing, `Rule
     Britannia,´ when she settled and went down, and ending with one awful scream in chorus.´ 
`But when the George the Second drove ashore, uncle, on the coast of Cornwall, in a dismal
     gale, two hours before daybreak, on the fourth of March,´ seventy-one, she had near two hundred
     horses aboard; and the horses breaking loose down below, early in the gale, and tearing to and
     fro, and trampling each other to death, made such noises, and set up such human cries, that the
     crew believing the ship to be full of devils, some of the best men, losing heart and head, went
     overboard in despair, and only two were left alive, at last, to tell the tale.´ 
`And when,´ said old Sol, `when the Polyphemus—´ 
`Private West India Trader, burden three hundred and fifty tons, Captain, John Brown of
     Deptford. Owners, Wiggs and Co.,´ cried Walter. 
`The same,´ said Sol; `when she took fire, four days´ sail with a fair wind out of Jamaica
     Harbour, in the night—´ 
`There were two brothers on board,´ interposed his nephew, speaking very fast and loud, `and
     there not being room for both of them in the only boat that wasn't swamped, neither of them
     would consent to go, until the elder took the younger by the waist and flung him in. And then
     the younger rising in the boat, cried out, “Dear Edward, think of your promised wife at home.
     I'm only a boy. No one waits at home for me. Leap down into my place!” and flung himself in the
     sea!´ 
The kindling eye and heightened colour of the boy, who had risen from his seat in the
     earnestness of what he said and felt, seemed to remind old Sol of something he had forgotten,
     or that his encircling mist had hitherto shut out. Instead of proceeding with any more
     anecdotes, as he had evidently intended but a moment before, he gave a short dry cough, and
     said, `Well! suppose we change the subject.´ 
The truth was, that the simple-minded uncle in his secret attraction towards the marvellous
     and adventurous—of which he was, in some sort, a distant relation, by his trade—had greatly
     encouraged the same attraction in the nephew; and that everything that had ever been put before
     the boy to deter him from a life of adventure, had had the usual unaccountable effect of
     sharpening his taste for it. This is invariable. It would seem as if there never was a book
     written, or a story told, expressly with the object of keeping boys on shore, which did not
     lure and charm them to the ocean, as a matter of course. 
But an addition to the little party now made its appearance, in the shape of a gentleman in a
     wide suit of blue, with a hook instead of a hand attached to his right wrist; very bushy black
     eyebrows; and a thick stick in his left hand, covered all over (like his nose) with knobs. He
     wore a loose black silk handkerchief round his neck, and such a very large coarse shirt collar,
     that it looked like a small sail. He was evidently the person for whom the spare wine-glass was
     intended, and evidently knew it; for having taken off his rough outer coat, and hung up, on a
     particular pet behind the door, such a hard glazed hat as a sympathetic person's head might
     ache at the sight of, and which left a red rim round his own forehead as if he had been wearing
     a tight basin, he brought a chair to where the clean glass was, and sat himself down behind it.
     He was usually addressed as Captain, this visitor; and had been a pilot, or a skipper, or a
     privateers-man, or all three perhaps; and was a very salt-looking man indeed. 
His face, remarkable for a brown solidity, brightened as he shook hands with uncle and
     nephew; but he seemed to be of a laconic disposition, and merely said: 
`How goes it?´ 
`All well,´ said Mr. Gills, pushing the bottle towards him. 
He took it up, and having surveyed and smelt it, said with extraordinary expression: 
`The?´ 
`The,´ returned the Instrument-maker. 
Upon that he whistled as he filled his glass, and seemed to think they were making holiday
     indeed. 
`Wal'r!´ he said, arranging his hair (which was thin) with his hook, and then pointing it at
     the Instrument-maker, `Look at him! Love! Honour! And Obey! Overhaul your catechism till you
     find that passage, and when found turn the leaf down. Success, my boy!´ 
He was so perfectly satisfied both with his quotation and his reference to it, that he could
     not help repeating the words again in a low voice, and saying he had forgotten 'em these forty
     year. 
`But I never wanted two or three words in my life that I didn't know where to lay my hand
     upon 'em, Gills,´ he observed. `It comes of not wasting language as some do.´ 
The reflection perhaps reminded him that he had better, like young Norval's father, `increase
     his store.´ At any rate he became silent, and remained so, until old Sol went out into the shop
     to light it up, when he turned to Walter, and said, without any introductory remark: 
`I suppose he could make a clock if he tried?´ 
`I shouldn't wonder, Captain Cuttle, returned the boy. 
`And it would go!´ said Captain Cuttle, making a species of serpent in the air with his hook.
     `Lord, how that clock would go!´ 
For a moment or two he seemed quite lost in contemplating the pace of this ideal timepiece,
     and sat looking at the boy as if his face were the dial. 
`But he's chockfull of science,´ he observed, waving his hook towards the stock-in-trade.
     `Look'ye here! Here's a collection of 'em. Earth, air, or water. It's all one. Only say where
     you'll have it. Up in a balloon? There you are. Down in a bell? There you are. D'ye want to put
     the North Star in a pair of scales and weigh it? He'll do it for you.´ 
It may be gathered from these remarks that Captain Cuttle's reverence for the stock of
     instruments was profound, and that his philosophy knew little or no distinction between trading
     in it and inventing it. 
`Ah!´ he said, with a sigh, `it's a fine thing to understand 'em. And yet it's a fine thing
     not to understand 'em. I hardly know which is best. It's so comfortable to sit here and feel
     that you might be weighed, measured, magnified, electrified, polarized, played the very devil
     with: and never know how.´ 
Nothing short of the wonderful Madeira, combined with the occasion (which rendered it
     desirable to improve and expand Walter's mind), could have ever loosened his tongue to the
     extent of giving utterance to this prodigious oration. He seemed quite amazed himself at the
     manner in which it opened up to view the sources of the taciturn delight, he had had in eating
     Sunday dinners in that parlour for ten years. Becoming a sadder and a wiser man, he mused and
     held his peace. 
`Come!´ cried the subject of his admiration, returning. `Before you have your glass of grog,
     Ned, we must finish the bottle.´ 
`Stand by!´ said Ned, filling his glass. `Give the boy some more.´ 
`No more, thank'e, uncle!´ 
`Yes, yes,´ said Sol, `a little more. We'll finish the bottle, to the House, Ned—Walter's
     house. Why it may be his house one of these days, in part. Who knows? Sir Richard Whittington
     married his master's daughter.´ 
`”Turn again Whittington, Lord Mayor of London, and when you are old you will never depart
     from it,”´ interposed the Captain. `Wal'r! Overhaul the book, my lad.´ 
`And although Mr. Dombey hasn't a daughter,´ Sol began. 
`Yes, yes, he has, Uncle,´ said the boy, reddening and laughing. 
`Has he?´ cried the old man. `Indeed I think he has too.´ 
`Oh! I know he has,´ said the boy. `Some of 'em were talking about it in the office to-day.
     And they do say, Uncle and Captain Cuttle,´ lowering his voice, `that he's taken a dislike to
     her, and that she's left, unnoticed, among the servants, and that his mind's so set all the
     while upon having his son in the House, that although he's only a baby now, he is going to have
     balances struck oftener than formerly, and the books kept closer than they used to be, and has
     even been seen (when he thought he wasn't) walking in the Docks, looking at his ships and
     property and all that, as if he was exulting like, over what he and his son will possess
     together. That's what they say. Of course I don't know.´ 
`He knows all about her already, you see,´ said the Instrumentmaker. 
`Nonsense, Uncle,´ cried the boy, still reddening and laughing, boy-like. `How can I help
     hearing what they tell me?´ 
`The Son's a little in our way at present, I'm afraid, Ned,´ said the old man, humouring the
     joke. 
`Very much,´ said the Captain. 
`Nevertheless, we'll drink him,´ pursued Sol. `So, here's to Dombey and Son.´ 
`Oh, very well, Uncle,´ said the boy, merrily. `Since you have introduced the mention of her,
     and have connected me with her, and have said that I know all about her, I shall make bold to
     amend the toast. So here's to Dombey—and Son—and Daughter!´ 
</div></body></text></TEI>