<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Dombey and Son</title><author>Dickens, Charles (1812-1870)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">
CHAPTER XLIV
A Separation
WITH the day, though not so early as the sun, uprose Miss Susan Nipper. There was a heaviness
     in this young maiden's exceedingly sharp black eyes, that abated somewhat of their sparkling,
     and suggested—which was not their usual character—the possibility of their being sometimes
     shut. There was likewise a swollen look about them, as if they had been crying over-night. But
     the Nipper, so far from being cast down, was singularly brisk and bold, and all her energies
     appeared to be braced up for some great feat. This was noticeable even in her dress, which was
     much more tight and trim than usual; and in occasional twitches of her head as she went about
     the house, which were mightily expressive of determination. 
In a word, she had formed a determination, and an aspiring one: it being nothing less than
     this—to penetrate to Mr. Dombey's presence, and have speech of that gentleman alone. `I have
     often said I would,´ she remarked, in a threatening manner, to herself, that morning, with many
     twitches of her head, `and now I will!´ 
Spurring herself on to the accomplishment of this desperate design, with a sharpness that was
     peculiar to herself, Susan Nipper haunted the hall and staircase during the whole forenoon,
     without finding a favourable opportunity for the assault. Not at all baffled by this
     discomfiture, which indeed had a stimulating effect, and put her on her mettle, she diminished
     nothing of her vigilance; and at last discovered, towards evening, that her sworn foe Mrs.
     Pipchin, under pretence of having sat up all night, was dozing in her own room, and that Mr.
     Dombey was lying on his sofa, unattended. 
With a twitch—not of her head merely, this time, but of her whole self—the Nipper went on
     tiptoe to Mr. Dombey's door, and knocked. `Come in!´ said Mr. Dombey. Susan encouraged herself
     with a final twitch, and went in. 
Mr. Dombey, who was eyeing the fire, gave an amazed look at his visitor, and raised himself a
     little on his arm. The Nipper dropped a curtsey. 
`What do you want?´ said Mr. Dombey. 
`If you please, Sir, I wish to speak to you.´ said Susan. 
Mr. Dombey moved his lips as if he were repeating the words, but he seemed so lost in
     astonishment at the presumption of the young woman as to be incapable of giving them utterance. 
`I have been in your service, Sir,´ said Susan Nipper, with her usual rapidity, `now twelve
     year a waiting on Miss Floy my own young lady who couldn't speak plain when I first come here
     and I was old in this house when Mrs. Richards was new, I may not be Meethosalem, but I am not
     a child in arms.´ 
Mr. Dombey, raised upon his arm and looking at her, offered no comment on this preparatory
     statement of facts. 
`There never was a dearer or a blesseder young lady than is my young lady, Sir,' said Susan,
     `and I ought to know a great deal better than some for I have seen her in her grief and I have
     seen her in her joy (there's not been much of it) and I have seen her with her brother and I
     have seen her in her loneliness and some have never seen her, and I say to some and all—I do!´
     and here the black-eyed shook her head, and slightly stamped her foot; `that she's blessedest
     and dearest angel is Miss Floy that ever drew the breath of life, the more that I was torn to
     pieces Sir the more I'd say it though I may not be a Fox's Martyr.´ 
Mr. Dombey turned yet paler than his fall had made him, with indignation and astonishment;
     and kept his eyes upon the speaker as if he accused them, and his ears too, of playing him
     false. 
`No one could be anything but true and faithful to Miss Floy, Sir,´ pursued Susan, `and I
     take no merit for my service of twelve year, for I love her—yes, I say to some and all I
     do!'—and here the black-eyed shook her head again, and slightly stamped her foot again, and
     checked a sob; `but true and faithful service gives me right to speak I hope, and speak I must
     and will now, right or wrong.´ 
`What do you mean, woman?´ said Mr. Dombey, glaring at her. `How do you dare?´ 
`What I mean, Sir, is to speak respectful and without offence, but out, and how I dare I know
     not but I do!´ said Susan. `Oh! you don't know my young lady Sir you don't indeed, you'd never
     know so little of her, if you did.´ 
Mr. Dombey, in a fury, put his hand out for the bell-rope; but there was no bell-rope on that
     side of the fire, and he could not rise and cross to the other without assistance. The quick
     eye of the Nipper detected his helplessness immediately, and now, as she afterwards observed,
     she felt she had got him. 
`Miss Floy,´ said Susan Nipper, `is the most devoted and most patient and most dutiful and
     beautiful of daughters, there an't no gentleman, no Sir, though as great and rich as all the
     greatest and richest of England put together, but might be proud of her and would and ought. If
     he knew her value right, he'd rather lose his greatness and his fortune piece by piece and beg
     his way in rags from door to door, I say to some and all, he would!´ cried Susan Nipper,
     bursting into tears, `than bring the sorrow on her tender heart that I have seen it suffer in
     this house!´ 
`Woman,´ cried Mr. Dombey, `leave the room.´ 
`Begging your pardon, not even if I am to leave the situation, Sir,´ replied the steadfast
     Nipper, `in which I have been so many years and seen so much—although I hope you'd never have
     the heart to send me from Miss Floy for such a cause—will I go now till I have said the rest, I
     may not be a Indian widow Sir and I am not and I would not so become but if I once made up my
     mind to burn myself alive, I'd do it! And I've made my mind up to go on.´ 
Which was rendered no less clear by the expression of Susan Nipper's countenance, than by her
     words. 
`There an't a person in your service, Sir,´ pursued the blackeyed, `that has always stood
     more in awe of you than me and you may think how true it is when I make so bold as say that I
     have hundreds and hundreds of times thought of speaking to you and never been able to make my
     mind up to it till last night, but last night decided of me.´ 
Mr. Dombey, in a paroxysm of rage, made another grasp at the bell-rope that was not there,
     and, in its absence, pulled his hair rather than nothing. 
`I have seen,´ said Susan Nipper, `Miss Floy strive and strive when nothing but a child so
     sweet and patient that the best of women might have copied from her, I've seen her sitting
     nights together half the night through to help her delicate brother with his learning, I've
     seen her helping him and watching him at other times—some well know when—I've seen her, with no
     encouragement and no help, grow up to be a lady, thank God! that is the grace and pride of
     every company she goes in, and I've always seen her cruelly neglected and keenly feeling of
     it—I say to some and all, I have!—and never said one word, but ordering one's self lowly and
     reverently towards one's betters, is not to be a worshipper of graven images, and I will and
     must speak!´ 
`Is there anybody there?´ cried Mr. Dombey, calling out. `Where are the men? where are the
     women? Is there no one there?´ 
`I left my dear young lady out of bed late last night,´ said Susan, nothing checked, `and I
     knew why, for you was ill Sir and she didn't know how ill and that was enough to make her
     wretched as I saw it did. I may not be a Peacock; but I have my eyes—and I sat up a little in
     my own room thinking she might be lonesome and might want me, and I saw her steal down stairs
     and come to this door as if it was a guilty thing to look at her own Pa, and then steal back
     again and go into them lonely drawing-rooms, a crying so, that I could hardly bear to hear it.
     I can not bear to hear it,´ said Susan Nipper, wiping her black eyes, and fixing them
     undauntingly on Mr. Dombey's infuriated face. `It's not the first time I have heard it, not by
     many and many a time you don't know your own daughter, Sir, you don't know what you're doing,
     Sir, I say to some and all,´ cried Susan Nipper, in a final burst, `that it's a sinful shame!´ 
`Why, hoity toity!´ cried the voice of Mrs. Pipchin, as the black bombazeen garments of that
     fair Peruvian Miner swept into the room. `What's this, indeed?´ 
Susan favoured Mrs. Pipchin with a look she had invented expressly for her when they first
     became acquainted, and resigned the reply to Mr. Dombey. 
`What's this?´ repeated Mr. Dombey, almost foaming. `What's this, Madam? You who are at the
     head of this household, and bound to keep it in order, have reason to inquire. Do you know this
     woman?´ 
`I know very little good of her, Sir,´ croaked Mrs. Pipchin. `How dare you come here, you
     hussy? Go along with you!´ 
But the inflexible Nipper, merely honouring Mrs. Pipchin with another look, remained. 
`Do you call it managing this establishment, Madam,´ said Mr. Dombey, `to leave a person like
     this at liberty to come and talk to me! A gentleman—in his own house—in his own
     room—assailed with the impertinences of women-servants!´ 
`Well, Sir,´ returned Mrs. Pipchin, with vengeance in her hard grey eye, `I exceedingly
     deplore it; nothing can be more irregular; nothing can be more out of all bounds and reason;
     but I regret to say, Sir, that this young woman is quite beyond control. She has been spoiled
     by Miss Dombey, and is amenable to nobody. You know you're not,´ said Mrs. Pipchin, sharply,
     and shaking her head at Susan Nipper. `For shame, you hussy! Go along with you!´ 
`If you find people in my service who are not to be controlled, Mrs. Pipchin,' said Mr.
     Dombey, turning back towards the fire, `you know what to do with them, I presume. You know what
     you are here for? Take her away!´ 
`Sir, I know what to do,´ retorted Mrs. Pipchin, `and of course shall do it. Susan Nipper,´
     snapping her up particularly short, `a month's warning from this hour.´ 
`Oh indeed!´ cried Susan, loftily. 
`Yes,´ returned Mrs. Pipchin, `and don't smile at me, you minx, or I'll know the reason why!
     Go along with you this minute!´ 
`I intend to go this minute, you may rely upon it,´ said the voluble Nipper. `I have been in
     this house waiting on my young lady a dozen year and I won't stop in it one hour under notice
     from a person owning to the name of Pipchin, trust me, Mrs. P.´ 
`A good riddance of bad rubbish!´ said that wrathful old lady. `Get along with you, or I'll
     have you carried out!´ 
`My comfort is,´ said Susan, looking back at Mr. Dombey, `that I have told a piece of truth
     this day which ought to have been told long before and can't be told too often or too plain and
     that no amount of Pipchinses—I hope the number of 'em mayn't be great´ (here Mrs. Pipchin
     uttered a very sharp `Go along with you!´ and Miss Nipper repeated the look) `can unsay what I
     have said, though they gave a whole year full of warnings beginning at ten o'clock in the
     forenoon and never leaving off till twelve at night and died of the exhaustion which would be a
     Jubilee!´ 
With these words, Miss Nipper preceded her foe out of the room; and walking upstairs to her
     own apartments in great state, to the choking exasperation of the ireful Pipchin, sat down
     among her boxes and began to cry. 
From this soft mood she was soon aroused, with a very wholesome and refreshing effect, by the
     voice of Mrs. Pipchin outside the door. 
`Does that bold-faced slut,´ said the fell Pipchin, `intend to take her warning, or does she
     not?´ 
Miss Nipper replied from within that the person described did not inhabit that part of the
     house, but that her name was Pipchin, and she was to be found in the housekeeper's room. 
`You saucy baggage!´ retorted Mrs. Pipchin, rattling at the handle of the door. `Go along
     with you this minute. Pack up your things directly! How dare you talk in this way to a
     gentlewoman who has seen better days?´ 
To which Miss Nipper rejoined from her castle, that she pitied the better days that had seen
     Mrs. Pipchin; and that for her part she considered the worst days in the year to be about that
     lady's mark, except that they were much too good for her. 
`But you needn't trouble yourself to make a noise at my door,´ said Susan Nipper, `nor to
     contaminate the key-hole with your eye, I'm packing up and going you may take your affidavit.´ 
The Dowager expressed her lively satisfaction at this intelligence, and with some general
     opinions upon young hussies as a race, and especially upon their demerits after being spoiled
     by Miss Dombey, withdrew to prepare the Nipper's wages. Susan then bestirred herself to get her
     trunks in order, that she might take an immediate and dignified departure; sobbing heartily all
     the time, as she thought of Florence. 
The object of her regret was not long in coming to her, for the news soon spread over the
     house that Susan Nipper had had a disturbance with Mrs. Pipchin, and that they had both
     appealed to Mr. Dombey, and that there had been an unprecedented piece of work in Mr. Dombey's
     room, and that Susan was going. The latter part of this confused rumour, Florence found to be
     so correct, that Susan had locked the last trunk and was sitting upon it with her bonnet on,
     when she came into her room. 
`Susan!´ cried Florence. `Going to leave me! You!´ 
`Oh for goodness gracious sake, Miss Floy,´ said Susan, sobbing, `don't speak a word to me or
     I shall demean myself before them Pi-i-ipchinses, and I wouldn't have 'em see me cry Miss Floy
     for worlds!´ 
`Susan!´ said Florence. `My dear girl, my old friend! What shall I do without you! Can you
     bear to go away so?´ 
`No-n-o-o, my darling dear Miss Floy, I can't indeed,´ sobbed Susan. `But it can't be helped,
     I've done my duty Miss, I have indeed. It's no fault of mine. I am quite resi-igned. I couldn't
     stay my month or I could never leave you then my darling and I must at last as well as at
     first, don't speak to me Miss Floy, for though I'm pretty firm I'm not a marble doorpost, my
     own dear.´ 
`What is it? Why is it?´ said Florence. `Won't you tell me?´ For Susan was shaking her head. 
`No-n-no, my darling,´ returned Susan. `Don't ask me, for I mustn't, and whatever you do
     don't put in a word for me to stop, for it couldn't be and you'd only wrong yourself, and so
     God bless you my own precious and forgive me any harm I have done, or any temper I have showed
     in all these many years!´ 
With which entreaty, very heartily delivered, Susan hugged her mistress in her arms. 
`My darling there's a many that may come to serve you and be glad to serve you and who'll
     serve you well and true,´ said Susan, `but there can't be one who'll serve you so affectionate
     as me or love you half as dearly, that's my comfort. Go-oodbye, sweet Miss Floy!´ 
`Where will you go, Susan?´ asked her weeping mistress. 
`I've got a brother down in the country Miss—a farmer in Essex,´ said the heart-broken
     Nipper, `that keeps ever so many co-o-ows and pigs and I shall go down there by the coach and
     sto-op with him, and don't mind me, for I've got money in the Savings´ Banks my dear, and
     needn't take another service just yet, which I couldn't, couldn't, couldn't do, my heart's own
     mistress!´ Susan finished with a burst of sorrow, which was opportunely broken by the voice of
     Mrs. Pipchin talking down stairs; on hearing which, she dried her red and swollen eyes, and
     made a melancholy feint of calling jauntily to Mr. Towlinson to fetch a cab and carry down her
     boxes. 
Florence, pale and hurried and distressed, but withheld from useless interference even here,
     by her dread of causing any new division between her father and his wife (whose stern,
     indignant face had been a warning to her a few moments since), and by her apprehension of being
     in some way unconsciously connected already with the dismissal of her old servant and friend,
     followed, weeping, down stairs to Edith's dressingroom, whither Susan betook herself to make
     her parting curtsey. 
`Now, here's the cab, and here's the boxes, get along with you, do!´ said Mrs. Pipchin,
     presenting herself at the same moment. `I beg your pardon, ma'am, but Mr. Dombey's orders are
     imperative.´ 
Edith, sitting under the hands of her maid—she was going out to dinner—preserved her haughty
     face, and took not the least notice. 
`There's your money,´ said Mrs. Pipchin, who in pursuance of her system, and in recollection
     of the mines, was accustomed to rout the servants about, as she had routed her young Brighton
     boarders; to the everlasting acidulation of Master Bitherstone, `and the sooner this house sees
     your back the better.´ 
Susan had no spirits even for the look that belonged to Mrs. Pipchin by right; so she dropped
     her curtsey to Mrs. Dombey (who inclined her head without one word, and whose eye avoided every
     one but Florence), and gave one last parting hug to her young mistress, and received her
     parting embrace in return. Poor Susan's face at this crisis, in the intensity of her feelings
     and the determined suffocation of her sobs, lest one should become audible and be a triumph to
     Mrs. Pipchin, presented a series of the most extraordinary physiognomical phenomena ever
     witnessed. 
`I beg your pardon, Miss, I'm sure,´ said Towlinson, outside the door with the boxes,
     addressing Florence, `but Mr. Toots is in the drawing-room, and sends his compliments, and begs
     to know how Diogenes and Master is.´ 
Quick as thought, Florence glided out and hastened down stairs, where Mr. Toots, in the most
     splendid vestments, was breathing very hard with doubt and agitation on the subject of her
     coming. 
`Oh, how de do, Miss Dombey,´ said Mr. Toots, `God bless my soul!´ 
This last ejaculation was occasioned by Mr. Toots's deep concern at the distress he saw in
     Florence's face; which caused him to stop short in a fit of chuckles, and become an image of
     despair. 
`Dear Mr. Toots,´ said Florence, `you are so friendly to me, and so honest, that I am sure I
     may ask a favour of you.´ 
`Miss Dombey,´ returned Mr. Toots, `if you'll only name one, you'll—you'll give me an
     appetite. To which,´ said Mr. Toots, with some sentiment, `I have long been a stranger.´ 
`Susan, who is an old friend of mine, the oldest friend I have,´ said Florence, `is about to
     leave here suddenly, and quite alone, poor girl. She is going home, a little way into the
     country. Might I ask you to take care of her until she is in the coach?´ 
`Miss Dombey,´ returned Mr. Toots, `you really do me an honour and a kindness. This proof of
     your confidence, after the manner in which I was Beast enough to conduct myself at Brighton—´ 
`Yes,´ said Florence, hurriedly—`no—don't think of that. Then would you have the kindness
     to—to go? and to be ready to meet her when she comes out? Thank you a thousand times!You ease
     my mind so much. She doesn't seem so desolate. You cannot think how grateful I feel to you, or
     what a good friend I am sure you are!´ And Florence in her earnestness thanked him again and
     again; and Mr. Toots, in his earnestness, hurried away—but backwards, that he might
     lose no glimpse of her. 
Florence had not the courage to go out, when she saw poor Susan in the hall, with Mrs.
     Pipchin driving her forth, and Diogenes jumping about her, and terrifying Mrs. Pipchin to the
     last degree by making snaps at her bombazeen skirts, and howling with anguish at the sound of
     her voice—for the good duenna was the dearest and most cherished aversion of his breast. But
     she saw Susan shake hands with the servants all round, and turn once to look at her old home;
     and she saw Diogenes bound out after the cab, and want to follow it, and testify an
     impossibility of conviction that he had no longer any property in the fare; and the door was
     shut, and the hurry over, and her tears flowed fast for the loss of an old friend, whom no one
     could replace. No one. No one. 
Mr. Toots, like the leal and trusty soul he was, stopped the cabriolet in a twinkling, and
     told Susan Nipper of his commission, at which she cried more than before. 
`Upon my soul and body!´ said Mr. Toots, taking his seat beside her, `I feel for you. Upon my
     word and honour I think you can hardly know your own feelings better than I imagine them. I can
     conceive nothing more dreadful than to have to leave Miss Dombey.´ 
Susan abandoned herself to her grief now, and it really was touching to see her. 
`I say,´ said Mr. Toots, `now, don't! at least I mean now do, you know!´ 
`Do what, Mr. Toots?´ cried Susan. 
`Why, come home to my place, and have some dinner before you start,´ said Mr. Toots. `My
     cook's a most respectable woman—one of the most motherly people I ever saw—and she'll be
     delighted to make you comfortable. Her son,´ said Mr. Toots, as an additional recommendation,
     `was educated in the Blue-coat School, and blown up in a powder-mill.´ 
Susan accepting this kind offer, Mr. Toots conducted her to his dwelling, where they were
     received by the Matron in question who fully justified his character of her, and by the
     Chicken, who at first supposed, on seeing a lady in the vehicle, that Mr. Dombey had been
     doubled up, agreeably to his old recommendation, and Miss Dombey abducted. This gentleman
     awakened in Miss Nipper some considerable astonishment; for, having been defeated by the Larkey
     Boy, his visage was in a state of such great dilapidation, as to be hardly presentable in
     society with comfort to the beholders. The Chicken himself attributed this punishment to his
     having had the misfortune to get into Chancery early in the proceedings, when he was severely
     fibbed by the Larkey one, and heavily grassed. But it appeared from the published records of
     that great contest that the Larkey Boy had had it all his own way from the beginning, and that
     the Chicken had been tapped, and bunged, and had received pepper, and had been made groggy, and
     had come up piping, and had endured a complication of similar strange inconveniences, until he
     had been gone into and finished. 
After a good repast, and much hospitality, Susan set out for the coach-office in another
     cabriolet, with Mr. Toots inside, as before, and the Chicken on the box, who, whatever
     distinction he conferred on the little party by the moral weight and heroism of his character,
     was scarcely ornamental to it, physically speaking, on account of his plasters; which were
     numerous. But the Chicken had registered a vow, in secret, that he would never leave Mr. Toots
     (who was secretly pining to get rid of him), for any less consideration than the good-will and
     fixtures of a public-house; and being ambitious to go into that line, and drink himself to
     death as soon as possible, he felt it his cue to make his company unacceptable. 
The night-coach by which Susan was to go, was on the point of departure. Mr. Toots having put
     per inside, lingered by the window, irresolutely, until the driver was about to mount; when,
     standing on the step, and putting in a face that by the light of the lamp was anxious and
     confused, he said abruptly: 
`I say, Susan! Miss Dombey, you know—´ 
`Yes, Sir.´ 
`Do you think she could—you know—eh?´ 
`I beg your pardon, Mr. Toots,´ said Susan, `but I don't hear you.´ 
`Do you think she could be brought, you know—not exactly at once, but in time—in a long
     time—to—to love me, you know? There!´ said poor Mr. Toots. 
`Oh dear no!´ returned Susan, shaking her head. `I should say, never. Ne—ver!´ 
`Thank'ee!´ said Mr. Toots. `It's of no consequence. Good night. It's of no consequence,
     thank'ee!´ 
</div></body></text></TEI>