
CHAPTER XIV.

This man's metallic; at a sudden blow
His soul rings hard. I cannot lay my palm,
Trembling with life, upon that jointed brass.
I shudder at the cold unanswering touch;
But if it press me in response, I'm bruised.
The next morning, when the Debarrys, including the Rector, who had ridden over to
      the Manor early, were still seated at breakfast, Christian came in with a letter, saying that
      it had been brought by a man employed at the chapel in Malthouse Yard, who had been ordered by
      the minister to use all speed and care in the delivery.
The letter was addressed to Sir Maximus.
"Stay, Christian, it may possibly refer to the lost pocket-book," said Philip Debarry, who
      was beginning to feel rather sorry for his factotum, as a reaction from previous suspicions
      and indignation.
Sir Maximus opened the letter and felt for his glasses, but then said, "Here, you read it,
      Phil: the man writes a hand like small print."

Philip cast his eyes over it, and then read aloud in a tone of satisfaction:—
Sir,—I send this letter to apprise you that I have now in my possession certain
       articles, which, last evening, at about half-past seven o'clock, were found lying on the
       grass at the western extremity of your park. The articles are —1°, a well-filled pocket-book,
       of brown leather, fastened with a black ribbon and with a seal of red wax ; 2°, a small
       note-book, covered with gilded vellum, whereof the clasp was burst, and from out whereof had
       partly escaped a small gold chain, with seals and a locket attached, the locket bearing on
       the back a device, and round the face a female name.Wherefore I request that you will
       further my effort to place these articles in the right hands, by ascertaining whether any
       person within your walls claims them as his property, and by sending that person to me (if
       such be found); for I will on no account let them pass from my care save into that of one
       who, declaring himself to be the owner, can state to me what is the impression on the seal,
       and what the device and name upon the locket.I am, Sir,Yours to command in all
       right dealing,
RUFUS LYON.Malthouse Yard, Oct. 3, 1832.

"Well done, old Lyon," said the Rector; "I didn't think that any composition of his would
      ever give me so much pleasure."
"What an old fox it is!" said Sir Maximus. "Why couldn't he send the things to me at once
      along with the letter?"
"No, no, Max; he uses a justifiable caution," said the Rector, a refined and rather severe
      likeness of his brother, with a ring of fearlessness and decision in his voice which startled
      all flaccid men and unruly boys. "What are you going to do, Phil?" he added, seeing his nephew
      rise.
"To write, of course. Those other matters are yours, I suppose?" said Mr Debarry, looking at
      Christian.
"Yes, sir."
"I shall send you with a letter to the preacher. You can describe your own property. And the
      seal, uncle—was it your coat-of-arms?"
"No, it was this head of Achilles. Here, I can take it off the ring, and you can carry it,
      Christian. But don't lose that, for I've had it ever since eighteen hundred. I should like to
      send my compliments with it," the Rector went on, looking at his brother, "and beg that since
      he has so much wise caution at command, he would exercise a little in
       more public matters, instead of making himself a firebrand in my parish, and
      teaching hucksters and tape-weavers that it's their business to dictate to statesmen."
"How did Dissenters, and Methodists, and Quakers, and people of that sort first come up,
      uncle?" said Miss Selina, a radiant girl of twenty, who had given much time to the harp.
"Dear me, Selina," said her elder sister, Harriet, whose forte was general knowledge, "don't
      you remember 'Woodstock'? They were in Cromwell's time."
"O! Holdenough, and those people? Yes; but they preached in the churches; they had no
      chapels. Tell me, uncle Gus; I like to be wise," said Selina, looking up at the face which was
      smiling down on her with a sort of severe benignity. "Phil says I'm an ignorant puss."
"The seeds of Nonconformity were sown at the Reformation, my dear, when some obstinate men
      made scruples about surplices and the place of the communion-table, and other trifles of that
      sort. But the Quakers came up about Cromwell's time, and the Methodists only in the last
      century. The first Methodists were regular clergymen, the more's the pity."

"But all those wrong things—why didn't government put them down?"
"Ah, to be sure," fell in Sir Maximus, in a cordial tone of corroboration.
"Because error is often strong, and government is often weak, my dear. Well, Phil, have you
      finished your letter?"
"Yes, I will read it to you," said Philip, turning and leaning over the back of his chair
      with the letter in his hand.
There is a portrait of Mr Philip Debarry still to be seen at Treby Manor, and a very fine
      bust of him at Rome, where he died fifteen years later, a convert to Catholicism. His face
      would have been plain but for the exquisite setting of his hazel eyes, which fascinated even
      the dogs of the household. The other features, though slight and irregular, were redeemed from
      triviality by the stamp of gravity and intellectual preoccupation in his face and bearing. As
      he read aloud, his voice was what his uncle's might have been if it had been modulated by
      delicate health and a visitation of self-doubt.
Sir,—In reply to the letter with which you have favoured me this morning, I beg to state
       that the articles you describe were lost from the pocket of my

servant, who is the bearer of this letter to you, and is the claimant of the vellum
       note-book and the gold chain. The large leathern pocket-book is my own property, and the
       impression on the wax, a helmeted head of Achilles, was made by my uncle, the Rev. Augustus
       Debarry, who allows me to forward his seal to you in proof that I am not making a mistaken
       claim.
I feel myself under deep obligation to you, sir, for the care and trouble you have taken
       in order to restore to its right owner a piece of property which happens to be of particular
       importance to me. And I shall consider myself doubly fortunate if at any time you can point
       out to me some method by which I may procure you as lively a satisfaction as I am now
       feeling, in that full and speedy relief from anxiety which I owe to your considerate
       conduct.
I remain, Sir, your obliged and faithful servant,
PHILIP DEBARRY.
"You know best, Phil, of course," said Sir Maximus, pushing his plate from him, by way of
      interjection. "But it seems to me you exaggerate preposterously every little service a man
      happens to do for you. Why should you make a general offer of that sort? How do you know
       what he will be asking you to do? Stuff and nonsense! Tell Willis to send him a
      few head of game. You should think twice before you give a blank cheque of that sort to one of
      these quibbling, meddlesome Radicals."
"You are afraid of my committing myself to 'the bottomless perjury of an et cetera,'" said
      Philip, smiling, as he turned to fold his letter. "But I think I am not doing any mischief; at
      all events I could not be content to say less. And I have a notion that he would regard a
      present of game just now as an insult. I should, in his place."
"Yes, yes, you; but you don't make yourself a measure of Dissenting preachers, I hope," said
      Sir Maximus, rather wrathfully. "What do you say, Gus?"
"Phil is right," said the Rector, in an absolute tone. "I would not deal with a Dissenter,
      or put profits into the pocket of a Radical which I might put into the pocket of a good
      Churchman and a quiet subject. But if the greatest scoundrel in the world made way for me, or
      picked my hat up, I would thank him. So would you, Max."
"Pooh! I didn't mean that one shouldn't behave like a gentleman," said Sir Maximus, in some
       vexation. He had great pride in his son's superiority even to himself; but he
      did not enjoy having his own opinion argued down as it always was, and did not quite trust the
      dim vision opened by Phil's new words and new notions. He could only submit in silence while
      the letter was delivered to Christian, with the order to start for Malthouse Yard
      immediately.
Meanwhile, in that somewhat dim locality the possible claimant of the note-book and the
      chain was thought of and expected with palpitating agitation. Mr Lyon was seated in his study,
      looking haggard and already aged from a sleepless night. He was so afraid lest his emotion
      should deprive him of the presence of mind necessary to the due attention to particulars in
      the coming interview, that he continued to occupy his sight and touch with the objects which
      had stirred the depths, not only of memory, but of dread. Once again he unlocked a small box
      which stood beside his desk, and took from it a little oval locket, and compared this with one
      which hung with the seals on the stray gold chain. There was the same device in enamel on the
      back of both: clasped hands surrounded with blue flowers. Both
       had round the face a name in gold italics on a blue ground: the name on the
      locket taken from the drawer was Maurice ; the name on the locket which hung with the
      seals was Annette , and within the circle of this name there was a lover's knot of
      light-brown hair, which matched a curl that lay in the box. The hair in the locket which bore
      the name of Maurice was of a very dark brown, and before returning it to the drawer Mr Lyon
      noted the colour and quality of this hair more carefully than ever. Then he recurred to the
      note-book: undoubtedly there had been something, probably a third name, beyond the names
       Maurice Christian , which had themselves been rubbed and slightly smeared as if by
      accident; and from the very first examination in the vestry, Mr Lyon could not prevent himself
      from transferring the mental image of the third name in faint lines to the rubbed leather. The
      leaves of the note-book seemed to have been recently inserted; they were of fresh white paper,
      and only bore some abbreviations in pencil with a notation of small sums. Nothing could be
      gathered from the comparison of the writing in the book with that of the yellow letters which
      lay in the box: the
       smeared name had been carefully printed, and so bore no resemblance to the
      signature of those letters; and the pencil abbreviations and figures had been made too
      hurriedly to bear any decisive witness. "I will ask him to write—to write a description of the
      locket," had been one of Mr Lyon's thoughts; but he faltered in that intention. His power of
      fulfilling it must depend on what he saw in this visitor, of whose coming he had a horrible
      dread, at the very time he was writing to demand it. In that demand he was obeying the voice
      of his rigid conscience, which had never left him perfectly at rest under his one act of
      deception—the concealment from Esther that he was not her natural father, the assertion of a
      false claim upon her. "Let my path be henceforth simple," he had said to himself in the
      anguish of that night; "let me seek to know what is, and if possible to declare it." If he was
      really going to find himself face to face with the man who had been Annette's husband, and who
      was Esther's father—if that wandering of his from the light had brought the punishment of a
      blind sacrilege as the issue of a conscious transgression, —he prayed that he might be able to
       accept all consequences of pain to himself. But he saw other possibilities
      concerning the claimant of the book and chain. His ignorance and suspicions as to the history
      and character of Annette's husband made it credible that he had laid a plan for convincing her
      of his death as a means of freeing himself from a burthensome tie; but it seemed equally
      probable that he was really dead, and that these articles of property had been a bequest, or a
      payment, or even a sale, to their present owner. Indeed, in all these years there was no
      knowing into how many hands such pretty trifles might have passed. And the claimant might,
      after all, have no connection with the Debarrys; he might not come on this day or the next.
      There might be more time left for reflection and prayer.
All these possibilities, which would remove the pressing need for difficult action, Mr Lyon
      represented to himself, but he had no effective belief in them; his belief went with his
      strongest feeling, and in these moments his strongest feeling was dread. He trembled under the
      weight that seemed already added to his own sin; he felt himself already confronted by
      Annette's husband and Esther's father. Perhaps the father was a gentleman
       on a visit to the Debarrys. There was no hindering the pang with which the old
      man said to himself,
"The child will not be sorry to leave this poor home, and I shall be guilty in her
      sight."
He was walking about among the rows of books when there came a loud rap at the outer door.
      The rap shook him so that he sank into his chair, feeling almost powerless. Lyddy presented
      herself.
"Here's ever such a fine man from the Manor wants to see you, sir. Dear heart, dear heart!
      shall I tell him you're too bad to see him?"
"Show him up," said Mr Lyon, making an effort to rally. When Christian appeared, the
      minister half rose, leaning on an arm of his chair, and said, "Be seated, sir," seeing nothing
      but that a tall man was entering.
"I've brought you a letter from Mr Debarry," said Christian, in an off-hand manner. This
      rusty little man, in his dismal chamber, seemed to the Ulysses of the steward's room a
      pitiable sort of human curiosity, to whom a man of the world would speak rather loudly, in
      accommodation to an eccentricity which was likely to be accompanied with deafness. One cannot
      be eminent in everything;
       and if Mr Christian had dispersed his faculties in study that would have enabled
      him to share unconventional points of view, he might have worn a mistaken kind of boot, and
      been less competent to win at écarté , or at betting, or in any other contest
      suitable to a person of figure.
As he seated himself, Mr Lyon opened the letter, and held it close to his eyes, so that his
      face was hidden. But at the word "servant" he could not avoid starting, and looking off the
      letter towards the bearer. Christian, knowing what was in the letter, conjectured that the old
      man was amazed to learn that so distinguished-looking a personage was a servant; he leaned
      forward with his elbows on his knees, balanced his cane on his fingers, and began a whispering
      whistle. The minister checked himself, finished the reading of the letter, and then slowly and
      nervously put on his spectacles to survey this man, between whose fate and his own there might
      be a terrible collision. The word "servant" had been a fresh caution to him. He must do
      nothing rashly. Esther's lot was deeply concerned.
"Here is the seal mentioned in the letter," said Christian.
Mr Lyon drew the pocket-book from his desk,
       and, after comparing the seal with the impression, said, "It is right, sir: I
      deliver the pocket-book to you."
He held it out with the seal, and Christian rose to take them, saying, carelessly, "The
      other things— the chain and the little book—are mine."
"Your name then is—"
"Maurice Christian."
A spasm shot through Mr Lyon. It had seemed possible that he might hear another name, and be
      freed from the worse half of his anxiety. His next words were not wisely chosen, but escaped
      him impulsively.
"And you have no other name?"
"What do you mean?" said Christian, sharply.
"Be so good as to reseat yourself."
Christian did not comply. "I'm rather in a hurry, sir," he said, recovering his coolness.
      "If it suits you to restore to me those small articles of mine, I shall be glad; but I would
      rather leave them behind than be detained." He had reflected that the minister was simply a
      punctilious old bore. The question meant nothing else. But Mr Lyon had wrought himself up to
      the task of finding out, then and there, if possible, whether or not this were Annette's
      husband.
       How could he lay himself and his sin before God if he wilfully declined to learn
      the truth?
"Nay, sir, I will not detain you unreasonably," he said, in a firmer tone than before. "How
      long have these articles been your property?"
"Oh, for more than twenty years," said Christian, carelessly. He was not altogether easy
      under the minister's persistence, but for that very reason he showed no more impatience.
"You have been in France and in Germany?"
"I have been in most countries on the Continent."
"Be so good as to write me your name," said Mr Lyon, dipping a pen in the ink, and holding
      it out with a piece of paper.
Christian was much surprised, but not now greatly alarmed. In his rapid conjectures as to
      the explanation of the minister's curiosity, he had alighted on one which might carry
      advantage rather than inconvenience. But he was not going to commit himself.
"Before I oblige you there, sir," he said, laying down the pen, and looking straight at Mr
      Lyon, "I must know exactly the reasons you have for putting these questions to me. You are a
      stranger to me— an excellent person, I daresay—but I have no concern
       about you farther than to get from you those small articles. Do you still doubt
      that they are mine? You wished, I think, that I should tell you what the locket is like. It
      has a pair of hands and blue flowers on one side, and the name Annette round the hair on the
      other side. That is all I have to say. If you wish for anything more from me, you will be good
      enough to tell me why you wish it. Now then, sir, what is your concern with me?"
The cool stare, the hard challenging voice, with which these words were uttered, made them
      fall like the beating cutting chill of heavy hail on Mr Lyon. He sank back in his chair in
      utter irresolution and helplessness. How was it possible to lay bare the sad and sacred past
      in answer to such a call as this? The dread with which he had thought of this man's coming,
      the strongly-confirmed suspicion that he was really Annette's husband, intensified the
      antipathy created by his gestures and glances. The sensitive little minister knew
      instinctively that words which would cost him efforts as painful as the obedient footsteps of
      a wounded bleeding hound that wills a foreseen throe, would fall on this man as the pressure
      of tender fingers falls on a brazen glove. And Esther
       —if this man was her father—every additional word might help to bring down
      irrevocable, perhaps cruel, consequences on her. A thick mist seemed to have fallen where Mr
      Lyon was looking for the track of duty: the difficult question, how far he was to care for
      consequences in seeking and avowing the truth, seemed anew obscured. All these things, like
      the vision of a coming calamity, were compressed into a moment of consciousness. Nothing could
      be done to-day; everything must be deferred. He answered Christian in a low apologetic
      tone.
"It is true, sir; you have told me all I can demand. I have no sufficient reason for
      detaining your property further."
He handed the note-book and chain to Christian, who had been observing him narrowly, and now
      said, in a tone of indifference, as he pocketed the articles,
"Very good, sir. I wish you a good-morning."
"Good-morning," said Mr Lyon, feeling, while the door closed behind his guest, that mixture
      of uneasiness and relief which all procrastination of difficulty produces in minds capable of
      strong forecast. The work was still to be done. He had still before him the task of learning
      everything that
       could be learned about this man's relation to himself and Esther.
Christian, as he made his way back along Malthouse Lane, was thinking, "This old fellow has
      got some secret in his head. It's not likely he can know anything about me; it must be about
      Bycliffe. But Bycliffe was a gentleman: how should he ever have had anything to do with such a
      seedy old ranter as that?"
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

