
 CHAPTER III.
WHEN she had outrun her strength, for the moment, and was forced to slacken her
      speed, she paused to take breath on the edge of the wooded lands. She looked neither to right
      nor left; on her backward flight the waters had no song, the marble forms no charm, the
      wonder‐flowers no
       magic for her as she went; she had no ear for the melodies
      of the birds, no sight for the paradise of the rose‐hung ways; she had only one thought
      left—the gold that she had gained.
The cruelty of his words had stabbed her with each of their slow keen words as with a knife;
      the sickness of a mortal terror had touched her for the instant, as she had remembered that it
      might be her fate to be not even so much as a memory in the life which she had saved from the
      grave.
But with the first breath of the outer air the feebleness passed. The strength of the
      passion that possessed her was too pure to leave her long a prey to any thought of her own
      fate.
She smiled again as she looked up through the leaves at the noon‐day sun.
“What will it matter how or when the gods take my life, so only they keep their faith and
      give me his?” she thought.
And her step was firm and free, and her glance cloudless, and her heart content, as she went
      on her homeward path through the heat of the day.
She was so young, she was so ignorant, she was still so astray in the human world about her,
      that she thought she held a talisman in those nine gold pieces.
“A little gold,” he had said; and here she had it—honest, clean, worthy of his touch and
      usage.
Her heart leaped to the glad and bounding music of early youth, youth which does not reason,
      which only believes, and which sees the golden haze of its own faiths, and thinks them the
      promise of the future, as young children see the golden haze of their own hair and think it
      the shade of the angels’ wings above their heads.
When she at length reached the mill‐house the sun had sunk; she had been sixteen hours on
      foot, taking nothing all the while but a roll of rye bread that she had carried in her pouch,
      and a few water‐cresses that she had gathered in a little brook when the mules had paused to
      drink there.
Yet when she had housed the grain, and turned the tired animals into their own nook of
      meadow to graze and rest for the night, she entered the house neither for repose
       nor food, but flew off again through the dusk of the
      falling night.
She had no remembrance of hunger, nor thirst, nor fatigue; she had only a buoyant sense of
      an ecstatic joy; she felt as though she had wings, and clove the air with no more effort than
      the belated starling which flew by her over the fields.
“A little god,” he had said; and in her bosom, wrapped in a green chestnut leaf, were there
      not the little, broad, round, glittering pieces which in the world of men seemed to have power
      to gain all love, all honour, all peace, and all fealty?”
“Phratos would have wished his gift to go so,” she thought to herself, with a swift,
      penitent, remorseful memory.
For a moment she paused and took them once more out of their hiding‐place, and undid the
      green leaf that enwrapped them, and kissed them and laughed, the hot tears falling down her
      cheeks, where she stood alone in the fields amid the honey‐smell of the clover in the grass,
      and the fruit‐fragrance of the orchards all about her in the dimness.
“A little gold!—a little gold!” she murmured, and she laughed aloud in her great joy, and
      blessed the gods that they had given her to hear the voice of his desire.
“A little gold,” he had said, only; and here she had so much!
No sorcerer, she thought, ever had power wider than this wealth bestowed on her. She did not
      know; she had no measurement. Flamma’s eyes she had seen glisten over a tithe of such a sum as
      over the riches of an emperor’s treasury.
She slipped them in her breast again and ran on past the reeds silvering in the rising moon,
      past the waters quiet on a windless air, past the dark Christ who would not look,—who had
      never looked, or she had loved him with her earliest love, even as for his pity she loved
      Thanatos.
Breathless and noiseless she severed the reeds with her swift feet, and lightly as a swallow
      on the wing passed through the dreary portals into Arslàn’s chamber.
His lamp was lighted.
He stood before the cartoon of the Barabbas, touching it
       here and there with his charcoal, adding those latest
      thoughts, those after‐graces, with which the artist delights to caress his picture, with a
      hand as soft and as lingering as the hand with which a mother caresses the yellow sunshine of
      her first‐born’s curls.
His face as he stood was very pale, passionless, weary, with a sadness sardonic and full of
      scorn for himself on his mouth, and in his eyes those dreams which went so far—so far—into
      worlds whose glories his hand could pourtray for no human sight.
He was thinking, as he worked, of the Barabbas.
“You must rot,” he thought. “You will feed the rat and the mouse; the squirrel will come and
      gnaw you to line his nest; and the beetle and the fly will take you for a spawning‐bed. You
      will serve no other end—since you are mine. And yet I am so great a fool that I love you, and
      try to bring you closer and closer to the thing I see, and which you are not, and never can
      be. For what man lives so happy as to see the Canaan of his ideals,—save as Moses saw it from
      afar off, only to raise his arms to it vainly, and die?”
There came a soft shiver of the air, as though it were severed by some eager bird.
She came and stood beside him, a flash like the sunrise on her face, a radiance in her eyes
      more lustrous than any smile; her body tremulous and breathless from the impatient speed with
      which her footsteps had been winged; about her all the dew and fragrance of the night.
“Here is the gold!” she cried.
Her voice was eager and broken with its too great haste.
“Gold?”
He turned and looked at her, ignorant of her meaning, astonished at her sudden presence
      there.
“Here is the gold!” she murmured, her voice rising swift and clear, and full of the music of
      triumph with which her heart was thrilling. “‘A little gold,’ you said, you remember?—‘only a
      little.’ And this is much. Take it—take it! Do you not hear?”
“Gold?” he echoed again, shaken from his trance of thought, and comprehending nothing and
      remembering nothing of the words that he had spoken in his solitude.
“Yes! It is mine,” she said, her voice broken in its
       tumult of ecstasy—“it is mine—all mine. It is no charity,
      no gift to me. The chain was worth it, and I would only take what it was worth. A little gold,
      you said; and now you can make the Barabbas live for ever upon canvas, and compel men to say
      that it is great.”
As the impetuous, tremulous words broke from her, she drew the green leaf with the coins in
      it from her bosom, and thrust it in to his hand, eager, exultant, laughing, weeping, all the
      silence and the control of her nature swept away in the flood of this immeasurable joy
      possessing her.
The touch of the glittering pieces against his hands stung him to comprehension; his face
      flushed over all its pallor; he thrust it away with a gesture of abhorrence and rejection.
“Money!” he muttered. “What money?—yours?”
“Yes, mine entirely; mine indeed!” she answered, with a sweet, glad ring of victory in her
      rejoicing voice. “It is true, quite true. They were the chains of sequins that Phratos gave me
      when I used to dance to his music in the mountains; and I have sold them. ‘A little gold,’ you
      said; ‘and the Barabbas can live for ever.’ Why do you look so? It is all mine; all
      yours—”
In the last words her voice lost all its proud exultation, and sank low, with a dull
      startled wonder in it.
Why did he look so?
His gesture of refusal she had not noticed. But the language his glance spoke was one plain
      to her. It terrified her, amazed her, struck her chill and dumb.
In it there was disgust, anger, loathing, even horror;—and yet there was in it also an
      unwonted softness, which in a woman’s eyes would have shown itself by a rush of sudden
      tears.
“What do you think that I have done?” she murmured under her breath. “The gold is mine—mine
      honestly. I have not stolen it, nor begged it. I got it as I say. Why will you not take it?
      Why do you look at me so?”
“I? Your money? God in heaven! what can you think me?”
She grew white to the lips, all the impetuous, radiant tumult of her innocent rapture frozen
      into terror.
“I have done nothing wrong,” she murmured with a piteous wistfulness and wonder—“nothing
      wrong, indeed;
       there is no shame in it. Will you not take it—for
       their sake?”
He turned on her with a severity almost savage.
“It is impossible! Good God! Was I not low enough already? How dared you think a thing so
      vile of me? Have I ever asked pity of any living soul?”
His voice was choked in his throat; he was wounded to the heart.
He had no thought that he was cruel; he had no intent to terrify or hurt her; but the sting
      of this last and lowest humiliation was so horrible to all the pride of his manhood, and so
      bitterly reminded him of his own abject poverty; and with all this there was an emotion in him
      that he had difficulty to control—being touched by her ignorance and by her gift as few things
      in his life had ever touched him.
She stood before him trembling, wondering, sorely afraid; all the light had died out of her
      face; she was very pale, and her eyes dilated strangely.
For some moments there was silence between them.
“You will not take it?” she said at last, in a hushed, fearful voice, like that of one who
      speaks in the sight of some dead thing which makes all quiet around it.
“Take it!” he echoed. “I could sooner kill a man out yonder and rob him. Can you not
      understand? Greater shame could never come to me. You do not know what you would do. There may
      be beasts that fall as low, no doubt, but they are curs too base for hanging. Have I
      frightened you? I did not mean to frighten you. You mean well and nobly, no doubt—no doubt.
      You do not know what you would do. Gifts of gold from man to man are bitter, and sap the
      strength of the receiver; but from woman to man they are—to the man shameful. Can you not
      understand?”
Her face burned duskily; she moved with a troubled confused effort to get away from his
      gaze.
“No,” she said in her shut teeth. “I do not know what you mean. Flamma takes all the gold I
      make. Why not you, if it be gold that is honest?”
“Flamma is your grandsire—your keeper—your master. He has a right to do as he chooses. He
      gives you food and shelter, and in return he takes the gains of your labour. But I,—what have
      I ever given you? I am a stranger to
       you, and should have no claim on you, if I could be base
      enough to seek one. I am hideously poor. I make no disguise with you,—you know too well how I
      live. But can you not see?—if I were mean enough to take the worth of a crust from you, I
      should be no more worthy of the very name of man. It is for the man to give to the woman. You
      see.”
She heard him in silence, her face still dark with the confused pain on it of one who has
      fallen or been struck upon the head, and half forgets and half remembers.
“I do not see,” she muttered. “Whoever has, gives; what does it matter? The folly in me was
      its littleness: it could not be of use. But it was all I had.”
“Little or great,—the riches of empires, or a beggar’s dole,—there could be no difference in
      the infamy to me. Have I seemed to you a creature so vile or weak that you could have a title
      to put such shame upon me?”
Out of the bitter passion of his soul, words more cruel than he had consciousness of rose to
      his lips and leaped to speech, and stung her as scorpions sting.
She said nothing; her teeth clenched, her face changed as it had used to do when Flamma had
      beaten her.
She said nothing, but turned away; and with one twist of her hand she flung the pieces
      through the open casement into the river that flowed below.
They sank with a little shiver of the severed water.
He caught her wrist a second too late.
“What madness? What have you done? You throw your gold away to the river‐swamp for me, when
      I have not a shred worth a copper‐piece to pay you back in their stead! I did not mean to hurt
      you; it was only the truth,—you could not have shamed me more. You bring on me an indignity
      that I can neither requite nor revenge. You have no right to load me with debts that I cannot
      pay—with gifts that I would die sooner than receive. But, then, how should you know?—how
      should you know? If I wounded you with sharp words, I did wrong.”
There was a softness that was almost tenderness in his voice as he spoke the last phrases in
      his self‐reproach; but her face did not change, her eyes did not lose their startled horror;
      she put her hand to her throat as though she choked.

“You cannot do wrong—to me,” she muttered, true, even in such a moment, to the absolute
      adoration which possessed her.
Then, ere he could stay her, she turned, without another word, and fled out from his
      presence into the dusk of the night.
The rushes in the moonlight sighed where they grew by the water‐side above the sands where
      the gold had sunk.
A thing more precious than gold was dead; and only the reeds mourned for it. A thing of the
      river as they were, born like them from the dust, from the flood, from the wind and the foam;
      a thing that a god might desire, a thing that a breeze might break.
