<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook The Hill of Dreams,</title><author>Machen, Arthur (1863-1947)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
VII
It was very dark in the room. He seemed by slow degrees to awake from a long and heavy
     torpor, from an utter forgetfulness, and as he raised his eyes he could scarcely discern the
     pale whiteness of the paper on the desk before him. He remembered something of a gloomy winter
     afternoon, of driving rain, of gusty wind: he had fallen asleep over his work, no doubt, and
     the night had come down.
He lay back in his chair, wondering whether it were late; his eyes were half closed, and he
     did not make the effort and rouse himself. He could hear the stormy noise of the wind, and the
     sound reminded him of the half-forgotten days. He thought of his boyhood, and the old rectory,
     and the great elms that surrounded it. There was something pleasant in the consciousness that
     he was still half dreaming; he knew he could wake up whenever he pleased, but for the moment he
     amused himself by the pretence that he was a little boy again, tired with his rambles and the
     keen air of the hills. He remembered how he would sometimes wake up in the dark at midnight,
     and listen sleepily for a moment to the rush of the wind straining and crying amongst the
     trees, and hear it beat upon the walls, and then he would fall to dreams again, happy in his
     warm, snug bed.
The wind grew louder, and the windows rattled. He half opened his eyes and shut them again,
     determined to cherish that sensation of long ago. He felt tired and heavy with sleep; he
     imagined that he was exhausted by some effort; he had, perhaps, been writing furiously without
     rest. He could not recollect at the instant what the work had been; it would be delightful to
     read the pages when he had made up his mind to bestir himself.
Surely that was the noise of boughs, swaying and grinding in the wind. He remembered one
     night at home when such a sound had roused him suddenly from a deep sweet sleep. There was a
     rushing and beating as of wings upon the air, and a heavy dreary noise, like thunder far away
     upon the mountain. He had got out of bed and looked from behind the blind to see what was
     abroad. He remembered the strange sight he had seen, and he pretended it would be just the same
     if he cared to look out now. There were clouds flying awfully from before the moon, and a pale
     light that made the familiar land look strange and terrible. The blast of wind came with a
     great shriek, and the trees tossed and bowed and quivered; the wood was scourged and horrible,
     and the night air was ghastly with a confused tumult, and voices as of a host. A huge black
     cloud rolled across the heaven from the west and covered up the moon, and there came a torrent
     of bitter hissing rain.
It was all a vivid picture to him as he sat in his chair, unwilling to wake. Even as he let
     his mind stray back to that night of the past years, the rain beat sharply on the window-panes,
     and though there were no trees in the grey suburban street, he heard distinctly the crash of
     boughs. He wandered vaguely from thought to thought, groping indistinctly amongst memories,
     like a man trying to cross from door to door in a darkened unfamiliar room. But, no doubt, if
     he were to look out, by some magic the whole scene would be displayed before him. He would not
     see the curve of monotonous two-storied houses, with here and there a white blind, a patch of
     light, and shadows appearing and vanishing, not the rain plashing in the muddy road, not the
     amber of the gas-lamp opposite, but the wild moonlight poured on the dearly loved country; far
     away the dim circle of the hills and woods, and beneath him the tossing trees about the lawn,
     and the wood heaving under the fury of the wind.
He smiled to himself, amidst his lazy meditations, to think how real it seemed, and yet it
     was all far away, the scenery of an old play long ended and forgotten. It was strange that
     after all these years of trouble and work and change he should be in any sense the same person
     as that little boy peeping out, half frightened, from the rectory window. It was as if looking
     in the glass one should see a stranger, and yet know that the image was a true reflection.
The memory of the old home recalled his father and mother to him, and he wondered whether his
     mother would come if he were to cry out suddenly. One night, on just such a night as this, when
     a great storm blew from the mountain, a tree had fallen with a crash and a bough had struck the
     roof, and he awoke in a fright, calling for his mother. She had come and had comforted him,
     soothing him to sleep, and now he shut his eyes, seeing her face shining in the uncertain
     flickering candle light, as she bent over his bed. He could not think she had died; the memory
     was but a part of the evil dreams that had come afterwards.
He said to himself that he had fallen asleep and dreamed sorrow and agony, and he wished to
     forget all the things of trouble. He would return to happy days, to the beloved land, to the
     dear and friendly paths across the fields. There was the paper, white before him, and when he
     chose to stir, he would have the pleasure of reading his work. He could not quite recollect
     what he had been about, but he was somehow conscious that the had been successful and had
     brought some long labor to a worthy ending. Presently he would light the gas, and enjoy the
     satisfaction that only the work could give him, but for the time he preferred to linger in the
     darkness, and to think of himself as straying from stile to stile through the scented meadows,
     and listening to the bright brook that sang to the alders.
It was winter now, for he heard the rain and the wind, and the swaying of the trees, but in
     those old days how sweet the summer had been. The great hawthorn bush in blossom, like a white
     cloud upon the earth, had appeared to him in twilight, he had lingered in the enclosed valley
     to hear the nightingale, a voice swelling out from the rich gloom, from the trees that grew
     around the well. The scent of the meadowsweet was blown to him across the bridge of years, and
     with it came the dream and the hope and the longing, and the afterglow red in the sky, and the
     marvel of the earth. There was a quiet walk that he knew so well; one went up from a little
     green byroad, following an unnamed brooklet scarce a foot wide, but yet wandering like a river,
     gurgling over its pebbles, with its dwarf bushes shading the pouring water. One went through
     the meadow grass, and came to the larch wood that grew from hill to hill across the stream, and
     shone a brilliant tender green, and sent vague sweet spires to the flushing sky. Through the
     wood the path wound, turning and dipping, and beneath, the brown fallen needles of last year
     were soft and thick, and the resinous cones gave out their odor as the warm night advanced, and
     the shadows darkened. It was quite still; but he stayed, and the faint song of the brooklet
     sounded like the echo of a river beyond the mountains. How strange it was to look into the
     wood, to see the tall straight stems rising, pillar-like, and then the dusk, uncertain, and
     then the blackness. So he came out from the larch wood, from the green cloud and the vague
     shadow, into the dearest of all hollows, shut in on one side by the larches and before him by
     high violent walls of turf, like the slopes of a fort, with a clear line dark against the
     twilight sky, and a weird thorn bush that grew large, mysterious, on the summit, beneath the
     gleam of the evening star.
And he retraced his wanderings in those deep old lanes that began from the common road and
     went away towards the unknown, climbing steep hills, and piercing the woods of shadows, and
     dipping down into valleys that seemed virgin, unexplored, secret for the foot of man. He
     entered such a lane not knowing where it might bring him, hoping he had found the way to
     fairyland, to the woods beyond the world, to that vague territory that haunts all the dreams of
     a boy. He could not tell where he might be, for the high banks rose steep, and the great hedges
     made a green vault above. Marvelous ferns grew rich and thick in the dark red earth, fastening
     their roots about the roots of hazel and beech and maple, clustering like the carven capitals
     of a cathedral pillar. Down, like a dark shaft, the lane dipped to the well of the hills, and
     came amongst the limestone rocks. He climbed the bank at last, and looked out into a country
     that seemed for a moment the land he sought, a mysterious realm with unfamiliar hills and
     valleys and fair plains all golden, and white houses radiant in the sunset light.
And he thought of the steep hillsides where the bracken was like a wood, and of bare places
     where the west wind sang over the golden gorse, of still circles in mid-lake, of the poisonous
     yew-tree in the middle of the wood, shedding its crimson cups on the dank earth. How he
     lingered by certain black waterpools hedged on every side by drooping wych-elms and
     black-stemmed alders, watching the faint waves widening to the banks as a leaf or a twig
     dropped from the trees.
And the whole air and wonder of the ancient forest came back to him. He had found his way to
     the river valley, to the long lovely hollow between the hills, and went up and up beneath the
     leaves in the warm hush of midsummer, glancing back now and again through the green alleys, to
     the river winding in mystic esses beneath, passing hidden glens receiving the streams that
     rushed down the hillside, ice-cold from the rock, passing the immemorial tumulus, the graves
     where the legionaries waited for the trumpet, the grey farmhouses sending the blue wreaths of
     wood smoke into the still air. He went higher and higher, till at last he entered the long
     passage of the Roman road, and from this, the ridge and summit of the wood, he saw the waves of
     green swell and dip and sink towards the marshy level and the gleaming yellow sea. He looked on
     the surging forest, and thought of the strange deserted city moldering into a petty village on
     its verge, of its encircling walls melting into the turf, of vestiges of an older temple which
     the earth had buried utterly.
It was winter now, for he heard the wail of the wind, and a sudden gust drove the rain
     against the panes, but he thought of the bee's song in the clover, of the foxgloves in full
     blossom, of the wild roses, delicate, enchanting, swaying on a long stem above the hedge. He
     had been in strange places, he had known sorrow and desolation, and had grown grey and weary in
     the work of letters, but he lived again in the sweetness, in the clear bright air of early
     morning, when the sky was blue in June, and the mist rolled like a white sea in the valley. He
     laughed when he recollected that he had sometimes fancied himself unhappy in those days; in
     those days when he could be glad because the sun shone, because the wind blew fresh on the
     mountain. On those bright days he had been glad, looking at the fleeting and passing of the
     clouds upon the hills, and had gone up higher to the broad dome of the mountain, feeling that
     joy went up before him.
He remembered how, a boy, he had dreamed of love, of an adorable and ineffable mystery which
     transcended all longing and desire. The time had come when all the wonder of the earth seemed
     to prefigure this alone, when he found the symbol of the Beloved in hill and wood and stream,
     and every flower and every dark pool discoursed a pure ecstasy. It was the longing for longing,
     the love of love, that had come to him when he awoke one morning just before the dawn, and for
     the first time felt the sharp thrill of passion.
He tried in vain to express to himself the exquisite joys of innocent desire. Even now, after
     troubled years, in spite of some dark cloud that overshadowed the background of his thought,
     the sweetness of the boy's imagined pleasure came like a perfume into his reverie. It was no
     love of a woman but the desire of womanhood, the Eros of the unknown, that made the heart
     tremble. He hardly dreamed that such a love could ever be satisfied, that the thirst of beauty
     could be slaked. He shrank from all contact of actuality, not venturing so much as to imagine
     the inner place and sanctuary of the mysteries. It was enough for him to adore in the outer
     court, to know that within, in the sweet gloom, were the vision and the rapture, the altar and
     the sacrifice.
He remembered, dimly, the passage of many heavy years since that time of hope and passion,
     but, perhaps, the vague shadow would pass away, and he could renew the boy's thoughts, the
     unformed fancies that were part of the bright day, of the wild roses in the hedgerow. All other
     things should be laid aside, he would let them trouble him no more after this winter night. He
     saw now that from the first he had allowed his imagination to bewilder him, to create a
     fantastic world in which he suffered, molding innocent forms into terror and dismay. Vividly,
     he saw again the black circle of oaks, growing in a haggard ring upon the bastions of the Roman
     fort. The noise of the storm without grew louder, and he thought how the wind had come up the
     valley with the sound of a scream, how a great tree had ground its boughs together, shuddering
     before the violent blast. Clear and distinct, as if he were standing now in the lane, he saw
     the steep slopes surging from the valley, and the black crown of the oaks set against the
     flaming sky, against a blaze and glow of light as if great furnace doors were opened. He saw
     the fire, as it were, smitten about the bastions, about the heaped mounds that guarded the
     fort, and the crooked evil boughs seemed to writhe in the blast of flame that beat from heaven.
     Strangely with the sight of the burning fort mingled the impression of a dim white shape
     floating up the dusk of the lane towards him, and he saw across the valley of years a girl's
     face, a momentary apparition that shone and vanished away.
Then there was a memory of another day, of violent summer, of white farmhouse walls blazing
     in the sun, and a far call from the reapers in the cornfields. He had climbed the steep slope
     and penetrated the matted thicket and lay in the heat, alone on the soft short grass that grew
     within the fort. There was a cloud of madness, and confusion of broken dreams that had no
     meaning or clue but only an indefinable horror and defilement. He had fallen asleep as he gazed
     at the knotted fantastic boughs of the stunted brake about him, and when he woke he was
     ashamed, and fled away fearing that "they" would pursue him. He did not know who "they" were,
     but it seemed as if a woman's face watched him from between the matted boughs, and that she
     summoned to her side awful companions who had never grown old through all the ages.
He looked up, it seemed, at a smiling face that bent over him, as he sat in the cool dark
     kitchen of the old farmhouse, and wondered why the sweetness of those red lips and the kindness
     of the eyes mingled with the nightmare in the fort, with the horrible Sabbath he had imagined
     as he lay sleeping on the hot soft turf. He had allowed these disturbed fancies, all this mad
     wreck of terror and shame that he had gathered in his mind, to trouble him for too long a time;
     presently he would light up the room, and leave all the old darkness of his life behind him,
     and from henceforth he would walk in the day.
He could still distinguish, though very vaguely, the pile of papers beside him, and he
     remembered, now, that he had finished a long task that afternoon, before he fell asleep. He
     could not trouble himself to recollect the exact nature of the work, but he was sure that he
     had done well; in a few minutes, perhaps, he would strike a match, and read the title, and
     amuse himself with his own forgetfulness. But the sight of the papers lying there in order made
     him think of his beginnings, of those first unhappy efforts which were so impossible and so
     hopeless. He saw himself bending over the table in the old familiar room, desperately
     scribbling, and then laying down his pen dismayed at the sad results on the page. It was late
     at night, his father had been long in bed, and the house was still. The fire was almost out,
     with only a dim glow here and there amongst the cinders, and the room was growing chilly. He
     rose at last from his work and looked out on a dim earth and a dark and cloudy sky.
Night after night he had labored on, persevering in his effort, even through the cold
     sickness of despair, when every line was doomed as it was made. Now, with the consciousness
     that he knew at least the conditions of literature, and that many years of thought and practice
     had given him some sense of language, he found these early struggles both pathetic and
     astonishing. He could not understand how he had persevered so stubbornly, how he had had the
     heart to begin a fresh page when so many folios of blotted, painful effort lay torn, derided,
     impossible in their utter failure. It seemed to him that it must have been a miracle or an
     infernal possession, a species of madness, that had driven him on, every day disappointed, and
     every day hopeful.
And yet there was a joyous side to the illusion. In these dry days that he lived in, when he
     had bought, by a long experience and by countless hours of misery, a knowledge of his
     limitations, of the vast gulf that yawned between the conception and the work, it was pleasant
     to think of a time when all things were possible, when the most splendid design seemed an
     affair of a few weeks. Now he had come to a frank acknowledgment; so far as he was concerned,
     he judged every book wholly impossible till the last line of it was written, and he had learnt
     patience, the art of sighing and putting the fine scheme away in the pigeon-hole of what could
     never be. But to think of those days! Then one could plot out a book that should be more
     curious than Rabelais, and jot down the outlines of a romance to surpass Cervantes, and design
     renaissance tragedies and volumes of contes, and comedies of the Restoration;
     everything was to be done, and the masterpiece was always the rainbow cup, a little way before
     him.
He touched the manuscript on the desk, and the feeling of the pages seemed to restore all the
     papers that had been torn so long ago. It was the atmosphere of the silent room that returned,
     the light of the shaded candle falling on the abandoned leaves. This had been painfully
     excogitated while the snowstorm whirled about the lawn and filled the lanes, this was of the
     summer night, this of the harvest moon rising like a fire from the tithebarn on the hill. How
     well he remembered those half-dozen pages of which he had once been so proud; he had thought
     out the sentences one evening, while he leaned on the foot-bridge and watched the brook swim
     across the road. Every word smelt of the meadowsweet that grew thick upon the banks; now, as he
     recalled the cadence and the phrase that had seemed so charming, he saw again the ferns beneath
     the vaulted roots of the beech, and the green light of the glowworm in the hedge.
And in the west the mountains swelled to a great dome, and on the dome was a mound, the
     memorial of some forgotten race, that grew dark and large against the red sky, when the sun
     set. He had lingered below it in the solitude, amongst the winds, at evening, far away from
     home; and oh, the labor and the vain efforts to make the form of it and the awe of it in prose,
     to write the hush of the vast hill, and the sadness of the world below sinking into the night,
     and the mystery, the suggestion of the rounded hillock, huge against the magic sky.
He had tried to sing in words the music that the brook sang, and the sound of the October
     wind rustling through the brown bracken on the hill. How many pages he had covered in the
     effort to show a white winter world, a sun without warmth in a grey-blue sky, all the fields,
     all the land white and shining, and one high summit where the dark pines towered, still in the
     still afternoon, in the pale violet air.
To win the secret of words, to make a phrase that would murmur of summer and the bee, to
     summon the wind into a sentence, to conjure the odor of the night into the surge and fall and
     harmony of a line; this was the tale of the long evenings, of the candle flame white upon the
     paper and the eager pen.
He remembered that in some fantastic book he had seen a bar or two of music, and, beneath,
     the inscription that here was the musical expression of Westminster Abbey. His boyish effort
     seemed hardly less ambitious, and he no longer believed that language could present the melody
     and the awe and the loveliness of the earth. He had long known that he, at all events, would
     have to be content with a far approach, with a few broken notes that might suggest, perhaps,
     the magistral everlasting song of the hill and the streams.
But in those far days the impossible was but a part of wonderland that lay before him, of the
     world beyond the wood and the mountain. All was to be conquered, all was to be achieved; he had
     but to make the journey and he would find the golden world and the golden word, and hear those
     songs that the sirens sang. He touched the manuscript; whatever it was, it was the result of
     painful labor and disappointment, not of the old flush of hope, but it came of weary days, of
     correction and re-correction. It might be good in its measure; but afterwards he would write no
     more for a time. He would go back again to the happy world of masterpieces, to the dreams of
     great and perfect books, written in an ecstasy.
Like a dark cloud from the sea came the memory of the attempt he had made, of the poor
     piteous history that had once embittered his life. He sighed and said alas, thinking of his
     folly, of the hours when he was shaken with futile, miserable rage. Some silly person in London
     had made his manuscript more saleable and had sold it without rendering an account of the
     profits, and for that he had been ready to curse humanity. Black, horrible, as the memory of a
     stormy day, the rage of his heart returned to his mind, and he covered his eyes, endeavoring to
     darken the picture of terror and hate that shone before him. He tried to drive it all out of
     his thought, it vexed him to remember these foolish trifles; the trick of a publisher, the
     small pomposities and malignancies of the country folk, the cruelty of a village boy, had
     inflamed him almost to the pitch of madness. His heart had burnt with fury, and when he looked
     up the sky was blotched, and scarlet as if it rained blood.
Indeed he had almost believed that blood had rained upon him, and cold blood from a sacrifice
     in heaven; his face was wet and chill and dripping, and he had passed his hand across his
     forehead and looked at it. A red cloud had seemed to swell over the hill, and grow great, and
     come near to him; he was but an ace removed from raging madness.
It had almost come to that; the drift and the breath of the scarlet cloud had well-nigh
     touched him. It was strange that he had been so deeply troubled by such little things, and
     strange how after all the years he could still recall the anguish and rage and hate that shook
     his soul as with a spiritual tempest.
The memory of all that evening was wild and troubled; he resolved that it should vex him no
     more, that now, for the last time, he would let himself be tormented by the past. In a few
     minutes he would rise to a new life, and forget all the storms that had gone over him.
Curiously, every detail was distinct and clear in his brain. The figure of the doctor driving
     home, and the sound of the few words he had spoken came to him in the darkness, through the
     noise of the storm and the pattering of the rain. Then he stood upon the ridge of the hill and
     saw the smoke drifting up from the ragged roofs of Caermaen, in the evening calm; he listened
     to the voices mounting thin and clear, in a weird tone, as if some outland folk were speaking
     in an unknown tongue of awful things.
He saw the gathering darkness, the mystery of twilight changing the huddled squalid village
     into an unearthly city, into some dreadful Atlantis, inhabited by a ruined race. The mist
     falling fast, the gloom that seemed to issue from the black depths of the forest, to advance
     palpably towards the walls, were shaped before him; and beneath, the river wound, snake-like,
     about the town, swimming to the flood and glowing in its still pools like molten brass. And as
     the water mirrored the afterglow and sent ripples and gouts of blood against the shuddering
     reeds, there came suddenly the piercing trumpet-call, the loud reiterated summons that rose and
     fell, that called and recalled, echoing through all the valley, crying to the dead as the last
     note rang. It summoned the legion from the river and the graves and the battlefield, the host
     floated up from the sea, the centuries swarmed about the eagles, the array was set for the last
     great battle, behind the leaguer of the mist.
He could imagine himself still wandering through the dim unknown, terrible country, gazing
     affrighted at the hills and woods that seemed to have put on an unearthly shape, stumbling
     amongst the briars that caught his feet. He lost his way in a wild country, and the red light
     that blazed up from the furnace on the mountains only showed him a mysterious land, in which he
     strayed aghast, with the sense of doom weighing upon him. The dry mutter of the trees, the
     sound of an unseen brook, made him afraid as if the earth spoke of his sin, and presently he
     was fleeing through a desolate shadowy wood, where a pale light flowed from the moldering
     stumps, a dream of light that shed a ghostly radiance.
And then again the dark summit of the Roman fort, the black sheer height rising above the
     valley, and the moonfire streaming around the ring of oaks, glowing about the green bastions
     that guarded the thicket and the inner place.
The room in which he sat appeared the vision, the trouble of the wind and rain without was
     but illusion, the noise of the waves in the seashell. Passion and tears and adoration and the
     glories of the summer night returned, and the calm sweet face of the woman appeared, and he
     thrilled at the soft touch of her hand on his flesh.
She shone as if she had floated down into the lane from the moon that swam between films of
     cloud above the black circle of the oaks. She led him away from all terror and despair and
     hate, and gave herself to him with rapture, showing him love, kissing his tears away, pillowing
     his cheek upon her breast.
His lips dwelt on her lips, his mouth upon the breath of her mouth, her arms were strained
     about him, and oh! she charmed him with her voice, with sweet kind words, as she offered her
     sacrifice. How her scented hair fell down, and floated over his eyes, and there was a marvelous
     fire called the moon, and her lips were aflame, and her eyes shone like a light on the
     hills.
All beautiful womanhood had come to him in the lane. Love had touched him in the dusk and had
     flown away, but he had seen the splendor and the glory, and his eyes had seen the enchanted
     light.

AVE ATQUE VALE

The old words sounded in his ears like the ending of a chant, and he heard the music's close.
     Once only in his weary hapless life, once the world had passed away, and he had known her, the
     dear, dear Annie, the symbol of all mystic womanhood.
The heaviness of languor still oppressed him, holding him back amongst these old memories, so
     that he could not stir from his place. Oddly, there seemed something unaccustomed about the
     darkness of the room, as if the shadows he had summoned had changed the aspect of the walls. He
     was conscious that on this night he was not altogether himself; fatigue, and the weariness of
     sleep, and the waking vision had perplexed him. He remembered how once or twice when he was a
     little boy startled by an uneasy dream, and had stared with a frightened gaze into nothingness,
     not knowing where he was, all trembling, and breathing quick, till he touched the rail of his
     bed, and the familiar outlines of the looking-glass and the chiffonier began to glimmer out of
     the gloom. So now he touched the pile of manuscript and the desk at which he had worked so many
     hours, and felt reassured, though he smiled at himself, and he felt the old childish dread, the
     longing to cry out for some one to bring a candle, and show him that he really was in his own
     room. He glanced up for an instant, expecting to see perhaps the glitter of the brass gas jet
     that was fixed on the wall, just beside his bureau, but it was too dark, and he could not rouse
     himself and make the effort that would drive the cloud and the muttering thoughts away.
He leant back again, picturing the wet street without, the rain driving like fountain spray
     about the gas lamp, the shrilling of the wind on those waste places to the north. It was
     strange how in the brick and stucco desert where no trees were, he all the time imagined the
     noise of tossing boughs, the grinding of the boughs together. There was a great storm and
     tumult in this wilderness of London, and for the sound of the rain and the wind he could not
     hear the hum and jangle of the trams, and the jar and shriek of the garden gates as they opened
     and shut. But he could imagine his street, the rain-swept desolate curve of it, as it turned
     northward, and beyond the empty suburban roads, the twinkling villa windows, the ruined field,
     the broken lane, and then yet another suburb rising, a solitary gas-lamp glimmering at a
     corner, and the plane tree lashing its boughs, and driving great showers against the glass.
It was wonderful to think of. For when these remote roads were ended one dipped down the hill
     into the open country, into the dim world beyond the glint of friendly fires. Tonight, how
     waste they were, these wet roads, edged with the red-brick houses, with shrubs whipped by the
     wind against one another, against the paling and the wall. There the wind swayed the great elms
     scattered on the sidewalk, the remnants of the old stately fields, and beneath each tree was a
     pool of wet, and a torment of raindrops fell with every gust. And one passed through the red
     avenues, perhaps by a little settlement of flickering shops, and passed the last sentinel
     wavering lamp, and the road became a ragged lane, and the storm screamed from hedge to hedge
     across the open fields. And then, beyond, one touched again upon a still remoter avant-garde of
     London, an island amidst the darkness, surrounded by its pale of twinkling, starry lights.
He remembered his wanderings amongst these outposts of the town, and thought how desolate all
     their ways must be tonight. They were solitary in wet and wind, and only at long intervals some
     one pattered and hurried along them, bending his eyes down to escape the drift of rain. Within
     the villas, behind the close-drawn curtains, they drew about the fire, and wondered at the
     violence of the storm, listening for each great gust as it gathered far away, and rocked the
     trees, and at last rushed with a huge shock against their walls as if it were the coming of the
     sea. He thought of himself walking, as he had often walked, from lamp to lamp on such a night,
     treasuring his lonely thoughts, and weighing the hard task awaiting him in his room. Often in
     the evening, after a long day's labor, he had thrown down his pen in utter listlessness,
     feeling that he could struggle no more with ideas and words, and he had gone out into driving
     rain and darkness, seeking the word of the enigma as he tramped on and on beneath these outer
     battlements of London.
Or on some grey afternoon in March or November he had sickened of the dull monotony and the
     stagnant life that he saw from his window, and had taken his design with him to the lonely
     places, halting now and again by a gate, and pausing in the shelter of a hedge through which
     the austere wind shivered, while, perhaps, he dreamed of Sicily, or of sunlight on the
     Provençal olives. Often as he strayed solitary from street to field, and passed the Syrian fig
     tree imprisoned in Britain, nailed to an ungenial wall, the solution of the puzzle became
     evident, and he laughed and hurried home eager to make the page speak, to note the song he had
     heard on his way.
Sometimes he had spent many hours treading this edge and brim of London, now lost amidst the
     dun fields, watching the bushes shaken by the wind, and now looking down from a height whence
     he could see the dim waves of the town, and a barbaric water tower rising from a hill, and the
     snuff-colored cloud of smoke that seemed blown up from the streets into the sky.
There were certain ways and places that he had cherished; he loved a great old common that
     stood on high ground, curtained about with ancient spacious houses of red brick, and their
     cedarn gardens. And there was on the road that led to this common a space of ragged uneven
     ground with a pool and a twisted oak, and here he had often stayed in autumn and looked across
     the mist and the valley at the great theatre of the sunset, where a red cloud like a charging
     knight shone and conquered a purple dragon shape, and golden lances glittered in a field of
     faerie green.
Or sometimes, when the unending prospect of trim, monotonous, modern streets had wearied him,
     he had found an immense refreshment in the discovery of a forgotten hamlet, left in a hollow,
     while all new London pressed and surged on every side, threatening the rest of the red roofs
     with its vulgar growth. These little peaceful houses, huddled together beneath the shelter of
     trees, with their bulging leaded windows and uneven roofs, somehow brought back to him the
     sense of the country, and soothed him with the thought of the old farm-houses, white or grey,
     the homes of quiet lives, harbors where, perhaps, no tormenting thoughts ever broke in.
For he had instinctively determined that there was neither rest nor health in all the arid
     waste of streets about him. It seemed as if in those dull rows of dwellings, in the prim new
     villas, red and white and staring, there must be a leaven working which transformed all to base
     vulgarity. Beneath the dull sad slates, behind the blistered doors, love turned to squalid
     intrigue, mirth to drunken clamor, and the mystery of life became a common thing; religion was
     sought for in the greasy piety and flatulent oratory of the Independent chapel, the stuccoed
     nightmare of the Doric columns. Nothing fine, nothing rare, nothing exquisite, it seemed, could
     exist in the weltering suburban sea, in the habitations which had risen from the stench and
     slime of the brickfields. It was as if the sickening fumes that steamed from the burning bricks
     had been sublimed into the shape of houses, and those who lived in these grey places could also
     claim kinship with the putrid mud.
Hence he had delighted in the few remains of the past that he could find still surviving on
     the suburb's edge, in the grave old houses that stood apart from the road, in the moldering
     taverns of the eighteenth century, in the huddled hamlets that had preserved only the glow and
     the sunlight of all the years that had passed over them. It appeared to him that vulgarity and
     greasiness and squalor had come with a flood, that not only the good but also the evil in man's
     heart had been made common and ugly, that a sordid scum was mingled with all the springs, of
     death as of life. It would be alike futile to search amongst these mean two-storied houses for
     a splendid sinner as for a splendid saint; the very vices of these people smelt of cabbage
     water and a pothouse vomit.
And so he had often fled away from the serried maze that encircled him, seeking for the old
     and worn and significant as an antiquary looks for the fragments of the Roman temple amidst the
     modern shops. In some way the gusts of wind and the beating rain of the night reminded him of
     an old house that had often attracted him with a strange indefinable curiosity. He had found it
     on a grim grey day in March, when he had gone out under a leaden-molded sky, cowering from a
     dry freezing wind that brought with it the gloom and the doom of far unhappy Siberian plains.
     More than ever that day the suburb had oppressed him; insignificant, detestable, repulsive to
     body and mind, it was the only hell that a vulgar age could conceive or make, an inferno
     created not by Dante but by the jerry-builder. He had gone out to the north, and when he lifted
     up his eyes again he found that he had chanced to turn up by one of the little lanes that still
     strayed across the broken fields. He had never chosen this path before because the lane at its
     outlet was so wholly degraded and offensive, littered with rusty tins and broken crockery, and
     hedged in with a paling fashioned out of scraps of wire, rotting timber, and bending worn-out
     rails. But on this day, by happy chance, he had fled from the high road by the first opening
     that offered, and he no longer groped his way amongst obscene refuse, sickened by the bloated
     bodies of dead dogs, and fetid odors from unclean decay, but the malpassage had become a
     peaceful winding lane, with warm shelter beneath its banks from the dismal wind. For a mile he
     had walked quietly, and then a turn in the road showed him a little glen or hollow, watered by
     such a tiny rushing brooklet as his own woods knew, and beyond, alas, the glaring foreguard of
     a "new neighborhood"; raw red villas, semi-detached, and then a row of lamentable shops.
But as he was about to turn back, in the hope of finding some other outlet, his attention was
     charmed by a small house that stood back a little from the road on his right hand. There had
     been a white gate, but the paint had long faded to grey and black, and the wood crumbled under
     the touch, and only moss marked out the lines of the drive. The iron railing round the lawn had
     fallen, and the poor flower-beds were choked with grass and a faded growth of weeds. But here
     and there a rosebush lingered amidst suckers that had sprung grossly from the root, and on each
     side of the hall door were box trees, untrimmed, ragged, but still green. The slate roof was
     all stained and livid, blotched with the drippings of a great elm that stood at one corner of
     the neglected lawn, and marks of damp and decay were thick on the uneven walls, which had been
     washed yellow many years before. There was a porch of trellis work before the door, and Lucian
     had seen it rock in the wind, swaying as if every gust must drive it down. There were two
     windows on the ground floor, one on each side of the door, and two above, with a blind space
     where a central window had been blocked up.
This poor and desolate house had fascinated him. Ancient and poor and fallen, disfigured by
     the slate roof and the yellow wash that had replaced the old mellow dipping tiles and the warm
     red walls, and disfigured again by spots and patches of decay; it seemed as if its happy days
     were for ever ended. To Lucian it appealed with a sense of doom and horror; the black streaks
     that crept upon the walls, and the green drift upon the roof, appeared not so much the work of
     foul weather and dripping boughs, as the outward signs of evil working and creeping in the
     lives of those within.
The stage seemed to him decked for doom, painted with the symbols of tragedy; and he wondered
     as he looked whether any one were so unhappy as to live there still. There were torn blinds in
     the windows, but he had asked himself who could be so brave as to sit in that room, darkened by
     the dreary box, and listen of winter nights to the rain upon the window, and the moaning of
     wind amongst the tossing boughs that beat against the roof.
He could not imagine that any chamber in such a house was habitable. Here the dead had lain,
     through the white blind the thin light had filtered on the rigid mouth, and still the floor
     must be wet with tears and still that great rocking elm echoed the groaning and the sobs of
     those who watched. No doubt, the damp was rising, and the odor of the earth filled the house,
     and made such as entered draw back, foreseeing the hour of death.
Often the thought of this strange old house had haunted him; he had imagined the empty rooms
     where a heavy paper peeled from the walls and hung in dark strips; and he could not believe
     that a light ever shone from those windows that stared black and glittering on the neglected
     lawn. But tonight the wet and the storm seemed curiously to bring the image of the place before
     him, and as the wind sounded he thought how unhappy those must be, if any there were, who sat
     in the musty chambers by a flickering light, and listened to the elm-tree moaning and beating
     and weeping on the walls.
And tonight was Saturday night; and there was about that phrase something that muttered of
     the condemned cell, of the agony of a doomed man. Ghastly to his eyes was the conception of any
     one sitting in that room to the right of the door behind the larger box tree, where the wall
     was cracked above the window and smeared with a black stain in an ugly shape.
He knew how foolish it had been in the first place to trouble his mind with such conceits of
     a dreary cottage on the outskirts of London. And it was more foolish now to meditate these
     things, fantasies, feigned forms, the issue of a sad mood and a bleak day of spring. For soon,
     in a few moments, he was to rise to a new life. He was but reckoning up the account of his
     past, and when the light came he was to think no more of sorrow and heaviness, of real or
     imagined terrors. He had stayed too long in London, and he would once more taste the breath of
     the hills, and see the river winding in the long lovely valley; ah! he would go home.
Something like a thrill, the thrill of fear, passed over him as he remembered that there was
     no home. It was in the winter, a year and a half after his arrival in town, that he had
     suffered the loss of his father. He lay for many days prostrate, overwhelmed with sorrow and
     with the thought that now indeed he was utterly alone in the world. Miss Deacon was to live
     with another cousin in Yorkshire; the old home was at last ended and done. He felt sorry that
     he had not written more frequently to his father: there were things in his cousin's letters
     that had made his heart sore. "Your poor father was always looking for your letters," she
     wrote, "they used to cheer him so much. He nearly broke down when you sent him that money last
     Christmas; he got it into his head that you were starving yourself to send it him. He was
     hoping so much that you would have come down this Christmas, and kept asking me about the
     plum-puddings months ago."
It was not only his father that had died, but with him the last strong link was broken, and
     the past life, the days of his boyhood, grew faint as a dream. With his father his mother died
     again, and the long years died, the time of his innocence, the memory of affection. He was
     sorry that his letters had gone home so rarely; it hurt him to imagine his father looking out
     when the post came in the morning, and forced to be sad because there was nothing. But he had
     never thought that his father valued the few lines that he wrote, and indeed it was often
     difficult to know what to say. It would have been useless to write of those agonizing nights
     when the pen seemed an awkward and outlandish instrument, when every effort ended in shameful
     defeat, or of the happier hours when at last wonder appeared and the line glowed, crowned and
     exalted. To poor Mr. Taylor such tales would have seemed but trivial histories of some Oriental
     game, like an odd story from a land where men have time for the infinitely little, and can
     seriously make a science of arranging blossoms in a jar, and discuss perfumes instead of
     politics. It would have been useless to write to the rectory of his only interest, and so he
     wrote seldom.
And then he had been sorry because he could never write again and never see his home. He had
     wondered whether he would have gone down to the old place at Christmas, if his father had
     lived. It was curious how common things evoked the bitterest griefs, but his father's anxiety
     that the plum-pudding should be good, and ready for him, had brought the tears into his eyes.
     He could hear him saying in a nervous voice that attempted to be cheerful: "I suppose you will
     be thinking of the Christmas puddings soon, Jane; you remember how fond Lucian used to be of
     plum-pudding. I hope we shall see him this December." No doubt poor Miss Deacon paled with rage
     at the suggestion that she should make Christmas pudding in July; and returned a sharp answer;
     but it was pathetic. The wind wailed, and the rain dashed and beat again and again upon the
     window. He imagined that all his thoughts of home, of the old rectory amongst the elms, had
     conjured into his mind the sound of the storm upon the trees, for, tonight, very clearly he
     heard the creaking of the boughs, the noise of boughs moaning and beating and weeping on the
     walls, and even a pattering of wet, on wet earth, as if there were a shrub near the window that
     shook off the raindrops, before the gust.
That thrill, as it were a shudder of fear, passed over him again, and he knew not what had
     made him afraid. There were some dark shadow on his mind that saddened him; it seemed as if a
     vague memory of terrible days hung like a cloud over his thought, but it was all indefinite,
     perhaps the last grim and ragged edge of the melancholy wrack that had swelled over his life
     and the bygone years. He shivered and tried to rouse himself and drive away the sense of dread
     and shame that seemed so real and so awful, and yet he could not grasp it. But the torpor of
     sleep, the burden of the work that he had ended a few hours before, still weighed down his limb
     and bound his thoughts. He could scarcely believe that he had been busy at his desk a little
     while ago, and that just before the winter day closed it and the rain began to fall he had laid
     down the pen with a sigh of relief, and had slept in his chair. It was rather as if he had
     slumbered deeply through a long and weary night, as if an awful vision of flame and darkness
     and the worm that dieth not had come to him sleeping. But he would dwell no more on the
     darkness; he went back to the early days in London when he had said farewell to the hills and
     to the waterpools, and had set to work in this little room in the dingy street.
How he had toiled and labored at the desk before him! He had put away the old wild hopes of
     the masterpiece conceived and executed in a fury of inspiration, wrought out in one white heat
     of creative joy; it was enough if by dint of long perseverance and singleness of desire he
     could at last, in pain and agony and despair, after failure and disappointment and effort
     constantly renewed, fashion something of which he need not be ashamed. He had put himself to
     school again, and had, with what patience he could command, ground his teeth into the
     rudiments, resolved that at last he would test out the heart of the mystery. They were good
     nights to remember, these; he was glad to think of the little ugly room, with its silly
     wall-paper and its "bird's-eye" furniture, lighted up, while he sat at the bureau and wrote on
     into the cold stillness of the London morning, when the flickering lamplight and the daystar
     shone together. It was an interminable labor, and he had always known it to be as hopeless as
     alchemy. The gold, the great and glowing masterpiece, would never shine amongst the dead ashes
     and smoking efforts of the crucible, but in the course of the life, in the interval between the
     failures, he might possibly discover curious things.
These were the good nights that he could look back on without any fear or shame, when he had
     been happy and content on a diet of bread and tea and tobacco, and could hear of some
     imbecility passing into its hundredth thousand, and laugh cheerfullyâ€”if only that last page
     had been imagined aright, if the phrases noted in the still hours rang out their music when he
     read them in the morning. He remembered the drolleries and fantasies that the worthy Miss
     Deacon used to write to him, and how he had grinned at her words of reproof, admonition, and
     advice. She had once instigated Dolly fils to pay him a visit, and that young prop of
     respectability had talked about the extraordinary running of Bolter at the Scurragh meeting in
     Ireland; and then, glancing at Lucian's books, had inquired whether any of them had "warm
     bits." He had been kind though patronizing, and seemed to have moved freely in the most
     brilliant society of Stoke Newington. He had not been able to give any information as to the
     present condition of Edgar Allan Poe's old school. It appeared eventually that his report at
     home had not been a very favorable one, for no invitation to high tea had followed, as Miss
     Deacon had hoped. The Dollys knew many nice people, who were well off, and Lucian's cousin, as
     she afterwards said, had done her best to introduce him to the beau monde of
     those northern suburbs.
But after the visit of the young Dolly, with what joy he had returned to the treasures which
     he had concealed from profane eyes. He had looked out and seen his visitor on board the tram at
     the street corner, and he laughed out loud, and locked his door. There had been moments when he
     was lonely, and wished to hear again the sound of friendly speech, but, after such an irruption
     of suburban futility, it was a keen delight, to feel that he was secure on his tower, that he
     could absorb himself in his wonderful task as safe and silent as if he were in mid-desert.
But there was one period that he dared not revive; he could no bear to think of those weeks
     of desolation and terror in the winter after his coming to London. His mind was sluggish, and
     he could not quite remember how many years had passed since that dismal experience; it sounded
     all an old story, but yet it was still vivid, a flaming scroll of terror from which he turned
     his eyes away. One awful scene glowed into his memory, and he could not shut out the sight of
     an orgy, of dusky figures whirling in a ring, of lurid naphtha flares blazing in the darkness,
     of great glittering lamps, like infernal thuribles, very slowly swaying in a violent blast of
     air. And there was something else, something which he could not remember, but it filled him
     with terror, but it slunk in the dark places of his soul, as a wild beast crouches in the
     depths of a cave.
Again, and without reason, he began to image to himself that old moldering house in the
     field. With what a loud incessant noise the wind must be clamoring about on this fearful night,
     how the great elm swayed and cried in the storm, and the rain dashed and pattered on the
     windows, and dripped on the sodden earth from the shaking shrubs beside the door. He moved
     uneasily on his chair, and struggled to put the picture out of his thoughts; but in spite of
     himself he saw the stained uneven walls, that ugly blot of mildew above the window, and perhaps
     a feeble gleam of light filtered through the blind, and some one, unhappy above all and for
     ever lost, sat within the dismal room. Or rather, every window was black, without a glimmer of
     hope, and he who was shut in thick darkness heard the wind and the rain, and the noise of the
     elm-tree moaning and beating and weeping on the walls.
For all his effort the impression would not leave him, and as he sat before his desk looking
     into the vague darkness he could almost see that chamber which he had so often imagined; the
     low whitewashed ceiling held up by a heavy beam, the smears of smoke and long usage, the cracks
     and fissures of the plaster. Old furniture, shabby, deplorable, battered, stood about the room;
     there was a horsehair sofa worn and tottering, and a dismal paper, patterned in a livid red,
     blackened and moldered near the floor, and peeled off and hung in strips from the dank walls.
     And there was that odor of decay, of the rank soil steaming, of rotting wood, a vapor that
     choked the breath and made the heart full of fear and heaviness.
Lucian again shivered with a thrill of dread; he was afraid that he had overworked himself
     and that he was suffering from the first symptoms of grave illness. His mind dwelt on confused
     and terrible recollections, and with a mad ingenuity gave form and substance to phantoms; and
     even now he drew a long breath, almost imagining that the air in his room was heavy and
     noisome, that it entered his nostrils with some taint of the crypt. And his body was still
     languid, and though he made a half motion to rise he could not find enough energy for the
     effort, and he sank again into the chair. At all events, he would think no more of that sad
     house in the field; he would return to those long struggles with letters, to the happy nights
     when he had gained victories.
He remembered something of his escape from the desolation and the worse than desolation that
     had obsessed him during that first winter in London. He had gone free one bleak morning in
     February, and after those dreary terrible weeks the desk and the heap and litter of papers had
     once more engulfed and absorbed him. And in the succeeding summer, of a night when he lay awake
     and listened to the birds, shining images came wantonly to him. For an hour, while the dawn
     brightened, he had felt the presence of an age, the resurrection of the life that the green
     fields had hidden, and his heart stirred for joy when he knew that he held and possessed all
     the loveliness that had so long moldered. He could scarcely fall asleep for eager and leaping
     thoughts, and as soon as his breakfast was over he went out and bought paper and pens of a
     certain celestial stationer in Notting Hill. The street was not changed as he passed to and fro
     on his errand. The rattling wagons jostled by at intervals, a rare hansom came spinning down
     from London, there sounded the same hum and jangle of the gliding trams. The languid life of
     the pavement was unaltered; a few people, un-classed, without salience or possible description,
     lounged and walked from east to west, and from west to east, or slowly dropped into the byways
     to wander in the black waste to the north, or perhaps go astray in the systems that stretched
     towards the river. He glanced down these by-roads as he passed, and was astonished, as always,
     at their mysterious and desert aspect. Some were utterly empty; lines of neat, appalling
     residences, trim and garnished as if for occupation, edging the white glaring road; and not a
     soul was abroad, and not a sound broke their stillness. It was a picture of the desolation of
     midnight lighted up, but empty and waste as the most profound and solemn hours before the day.
     Other of these by-roads, of older settlement, were furnished with more important houses,
     standing far back from the pavement, each in a little wood of greenery, and thus one might look
     down as through a forest vista, and see a way smooth and guarded with low walls and yet
     untrodden, and all a leafy silence. Here and there in some of these echoing roads a figure
     seemed lazily advancing in the distance, hesitating and delaying, as if lost in the labyrinth.
     It was difficult to say which were the more dismal, these deserted streets that wandered away
     to right and left, or the great main thoroughfare with its narcotic and shadowy life. For the
     latter appeared vast, interminable, grey, and those who traveled by it were scarcely real, the
     bodies of the living, but rather the uncertain and misty shapes that come and go across the
     desert in an Eastern tale, when men look up from the sand and see a caravan pass them, all in
     silence, without a cry or a greeting. So they passed and repassed each other on those
     pavements, appearing and vanishing, each intent on his own secret, and wrapped in obscurity.
     One might have sworn that not a man saw his neighbor who met him or jostled him, that here
     every one was a phantom for the other, though the lines of their paths crossed and recrossed,
     and their eyes stared like the eyes of live men. When two went by together, they mumbled and
     cast distrustful glances behind them as though afraid all the world was an enemy, and the
     pattering of feet was like the noise of a shower of rain. Curious appearances and simulations
     of life gathered at points in the road, for at intervals the villas ended and shops began in a
     dismal row, and looked so hopeless that one wondered who could buy. There were women fluttering
     uneasily about the greengrocers, and shabby things in rusty black touched and retouched the red
     lumps that an unshaven butcher offered, and already in the corner public there was a confused
     noise, with a tossing of voices that rose and fell like a Jewish chant, with the senseless stir
     of marionettes jerked into an imitation of gaiety. Then, in crossing a side street that seemed
     like grey mid-winter in stone, he trespassed from one world to another, for an old decayed
     house amidst its garden held the opposite corner. The laurels had grown into black skeletons,
     patched with green drift, the ilex gloomed over the porch, the deodar had blighted the
     flower-beds. Dark ivies swarmed over an elm-tree, and a brown clustering fungus sprang in gross
     masses on the lawn, showing where the roots of dead trees moldered. The blue verandah, the blue
     balcony over the door, had faded to grey, and the stucco was blotched with ugly marks of
     weather, and a dank smell of decay, that vapor of black rotten earth in old town gardens, hung
     heavy about the gates. And then a row of musty villas had pushed out in shops to the pavement,
     and the things in faded black buzzed and stirred about the limp cabbages, and the red lumps of
     meat.
It was the same terrible street, whose pavements he had trodden so often, where sunshine
     seemed but a gaudy light, where the fume of burning bricks always drifted. On black winter
     nights he had seen the sparse lights glimmering through the rain and drawing close together, as
     the dreary road vanished in long perspective. Perhaps this was its most appropriate moment,
     when nothing of its smug villas and skeleton shops remained but the bright patches of their
     windows, when the old house amongst its moldering shrubs was but a dark cloud, and the streets
     to the north and south seemed like starry wastes, beyond them the blackness of infinity. Always
     in the daylight it had been to him abhorred and abominable, and its grey houses and purlieus
     had been fungus-like sproutings, an efflorescence of horrible decay.
But on that bright morning neither the dreadful street nor those who moved about it appalled
     him. He returned joyously to his den, and reverently laid out the paper on his desk. The world
     about him was but a grey shadow hovering on a shining wall; its noises were faint as the
     rustling of trees in a distant wood. The lovely and exquisite forms of those who served the
     Amber Venus were his distinct, clear, and manifest visions, and for one amongst them who came
     to him in a fire of bronze hair his heart stirred with the adoration of love. She it was who
     stood forth from all the rest and fell down prostrate before the radiant form in amber, drawing
     out her pins in curious gold, her glowing brooches of enamel, and pouring from a silver box all
     her treasures of jewels and precious stones, chrysoberyl and sardonyx, opal and diamond, topaz
     and pearl. And then she stripped from her body her precious robes and stood before the goddess
     in the glowing mist of her hair, praying that to her who had given all and came naked to the
     shrine, love might be given, and the grace of Venus. And when at last, after strange
     adventures, her prayer was granted, then when the sweet light came from the sea, and her lover
     turned at dawn to that bronze glory, he saw beside him a little statuette of amber. And in the
     shrine, far in Britain where the black rains stained the marble, they found the splendid and
     sumptuous statue of the Golden Venus, the last fine robe of silk that the lady had dedicated
     falling from her fingers, and the jewels lying at her feet. And her face was like the lady's
     face when the sun had brightened it on that day of her devotion.
The bronze mist glimmered before Lucian's eyes; he felt as though the soft floating hair
     touched his forehead and his lips and his hands. The fume of burning bricks, the reek of
     cabbage water, never reached his nostrils that were filled with the perfume of rare unguents,
     with the breath of the violet sea in Italy. His pleasure was an inebriation, an ecstasy of joy
     that destroyed all the vile Hottentot kraals and mud avenues as with one white lightning flash,
     and through the hours of that day he sat enthralled, not contriving a story with patient art,
     but rapt into another time, and entranced by the urgent gleam in the lady's eyes.
The little tale of The Amber Statuette had at last issued from a humble office in
     the spring after his father's death. The author was utterly unknown; the author's Murray was a
     wholesale stationer and printer in process of development, so that Lucian was astonished when
     the book became a moderate success. The reviewers had been sadly irritated, and even now he
     recollected with cheerfulness an article in an influential daily paper, an article pleasantly
     headed: "Where are the disinfectants?"
And thenâ€”but all the months afterwards seemed doubtful, there were only broken revelations
     of the laborious hours renewed, and the white nights when he had seen the moonlight fade and
     the gaslight grow wan at the approach of dawn.
He listened. Surely that was the sound of rain falling on sodden ground, the heavy sound of
     great swollen drops driven down from wet leaves by the gust of wind, and then again the strain
     of boughs sang above the tumult of the air; there was a doleful noise as if the storm shook the
     masts of a ship. He had only to get up and look out of the window and he would see the treeless
     empty street, and the rain starring the puddles under the gas-lamp, but he would wait a little
     while.
He tried to think why, in spite of all his resolutions, a dark horror seemed to brood more
     and more over all his mind. How often he had sat and worked on just such nights as this,
     contented if the words were in accord though the wind might wail, though the air were black
     with rain. Even about the little book that he had made there seemed some taint, some shuddering
     memory that came to him across the gulf of forgetfulness. Somehow the remembrance of the
     offering to Venus, of the phrases that he had so lovingly invented, brought back again the
     dusky figures that danced in the orgy, beneath the brassy glittering lamps; and again the
     naphtha flares showed the way to the sad house in the fields, and the red glare lit up the
     mildewed walls and the black hopeless windows. He gasped for breath, he seemed to inhale a
     heavy air that reeked of decay and rottenness, and the odor of the clay was in his
     nostrils.
That unknown cloud that had darkened his thoughts grew blacker and engulfed him, despair was
     heavy upon him, his heart fainted with a horrible dread. In a moment, it seemed, a veil would
     be drawn away and certain awful things would appear.
He strove to rise from his chair, to cry out, but he could not. Deep, deep the darkness
     closed upon him, and the storm sounded far away. The Roman fort surged up, terrific, and he saw
     the writhing boughs in a ring, and behind them a glow and heat of fire. There were hideous
     shapes that swarmed in the thicket of the oaks; they called and beckoned to him, and rose into
     the air, into the flame that was smitten from heaven about the walls. And amongst them was the
     form of the beloved, but jets of flame issued from her breasts, and beside her was a horrible
     old woman, naked; and they, too, summoned him to mount the hill.
He heard Dr. Burrows whispering of the strange things that had been found in old Mrs.
     Gibbon's cottage, obscene figures, and unknown contrivances. She was a witch, he said, and the
     mistress of witches.
He fought against the nightmare, against the illusion that bewildered him. All his life, he
     thought, had been an evil dream, and for the common world he had fashioned an unreal red
     garment, that burned in his eyes. Truth and the dream were so mingled that now he could not
     divide one from the other. He had let Annie drink his soul beneath the hill, on the night when
     the moonfire shone, but he had not surely seen her exalted in the flame, the Queen of the
     Sabbath. Dimly he remembered Dr. Burrows coming to see him in London, but had he not imagined
     all the rest?
Again he found himself in the dusky lane, and Annie floated down to him from the moon above
     the hill. His head sank upon her breast again, but, alas, it was aflame. And he looked down,
     and he saw that his own flesh was aflame, and he knew that the fire could never be
     quenched.
There was a heavy weight upon his head, his feet were nailed to the floor, and his arms bound
     tight beside him. He seemed to himself to rage and struggle with the strength of a madman; but
     his hand only stirred and quivered a little as it lay upon the desk.
Again he was astray in the mist; wandering through the waste avenues of a city that had been
     ruined from ages. It had been splendid as Rome, terrible as Babylon, and for ever the darkness
     had covered it, and it lay desolate for ever in the accursed plain. And far and far the grey
     passages stretched into the night, into the icy fields, into the place of eternal gloom.
Ring within ring the awful temple closed around him; unending circles of vast stones, circle
     within circle, and every circle less throughout all ages. In the center was the sanctuary of
     the infernal rite, and he was borne thither as in the eddies of a whirlpool, to consummate his
     ruin, to celebrate the wedding of the Sabbath. He flung up his arms and beat the air, resisting
     with all his strength, with muscles that could throw down mountains; and this time his little
     finger stirred for an instant, and his foot twitched upon the floor.
Then suddenly a flaring street shone before him. There was darkness round about him, but it
     flamed with hissing jets of light and naphtha fires, and great glittering lamps swayed very
     slowly in a violent blast of air. A horrible music, and the exultation of discordant voices,
     swelled in his ears, and he saw an uncertain tossing crowd of dusky figures that circled and
     leapt before him. There was a noise like the chant of the lost, and then there appeared in the
     midst of the orgy, beneath a red flame, the figure of a woman. Her bronze hair and flushed
     cheeks were illuminate, and an argent light shone from her eyes, and with a smile that froze
     his heart her lips opened to speak to him. The tossing crowd faded away, falling into a gulf of
     darkness, and then she drew out from her hair pins of curious gold, and glowing brooches in
     enamel, and poured out jewels before him from a silver box, and then she stripped from her body
     her precious robes, and stood in the glowing mist of her hair, and held out her arms to him.
     But he raised his eyes and saw the mould and decay gaining on the walls of a dismal room, and a
     gloomy paper was dropping to the rotting floor. A vapor of the grave entered his nostrils, and
     he cried out with a loud scream; but there was only an indistinct guttural murmur in his
     throat.
And presently the woman fled away from him, and he pursued her. She fled away before him
     through midnight country, and he followed after her, chasing her from thicket to thicket, from
     valley to valley. And at last he captured her and won her with horrible caresses, and they went
     up to celebrate and make the marriage of the Sabbath. They were within the matted thicket, and
     they writhed in the flames, insatiable, for ever. They were tortured, and tortured one another,
     in the sight of thousands who gathered thick about them; and their desire rose up like a black
     smoke.
Without, the storm swelled to the roaring of an awful sea, the wind grew to a shrill long
     scream, the elm-tree was riven and split with the crash of a thunderclap. To Lucian the tumult
     and the shock came as a gentle murmur, as if a brake stirred before a sudden breeze in summer.
     And then a vast silence overwhelmed him.
A few minutes later there was a shuffling of feet in the passage, and the door was softly
     opened. A woman came in, holding a light, and she peered curiously at the figure sitting quite
     still in the chair before the desk. The woman was half dressed, and she had let her splendid
     bronze hair flow down, her cheeks were flushed, and as she advanced into the shabby room, the
     lamp she carried cast quaking shadows on the moldering paper, patched with marks of rising
     damp, and hanging in strips from the wet, dripping wall. The blind had not been drawn, but no
     light or glimmer of light filtered through the window, for a great straggling box tree that
     beat the rain upon the panes shut out even the night. The woman came softly, and as she bent
     down over Lucian an argent gleam shone from her brown eyes, and the little curls upon her neck
     were like golden work upon marble. She put her hand to his heart, and looked up, and beckoned
     to some one who was waiting by the door.
"Come in, Joe," she said. "It's just as I thought it would be: 'Death by misadventure'"; and
     she held up a little empty bottle of dark blue glass that was standing on the desk. "He would
     take it, and I always knew he would take a drop too much one of these days."
"What's all those papers that he's got there?"
"Didn't I tell you? It was crool to see him. He got it into 'is 'ead he could write a book;
     he's been at it for the last six months. Look 'ere."
She spread the neat pile of manuscript broadcast over the desk, and took a sheet at
     haphazard. It was all covered with illegible hopeless scribblings; only here and there it was
     possible to recognize a word.
"Why, nobody could read it, if they wanted to."
"It's all like that. He thought it was beautiful. I used to 'ear him jabbering to himself
     about it, dreadful nonsense it was he used to talk. I did my best to tongue him out of it, but
     it wasn't any good."
"He must have been a bit dotty. He's left you everything."
"Yes."
"You'll have to see about the funeral."
"There'll be the inquest and all that first."
"You've got evidence to show he took the stuff."
"Yes, to be sure I have. The doctor told him he would be certain to do for himself, and he
     was found two or three times quite silly in the streets. They had to drag him away from a house
     in Halden Road. He was carrying on dreadful, shaking at the gaite, and calling out it was 'is
     'ome and they wouldn't let him in. I heard Dr. Manning myself tell 'im in this very room that
     he'd kill 'imself one of these days. Joe! Aren't you ashamed of yourself. I declare you're
     quite rude, and it's almost Sunday too. Bring the light over here, can't you?"
The man took up the blazing paraffin lamp, and set it on the desk, beside the scattered heap
     of that terrible manuscript. The flaring light shone through the dead eyes into the dying
     brain, and there was a glow within, as if great furnace doors were opened.
</div></body></text></TEI>