
CHAPTER II
Tarr had arrived at Bertha’s place about seven in the evening on his first return from
      Montmartre. He hung about for a little. In ten minutes’ time he had his reward. She came out,
      followed by Kreisler. Bertha did not see him at first. He followed on the other side of the
      street, some fifteen yards behind. He did this with sleepy gratification. All was well.
Relations with her were now, it must be clear, substantially at an end. A kind of good
      sensation of alternating jealousy and regret made him wander along with obedient gratitude.
      Should she turn round and see him, how uncomfortable she would be ! How naturally alike in
      their mechanical marching gait she and the German were! He was a distinct third party. Being a
      stranger, with very different appearance, thrilled him agreeably. By a little manoeuvre of
      short cuts he would get in front of them. This he did.
Bertha saw him as he debouched from his turning. She stopped dead, and appeared to
      astonished Kreisler to be about to take to her heels. It was flattering in a way that his mere
      presence should produce this effect. He went up to her. Her palm a sentimental instrument of
      weak, aching, heavy tissues, she gave him her hand, face fixed on him in a mask of regret and
      reproach. Fascinated by the intensity of this, he had been staring at her a little too long,
      perhaps with some of the reflection of her expression. He turned towards Kreisler. He found a,
      to him. conventionally German indifferent countenance.
“Herr Kreisler,” Bertha said with laconic energy, as though she were uttering some fatal
      name. Her “Herr Kreisler” said hollowly, “It’s done !” It also had an inflexion of “What
      shall I do ?”
A sick energy saturated her face, the lips were indecently compressed, the eyes wide, dull,
      with red rims.
Tarr bowed to Kreisler as Bertha said his name. Kreisler raised his hat. Then, with a
      curious feeling of already thrusting himself on these people, he began to walk along beside
      Bertha. She moved like an unconvinced party to a bargain, who consents to walk up and down a
      little, preliminary to a final consideration of the affair. “Yes, but walking won’t
      help matters,” she might have been saying. Kreisler’s indifference was absolute. There was an
      element of the child’s privilege in Tarr’s making himself of the party (“Sorbet, tu es si
       jeune”). There was the claim for indulgence of a spirit not entirely serious! The
      childishness of this turning up as though nothing had happened, with such wilful resolve not
      to recognize the seriousness of things, Bertha’s drama, the significance of the awful words, “
      Herr Kreisler !” and so on, was present to him. Bertha must know the meaning of his rapid
      resurrection — she knew him too well not to know that. So they walked on,
      without conversation. Then Tarr inquired if she were “quite well.”
' “Yes, Sorbert, quite well,” she replied, with soft tragic banter.
As though by design, he always found just the words or tone that would give an opening for
      this sentimental irony of hers.
But the least hint that he had come to reinstate himself must not remain. It must be clearly
      understood that Kreisler was the principal figure now. He, Tarr, was only a
      privileged friend.
With unflattering rapidity somebody else had been found. Her pretension to heroic attachment
      was compromised. Should not he put in for the vacated berth ?
He had an air of welcoming Kreisler. “Make
        yourself at home; don’t mind me,” his manner said. As to showing him over the
      premises he was taking possession of — he had made the inspection, himself, no doubt!
“We have a mutual friend, Lowndes,” Tarr said to Kreisler, pleasantly. “A week or two ago
      he was going to introduce me to you, but it was fated——”
“Ah, yes, Lowndes,” said Kreisler, “I know him.”
“Has he left Paris, do you know ?”
“I think not. I thought I saw him yesterday, there, in the Boulevard du Paradis.” Kreisler
      nodded over his shoulder, indicating precisely the spot on which they had met. His gesture
      implied that Lowndes might still be found thereabout.
Bertha shrank in “subtle” pantomime from their affability. Prom the glances she pawed her
      German friend with, he must deserve nothing but horrified avoidance. Sorbert’s astute and
      mischievous way of saddling her with Kreisler, accepting their being together as the most
      natural thing in life, roused her combativity. Tarr honoured him, clearly out of politeness to
      her. Very well: all she could do for the moment was to be noticeably distant with Kreisler.
      She must display towards him the disgust and reprobation that Tarr should feel, and which
      he refused, in order to vex her.
Kreisler during the last few days had persisted and persisted. He had displayed some
      cleverness in his choice of means. As a result of overtures and manoeuvres, Bertha had now
      consented to see him. Her demoralization was complete. She could not stand up any longer
      against the result, personified by Kreisler, of her idiotic actions. At present
      she transferred her self-hatred from herself to Kreisler.
Tarr’s former relations with Bertha were known to him. He resented the Englishman’s air of
      proprietorship, the sort of pleasant “handing-over” that was going on. It had for object, he
      thought, to cheapen his little success.
“I don’t think, Herr Kreisler, I’ll come to dinner after all.” She stood still and rolled
      her eyes wildly in several directions, and stuck one of her hands stiffly out from her
      side.
“Very well, Fraulein,” he replied evenly. — The dismissal annoyed him. His eyes took in
      Tarr compendiously in passing. Was this a resuscitation of old love at his expense ? Tarr had
      perhaps come to claim his property. This was not the way that is usually done.
“Adieu, Herr Kreisler,” sounded like his dismissal. A “never let me see you again ;
      understand that here things end!” was written baldly in her very bald eyes. With irony he bid
      good day to Tarr.
“I hope we shall meet again” : Tarr shook him warmly by the hand.
“It is likely,” Kreisler replied at once.
As yet Kreisler was undisturbed. He intended not to relinquish his acquaintance with Bertha
      Lunken. If the Englishman’s amiability were a polite way of reclaiming property left
      owner-less and therefore susceptible of new rights being deployed as regards it, then in time
      those later rights would be vindicated. Kreisler’s first impression of Tarr was not
      flattering. But no doubt they would meet again, as he had said.
