
CHAPTER IV
Kreisler pocketed Ernst’s hundred marks and made no further attempt on the formerly
      hospitable income of his friend. Debts began accumulating. Only he found he had grown
      suddenly timid with his creditors. The concierge frightened him. He conciliated the garçon at
      the cafe, to whom he owed money. He even paid several debts that it was quite unnecessary to
      pay, in a moment of panic and weakness. A straitened week ensued. At the Berne he had lost his
      nerve in some way; he clowned obsequiously on some evenings, and, depressed and slack the
      next, perhaps, resented his companions’ encores.
Next he gradually developed the habit of sitting alone. More often than not he would come
      into the 
        café and go to a table at the opposite side of the room to that at which the
      Germans were sitting.
Ridicule is sighted at twenty yards, the spectator then, without the sphere of average
      immediate magnetism. For once it does not matter, but if persisted in it inevitably results in
      humour. Those who keep to themselves awaken mirth as a cartwheel running along the road by
      itself would. People feel with the “lonely” man that he is going about with some eccentric
      companion — that is himself. Why did he choose this deaf-and-dumb companion ? What do they
      find to say ? He is ludicrous as two men would be who, perpetually in each other’s company,
      were never seen to exchange a word — who dined together, went to theatre or café, without
      ever looking at each other or speaking.
So Kreisler became a lonely figure. It was a strange feeling. He must be quiet and not
      attract attention. He. was marked in some way as though he had committed a theft. Perhaps it
      was merely the worry of perpetual “tick” beginning to tell. For the moment he would just put
      himself aside and see what happened. He was afraid of himself too. Always up till then
      immersed in that self, now for the first time he stood partly outside it. This slight divorce
      made him less sure in his actions. A little less careful of his appearance, he went sluggishly
      about, smoking, reading the paper a great deal, working at the art school fairly often,
      playing billiards with an Austrian cook whose acquaintance he had made in a café and who
      disappeared owing him seven francs.
Volker had been a compendious phenomenon in his life, although his cheery gold had attracted
      him to the more complete discovery. He had ousted women, too, from Kreisler’s daily needs. He
      had become a superstition for his tall friend.
It was Kreisler’s deadness, his absolute lack of any reason to be confident and yet perfect
      aplomb,  that mastered his companion. But this acquired eventually its significance as well,
      for Kreisler. The inertia and phlegm, outward sign of depressing 
        everyday Kreisler, had found some one for whom they were a charm and something
      to be envied. Kreisler’s imagination woke shortly after Volker’s. It was as though a peasant
      who had always regarded his life as the dullest affair, were suddenly inspirited about himself
      by realizing some townsman’s poetic notion of him. Kreisler’s moody wastefulness and
      futility had found a raison d’etre and meaning.
Ernst Volker had remained for three vague years becalmed on this empty sea. Kreisler basked
      round him, never having to lift his waves and clash them together as formerly he had been
      forced sometimes to do. There had been no appeals to life. Volker had been the guarantor of
      his peace. His failure was the omen of the sinking ship, the disappearance of the rats!
Then they had never arrived at terms of friendship. It had been only an epic
      acquaintanceship, and Kreisler had taken him about as a parasite that he pretended not to
      notice.
There was no question, therefore, of a reproach at desertion. He merely hopped off on to
      somebody else. Kreisler was more exasperated at this than at the defection of a friend, who
      could be fixed down, and from whom at last explanation must come. It was an unfair advantage
      taken. A man had no right to accompany you in that distant and paradoxical fashion, get all he
      could, become ideally useful, unless it was for life.
He watched Soltyk’s success with distant mockery. Volker’s loves were all husks, of
      illogical completeness.
A man appeared one day in the Berne who had known Kreisler in Munich. The story of
      Kreisler’s marrying his fiancee to his father then became known. Other complications were
      alleged in which Otto’s paternity played a part. The dot of the bride was another obscure
      matter. It was during his aloofness. He looked the sort of man, the party agreed, who would
      splice his sweetheart with his papa or reinforce his papa’s affairs with a dot he did not wish
      to pay for at last with his own person. The Berne was 
       also informed that Kreisler had to keep seventeen children in Munich alone; that
      he only had to look at a woman for her to become pregnant. It was when the head of the column,
      the eldest of the seventeen, emerged into boyhood, requiring instruction, that Kreisler left
      for Rome. Since then a small society had been founded in Bavaria to care for
      Kreisler’s offsprings throughout Germany. This great capacity of Otto’s was, naturally, not
      admired; at the best it could be considered as a misdirected and disordered efficiency. The
      stories pleased, nevertheless. When he appeared that night his friends turned towards
      his historic figure with cries of welcome. But he was not gregarious. He missed his
      opportunity. He took a seat in the passage-way leading to the Bureau de Tabac. As their
      laughter struck him through his paper he was unstrung enough to be annoyed.
He frowned and puckered up his eyes, and two flushed lines descended from his eyes to his
      jaw. On their way out one or two of his compatriots greeted him :
“Sacred Otto ! Why so unsociable ?”
“Hush ! He has much to think about. You don’t understand what the cares of——”
, “Come, old Otto, a drink !”
He shook them off with mixture of affected anger and genuine spitting oaths. He avoided
      their eyes and spat blasphemously at his beer. He avoided the café for some days.
Kreisler then recovered.
At first nothing much happened. He had just gone back again into the midst of his machinery
      like a bone slipped into its place, with a soft crick. He became rather more firm with his
      creditors. He changed his rooms (moving then to the Boulevard Pfeiffer), passed an occasional
      evening with the Germans at the Berne, and started a portrait of Suzanne, who had been sitting
      at the school.
“How is Herr Volker ? Is he out of Paris ?” Fraulein Lipmann asked him when they met. “
      Come round and see us.”
People’s actual or possible proceedings formed in very hard-and-fast mould in Kreisler’s
      mind, seen not with realism, but through conventions of his suspicious irony. This solicitude
      as to Volker he contrasted with their probable indifference as regards his old, shabby, and
      impolite self.
But he went round, his reception being insipid. He had shown no signs of animation or
      interest in them. Both he and the ladies were rather doubtful as to why he came at all. No
      pleasure resulted on either side from these visits, yet they doggedly continued. A distinct
      and steady fall in the temperature could be observed. He sneered, as though the aimlessness of
      his visits were an insult that had at last been taken up. They would have been for
      ever discontinued except for a sudden necessity to reopen that channel of bourgeois
      intercourse.
