
CHAPTER II
A great many of Frederick Tarr’s resolutions came from his conversation. It was a tribunal
      to which he brought his hesitations. An active and hustling spirit presided over this section
      of his life.
Civilized men have for conversation something of the superstitious feeling that ignorant men
      have for the written or the printed word.
Hobson had attracted a great deal of steam to himself. Tarr was unsatisfied. — He rushed
      away from the café Berne still strong and with much more to say. He rushed towards Bertha to
      say it.
A third of the way he came on a friend who should have been met before Hobson. Then Bertha
      and he could have been spared.
Butcher was a bloody wastrel enamoured of gold and liberty. — He was a romantic, educating
      his schoolboyish sense of adventure up to the pitch of drama. He had been induced by Tarr to
      develop an interest in commerce. He had started a motor business in Paris, and through
      circularizing the Americans resident there and using his English connexions, he was succeeding
      on the lines suggested.
' Tarr had argued that an interest of this sort would prevent him from becoming arty and
      silly. — Tarr would have driven his entire circle of acquaintances into commerce if he could.
      He had at first cherished the ambition of getting Hobson into a bank in South Africa.
As he rushed along then a gaunt car met him, rushing in the opposite direction. Butcher’s
      large red nose stood under a check cap phenomenally peaked. A sweater and Yankee jacket
      exaggerated his breadth. He was sunk in horizontal massiveness in the car — almost in the
      road. A quizzing, heavy smile broke his face open in an indifferent businesslike way. It was a
      sour smile, as though half his face were frozen with cocaine. — He pulled up with 
       the air of an Iron-Age mechanic, born among beds of embryonic machinery.
“Ah, I thought I might see you.” — He rolled over the edge and stood grinning and
      stretching in front of his friend.
“Where are you off to ?” Tarr asked.
“I heard there were some gypsies encamped over by Charenton.” — He smiled and waited, his
      entire face breaking up expectantly into cunning pits and traps. — Mention of “gypsies”
      usually drew Tarr. They were a survival of Butcher’s pre-motor days.
“Neglecting business ?” was all Tarr said however. “Have you time for a drink ?”
“Yes !” Butcher turned with an airy jerk to his car. “Shall we go to the Panthéon ?”
“How about the Univers ? Would that take long ?”
“The Univers ? Four or five minutes. — Jump in.”
When they had got to the Univers and ordered their drink, Tarr said :
“I’ve just been talking to Alan Hobson. I’ve been telling him off.”
“That’s right. — How had he deserved it ?”
“Oh, he happened to drop on me when I was thinking about my girl. He began
      congratulating me on my engagement. So I gave him my views on marriage, and then wound up with
      a little improvisation about himself.”
Butcher maintained a decorous silence, drinking his beer.
“You’re not engaged to be married, are you ?” he asked.
. “Well, that’s a difficult question.” — Tarr laughed with circumspection and softness. “I
      don’t know whether I am or whether I’m not.”
“Would it be the German girl, if you were ?”
“Yes, she’d be the one.”
There was a careful absence of comment in Butcher’s face.
“Ought I to marry the Lunken ?”

“No,” Butcher said with measure.
“In that case I ought to tell her at once.”
“That is so.”
Tarr had a dark morning coat, whose tails flowed behind him as he walked strongly and
      quickly along, and curled on either side of his hips as he sat. It was buttoned half-way down
      the body. — He was taller than Butcher, wore glasses, had a dark skin, and a steady,
      unamiable, impatient expression. He was clean-shaven, with a shallow, square jaw and straight,
      thick mouth. — His hands were square and usually hot.
He impressed you as having inherited himself last week, and as under a great press of
      business to grasp the details and resources of the concern. Not very much satisfaction at his
      inheritance, and no swank. Great capacity was printed all over him. — He did not appear to
      have been modified as yet by any sedentary, sentimental, or other discipline or habit. He was
      at his first push in an ardent and exotic world, with a good fund of passion from a
      frigid climate of his own. — His mistakes he talked over without embarrassment. He felt them
      deeply. He was experimental and modest.
A rude and hard infancy, according to Balzac, is best for development of character. A child
      learns duplicity, and hardens in defence. — An enervating childhood of molly-coddling, on the
      other hand, such as Tarr’s, has its advantages. — He was an only child of a selfish, vigorous
      mother. The long foundation of delicate trustfulness and childishness makes for a store of
      illusion to prolong youth and health beyond the usual term. Tarr, with the Balzac
      upbringing, would have had a little too much character, like a rather too muscular man. As it
      was, he was a shade too nervous. But his confidence in the backing of character was
      unparalleled. You would have thought he had an iron-field behind him.
When he solicited advice, it was transparently a matter of form. But he appeared to need his
      own advice to come from himself in public. — Did he feel
       himself of more importance in public ? — His relation to the world was definite
      and complementary. He preferred his own word to come out of the air ; when, that is, issuing
      from his mouth, it entered either ear as an independent vibration. He was the kind of man who,
      if he ever should wish to influence the world, would do it so that he might touch himself more
      plastically through others. He would paint his picture for himself. He was capable of
      respect for his self-projection. It had the authority of a stranger for him.
Butcher knew that his advice was not really solicited. — This he found rather annoying, as
      he wanted to meddle. But his opportunity would come.  — Tarr’s affairs with Bertha Lunken were
      very exasperating. Of all the drab, dull, and disproportionately long liaisons, that one was
      unique! He had accepted it as an incomprehensible and silly joke.
“She’s a very good sort. You know, she is phenomenally kind. It’s not quite so absurd as
      you think, my question as to whether I should marry her. Her love is quite beyond
      question.”
Butcher listened with a slight rolling of the eyes, which was a soft equivalent for grinding
      his teeth.
Tarr proceeded:
“She has a nice healthy penchant for self-immolation ; not, unfortunately, directed by any
      considerable tact or discretion. She is apt to lie down on the altar at the wrong moment —
      even to mistake all sorts of unrelated things for altars. She once lay down on the pavement of
      the Boulevard Sebastopol, and continued to lie there heroically till, with the help of an
      agent, I bundled her into a cab. She is genial and fond of a gross pleasantry, very near to ‘
      the people ’ — le peuple, as she says, purringly and pityingly. All individuals who
      have class marked on them strongly resemble each other. A typical duchess is much more like a
      typical nurserymaid than she is like anybody not standardized to the same extent. So is
      Bertha, a bourgeoise, or rather bourgeois-Bohemian, reminiscent of the popular maiden.”

Tarr relighted his cigarette.
“She is full of good sense. — She is a high standard Aryan female, in good condition,
      superbly made ; of the succulent, obedient, clear, peasant type. It is natural that in my
      healthy youth, living in these Bohemian wastes, I should catch fire. But that is not the whole
      of the picture. She is unfortunately not a peasant. She has German culture, and a florid
      philosophy of love. — She is an art-student. —  She is absurd.”
Tarr struck a match for his cigarette.
“You would ask then how it is that I am still there ? The peasant-girl — if such it were —
      would not hold you for ever; even less so the spoiled peasant. — But that’s where the mischief
      lies. — That bourgeois, spoiled, ridiculous element was the trap. I was innocently depraved
      enough to find it irresistible. It had the charm of a vulgar wall-paper, a gimcrack ornament.
      A cosy banality set in the midst of a rough life. Youthful exoticism has done it, the
      something different from oneself.”
Butcher did not roll his eyes any more. They looked rather moist. He was thinking of love
      and absurdities that had checkered his own past, and was regretting a downy doll. He was won
      over , besides by Tarr’s plaidoirie, as he always was. His friend could have
      convinced him of anything on earth within ten minutes.
Tarr, noticing the effect of his words, laughed. Butcher was like a dog, with his rheumy
      eyes.
“My romance, you see, is exactly inverse to yours,” Tarr proceeded. “But pure
      unadulterated romanticism with me is in about the same rudimentary state as sex. So they had
      perhaps better keep together ? I only allow myself to philander with little things. I have
      succeeded in shunting our noxious illusionism away from the great spaces and ambitions. I
      have billeted it with a bourgeoise in a villa. These things are all arranged above our heads.
      They are no doubt self-protective. The whole of a man’s ninety-nine per cent, of obscurer
      mechanism is daily engaged in 
      organizing his life in accordance with his deepest necessity. Each person boasts
      some notable invention of personal application only.
“So there I am fixed with my bourgeoise in my skin, dans ma peau. What
      is the next step ? — The body is the main thing. — But I think I have made a discovery. In sex
      I am romantic and arriéré. It would be healthier for all sex to be so. But
      that is another matter. Well, I cannot see myself attracted by an exceptional woman — ‘
      spiritual ’ woman —  ‘ noble soul,’ or even a particularly refined and witty animal. — I do
      not understand attraction for such beings. — Their existence appears to me quite natural and
      proper, but, not being as fine as men ; not being as fine as pictures or poems; not being as
      fine as housewives or classical Mothers of Men ; they appear to me to occupy an unfortunate
      position on this earth. No man properly demarcated as I am will have much to do with them.
      They are very beautiful to look at. But they are unfortunately alive, and usually cats. If you
      married one of them, out of pity, you would have to support the eternal grin of a Gioconda
      fixed complacently on you at all hours of the day, the pretensions of a piece of canvas
      that had sold for thirty thousand pounds. You could not put your foot through the canvas
      without being hanged. You would not be able to sell it yourself for that figure, and so get
      some little compensation. Tout au plus, if the sentimental grin would
      not otherwise come off, you could break its jaw, perhaps.” Butcher flung his head up, and
      laughed affectedly.
“Ha ha !” — he went again.
“Very good ! — Very good ! — I know who you’re thinking of,” he said.
“Do you ? Oh, the ‘ Gioconda smile,’ you mean ? — Yes. — In that instance, the man had only
      his silly sentimental self to blame. He has paid the biggest price given in our time for a
       living masterpiece. Sentimentalizing about masterpieces and sentimental
       prices will soon have seen their day, I expect. New masterpieces in painting will then 
       appear again, perhaps, where the live ones leagued with the old dead ones
      disappear. — Really, the more one considers it, the more creditable and excellent my
      self-organization appears. I have a great deal to congratulate myself upon.”
Butcher blinked and pulled himself together with a grave dissatisfied expression.
“But will you carry it into effect to the extent ? — Will you ? — Would marriage be the
      ideal termination ?” — Butcher had a way of tearing up and beginning all over again on a new
      breath.
“That is what Hobson asked. — No, I don’t think marriage has anything to do with it. That
      is another question altogether.”
“I thought your remarks about the housewife suggested——”
“No. — My relation to the idea of the housewife Is platonic. I am attracted to the
      housewife as I might be attracted to the milliner. But just as I should not necessarily employ
      the latter to make hats — I should have some other use for her — so my connexion with the
      other need not imply a manage. But my present difficulty centres round that question:
“What am I to do with Fräulein Lunken ?”
Butcher drew himself up, and hiccuped solemnly and slowly.
He did not reply.
“Once again, is marriage out of the question ?” Tarr asked.
“You know yourself best. I don’t think you ought to marry.”
“Why, am I—?”
“No. You wouldn’t stop with her. So why marry ?”
He hiccuped again, and blinked.
Tarr gazed at his oracle with curiosity. — With eyes glassily bloodshot, it discharged its
      wisdom on gusts of air. Butcher was always surly about women, or rather men’s tenderness for
      them. He was a vindictive enemy of the sex. He stood, a patient constable, forbidding Tarr
      respectfully a certain road. He 
       spoke with authority and shortness, and hiccuped to convey the absolute and
      assured quality of his refusal.
“Well, in that case,” Tarr said, “I must make a move. I have treated Bertha very
      badly.”
Butcher smothered a hiccup. — He ordered another drink.
“Yes, I owe my girl anything I can give her. It is hardly my fault. With the training you
      get in England, how can you be expected to realize anything ? The University of Humour that
      prevails everywhere in England as the national institution for developing youth, provides you
      with nothing but a first-rate means of evading reality. The whole of English training — the
      great fundamental spirit of the country — is a system of deadening feeling, a prescription for
      Stoicism. Many of the results are excellent. It saves us from gush in many cases; it is an
      excellent armour in times of crisis or misfortune. The English soldier gets his special
      cachet from it. But for the sake of this wonderful panacea —  English humour — we sacrifice
      much. It would be better to face our Imagination and our nerves without this soporific. Once
      this armature breaks down, the man underneath is found in many cases to have become softened
      by it. He is subject to shock, oversensitiveness, and many ailments not met with in the more
      frank and direct races. Their superficial sensitiveness allows of a harder core. — To set
      against this, of course, you have the immense reserves of delicacy, touchiness, sympathy, that
      this envelope of cynicism has accumulated. It has served English art marvellously. But it is
      probably more useful for art than for practical affairs. And the artist could always look
      after himself. Anyhow, the time seems to have arrived in my life, as I consider it has
      arrived in the life of the country, to discard this husk and armour. Life must be met on other
      terms than those of fun and sport.”
Butcher guffawed provocatively. Tarr joined him. They both quaffed their beer.

“You’re a terrible fellow,” said Butcher. “If you had your way, you’d leave us stark
      naked. We should all be standing on our little island in the savage state of the Ancient
      Britons — figuratively.” He hiccuped.
“Yes, figuratively. But in reality the country would be armed better than it ever had been
      before. And by the sacrifice of these famous ‘ national characteristics ’ we cling to
      sentimentally, and which are merely the accident of a time, we should lay a soil and
      foundation of unspecific force, on which new and realler ‘ national flavours ’ would very
      soon sprout.”
“I quite agree,” Butcher jerked out energetically.
He ordered another lager.
“I agree with what you say. If we don’t give up dreaming, we shall get spanked. I have
      given up my gypsies. That was very public-spirited of me?” He looked coaxingly.
“If every one would give up their gypsies, their jokes, and their gentlemen — ‘ Gentlemen ’
      are worse than gypsies. It would do perhaps if they reduced them considerably, as you have
      your Gitanos.  — I’m going to swear off humour for a year. I am going to gaze on even you
      inhumanly. All my mock matrimonial difficulties come from humour. I am going to gaze on Bertha
      inhumanly, and not humorously. Humour paralyses the sense for reality and wraps people in a
      phlegmatic and hysterical dreamworld, full of the delicious swirls of the switchback, the
      drunkenness of the merry-go-round — screaming leaps from idea to idea. My little weapon for
      bringing my man to earth — shot-gun or what not — gave me good sport, too, and was of the best
      workmanship. I carried it slung jauntily for some time at my side —  you may have noticed it.
      But I am in the tedious position of the man who hits the bull’s-eye every time. Had I not been
      disproportionately occupied with her absurdities, I should not have allowed this charming girl
      to engage herself to me.
“My first practical step now will be to take this
       question of ‘ engaging ’ myself or not into my own hands. I shall
       disengage myself on the spot.”
“So long as you don’t engage yourself again next minute, and so on. If I felt that the time
      was not quite ripe, I’d leave it in Fräulein Lunken’s hands a little longer. I expect she does
      it better than you would.”
Butcher filled his pipe, then he began laughing. He laughed theatrically until Tarr stopped
      him.
“What are you laughing at ?”
“You are a nut! Ha ! ha ! ha !”
“How am I a nut ? You must be thinking about your old machine out there.”
Butcher composed himself — theatrically.
“I was laughing at you. You repent of your thoughtlessness, and all that. Your next step is
      to put it right. I was laughing at the way you go about it. You now proceed kindly but firmly
      to break off your engagement and discard the girl. That is very neat.”
“Do you think so ? Well, perhaps it is a trifle over-tidy. I hadn’t looked at it in that
      way.”
“You can’t be too tidy,” Butcher said dogmatically. He talked to Tarr, when a little worked
      up, as Tarr talked to him. He didn’t notice that he did. It was partly
       calinerie and flattery.
Tarr pulled out a very heavy and determined-looking watch. He would have suffered had he
      been compelled to use a small watch. For the time to be microscopic and noiseless would be
      unbearable. The time must be human. That he insisted on. And it must not be pretty or
      neat.
“It is late. I must go. Must you get back to Passy or can you stop ?”
“Do you know, I’m afraid I must get back. I have to lunch with a fellow at one, who is
      putting me on to a good thing. But can I take you anywhere ? Or are you lunching here ?”
“No. — Take me as far as the Samaritaine, will you ?”
Butcher took him along two sides of the Louvre, to the river.

“Good-bye, then. Don’t forget Saturday, six o’clock.”
Butcher nodded in bright, clever silence. He shuffled into his car again, working his
      shoulders like a verminous tramp. He rushed away, piercing blasts from his horn rapidly
      softening as he became smaller. Tarr was glad he had brought the car and Butcher together.
      They were opposites with some grave essential in common.
His usual lunch time an hour away, his so far unrevised programme was to go to the Rue
      Lhomond and search for Hobson’s studio. For the length of a street it was equally the road to
      the studio and to Bertha’s rooms. He knew to which he was going.
But a sensation of peculiar freedom and leisure possessed him. There was no hurry. Was
      there any hurry to go where he was going ? With a smile in his mind, his face irresponsible
      and solemn, he turned sharply into a narrow street, rendered dangerous by motor-buses, and
      asked at a loge if Monsieur Lowndes were in.
“Monsieur Lounes ? Je pense que oui. Je ne l’ai pas vu sortir.”
He ascended to the fourth floor and rang a bell.
Lowndes was in. He heard him coming on tiptoe to .the door, and felt him gazing at him
      through an invisible crack. He placed himself in a favourable position.
