
CHAPTER VIII
Destiny has more power over the superstitious. They attract constantly bright fortunes and
      disasters within their circle. Destiny had laid its trap in the unconscious Kreisler. It fixed
      it with powerful violent springs. Eight days later (dating from the Observatoire meeting), it
      snapped down on Bertha.
Kreisler’s windows had been incandescent with steady saffron rays, coming over the roofs of
      the 
        quarter. His little shell of a room had breasted them with pretence of antique
      adventure. The old boundless yellow lights streamed from their abstract El Dorado. They were a
      Gulf Stream for our little patch of a world, making a people as quiet as the English. Men once
      more were invited to be the motes in the sunbeam, to play in the sleepy surf on the edge of
      remoteness.
Now, from within, his windows looked as suddenly harsh and familiar. Unreasonable limitation
      gave its specific colour to thin glass.
The clock was striking eight. Like eight metallic glittering waves dashing discordantly
      together in a cavern, its strokes rushed up and down in Bertha’s head. She was leaning on the
      mantelshelf, head sunk forward, with the action of a person about to be sick. She had
      struggled up from the bed a moment before — the last vigour at her disposal being spent
      in getting away from the bed at all costs.
“Oh schwein ! schwein ! Ich hass es — ich hass dich ! Schwein ! Schensal! schensslicher
      Mensch !”
All the hatred and repulsion of her being, in a raw, indecent heat, seemed turned into this
      tearful sonority, gushing up like blood. An exasperated falling, deepening singsong in the “
      schensslicher Mensch !” something of the disgusting sound of the brutal relishing and
      gobbling of food. Hatred expresses itself like the satisfaction of an appetite. The
      outrage was spat out of her body on to him. As she stood there she looked like some one on
      whom a practical joke had been played, of the primitive and physical order, such as drenching,
      in some amusing manner, with dirty water. She had been decoyed into swallowing something
      disgusting. Her attitude was reminiscent of the way people are seen to stand bent awkwardly
      forward, neck craned out, slowly wiping the dirt off their clothes, or spitting out the
      remains of their polluted drink, cursing the joker.
This had been, too, a desperate practical joke in its madness and inconsequence. But it was
      of the solemn and lonely order. At its consummation there 
       had been no chorus of intelligible laughter. An uncontrolled Satyr-like figure
      had leapt suddenly away: Bertha, in a struggle that had been outrageous and extreme, fighting
      with the silence of a confederate beneath the same ban of the world. A joke too deep for
      laughter, parodying the phrase, alienating sorrow and tears, had been achieved. The victim had
      been conscious of an eeriness.
A folded blouse lay on the corner of Kreisler’s trunk. Bertha’s arms and shoulders were
      bare, her hair hanging in wisps and strips, generally — a Salon picture was the result. For
      purposes of work (he had asked her to sit for him), the blouse had been put aside. A jagged
      tear in her chemise over her right breast also seemed the doing of a Salon artist of
      facile and commercial invention.
Kreisler stood at the window. His eyes had a lazy, expressionless stare, his lips were open.
      Nerves brain and the whole body were still spinning and stunned, his muscles teeming with
      actions not finished, sharp, when the actions finished. He was still swamped and strung with
      violence. His sudden immobility, as he stood there, made the riot of movement and will rise to
      his brain like wine from a weak body. Satisfaction had, however, stilled everything except
      this tingling prolongation of action.
The inanity of what had happened to her showed as her unique, intelligible feeling. Her
      being there at all, her eccentric conduct of the last week, what disgusting folly ! Ever since
      she had known Tarr, her “sentiment” had been castigating her. A watchful fate appeared to be
      inventing morals to show her the folly of her perpetual romancing. And now this
      had happened. It was senseless. There was not a single atom of compensation anywhere. She was
      not one of those who, were there any solid compensation of sentiment and necessity (such as,
      in the most evident degree, was the case with Tarr), would draw back from natural conclusions.
      Then conclusive physical matters were a culmination of her romance, and not a separate and
      disloyal gratification. It never occurred 
       to her that they could be arrived at without traversing the romance.
Was this to be explained as the boulevard incident had been explained by her ? Was she to
      proceed with her explanations and her part ? But this time it would be to herself that the
      explanations would have to be made. That was a different audience ; a dim feeling found its
      way into her, with a sort of sickening malice. She had a glimpse too of Kreisler’s Bertha —
       the woman that you couldn’t shake oft, who, for some unimaginable reason, was always hanging
      on to you. She even had the strength to admit, distantly, the logic of this act — what had
      happened to her — still more disgusting and hateful than its illogic. The only thing that
      might have been found to mitigate, in some sense, the dreary, sudden madness of it, was that
      she felt practically nothing at all for Kreisler. It was like some violent accident of the
      high road, the brutality of a tramp. And — as that too would — it partook of the unreality of
      nightmare.
A few minutes before he had been tranquilly working away at a drawing, she sitting in some
      pose she had taken up with quick ostentatious intelligence. Startled at his request to draw
      her shoulders she had immediately condemned this feeling. She had come to sit for him ; the
      mere idea that there was any danger was so repulsive that she immediately consented. He was an
      artist, too, of course. While he was working they had not talked. Then he had put down his
      paper and chalk, stretched, and said:
“Your arms are like bananas!” A shiver of warning had penetrated her at this. But still he
      was an artist: it was natural — even inevitable — that he should compare her arms to
      bananas.
“Oh ! I hope you’ve made a good drawing. May I see ?” She intended to emphasize the reason
      of this exposure.
He had got up, and before she knew what he was doing caught hold of her above the elbow,
      chafing her arm, saying:
“You have pins and needles, Fraulein ?” The
      
“Fraulein” used here had some disquieting sound. She drew herself away, now serious and on
      the defence.
“No, thank you. Now I will put my blouse on, if you have finished.”
They had looked at each other uncertainly for a moment, he with a flushed rather silly fixed
      smile. She was afraid, somehow, to move away.
“Let me rub your arm.” Then with the fury of a man waking up to some insult, he had seized
      her. Her tardy words, furious struggling and all her contradictory emotions disappeared in the
      whirlpool towards which they had, with a strange deliberateness and yet aimlessness, been
      steering.
He was standing there at the window now as though wishing to pretend that he had done
      nothing; she “had been dreaming things” merely. The long silence and monotony of the posing
      had prepared her for the strangeness now. It had been the other extreme out of which she had
      been flung and into which, at present, she was again flung. She saw side by side and
      unconnected the silent figure drawing her and the other one full of blindness and
      violence. Then there were two other figures, one getting up from the chair, yawning, and the
      present lazy one at the window — four in all, that she could not bring together somehow, each
      in a complete compartment of time of its own. It would be impossible to make the present idle
      figure at the window interest itself in these others. A loathsome, senseless event, of
      no meaning, naturally, to that figure there. It had quietly, indifferently, talked : it had
      drawn : it had suddenly flung itself upon her and taken her, and now it was standing idly
      there. It could do all these things. It appeared to her in a series of precipitate states. It
      resembled in this a switchback, rising slowly, in a steady insouciant way to the top of
      an incline, and then plunging suddenly down the other. Or a mastiff’s head turning indolently
      for some seconds and then snapping at a fly, detached again the next moment. Her fury and
      animal hostility 
       did not last more than a few minutes. She had come there, got what she did not
      expect, and now must go away again. There was positively nothing more to be said to Kreisler.
      She had spasmodic returns of raging. They did not pass her dourly active mind. There never had
      been anything to say to him. He was a mad beast.
She now had to go away as though nothing had happened. It was nothing. After all what did
      it matter what became of her now ? Her body was of little importance — ghosts of romantic
      consolations here ! What was the good (seeing what she knew and everything) of storming
      against this man * She saw herself coming there that afternoon, talking with amiable
      affectation of interest in his work, in him (in him !), sitting for him ; a long,
      uninterrupted stream of amiability, talk, suddenly the wild few minutes, then the present
      ridiculous hush.
The moral, heavily, too heavily, driven in by her no doubt German fate, found its mark in
      her mind. What Tarr laughed at her for — that silly and vulgar mush, was the cause of all
      this. Well!
She had done up her hair; her hat was once more on her head. She went towards the door, her
      face really haggard, inevitable consciousness of drama too in it. Kreisler turned round, went
      towards the door also, unlocked it, let her pass without saying anything, and, waiting a
      moment, closed it indifferently again. She was let out as a workman would have been, who had
      been there to mend a shutter or rectify a bolt.
