<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="44">
Chapter XLIV
When the first whisper of the way in which she was—as people say—"left" reached Lucilla, her
     first feeling was incredulity. It was conveyed to her by Aunt Jemima, who came to her in her
     room after the funeral with a face blanched with dismay. Miss Marjoribanks took it for grief;
     and, though she did not look for so much feeling from Mrs John, was pleased and comforted that
     her aunt should really lament her poor papa. It was a compliment which, in the softened and
     sorrowful state of Lucilla's mind, went to her heart. Aunt Jemima came up and kissed her in a
     hasty excited way, which showed genuine and spontaneous emotion, and was not like the solemn
     pomp with which sympathising friends generally embrace a mourner; and then she made Lucilla sit
     down by the fire and held her hands. "My poor child," said Aunt Jemima—"my poor, dear,
     sacrificed child! you know, Lucilla, how fond I am of you, and you can always come to me——"
"Thank you, dear Aunt Jemima," said Miss Marjoribanks, though she was a little puzzled. "You
     are the only relative I have, and I knew you would not forsake me. What should I do without you
     at such a time? I am sure it is what dear papa would have wished——"
"Lucilla," cried Mrs John impulsively, "I know it is natural you should cry for your father;
     but when you know all,—you that never knew what it was to be without money—that never were
     straitened even, or obliged to give up things, like most other young women. Oh, my dear, they
     said I was to prepare you, but how can I prepare you? I feel as if I never could forgive my
     brother-in-law; that he should bring you up like this, and then——"
"What is it?" said Miss Marjoribanks, drying her tears. "If it is anything new, tell me, but
     don't speak so of—of——What is it? say it right out."
"Lucilla," said Aunt Jemima solemnly, "you think you have a great deal of courage, and now is
     your time to show it. He has left you without a farthing—he that was always thought to be so
     rich. It is quite true what I am saying. He has gone and died and left nothing, Lucilla. Now I
     have told you; and oh, my poor, dear, injured child," cried Mrs John, with fervour, "as long as
     I have a home there will be room in it for you."
But Lucilla put her aunt away softly when she was about to fall upon her neck. Miss
     Marjoribanks was struck dumb; her heart seemed to stop beating for the moment. "It is quite
     impossible—it cannot be true," she said, and gave a gasp to recover her breath. Then Mrs John
     came down upon her with facts, proving it to be true—showing how Dr Marjoribanks's money was
     invested, and how it had been lost. She made a terrible muddle of it, no doubt, but Lucilla was
     not very clear about business details any more than her aunt, and she did not move nor say a
     word while the long, involved, endless narrative went on. She kept saying it was impossible in
     her heart for half of the time, and then she crept nearer the fire and shivered, and said
     nothing even to herself, and did not even seem to listen, but knew that it must be true. It
     would be vain to attempt to say that it was not a terrible blow to Lucilla; her strength was
     weakened already by grief and solitude and want of food, for she could not find it in her heart
     to go on eating her ordinary meals as if nothing had happened; and all of a sudden she felt the
     cold seize her, and drew closer and closer to the fire. The thoughts which she had been
     thinking in spite of herself, and for which she had so greatly condemned herself, went out with
     a sudden distinctness, as if it had been a lamp going out and leaving the room in darkness, and
     a sudden sense of utter gloom and cold and bewildering uncertainty came over Lucilla. When she
     lifted her eyes from the fire, into which she had been gazing, it almost surprised her to find
     herself still in this warm room where there was every appliance for comfort, and where her
     entire wardrobe of new mourning—everything, as Aunt Jemima said, that a woman could desire—was
     piled up on the bed. It was impossible that she could be a penniless creature, left on her own
     resources, without father or supporter or revenue; and yet—good heavens! could it be true?
"If it is true, Aunt Jemima," said Lucilla, "I must try to bear it; but my poor head feels
     all queer. I'd rather not think any more about it to-night."
"How can you help thinking about it, Lucilla?" cried Mrs John. "I can think of nothing else;
     and I am not so much concerned as you."
Upon which Lucilla rose and kissed Aunt Jemima, though her head was all confused and she had
     noises in her ears. "I don't think we are much like each other, you know," she said. "Did you
     hear how Mrs Chiley was? I am sure she will be very sorry;" and with that Miss Marjoribanks
     softened, and felt a little comforted, and cried again—not for the money, but for her father.
     "If you are going downstairs, I think I will come down to tea, Aunt Jemima," she said. But
     after Mrs John had gone away full of wonder at her philosophy, Lucilla drew close to the fire
     again and took her head between her hands and tried to think what it meant. Could it be true?
     Instead of the heiress, in a good position, who could go abroad or anywhere, and do anything
     she liked, was it possible that she was only a penniless single woman with nobody to look to,
     and nothing to live on? Such an extraordinary incomprehensible revolution might well make any
     one feel giddy. The solid house and the comfortable room, and her own sober brain, which was
     not in the way of being put off its balance, seemed to turn round and round as she looked into
     the fire. Lucilla was not one to throw the blame upon her father, as Mrs John had done. On the
     contrary she was sorry, profoundly sorry for him, and made such a picture to herself of what
     his feelings must have been, when he went into his room that night and knew that all his
     hard-earned fortune was gone, that it made her weep the deepest tears for him that she had yet
     shed. "Poor papa!" she said to herself; and as she was not much given to employing her
     imagination in this way, and realising the feeling of others, the effect was all the greater
     now. If he had but told her, and put off a share of the burden from his own shoulders on to
     hers who could have borne it! but the Doctor had never done justice to Lucilla's qualities.
     This, amid her general sense of confusion and dizziness and insecurity, was the only clear
     thought that struck Miss Marjoribanks; and that it was very cold and must be freezing outside;
     and how did the poor people manage who had not all her present advantages? She tried to put
     away this revelation from her, as she had said to Aunt Jemima, and keep it for a little at
     arm's length, and get a night's rest in the meantime, and so be able to bring a clear head to
     the contemplation of it to-morrow, which was the most judicious thing to do. But when the mind
     has been stimulated by such a shock, Solomon himself, one would suppose, could scarcely,
     however clearly he might perceive what was best, take the judicious passive way. When Lucilla
     got up from where she was crouching before the fire, she felt so giddy that she could scarcely
     stand. Her head was all queer, as she had said, and she had a singing in her ears. She herself
     seemed to have changed along with her position. An hour or two before, she could have answered
     for her own steadiness and self-possession in almost any circumstances, but now the blood
     seemed to be running a race in her veins, and the strangest noises hummed in her ears. She felt
     ashamed of her weakness, but she could not help it; and then she was weak with grief and
     excitement and comparative fasting, which told for something, probably, in her inability to
     bear so unlooked-for a blow.
But Miss Marjoribanks thought it was best to go down to the drawing-room for tea, as she had
     said. To see everything just as it had been, utterly indifferent and unconscious of what had
     happened, made her cry, and relieved her giddiness by reviving her grief; and then the next
     minute a bewildering wonder seized her as to what would become of this drawing-room, the scene
     of her triumphs—who would live in it, and whom the things would go to—which made her sick, and
     brought back the singing in her ears. But on the whole she took tea very quietly with Aunt
     Jemima, who kept breaking into continual snatches of lamentation, but was always checked by
     Lucilla's composed looks. If she had not heard this extraordinary news, which made the world
     turn round with her, Miss Marjoribanks would have felt that soft hush of exhaustion and grief
     subdued which, when the grief is not too urgent, comes after all is over; and even now she felt
     a certain comfort in the warm firelight and the change out of her own room—where she had been
     living shut up, with the blinds down, and the black dresses everywhere about, for so many
     dreary days.
John Brown, who had charge of Dr Marjoribanks's affairs, came next day and explained
     everything to Lucilla. The lawyer had had one short interview with his client after the news
     came, and Dr Marjoribanks had borne it like a man. His face had changed a little, and he had
     sat down, which he was not in the habit of doing, and drawn a kind of shivering long breath;
     and then he had said, "Poor Lucilla!" to himself. This was all Mr Brown could say about the
     effect the shock had on the Doctor. And there was something in this very scanty information
     which gave Lucilla a new pang of sorrow and consolation. "And he patted me on the shoulder that
     last night," she said, with tender tears; and felt she had never loved her father so well in
     all her life—which is one of the sweeter uses of death which many must have experienced, but
     which belonged to a more exquisite and penetrating kind of emotion than was common to
     Lucilla.
"I thought he looked a little broken when he went out," said Mr Brown, "but full of pluck and
     spirit, as he always was. 'I am making a good deal of money, and I may live long
     enough to lay by a little still,' were the last words he said to me. I remember he put a kind
     of emphasis on the may. Perhaps he knew he was not so strong as he looked. He was a
     good man, Miss Marjoribanks, and there is nobody that has not some kind thing to tell of him,"
     said the lawyer, with a certain moisture in his eyes; for there was nobody in Carlingford who
     did not miss the old Doctor, and John Brown was very tender-hearted in his way.
"But nobody can know what a good father he was," said Lucilla, with a sob; and she meant it
     with all her heart, thinking chiefly of his hand on her shoulder that last night, and of the
     "Poor Lucilla!" in John Brown's office; though, after all, perhaps, it was not chiefly as a
     tender father that Dr Marjoribanks shone, though he gave his daughter all she wanted or asked
     for. Her grief was so true, and so little tinctured by any of that indignation over the
     unexpected loss, which Aunt Jemima had not been able to conceal, that John Brown was quite
     touched, and felt his heart warm to Lucilla. He explained it all very fully to her when she was
     composed enough to understand him; and as he went through all the details the giddiness came
     back, and once more Miss Marjoribanks felt the world running round, and heard his statement
     through the noises in her ears. All this settled down, however, into a certain distinctness as
     John Brown, who was very clear-headed and good at making a concise statement, went on; and
     gradually the gyrations became slower and slower, and the great universe became solid once
     more, and held to its moorings under Lucilla's feet, and she ceased to hear that supernatural
     hum and buzz. The vague shadows of chaos and ruin dispersed, and through them she saw once more
     the real aspect of things. She was not quite penniless. There was the house, which was a very
     good house, and some little corners and scraps of money in the Funds, which were Lucilla's very
     own, and could not be lost; and last of all there was the business—the best practice in
     Carlingford, and entire command of Grange Lane.
"But what does that matter?" said Lucilla; "if poor papa had retired indeed, as I used to beg
     him to do, and parted with it——But everybody has begun to send for Dr Rider already," she said,
     in an aggrieved voice; and then for the first time John Brown remembered, to his confusion,
     that there was once said to be "something between" Miss Marjoribanks and Dr Rider; which
     complicated the affair in the most uncomfortable way.
"Yes," he said, "and of course that would make it much more difficult to bring in another
     man; but Rider is a very honourable young fellow, Miss Marjoribanks——"
"He is not so very young," said Lucilla. "He is quite as old as I am, though no one ever
     would think so. I am sure he is honourable, but what has that to do with it? And I do think Mrs
     Chiley might have done without—anybody else: for a day or two, considering when it was——"
And here she stopped to cry, unreasonably, but yet very naturally; for it did feel hard that
     in the house to which Dr Marjoribanks's last visit had been paid, another doctor should have
     been called in next day.
"What I meant to say," said John Brown, "was, that Dr Rider, though he is not rich, and could
     not pay a large sum of money down, would be very glad to make some arrangement. He is very
     anxious about it, and he seemed himself to think that if you knew his circumstances you would
     not be disinclined to——But as I did not at all know——"
Lucilla caught, as it were, and met, and forced to face her, her informant's embarrassed,
     hesitating look. "You say this," said Miss Marjoribanks, "because people used to say there was
     something between us, and you think I may have some feeling about it. But there never was
     anything between us. Anybody with a quarter of an eye could have seen that he was going out of
     his senses about that little Australian girl. And I am rather fond of men that are in love—it
     shows they have some good in them. But it is dreadful to talk of such things now," said
     Lucilla, with a sigh of self-reproach. "If Dr Rider has any arrangement to propose, I should
     like to give him the preference, please. You see they have begun to send for him already in
     Grange Lane."
"I will do whatever you think proper," said John Brown, who was rather scared, and very much
     impressed by Miss Marjoribanks's candour. Dr Rider had been the first love of Mr Brown's own
     wife, and the lawyer had a curious kind of satisfaction in thinking that this silly young
     fellow had thus lost two admirable women, and that probably the little Australian was equally
     inferior to Miss Marjoribanks and Mrs Brown. He ought to have been grateful that Dr Rider had
     left the latter lady to his own superior discrimination—and so he was; and yet it gave him a
     certain odd satisfaction to think that the Doctor was not so happy as he might have been. He
     went away fully warranted to receive Dr Rider's proposition, and even, to a certain extent, to
     decide upon it—and Lucilla threw herself back in her chair in the silent drawing-room, from
     which Aunt Jemima had discreetly withdrawn, and began to think over the reality of her position
     as she now saw it for the first time.
The sense of bewildering revolution and change was over; for, strangely enough, the greater a
     change is the more easily the mind, after the first shock, accepts and gets accustomed to it.
     It was over, and the world felt steady once more under Lucilla's feet, and she sat down, not
     precisely amid the ruins of her happiness, but still in the presence of many an imagination
     overthrown, to look at her real position. It was not, after all, utter poverty, misery, and
     destitution, as at the first glance she had believed. According to what John Brown had said,
     and a rapid calculation which Lucilla had herself made in passing, something approaching two
     hundred a year would be left to her—just a small single woman's revenue, as she thought to
     herself. Two hundred a year! All at once there came into Miss Marjoribanks's mind a sudden
     vision of the two Miss Ravenswoods, who had lived in that pretty set of rooms over Elsworthy's
     shop, facing into Grange Lane, and who had kept a lady's maid, and asked the best people in the
     place to tea, upon a very similar income, and how their achievements had been held up to
     everybody as a model of what genteel economy could do. She thought of them, and her heart sank
     within her; for it was not in Lucilla's nature to live without a sphere, nor to disjoin herself
     from her fellow-creatures, nor to give up entirely the sovereign position she had held for so
     many years. Whatever she might ultimately do, it was clear that, in the meantime, she could not
     make up her mind to any such giving up of the battle as that. And then there was the house. She
     might let it to the Riders, and add probably another hundred a year to her income; for though
     it was an excellent house, and worth more than a hundred a year, still there was no competition
     for houses in Grange Lane, and the new Doctor was the only probable tenant. And, to tell the
     truth, though Lucilla was very reasonable, it went to her heart at the present moment to think
     of letting the house to the new Doctor, and having the patients come as usual, and the lamp
     lighted as of old, and nothing changed except the central figure of all. She ought to have been
     above such sentimental ideas when a whole hundred pounds a year was in question; but she was
     not, which of itself was a strange phenomenon. If she could have made up her mind to that,
     there were a great many things that she might have done. She might still have gone abroad, and
     to some extent taken a limited share in what was going on in some section of English society on
     the Continent. Or she might have gone to one of the mild centres of a similar kind of life in
     England. But such a prospect did not offer many attractions to Miss Marjoribanks. If she had
     been rich, it would have been different. Thus there gradually dawned upon her the germ of the
     plan she ultimately adopted, and which was the only one that commended itself to her feelings.
     Going away was expensive and troublesome at the best; and even at Elsworthy's, if she could
     have made up her mind to such an expedient, she would have been charged a pound a week for the
     rooms alone, not to speak of all kinds of extras, and never having the satisfaction of feeling
     yourself in your own place. Under all the circumstances, it was impressed upon Lucilla's mind
     that her natural course was to stay still where she was, and make no change. Why should she
     make any change? The house was her own, and did not cost anything, and if Nancy would but stand
     by her and one good maid——It was a venture; but still Lucilla felt as if she might be equal to
     it. Though she was no mathematician, Miss Marjoribanks was very clever at mental arithmetic in
     a practical sort of way. She put down lines upon lines of figures in her head while she sat
     musing in her chair, and worked them out with wonderful skill and speed and accuracy. And the
     more she thought of it, the more it seemed to her that this was the thing to do. Why should she
     retreat and leave her native soil and the neighbourhood of all her friends because she was poor
     and in trouble? Lucilla was not ashamed of being poor—nor even frightened by it, now that she
     understood what it was—any more than she would have been frightened, after the first shock, had
     her poverty even been much more absolute. She was standing alone at this moment as upon a
     little island of as yet undisturbed seclusion and calm, and she knew very well that outside a
     perfect sea of good advice would surge round her as soon as she was visible. In these
     circumstances Lucilla took by instinct the only wise course: she made up her mind there and
     then with a perfect unanimity which is seldom to be gained when counsellors are admitted. And
     what she decided upon, as was to be expected from her character, was not to fly from her
     misfortune and the scene of it, but to confront fate and take up her lawful burden and stay
     still in her own house. It was the wisest and the easiest, and at the same time the most heroic
     course to adopt, and she knew beforehand that it was one which would be approved of by nobody.
     All this Lucilla steadily faced and considered and made up her mind to while she sat alone;
     although silence and solitude and desolation seemed to have suddenly come in and taken
     possession all around her of the once gay and brilliant room.
She had just made her final decision when she was rejoined by her aunt, who, everybody said,
     was at this trying moment like a mother to Lucilla. Yet Aunt Jemima, too, had changed a little
     since her brother-in-law's death. She was very fond of Miss Marjoribanks, and meant every word
     she had said about giving her a home, and still meant it. But she did not feel so certain now
     as she had done about Tom's love for his cousin, nor at all anxious to have him come home just
     at this moment; and for another thing, she had got a way of prowling about the house and
     looking at the furniture in a speculative, auctioneering sort of way. "It must be all sold, of
     course," Aunt Jemima had said to herself, "and I may as well look what things would suit me;
     there is a little chiffonier that I have always wanted for my drawing-room, and Lucilla would
     like to see a few of the old things about her, poor dear." With this idea Mrs John gave herself
     a great deal of unnecessary fatigue, and gave much offence to the servants by making
     pilgrimages all over the house, turning up at the most unlikely places and poking about in the
     least frequented rooms. It was a perfectly virtuous and even amiable thing to do, for it was
     better, as she reasoned, that they should go to her than to a stranger, and it would be nice
     for Lucilla to feel that she had some of the old things about her; but then such delicate
     motives are seldom appreciated by the homely critics downstairs.
It was with something of this same air that she came into the drawing-room, where Lucilla
     was. She could not help laying her hand in a suggestive sort of way on a small table which she
     had to pass, as if she were saying to herself (as indeed she was saying), "The veneer has been
     broken off at that side, and the foot is mended; it will bring very little; and yet it looks
     well when you don't look too close." Such were the ideas with which Aunt Jemima's mind was
     filled. But yet she came forward with a great deal of sympathy and curiosity, and forgot about
     the furniture in presence of her afflicted niece.
"Did he tell you anything, Lucilla?" said Mrs John; "of course he must have told you
     something—but anything satisfactory, I mean."
"I don't know if you can call it satisfactory," said Lucilla, with a sudden rush of softer
     thoughts; "but it was a comfort to hear it. He told me something about dear papa, Aunt Jemima.
     After he had heard of that, you know—all that he said was, Poor Lucilla! And don't you
     remember how he put his hand on my shoulder that last night? I am so—so—glad he did it," sobbed
     Miss Marjoribanks. It may be supposed it was an abrupt transition from her calculations; but
     after all it was only a different branch of the same subject; and Lucilla in all her life had
     never before shed such poignant and tender tears.
"He might well say, Poor Lucilla!" said Mrs John—"brought up as you have been, my dear; and
     did not you hear anything more important?—I mean, more important in a worldly point of view,"
     Aunt Jemima added, correcting herself, "of course, it must be the greatest comfort to hear
     something about your poor papa."
And then Lucilla unfolded John Brown's further particulars to her surprised hearer. Mrs John
     lived upon a smallish income herself, and she was not so contemptuous of the two hundred a
     year. "And the house," she said—"the house would bring you in another hundred, Lucilla. The
     Riders, I am sure, would take it directly, and perhaps a great part of the furniture too. Three
     hundred would not be so bad for a single woman. Did you say anything about the furniture, my
     dear?" Aunt Jemima added, half regretfully, for she did feel that she would be sorry to lose
     that chiffonier.
"I think I shall stay in the house," said Lucilla; "you may think it silly, Aunt Jemima, but
     I was born in it, and——"
"Stay in the house!" Mrs John said, with a gasp. She did not think it silly, but simple
     madness, and so she told her niece. If Lucilla could not make up her mind to Elsworthy's, there
     was Brighton and Bath and Cheltenham, and a hundred other places where a single woman might be
     very comfortable on three hundred a year. And to lose a third part of her income for a piece of
     sentiment was so utterly unlike any conception Aunt Jemima had ever formed of her niece. It
      was unlike Miss Marjoribanks; but there are times of life when even the most
     reasonable people are inconsistent. Lucilla, though she felt it was open to grave criticism,
     felt only more confirmed in her resolution by her aunt's remarks. She heard a voice Aunt Jemima
     could not hear, and that voice said, Stay!
</div></body></text></TEI>