<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">
Chapter XXXIV
This was how the crisis came to an end, which had been of so much interest to the parties
     immediately affected. Mrs Woodburn had one of her nervous attacks next morning, and was very
     ill, and alarmed Dr Marjoribanks; but at her very worst moment the incorrigible mimic convulsed
     her anxious medical adviser and all her attendants by a sudden adoption of the character of Mrs
     Mortimer, whom she must have made a careful study of the previous night. "Tell him to tell him
     to go downstairs," cried the half-dead patient; "I want to speak to him, and he is not to
     hear;—if he were not so thoughtless, he would offer him some lunch at least," Mrs Woodburn said
     pathetically, with closed eyes and a face as pale as death. "She never did anything better in
     her life," Dr Marjoribanks said afterwards; and Mr Woodburn, who was fond of his wife in his
     way, and had been crying over her, burst into such an explosion of laughter that all the
     servants were scandalised. And the patient improved from that moment. She was perfectly well
     and in the fullest force a week afterwards, when she came to see Lucilla, who had also been
     slightly indisposed for a day or two. When Thomas had shut the door, and the two were quite
     alone, Mrs Woodburn hugged Miss Marjoribanks with a fervour which up to that moment she had
     never exhibited. "It was only necessary that we should get into full sympathy with each other
     as human creatures," she said, lifting her finger like the Archdeacon; and for all the rest of
     that autumn and winter Mrs Woodburn kept society in Carlingford in a state of inextinguishable
     laughter. The odd thing was that Miss Marjoribanks, who had been one of her favourite
     characters, disappeared almost entirely from her repertory. Not quite altogether, because there
     were moments of supreme temptation which the mimic could not resist; but as a general rule
     Lucilla was the only woman in Carlingford who escaped the universal critic. No sort of
     acknowledgment passed between them of the obligations one had to the other, and, what was still
     more remarkable, no discussion of the terrible evening when Lucilla had held the Archdeacon
     with her eye, and prevented the volcano from exploding. Perhaps Mrs Woodburn, for her part,
     would have been pleased to have had such an explanation, but Miss Marjoribanks knew better. She
     knew it was best not to enter upon confidences which neither could ever forget, and which might
     prevent them meeting with ease in the midst of the little world which knew nothing about it.
     What Lucilla knew, she knew, and could keep to herself; but she felt at the same time that it
     was best to have no expansions on the subject. She kept it all to herself, and made the
     arrangements for Mrs Mortimer's marriage, and took charge of everything. Everybody said that
     nothing could be more perfect than the bride's toilette, which was as nice as could be, and yet
     not like a real bride after all; a difference which was only proper under the
     circumstances; for she was married in lavender, poor soul, as was to be expected. "You have not
     gone off the least bit in the world, and it is quite a pleasure to see you," Lucilla said, as
     she kissed her that morning—and naturally all Carlingford knew that it was owing to
     her goodness that the widow had been taken care of and provided for, and saved up for the
     Archdeacon. Miss Marjoribanks, in short, presided over the ceremony as if she had been Mrs
     Mortimer's mother, and superintended the wedding breakfast, and made herself agreeable to
     everybody. And in the meantime, before the marriage took place, most people in Carlingford
     availed themselves of the opportunity of calling on Mrs Mortimer. "If she should happen to be
     the future bishop's lady, and none of us ever to have taken any notice of her," somebody said,
     with natural dismay. Lucilla did not discourage the practical result of this suggestion, but
     she felt an instinctive certainty in her mind that now Mr Beverley would never be
     bishop of Carlingford, and indeed that the chances were Carlingford would never be elevated
     into a bishopric at all.
It was not until after the marriage that Mr Cavendish went away. To be sure, he was not
     absolutely present at the ceremony, but there can be no doubt that the magnificent
      parure which Mrs Mortimer received the evening before her marriage, "from an old
     friend," which made everybody's mouth water, and which she herself contemplated with mingled
     admiration and dismay, was sent by Mr Cavendish. "Do you think it could be from him;
     or only from him?" the bride said, bewildered and bewildering. "I am sure he might have known I
     never should require anything so splendid." But Lucilla, for her part, had no doubt whatever on
     the subject; and the perfect good taste of the offering made Miss Marjoribanks sigh, thinking
     once more how much that was admirable was wasted by the fatal obstacle which prevented Mr
     Cavendish from aspiring to anybody higher than Barbara Lake. As for the Archdeacon, he too
     found it very easy to satisfy his mind as to the donor of the emeralds. He put them away from
     him severely, and did not condescend to throw a second glance at their deceitful splendour.
     "Women are curiously constituted," said Mr Beverley, who was still at the height of
     superiority, though he was a bridegroom. "I suppose those sort of things give them
     pleasure—things which neither satisfy the body nor delight the soul."
"If it had been something to eat, would it have pleased you better?" said Lucilla, moved for
     once in her life to be impertinent, like an ordinary girl. For really when a man showed himself
     so idiotic as to despise a beautiful set of emeralds, it went beyond even the well-known
     tolerance and compassionate good-humour with which Miss Marjoribanks regarded the vagaries of
     "the gentlemen." There is a limit in all things, and this was going too far.
"I said, to satisfy the body, Miss Marjoribanks," said the Archdeacon, "which is an office
     very temporarily and inadequately performed by something to eat. I prefer the welfare of my
     fellow-creatures to a few glittering stones—even when they are round Her neck," Mr Beverley
     added, with a little concession to the circumstances. "Jewellery is robbery in a great town
     where there is always so much to be done, and so little means of doing it; to secure health to
     the people, and education——"
"Yes," said Miss Marjoribanks, who knew in her heart that the Archdeacon was afraid of her.
     "It is so nice of you not to say any of those dreadful sanitary words—and I am sure you could
     make something very nasty and disagreeable with that diamond of yours. It is a beautiful
     diamond; if I were Helen I should make you give it me," said Lucilla sweetly; and the
     Archdeacon was so much frightened by the threat that he turned his ring instinctively, and
     quenched the glitter of the diamond in his closed hand.
"It was a present," he said hastily, and went away to seek some better occupation than
     tilting with the womankind, who naturally had possession of the bride's little house and
     everything in it at that interesting moment. It was the last evening of Lucilla's reign, and
     she was disposed to take the full good of it. And though Mrs Mortimer's trousseau was modest,
     and not, as Lydia Brown repeated, like that of a real bride, it was still voluminous
     enough to fill the room to overflowing, where it was all being sorted and packed under Miss
     Marjoribanks's eye.
"It is a very nice diamond indeed," said Lucilla; "if I were you I would certainly make him
     give it to me—rings are no good to a gentleman. They never have nice hands, you know—though
     indeed when they have nice hands," said Miss Marjoribanks reflectively, "it is a great deal
     worse, for they keep always thrusting them under your very eyes. It is curious why They should
     be so vain. They talk of women!" Lucilla added, with natural derision; "but, my dear, if I were
     you I would make him give it me; a nice diamond is always a nice thing to have."
"Lucilla," said the widow, "I am sure I don't know how to thank you for all you have done for
     me; but, dear, if you please, I would not talk like that! The gentlemen laugh, but I am sure
     they don't like it all the same;" for indeed the bride thought it her duty, having won the
     prize in her own person, to point out to her young friend how, to attain the same end, she
     ought to behave.
Miss Marjoribanks did not laugh, for her sense of humour, as has been said, was not strong,
     but she kissed her friend with protecting tenderness. "My dear, if that had been what I was
     thinking of I need never have come home," said Lucilla; and her superiority was so calm and
     serene, that Mrs Mortimer felt entirely ashamed of herself for making the suggestion. The widow
     was simple-minded, and, like most other women, it gratified her to believe that here and there,
     as in Miss Marjoribanks's case, there existed one who was utterly indifferent to the gentlemen,
     and did not care whether they were pleased or not; which restored a little the balance of the
     world to the widow-bride, who felt with shame that she cared a great deal, and was quite
     incapable of such virtue. As for Lucilla herself, she was not at that moment in conscious
     enjoyment of the strength of mind for which her friend gave her credit. On the contrary, she
     could not help a certain sense of surprised depression as she superintended the packing of the
     boxes. The man had had it in his power to propose to her, and he was going to be married to Mrs
     Mortimer! It was not that Lucilla was wounded or disappointed, but that she felt it as a
     wonderful proof of the imperfection and weakness of human nature. Even in the nineteenth
     century, which has learnt so much, such a thing was possible! It filled her with a gentle
     sadness as she had the things put in, and saw the emeralds safely deposited in their
     resting-place. Not that she cared for the Archdeacon, who had thus disposed of himself; but
     still it was a curious fact that such a thing could be.
Altogether it must be admitted that at this special moment Miss Marjoribanks occupied a
     difficult position. She had given the Archdeacon to understand that Mr Cavendish was a
      "very particular friend"; and even when the danger was past, Lucilla scorned to
     acknowledge her pious prevarications. During all this interval she continued so gracious to him
     that everybody was puzzled, and Mrs Woodburn even insisted on her brother, after all, making
     his proposal, which would be better late than never.
"I am sure she is fond of you," said the softened mimic, "and that sort of thing doesn't
     matter to a woman as it does to a man;" for it has been already said that Mrs Woodburn,
     notwithstanding her knack of external discrimination, had very little real knowledge of
     character. And even at moments, Mr Cavendish himself, who ought to have known better, was half
     tempted to believe that Lucilla meant it. The effect upon Dr Marjoribanks was still more
     decided. He thought he saw in his daughter the indications of that weakness which is sometimes
     so surprising in women, and it disturbed the Doctor's serenity; and he actually tried to snub
     Lucilla on sundry occasions, with that wonderful fatuity which is common to men.
"I hope when this marriage is over people will recover their senses. I hear of nothing else,"
     Dr Marjoribanks said one day at dessert, when they were alone. He took some chestnuts as he
     spoke, and burned his fingers, which did not improve his temper. "That sort of rubbish, I
     suppose, is much more interesting than attending to your natural duties," the Doctor added
     morosely, which was not a kind of address which Miss Marjoribanks was used to hear.
"Dear papa," said Lucilla, "if I attended to my duties ever so much I could not keep you from
     burning your fingers. There are some things that people must do for themselves," the
     dutiful daughter added, with a sigh. Nobody could doubt who knew Lucilla that she would have
     gladly taken the world on her shoulders, and saved everybody from those little misadventures;
     but how could she help it if people absolutely would not take care of themselves?
The Doctor smiled grimly, but he was not satisfied. He was, on the contrary, furious in a
     quiet way. "I don't need at this time of day to be told how clever you are, Lucilla," said her
     father; "and I thought you had been superior to the ordinary folly of women——"
"Papa, for Heaven's sake!" cried Miss Marjoribanks. She was really alarmed this time, and she
     did not hesitate to let it be apparent. "I do not mean to say that I always do precisely what I
     ought to do," said Lucilla; "nobody does that I know of; but I am sure I never did anything to
     deserve that. I never was superior, and I hope I never shall be; and I know I never
     pretended to it," she said, with natural horror; for the accusation, as everybody will
     perceive, was hard to bear.
The Doctor laughed again, but with increased severity. "We understand all that," he said. "I
     am not in the secret of your actions, Lucilla. I don't know what you intend, or how far you
     mean to go. The only thing I know is that I see that young fellow Cavendish a great deal
     oftener in the house and about it than I care to see him; and I have had occasion to say the
     same thing before. I know nothing about his means," said Dr Marjoribanks; "his property may be
     in the Funds, but I think it a great deal more likely that he speculates. I have worked hard
     for my money, and I don't mean it to go in that way, Lucilla. I repeat, I am not in the secret
     of your proceedings——"
"Dear papa! as if there was any secret," said Lucilla, fixing her candid eyes upon her
     father's face. "I might pretend I did not understand you if there was anything in what you say,
     but I never go upon false pretences when I can help it. I am very fond of Mr Cavendish," she
     continued regretfully, after a pause. "There is nobody in Carlingford that is so nice; but I
     don't see whom he can marry except Barbara Lake." Miss Marjoribanks would have scorned to
     conceal the unfeigned regret which filled her mind when she uttered these words. "I am
     dreadfully sorry, but I don't see anything that can be done for him," she said, and sighed once
     more. As for the Doctor, he forgot all about his chestnuts, and sat and stared at her, thinking
     in his ignorance that it was a piece of acting, and not knowing whether to be angry or to yield
     to the amusement which began to rise in his breast.
"He may marry half a dozen Barbara Lakes," said Dr Marjoribanks, "and I don't see what reason
     we should have to interfere: so long as he doesn't want to marry you——"
"That would be impossible, papa," said Lucilla, with pensive gravity. "I am sure I am very,
     very sorry. She has a very nice voice, but a man can't marry a voice, you know; and if there
     was anything that I could do——I am not sure that he ever wished for that either," Miss
     Marjoribanks added, with her usual candour. "It is odd, but for all that it is true." For it
     was a moment of emotion, and she could not help giving utterance to the surprise with which
     this consideration naturally filled her mind.
"What is odd, and what is true?" said Dr Marjoribanks, growing more and more bewildered. But
     Lucilla only put aside her plate and got up from her chair.
"Not any more wine, thank you," she said. "I know you don't want me any more, and I have so
     much to do. I hope you will let me invite Barbara here when they are married, and pay her a
     little attention; for nobody likes her in Grange Lane, and it would be so hard upon
      him. The more I think of it, the more sorry I am," said Lucilla; "he deserved better,
     papa; but as for me, everybody knows what is my object in life."
Thus Miss Marjoribanks left the table, leaving her father in a singular state of satisfaction
     and surprise. He did not believe a word of what she had been saying, with that curious
     perversity common to the people who surrounded Lucilla, and which arose not so much from doubt
     of her veracity as from sheer excess of confidence in her powers. He thought she had foiled him
     in a masterly manner, and that she was only, as people say, amusing herself, and had no serious
     intentions; and he laughed quietly to himself when she left him, in the satisfaction of finding
     there was nothing in it. Miss Marjoribanks, for her part, went on tranquilly with the
     arrangements for the marriage; one by one she was disembarrassing herself from the
     complications which had grown round her during the first year of her reign in Carlingford; and
     now only the last links of the difficulty remained to be unrolled.
The explanation she had with Mr Cavendish himself was in every way more interesting. It
     happened pretty late one evening, when Lucilla was returning with her maid from the widow's
     little cottage, which was so soon to be deserted. She was just at that moment thinking of the
     wistaria which had grown so nicely, and of all the trouble she had taken with the garden.
     Nobody could tell who might come into it now, after she had done so much for it; and Miss
     Marjoribanks could not but have a momentary sense that, on the whole, it was a little
     ungrateful on the part of Mrs Mortimer, when everybody had taken such pains to make her
     comfortable. At this moment, indeed, Lucilla was slightly given to moralising, though with her
     usual wisdom she kept her meditations to herself. She was thinking with a momentary vexation of
     all the plants that had been put into the beds, and of so much time and trouble lost—when Mr
     Cavendish came up to her. It was a cold evening, and there was nothing in common between this
     walk and the walk they had taken together from Grove Street to Grange Lane on an earlier
     occasion. But this time, so far from being reluctant to accompany her, Mr Cavendish came to her
     side eagerly. The maid retired a little behind, and then the two found themselves in that most
     perfect of all positions for mutual confidence—a street not too crowded and noisy, all shrouded
     in the darkness, and yet twinkling with the friendly lights of an autumn evening. Nothing could
     have been more perfect than their isolation from the surrounding world, if they thought proper
     to isolate themselves; and yet it was always there to be taken refuge in if the confidence
     should receive a check, or the mind of the chance companions change.
"I have been trying to catch a glimpse of you for a long time," said Mr Cavendish, after they
     had talked a little in the ordinary way, as everybody was doing in Grange Lane, about the two
     people henceforward to be known in Carlingford as "the Beverleys." "But you are always so busy
     serving everybody. And I have a great deal to say to you that I don't know how to say."
"Then don't say it, please," said Lucilla. "It is a great deal better not. It might be funny,
     you know; but I am not disposed to be funny to-night. I am very glad about Mrs Mortimer, to be
     sure, that she is to be settled so nicely, and that they are going to be married at last. But,
     after all, when one thinks of it, it is a little vexatious. Just when her house was all put to
     rights, and the garden looking so pretty, and the school promising so well," said Lucilla; and
     there was a certain aggrieved tone in her voice.
"And it is you who have done everything for her, as for all the rest of us," said Mr
     Cavendish, though he could not help laughing a little; and then he paused, and his voice
     softened in the darkness by Lucilla's side. "Do not let us talk of Mrs Mortimer," he said. "I
     sometimes have something just on my lips to say, and I do not know whether I dare say it. Miss
     Marjoribanks——"
And here he came to a pause. He was fluttered and frightened, which was what she, and not he,
     ought to have been. And at the bottom of his heart he did not wish to say it, which gave far
     more force to his hesitation than simply a doubt whether he might dare. Perhaps Lucilla's heart
     fluttered too, with a sense that the moment which once would not have been an unwelcome moment,
     had at last arrived. Her heart, it is true, was not very particularly engaged; but
     still she was sensible of all Mr Cavendish's capacities, and was "very fond" of him, as she
     said; and her exertions on his behalf had produced their natural effect, and moved her
     affections a little. She made an involuntary pause for the hundredth part of a minute, and
     reckoned it all up again, and asked herself whether it were possible. There was something, in
     the first place, becoming and suitable in the idea that she, who was the only person who knew
     his secret, should take him and it together and make the best of them. And Lucilla had the
     consciousness that she could indeed make a great deal of Mr Cavendish. Nobody had ever crossed
     her path of whom so much could be made; and as for any further danger of his real origin and
     position being found out and exposed to the world, Miss Marjoribanks was capable of smiling at
     that when the defence would be in her own hands. She might yet accept him, and have him elected
     member for Carlingford, and carry him triumphantly through all his difficulties. For a small
     part—nay, even for the half of a minute—Lucilla paused, and made a rapid review of the
     circumstances, and reconsidered her decision. Perhaps if Mr Cavendish had been really in
     earnest, that which was only a vague possibility might have become, in another minute, a fact
     and real. It was about the first time that her heart had found anything to say in the matter;
     and the fact was that it actually fluttered in her reasonable bosom, and experienced a certain
      malaise which was quite new to her. Was it possible that she could be in love with Mr
     Cavendish? or was it merely the excitement of a final decision which made that unusual
     commotion far away down at the bottom of Lucilla's heart?
However that might be, Miss Marjoribanks triumphed over her momentary weakness. She saw the
     possibility, and at the same moment she saw that it could not be; and while Mr Cavendish
     hesitated, she, who was always prompt and ready, made up her mind.
"I don't know what I have done in particular, either for her or the rest of you," she said,
     ignoring the other part of her companion's faltering address, "except to help to amuse you; but
     I am going to do something very serious, and I hope you will show you are grateful, as you
     say—though I don't know what you have to be grateful about—by paying great attention to me. Mr
     Cavendish, I am going to give you good advice," said Lucilla; and, notwithstanding her courage,
     she too faltered a little, and felt that it was rather a serious piece of business that she had
     taken in hand.
"Advice?" Mr Cavendish said, like an echo of her voice; but that was all he found time to
     say.
"We are such old friends, that I know you won't be vexed," said Lucilla; "and then we
     understand each other. It is so nice when two people understand each other; they can say
     quantities of things that strangers cannot say. Mr Cavendish, you and Barbara are in love,"
     said Lucilla, making a slight pause, and looking in his face.
"Miss Marjoribanks!" cried the assaulted man, in the extremity of his amazement and horror.
     As for Lucilla, she came a little closer to him, and shook her head in a maternal,
     semi-reproving way.
"Don't say you are not," said Miss Marjoribanks; "you never could deceive me—not in
     anything like that. I saw it almost as soon as you met. They are not rich, you know, but they
     are very nice. Mr Lake and Rose," said Lucilla, with admirable prudence, keeping off the
     difficult subject of Barbara herself, "are the two very nicest people I know; and everybody
     says that Willie is dreadfully clever. I hope you will soon be married, and that you will be
     very happy," she continued, with an effort. It was a bold thing to say, and Lucilla's throat
     even contracted a little, as if to prevent the words from getting utterance; but then she was
     not a person, when she knew a thing was right, to hesitate about doing it; and in Miss
     Marjoribanks's mind duty went before all, as has already been on several occasions said.
After this a horrible silence fell upon the two—a silence which, like darkness, could be
     felt. The thunderbolt fell upon the victim's unprotected head without any warning. The idea
     that Lucilla would talk to him about Barbara Lake was the very last that could have entered Mr
     Cavendish's mind. He was speechless with rage and mortification. He took it for an insult
     inflicted upon him in cold blood, doing Lucilla much injustice as the other people who took the
     candid expression of her sentiments for a piece of acting. He was a gentleman, notwithstanding
     his doubtful origin, and civilised down to his very finger-tips; but he would have liked to
     have knocked Miss Marjoribanks down, though she was a woman. And yet, as she was a woman, he
     dared not for his life make any demonstration of his fury. He walked along by her side down
     into the respectable solitude of Grange Lane, passing through a bright bit of George Street,
     and seeing askance, by the light from the shop windows, his adviser walking beside him, with
     the satisfaction of a good conscience in her face. This awful silence lasted until they reached
     Dr Marjoribanks's door.
"Thank you for coming with me so far," said Lucilla, holding out her hand. "I suppose I must
     not ask you to come in, though papa would be delighted to see you. I am afraid you are very
     angry with me," Miss Marjoribanks added, with a touch of pathos; "but you may be sure I would
     always stand by you; and I said it because I thought it was for the best."
"On the contrary, I am much obliged to you," said Mr Cavendish, with quiet fury, "and deeply
     touched by the interest you take in my happiness. You may be sure I shall always be grateful
     for it; and for the offer of your support," said the ungrateful man, with the most truculent
     meaning. As for Miss Marjoribanks, she pressed quite kindly the hurried hand with which he
     touched hers, and went in, still saying, "Good-night." She had done her duty, whatever might
     come of it. He rushed home furious; but she went to a little worsted-work with a mind at peace
     with itself and all men. She was gentler than usual even to the maids, who always found Miss
     Marjoribanks a good mistress—but she felt a little sad in the solitude of her genius. For it is
     true that to be wiser and more enlightened than one's neighbours is in most cases a weariness
     to the flesh. She had made a sacrifice, and nobody appreciated it. Instead of choosing a
     position which pleased her imagination, and suited her energies, and did not go against her
     heart, Lucilla, moved by the wisest discretion, had decided, not without regret, to give it up.
     She had sacrificed her own inclination, and a sphere in which her abilities would have had the
     fullest scope, to what she believed to be the general good; and instead of having the heroism
     acknowledged, she was misunderstood and rewarded with ingratitude. When Miss Marjoribanks found
     herself alone in the solitude of her drawing-room, and in the still greater solitude, as we
     have said, of her genius, she felt a little sad, as was natural. But at the same moment there
     came into Lucilla's mind a name, a humble name, which has been often pronounced in the pages of
     this history, and it gave her once more a certain consolation. A sympathetic presence seemed to
     diffuse itself about her in her loneliness. There are moments when the faith of a very humble
     individual may save a great soul from discouragement; and the consciousness of being believed
     in once more came with the sweetest and most salutary effect upon Lucilla's heart.
</div></body></text></TEI>