<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="45">
Chapter XLV
It must be allowed that Lucilla's decision caused very general surprise in Carlingford, where
     people had been disposed to think that she would be rather glad, now that things were so
     changed, to get away. To be sure it was not known for some time; but everybody's idea was that,
     being thus left alone in the world, and in circumstances so reduced, Miss Marjoribanks
     naturally would go to live with somebody. Perhaps with her aunt, who had something, though she
     was not rich; perhaps, after a little, to visit about among her friends, of whom she had so
     many. Nobody doubted that Lucilla would abdicate at once, and a certain uneasy, yet delicious,
     sense of freedom had already stolen into the hearts of some of the ladies in Grange Lane. They
     lamented, it is true, the state of chaos into which everything would fall, and the dreadful
     loss Miss Marjoribanks would be to society; but still, freedom is a noble thing, and Lucilla's
     subjects contemplated their emancipation with a certain guilty delight. It was, at the same
     time, a most fertile subject of discussion in Carlingford, and gave rise to all those lively
     speculations and consultations, and oft-renewed comparing of notes, which take the place of
     bets in the feminine community. The Carlingford ladies as good as betted upon Lucilla, whether
     she would go with her aunt, or pay Mrs Beverley a visit at the Deanery, or retire to Mount
     Pleasant for a little, where those good old Miss Blounts were so fond of her. Each of these
     opinions had its backers, if it is not profane to say so; and the discussion which of them Miss
     Marjoribanks would choose waxed very warm. It almost put the election out of people's heads;
     and indeed the election had been sadly damaged in interest and social importance by the sad and
     most unexpected event which had just happened in Grange Lane.
But when the fact was really known, it would be difficult to describe the sense of guilt and
     horror which filled many innocent bosoms. The bound of freedom had been premature—liberty and
     equality had not come yet, notwithstanding that too early unwise élan of republican
     satisfaction. It was true that she was in deep mourning, and that for a year, at least, society
     must be left to its own devices; and it was true, also, that she was poor—which might naturally
     be supposed a damper upon her energies—but, at the same time, Carlingford knew its Lucilla. As
     long as she remained in Grange Lane, even though retired and in crape, the constitutional
     monarch was still present among her subjects; and nobody could usurp her place or show that
     utter indifference to her regulations which some revolutionaries had dreamed of. Such an idea
     would have gone direct in the face of the British Constitution, and the sense of the community
     would have been dead against it. But everybody who had speculated upon her proceedings
     disapproved of Lucilla in her most unlooked-for resolution. Some could not think how she could
     bear it, staying on there when everything was so changed; and some said it was a weakness they
     could never have believed to exist in her; and some—for there are spiteful people
     everywhere—breathed the names of Cavendish and Ashburton, the rival candidates, and hinted that
     Miss Marjoribanks had something in her mind to justify her lingering. If Lucilla had not been
     supported by a conscious sense of rectitude, she must have broken down before this universal
     disapprobation. Not a soul in the world except one supported her in her resolution, and that
     was perhaps, of all others, the one least likely to be able to judge.
And it was not for want of opportunity to go elsewhere. Aunt Jemima, as has been seen, did
     not lose an instant in offering the shelter of her house to her niece; and Mrs Beverley wrote
     the longest, kindest, most incoherent letter begging her dear Lucilla to come to her
     immediately for a long visit, and adding, that though she had to go out a good deal into
     society, she needn't mind, for that everything she could think of would be done to make her
     comfortable; to which Dr Beverley himself, who was now a dean, added an equally kind
     postscript, begging Miss Marjoribanks to make her home at the Deanery "until she saw how things
     were to be." "He would have found me a place, perhaps," Lucilla said, when she folded up the
     letter—and this was a terrible mode of expression to the genteel ears of Mrs John.
"I wish you would not use such words, my dear," said Aunt Jemima; "even if you had been as
     poor as you thought, my house would always have been a home for you. Thank Heaven I have enough
     for both; you never needed to have thought, under any circumstances, of taking a—a situation.
     It is a thing I could never have consented to,"—which was a very handsome thing of Aunt Jemima
     to say.
"Thank you, aunt," said Lucilla, but she sighed; for, though it was very kind, what was Miss
     Marjoribanks to have done with herself in such a dowager establishment? And then Colonel Chiley
     came in, who had also his proposal to make.
"She sent me," the Colonel said; "it's been a sad business for us all, Lucilla; I
     don't know when I have felt anything more; and as for her, you know, she has never held up her
     head since——"
"Dear Mrs Chiley!" Miss Marjoribanks said, unable to resist the old affection; "and yet I
     heard she had sent for Dr Rider directly," Lucilla added. She knew it was quite natural, and
     perhaps quite necessary, but then it did seem hard that his own friends should be the first to
     replace her dear papa.
"It was I did that," said the Colonel. "What was a man to do? I was horribly cut up, but I
     could not stand and see her making herself worse; and I said you had too much sense to
     mind——"
"So I ought," said Lucilla, with penitence, "but when I remembered where he was last, the
     very last place——"
It was hard upon the Colonel to stand by and see a woman cry. It was a thing he could never
     stand, as he had always said to his wife. He took the poker, which was his favourite resource,
     and made one of his tremendous dashes at the fire, to give Lucilla time to recover herself, and
     then he turned to Aunt Jemima, who sat pensively by:
"She sent me," said the Colonel, who did not think his wife needed any other
     name—"not that I would not have come of my own accord; we want Lucilla to go to us, you see. I
     don't know what plans she may have been making, but we're both very fond of her—she knows that.
     I think, if you have not settled upon anything, the best that Lucilla can do is to come to us.
     She'll be the same as at home, and always somebody to look after her——"
The old Colonel was standing before the fire, wavering a little on his long unsteady old
     legs, and looking wonderfully well preserved, and old and feeble; and Lucilla, though she was
     in mourning, was so full of life and force in her way. It was a curious sort of protection to
     offer her, and yet it was real protection, and love and succour, though, Heaven knows! it might
     not perhaps last out the year.
"I am sure, Colonel Chiley, it is a very kind offer," said Aunt Jemima, "and I would have
     been thankful if she could have made up her mind to go with me. But I must say she has taken a
     very queer notion into her head—a thing I should never have expected from Lucilla—she says she
     will stay here."
"Here?—ah—eh—what does she mean by here?" said the Colonel.
"Here, Colonel Chiley, in this great big melancholy house. I have been thinking
     about it, and talking about it till my head goes round and round. Unless she were to take
     Inmates," said Aunt Jemima, in a resigned and doleful voice. As for the Colonel, he was
     petrified, and for a long time had not a word to say.
"Here!—By Jove, I think she must have lost her senses," said the old soldier. "Why,
     Lucilla, I—I thought—wasn't there something about the money being lost? You couldn't keep up
     this house under a—fifteen hundred a year at least; the Doctor spent a mint of money;—you must
     be going out of your senses. And to have all the sick people coming, and the bell ringing of
     nights. Bless my soul! it would kill anybody," said Colonel Chiley. "Put on your bonnet, and
     come out with me; shutting her up here, and letting her cry, and so forth—I don't say it ain't
     natural—I'm terribly cut up myself whenever I think of it; but it's been too much for her
     head," said the Colonel, with anxiety and consternation mingling in his face.
"Unless she were to take Inmates, you know," said Aunt Jemima, in a sepulchral voice. There
     was something in the word that seemed to carry out to a point of reality much beyond anything
     he had dreamt of, the suggestion Colonel Chiley had just made.
"Inmates! Lord bless my soul! what do you mean, ma'am?" said the old soldier. "Lucilla, put
     on your bonnet directly, and come and have a little fresh air. She'll soon be an inmate herself
     if we leave her here," the Colonel said. They were all very sad and grave, and yet it was a
     droll scene; and then the old hero offered Lucilla his arm, and led her to the door. "You'll
     find me in the hall as soon as you are ready," he said, in tones half gruff, half tender, and
     was glad to go downstairs, though it was cold, and put on his greatcoat with the aid of Thomas,
     and stand warming the tips of his boots at the hall fire. As for Lucilla, she obeyed him
     without a word; and it was with his unsteady but kind old arm to lean upon that she first saw
     how the familiar world looked through the mist of this strange change that had come over it,
     and through the blackness of her crape veil.
But though she succeeded in satisfying her friends that she had made up her mind, she did not
     secure their approval. There were so many objections to her plan. "If you had been rich even, I
     don't think I should have approved of it, Lucilla," Mrs Chiley said, with tears; "and I think
     we could have made you happy here." So the good old lady spoke, looking round her pretty room,
     which was so warm and cheery and bright, and where the Colonel, neat and precise as if he had
     come out of a box, was standing poking the fire. It looked all very solid and substantial, and
     yet it was as unstable as any gossamer that the careless passenger might brush away. The two
     good people were so old that they had forgotten to remember they were old. But neither did
     Lucilla think of that. This was really what she thought and partly said:
"I am in my own house, that wants no expense nor changing, and Nancy is getting old, and does
     not mind standing by me. And it is not so much trouble after all keeping everything nice when
     there is no gentleman coming in, and nothing else to do. And, besides, I don't mean to be
     Lucilla Marjoribanks for ever and ever." This was the general scope, without going into all the
     details, of what Lucilla said.
But, at the same time, though she was so happy as not to be disturbed in her decision, or
     made uncomfortable, either by lamentation or remonstrance, and had no doubt in her mind that
     she was doing right, it was disagreeable to Miss Marjoribanks to go thus in the face of all her
     friends. She went home by herself, and the house did look dreary from the outside. It was just
     as it had always been, for none of the servants were dismissed as yet, nor any external change
     made; but still a look as if it had fallen asleep—a look as if it too had died somehow, and
     only pretended to be a house and home—was apparent, in the aspect of the place; and when the
     servants were gone, and nobody remained except Lucilla and her faithful Nancy, and a young
     maid—which must be the furthest limit of Miss Marjoribanks's household, and difficult enough to
     maintain upon two hundred a year—what would it look like? This thought was more discouraging
     than any remonstrances; and it was with a heavy heart that Lucilla re-entered her solitary
     house. She told Thomas to follow her upstairs; and when she sank, tired, into a chair, and put
     up her veil before commencing to speak to him, it was all she could do to keep from crying. The
     depressing influences of this sad week had told so much on her, that she was quite fatigued by
     her walk to see Mrs Chiley; and Thomas, too, knew why he had been called, and stood in a formal
     manner before her, with his hands crossed, against the closed door. When she put back her thick
     black veil, the last climax of painful change came upon Miss Marjoribanks. She did not feel as
     if she were Lucilla; so discouraged and depressed and pale, and tired with her walk as she was,
     with all sorts of projects and plans so quenched out of her; almost if she had been charged
     with being somebody else, the imputation was one which she could not have denied.
"Thomas," she said faintly, "I think I ought to speak to you myself about all that has
     happened—we are such old friends, and you have been such a good kind servant. You know I shan't
     be able to keep up——"
"And sorry we all was, Miss, to hear it," said Thomas, when Lucilla's utterance failed. "I am
     sure there never was a better master, though particular; and for a comfortabler house——"
"If I had been as poor papa expected to leave me," said Miss Marjoribanks, after a little
     pause, "everything would have gone on as usual: but after your long service here, and so many
     people as know you, Thomas, you will have no difficulty in getting as good a place: and you
     know that anything I can say——"
"Thank you, Miss," said Thomas; and then he made a pause. "It was not exactly that as I was
     thinking of; I've set my heart, this many a day, on a little business. If you would be so kind
     as to speak a word for me to the gentlemen as has the licensing. There ain't nobody as knows
     better how——"
"What kind of a business, Thomas?" said Lucilla, who cheered up a little in ready interest,
     and would have been very glad if she could have taken a little business too.
"Well, Miss, a kind of a quiet—public-house, if I don't make too bold to name it," said
     Thomas, with a deprecating air—"not one of them drinking-places, Miss, as, I know, ladies can't
     abide; but many a man, as is a very decent man, wants his pint o' beer now and again, and their
     little sort of clubs of a night as well as the gentlefolks; and it's my opinion, Miss, as it's
     a man's dooty to see as that sort of thing don't go too far, and yet as his fellow-creatures
     has their bit of pleasure," said Thomas, who naturally took the defensive side.
"I am sure you are quite right," said Lucilla, cheering up more and more, and instinctively,
     with her old statesmanlike breadth of view, throwing a rapid glance upon the subject to see
     what capabilities there might be in it; "and I hope you will try always to exercise a good
     influence—What is all that noise and shouting out of doors?"
"It's one of the candidates, Miss," said Thomas, "as is addressing of the bargemen at the top
     o' Prickett's Lane."
"Ah!" said Lucilla; and a deep sigh escaped from her bosom. "But you cannot do anything of
     that kind, you know, Thomas, without a wife."
"Yes, Miss," said Thomas, with great confusion and embarrassment; "that was just what I was
     going to say. Me and Betsy——"
"Betsy!" said Lucilla, with dismay; for it had been Betsy she had specially fixed upon as the
     handy, willing, cheerful maid who, when there was no gentleman coming in, and little else to
     do, might keep even this big house in order. She sighed; but it was not in her power, even if
     she had desired it, to put any restriction upon Betsy's wishes. And it was not without a
     momentary envy that she received the intelligence. It was life the housemaid was about to enter
     on—active life of her own, with an object and meaning—clogged by Thomas, no doubt, who did not
     appear to Lucilla as the bright spot in the picture—but still independent life; whereas her
     mistress knew of nothing particularly interesting in her own uncertain future. She was roused
     from her momentary meditation by the distant shouts which came from the top of Prickett's Lane,
     and sighed again, without knowing it, as she spoke.
"It's a pity you had not got your—little inn," said Lucilla, for the sake of euphony, "six
     months or a year ago, for then you might have voted for Mr Ashburton, Thomas. I had forgotten
     about the election until now."
"Not as that needn't stand in the way, Miss," said Thomas eagerly; "there's Betsy's brother
     as has it now, and he ain't made up his mind about his vote; and if he knowed as it would be
     any comfort to you——"
"Of course it will be a comfort to me!" said Miss Marjoribanks; and she got up from her chair
     with a sense that she was still not altogether useless in the world. "Go and speak to him
     directly, Thomas; and here's one of Mr Ashburton's colours that I made up myself; and tell him
     that there can be no doubt he is the man for Carlingford; and send up Nancy to me. And
     I hope Betsy and you will be very happy," said Lucilla. She had been dreadfully down, but the
     rebound was all the more grateful. "I am not done with yet, and, thank Heaven! there must
     always be something to do," she said to herself when she was alone. And she threw off her
     shawl, and began to make the drawing-room look like itself; not that it was not perfectly in
     order, and as neat as a room could be; but still the neatness savoured of Betsy, and not of
     Lucilla. Miss Marjoribanks, in five minutes, made it look like that cosy empire of hospitality
     and kindness and talk and wit, and everything pleasant, that it used to be; and then, when she
     had finished, she sat down and had a good cry, which did not do her any harm.
Then Nancy appeared, disturbed in her preparations for dinner, and with her arms wrapped in
     her apron, looking glum and defiant. Hers was not the resigned and resourceful preparation for
     her fate which had appeared in Thomas. She came in, and put the door ajar, and leant her back
     against the sharp edge. She might be sent off like the rest, if that was Miss Lucilla's
     meaning—her that had been in the house off and on for more than thirty years; but if it was so,
     at least she would not give up without unfolding a bit of her mind.
"Come in," said Lucilla, drying her eyes—"come in and shut the door; you had better come and
     sit down here, Nancy, for I have a great deal to say, and I want to speak to you as a
     friend."
Nancy shut the door, but she thought to herself that she knew what all this meant, and made
     but a very little movement into the room, looking more forbidding than ever. "Thank you all the
     same, Miss Lucilla, but I ain't too old to stand," she said; and stood firm to meet the shock,
     with her arms folded under her apron, thinking in her heart that it was about one of the
     almshouses, her horror and hope, that her young mistress was going to speak.
"Nancy," said Lucilla, "I want to tell you what I am going to do. I have to make up my mind
     for myself now. They all go against me, and one says I should do this and another says I should
     do that; but I don't think anybody knows me so well as you do. Don't stand at the door. I want
     to consult you as a friend. I want to ask you a question, and you must answer as if you were
     before a judge—I have such confidence in you."
Nancy's distrust and defiance gave way a little before this appeal. She came a step nearer,
     and let the apron drop from her folded arms. "What is it, Miss Lucilla?—though I ain't
     pretending to be one to advise," she said, building a kind of intrenchment round her with the
     nearest chairs.
"You know how things are changed," said Lucilla, "and that I can't stay here as I used to do.
     People think I should go and live with somebody; but I think, you know—if I was one of
     those ladies that have a faithful old servant to stand by them, and never to grumble nor make a
     fuss, nor go back on the past, nor go in for expensive dishes—one that wouldn't mind cooking a
     chop or making a cup of tea, if that was all we could afford—why, I think, Nancy——"
But Nancy could not hear any more. She made a little rush forward, with a kind of convulsive
     chuckling that was half sobbing and half laughter. "And me here!" cried Dr Marjoribanks's
     famous cook, who had spent a fortune on her gravy-beef alone, and was one of the most expensive
     people in Carlingford—"me as has done for you all your days! me as would—if it was but a roast
     potato!" cried the devoted woman. She was in such a state of hysterical flutter and excitement
     that Lucilla had to take her almost into her arms and put the old woman into a chair and bring
     her to, which was an occupation quite in Miss Marjoribanks's way.
"But I shall only have two hundred a year," said Lucilla. "Now don't be rash; there will have
     to be a maid to keep things tidy, and that is every farthing I shall have. You used to spend as
     much in gravy-beef," said Miss Marjoribanks, with a sigh.
"Oh, Miss Lucilla, let bygones be bygones," said Nancy, with tears. "If I did, it wasn't
     without many a little something for them as was too poor to buy it for themselves—for I never
     was one as boiled the senses out of a bit of meat; and when a gentleman is well-to-do, and
     hasn't got no occasion to count every penny——The Doctor, I will say for him, was never one as
     asked too many questions. Give him a good dinner on his own table, and he wasn't the gentleman
     as grudged a bit of broken meat for the poor folks. He did a deal of good as you nor no one
     never know'd of, Miss Lucilla," said Nancy, with a sob.
And then his daughter and his faithful old servant cried a little in company over Dr
     Marjoribanks's vacant place. What could a man have more? Nobody was made altogether desolate by
     his death, nor was any heart broken, but they wept for him honestly, though the old woman felt
     happy in her sorrow. And Lucilla, on her knees before the fire, told Nancy of that exclamation
     the Doctor had made in John Brown's office, and how he had put his hand on her shoulder that
     last night. "All he said was, Poor Lucilla!" sobbed Miss Marjoribanks; "he never thought of
     himself nor all his money that he had worked so hard for;" and once more that touch of
     something more exquisite than was usual to her went sharply down into Lucilla's heart and
     brought up tenderer and deeper tears.
She felt all the better for it after, and was even a little cheerful in the evening, and like
     herself; and thus it will be seen that one person in Carlingford—not, it is true, a popular
     oracle, but of powerful influence and first-rate importance in a practical point of view—gave
     the heartiest approbation to Miss Marjoribanks's scheme for her new life.
</div></body></text></TEI>