<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="7">
Chapter VII
Miss Marjoribanks had so many things to think of next morning that she found her cousin, who
     was rather difficult to get rid of, much in her way: naturally the young man was briefless, and
     came on circuit for the name of the thing, and was quite disposed to dawdle the first morning,
     and attach himself to the active footsteps of Lucilla; and for her part, she had things to
     occupy her so very much more important. For one thing, one of Dr Marjoribanks's little
     dinner-parties was to take place that evening, which would be the first under the new régime,
     and was naturally a matter of some anxiety to all parties. "I shall go down and ask Mrs Chiley
     to come with the Colonel," said Lucilla. "I have always meant to do that. We can't have a full
     dinner-party, you know, as long as the house is so shabby; but I am sure Mrs Chiley will come
     to take care of me."
"To take care of you!—in your father's house! Do you think they'll bite?" said the Doctor
     grimly; but as for Lucilla, she was quite prepared for that.
"I must have a chaperone, you know," she said. "I don't say it is not quite absurd; but then,
     at first, I always make it a point to give in to the prejudices of society. That is how I have
     always been so successful," said the experienced Lucilla. "I never went in the face of
     anybody's prejudices. Afterwards, you know, when one is known——"
The Doctor laughed, but at the same time he sighed. There was nothing to be said against Mrs
     Chiley, who had, on the whole, as women go, a very superior training, and knew what a good
     dinner was; but it was the beginning of the revolution of which Dr Marjoribanks, vaguely
     oppressed with the idea of new paper, new curtains, and all that was involved in the entrance
     of Mr Holden the upholsterer into the house, did not see the end. He acquiesced, of course,
     since there was nothing else for it: but it must be confessed that the spectre of Mrs Chiley
     sitting at his right hand clouded over for the Doctor the pleasant anticipation of the evening.
     If it had been possible to put her at the head of the table beside Lucilla, whom she was to
     come to take care of, he could have borne it better—and to be sure it would have been a great
     deal more reasonable; but then that was absolutely out of the question, and the Doctor gave in
     with a sigh. Thus it was that he began to realise the more serious result of that
     semi-abdication into which he had been beguiled. The female element, so long peacefully ignored
     and kept at a distance, had come in again in triumph and taken possession, and the Doctor knew
     too well by the experience of a long life what a restless and troublesome element it was. He
     had begun to feel that it had ceased to be precisely amusing as he took his place in his
     brougham. It was good sport to see Lucilla make an end of Tom, and put her bridle upon the
     stiff neck of Nancy; but when it came to changing the character of the Doctor's dinners, his
     intellect naturally got more obtuse, and he did not see the joke.
As for Tom, he had to be disposed of summarily. "Do go away," Miss Marjoribanks said, in her
     straightforward way. "You can come back to luncheon if you like;—that is to say, if you can
     pick up anybody that is very amusing, you may bring him here about half-past one, and if any of
     my friends have come to call by that time, I will give you lunch; but it must be somebody very
     amusing, or I will have nothing to say to you," said Lucilla. And with this dismissal Tom
     Marjoribanks departed, not more content than the Doctor; for, to be sure, the last thing in the
     world which the poor fellow thought of was to bring somebody who was amusing, to injure his
     chances with Lucilla. Tom, like most other people, was utterly incapable of fathoming the grand
     conception which inspired Miss Marjoribanks. When she told him that it was the object of her
     life to be a comfort to papa, he believed it to a certain extent, but it never occurred to him
     that filial devotion, though beautiful to contemplate, would preserve Lucilla's heart from the
     ordinary dangers of youth, or that she was at all in earnest in postponing all matrimonial
     intentions until she was nine-and-twenty, and had begun to "go off" a little. So he went away
     disconsolate enough, wavering between his instinct of obedience and his desire of being in
     Lucilla's company, and a desperate determination never to be the means of injuring himself by
     presenting to her anybody who was very amusing. All Miss Marjoribanks's monde, as it
     happened, was a little out of humour that day. She had gone on so far triumphantly that it had
     now come to be necessary that she should receive a little check in her victorious career.
When Tom was disposed of, Miss Marjoribanks put on her hat and went down Grange Lane to carry
     her invitation to Mrs Chiley, who naturally was very much pleased to come. "But, my dear, you
     must tell me what to put on," the old lady said. "I don't think I have had anything new since
     you were home last. I have heard so much about Dr Marjoribanks's dinners that I feel a little
     excited, as if I was going to be made a freemason or something. There is my brown, you know,
     that I wear at home when we have anybody—and my black velvet; and then there is my French gray
     that I got for Mary Chiley's marriage."
"Dear Mrs Chiley," said Lucilla, "it doesn't matter in the least what you wear; there are
     only to be gentlemen, you know, and one never dresses for gentlemen. You must keep that
     beautiful black velvet for another time."
"Well, my dear," said Mrs Chiley, "I am long past that sort of thing—but the men
     think, you know, that it is always for them we dress."
"Yes," said Miss Marjoribanks, "their vanity is something dreadful—but it is one of my
     principles never to dress unless there are ladies. A white frock, high in the neck,"
     said Lucilla, with sweet simplicity—"as for anything else, it would be bad style."
Mrs Chiley gave her young visitor a very cordial kiss when she went away. "The sense she
     has!" said the old lady; but at the same time the Colonel's wife was so old-fashioned that this
     contemptuous way of treating "The Gentlemen" puzzled her unprogressive intelligence. She
     thought it was superhuman virtue on Lucilla's part, nearly incredible, and yet established by
     proofs so incontestable that it would be a shame to doubt it; and she felt ashamed of
     herself—she who might have been a grandmother, had such been the will of Providence—for
     lingering five minutes undecided between her two best caps. "I dare say Lucilla does not spend
     so much time on such vanity, and she only nineteen," said the penitent old lady. As for Miss
     Marjoribanks, she returned up Grange Lane with a mind at ease, and that consciousness of
     superior endowments which gives amiability and expansion even to the countenance. She did not
     give any money to the beggar who at that period infested Grange Lane with her six children, for
     that was contrary to those principles of political economy which she had studied with such
     success at Mount Pleasant; but she stopped and asked her name, and where she lived, and
     promised to inquire into her case. "If you are honest and want to work, I will try to find you
     something to do," said Miss Marjoribanks; which, to be sure, was a threat appalling enough to
     keep her free from any further molestation on the part of that interesting family. But Lucilla,
     to do her justice, felt it equally natural that beneficence should issue from her in this
     manner as in that other mode of feeding the hungry which she was willing to adopt at half-past
     one, and had solemnly engaged herself to fulfil at seven o'clock. She went up after that to Mr
     Holden's, and had a most interesting conversation, and found among his stores a delicious
     damask, softly, spiritually green, of which, to his great astonishment, she tried the effect in
     one of the great mirrors which ornamented the shop. "It is just the tint I want," Lucilla said,
     when she had applied that unusual test; and she left the fashionable upholsterer of Carlingford
     in a state of some uncertainty whether it was curtains or dresses that Miss Marjoribanks meant
     to have made.
Perhaps this confusion arose from the fact that Lucilla's mind was occupied in discussing the
     question whether she should not go round by Grove Street, and try that duet again with Barbara,
     and invite her to Grange Lane in the evening to electrify the little company; or whether, in
     case this latter idea might not be practicable, she should bring Barbara with her to lunch by
     way of occupying Tom Marjoribanks. Lucilla stood at Mr Holden's door for five seconds at least
     balancing the matter; but finally she gave her curls a little shake, and took a quick step
     forward, and without any more deliberation returned towards Grange Lane; for, on the whole, it
     was better not to burst in full triumph all at once upon her constituency, and exhaust her
     forces at the beginning. If she condescended to sing something herself, it would indeed be a
     greater honour than her father's dinner-party, in strict justice, was entitled to; and as for
     the second question, though Miss Marjoribanks was too happy in the confidence of her own powers
     to fear any rivals, and though her cousin's devotion bored her, still she felt doubtful how far
     it was good policy to produce Barbara at luncheon for the purpose of occupying Tom. Other
     people might see her besides Tom, and her own grand coup might be forestalled for
     anything she could tell; and then Tom had some title to consideration on his own merits, though
     he was the unlucky member of the family. He might even, if he were so far left to himself
     (though Miss Marjoribanks smiled at the idea), fall in love with Barbara; or, what was more
     likely, driven to despair by Lucilla's indifference, he might pretend to fall in love;
     and Lucilla reflected, that if anything happened she could never forgive herself. This was the
     point she had arrived at when she shook her tawny curls and set out suddenly on her return
     home.
It was now nearly one o'clock, and it was quite possible that Tom, as well as herself, might
     be on the way to Grange Lane; but Lucilla, who, as she said, made a point of never going
     against the prejudices of society, made up her mind to remain sweetly unconscious of the hour
     of luncheon, unless some lady came to keep her company. But then Miss Marjoribanks was always
     lucky, as she said. A quarter of an hour before Tom applied for admission, Miss Bury came to
     pay Lucilla a visit. She had been visiting in her district all the morning, and was very easily
     persuaded to repose herself a little; and then, naturally, she was anxious about her young
     friend's spiritual condition, and the effect upon her mind of a year's residence abroad. She
     was asking whether Lucilla had not seen something soul-degrading and dishonouring to religion
     in all the mummeries of Popery; and Miss Marjoribanks, who was perfectly orthodox, had replied
     to the question in the most satisfactory manner; when Tom made his appearance, looking rather
     sheepish and reluctant, and followed by the "somebody amusing" whom Lucilla had commissioned
     him to bring. He had struggled against his fate, poor fellow! but when it happens to be a man's
     instinct to do what he is told, he can no more resist it than if it was a criminal impulse. Tom
     entered with his amusing companion, who had been chosen with care, and was very uninviting to
     look at; and by and by Miss Bury, with the most puzzled looks, found herself listening to
     gossip about the theatres and all kinds of profane subjects. "I think they are going to hang
     that fellow that killed the tailor," said the amusing man; "that will stir you up a little in
     Carlingford, I should suppose. It is as good as a play for a country town. Of course, there
     will be a party that will get up a memorial, and prove that a man so kind-hearted never existed
     out of paradise; and there will be another party who will prove him to be insane; and then at
     the end all the blackguards within a hundred miles will crowd into Carlingford, and the fellow
     will be hanged, as he deserves to be; but I assure you it's a famous amusement for a country
     town."
"Sir," said Miss Bury, with a tremulous voice, for her feelings had overcome her, "when you
     speak of amusement, does it ever occur to you what will become of his miserable soul?"
"I assure you, wretches of that description have no souls," said the young barrister, "or
     else, of course, I would not permit myself to speak so freely. It is a conclusion I have come
     to not rashly, but after many opportunities of observing," the young man went on with
     solemnity; "on the whole, my opinion is, that this is the great difference between one portion
     of mankind and the other: that description of being, you may take my word for it, has no
     soul."
"I never take anybody's word for what is so plainly stated in the Holy Scriptures," said Miss
     Bury; "I never heard any one utter such a terrible idea. I am sure I don't want to defend a—a
     murderer," cried the Rector's sister, with agitation; "but I have heard of persons in that
     unfortunate position coming to a heavenly frame of mind, and giving every evidence of being
     truly converted. The law may take their lives, but it is an awful thing—a truly dreadful
     thing," said Miss Bury, trembling all over, "to try to take away their soul."
"Oh, nonsense, Lucilla. By Jove! he does not mean that, you know," said Tom, interposing to
     relieve his friend.
"Do you believe in Jove, Mr Thomas Marjoribanks," said Miss Bury, looking him in an alarming
     manner full in the face.
The unfortunate Tom grew red and then he grew green under this question and that awful look.
     "No, Miss Bury, I can't say I do," he answered humbly; and the amusing man was so much less
     brotherly than Tom that he burst into unsympathetic laughter. As for Lucilla, it was the first
     real check she had sustained in the beginning of her career. There could not have been a more
     unfortunate contretemps, and there is no telling how disastrous the effect might have
     been, had not her courage and coolness, not to say her orthodoxy, been equal to the occasion.
     She gave her cousin a look which was still more terrible than Miss Bury's, and then she took
     affairs into her own hands.
"It is dreadful sometimes to see what straits people are put to, to keep up the
     conversation," said Lucilla; "Tom in particular, for I think he has a pleasure in talking
     nonsense. But you must not suppose I am of that opinion. I remember quite well there was a
     dreadful man once here in jail for something, and Mr Bury made him the most beautiful
     character! Every creature has a soul. I am sure we say so in the Creed every day of our lives,
     and especially in that long creed where so many people perish everlastingly. So far from
     laughing, it is quite dreadful to think of it," said Lucilla. "It is one of my principles never
     to laugh about anything that has to do with religion. I always think it my duty to speak with
     respect. It has such a bad effect upon some minds. Miss Bury, if you will not take anything
     more, I think we had better go upstairs."
To think that Tom, whose luck, as usual, had betrayed him to such an unlooked-for extent,
     should have been on the point of following to the drawing-room, was more than Miss Marjoribanks
     could comprehend; but fortunately his companion had more sense, and took his leave, taking his
     conductor with him. Miss Bury went upstairs in silence, sighing heavily from time to time. The
     good woman was troubled in her spirit at the evident depravity of the young men with whom
     circumstances had constrained her to sit down at table, and she was sadly afraid that such
     companionship must have a debasing effect upon the mind of that lamb of the flock now standing
     before her. Miss Bury bethought herself of Dr Marjoribanks's profane jokes, and the
     indifference he had shown to many things in which it was his duty to have interested himself,
     and she could not but look with tender pity in her young friend's face.
"Poor dear," said Miss Bury, "it is dreadful indeed if this is the sort of society you are
     subjected to. I could recommend to Dr Marjoribanks a most admirable woman, a true Christian,
     who would take charge of things and be your companion, Lucilla. It is not at all nice for you,
     at your age, to be obliged to receive young men like these alone."
"I had you!" said Lucilla, taking both Miss Bury's hands. "I felt it was such a blessing. I
     would not have let Tom stay for luncheon if you had not been there; and now I am so glad,
     because it has shown me the danger of letting him bring people. I am quite sure it was a
     special providence that made you think of coming here to-day."
"Well, my dear," said Miss Bury, who was naturally mollified by this statement of the
     question, "I am very glad to have been of use to you. If there is anything I desire in this
     life, it is to be useful to my fellow-creatures, and to do my work while it is called day. I
     should not think the time lost, my dear Lucilla, if I could only hope that I had impressed upon
     your mind that an account must be given of every careless word——"
"Oh, yes," said Lucilla, "that is so true; and besides, it is quite against my
     principles. I make it a point never to speak of anything about religion except with the
     greatest respect; and I am quite sure it was a special providence that I had you."
Miss Bury took her farewell very affectionately, not to say effusively, after this, with her
     heart melting over the ingenuous young creature who was so thankful for her protection; but at
     the same time she left Miss Marjoribanks a prey to the horrible sensation of having made a
     failure. To be sure, there was time to recover herself in the evening, which was, so to speak,
     her first formal appearance before the public of Carlingford. Tom was so ill-advised as to come
     in when she was having her cup of tea before dinner to fortify her for her exertions; and the
     reception he met with may be left to the imagination. But, after all, there was little
     satisfaction in demolishing Tom; and then Lucilla had known from the beginning that the success
     of her undertaking depended entirely on herself.
</div></body></text></TEI>