<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Miss Marjoribanks, by Mrs.
     Oliphant.</title><author>Oliphant, Margaret (1828–1897)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
Chapter XLI
Mr Cavendish thought he had been an object of admiration to Maria Brown, as we have said. He
     thought of it with a little middle-aged complacency, and a confidence that this vague sentiment
     would stand the test he was about to apply to it, which did honour to the freshness of his
     heart. With this idea it was Miss Brown he asked for as he knocked at the Major's door; and he
     found them both in the drawing-room, Maria with gloves on to hide the honourable stains of her
     photography, which made her comparatively useless when she was out of her "studio"—and her
     father walking about in a state of excitement, which was, indeed, what Mr Cavendish expected.
     The two exchanged a guilty look when they saw who their visitor was. They looked as people
     might well look who had been caught in the fact and did not know how to get over it. They came
     forward, both of them, with a cowardly cordiality and eagerness to welcome him—"How very good
     of you to come to see us so soon!" Miss Brown said, and fluttered and looked at her father, and
     could not tell what more to say. And then a dead pause fell upon them—such a pause as not
     unfrequently falls upon people who have got through their mutual greetings almost with an
     excess of cordiality. They stopped short all at once, and looked at each other, and smiled, and
     made a fatal conscious effort to talk of something. "It is so good of you to come so soon,"
     Miss Brown repeated; "perhaps you have been to see Lucilla," and then she stopped again,
     slightly tremulous, and turned an appealing gaze to her papa.
"I have come to see you," said Mr Cavendish, plucking up all his courage. "I have
     been a long time gone, you know, but I have not forgotten Carlingford; and you must forgive me
     for saying that I was very glad to hear I might still come to see—Miss Brown. As for Lydia?"
     said the candidate, looking about him with a smile.
"Ah, Lydia," said her sister, with a sigh—"her eldest is eight, Mr Cavendish. We don't see
     her as often as we should like—marriage makes such a difference. Of course it is quite natural
     she should be all for her own family now."
"Quite natural," said Mr Cavendish, and then he turned to the Major. "I don't think there are
     quite so many public changes as I expected to see. The old Rector always holds out, and the old
     Colonel; and you have not done much that I can see about the new paving. You know what I have
     come home about, Major; and I am sure I can count upon you to support me," the candidate said,
     with a great deal more confidence than he felt in his voice.
Major Brown cleared his throat; his heart was moved by the familiar voice, and he could not
     conceal his embarrassment. "I hope nothing will ever occur," he said, "to make any difference
     in the friendly feelings—I am sure I shall be very glad to welcome you back permanently to
     Carlingford. You may always rest assured of that," and he held out his hand. But he grew red as
     he thought of his treachery, and Maria, who was quaking over it, did not even try to say a word
     to help him—and as for Mr Cavendish, he took up his position on the arm of the sofa, as he used
     to do. But he had a slim youthful figure when he used to do it, and now the attitude was one
     which revealed a certain dawning rotundity, very different, as Maria afterwards said, from
     one's idea of Mr Cavendish. He was not aware of it himself, but as these two people looked,
     their simultaneous thought was how much he had changed.
"Thank you, you are very kind," said Mr Cavendish. "I have been a little lazy, I am afraid,
     since I came here; but I expect my agent down to-night, and then, I hope, you'll come over to
     my place and have a talk with Woodburn and Centum and the rest about it. I am a poor tactician,
     for my part. You shall contrive what is best to be done, and I'll carry it out. I suppose I may
     expect almost to walk over," he said. It was the confidence of despair that moved him. The more
     he saw that his cause was lost, the more he would make it out that he was sure to win—which is
     not an unusual state of mind.
"I—I don't know, I am sure," said poor Major Brown. "To tell the truth, I—though I can safely
     say my sympathies are always with you, Cavendish—I—have been so unfortunate as to commit
     myself, you know. It was quite involuntary, I am sure, for I never thought my casual expression
     of opinion likely to have any weight——"
"Papa never will perceive the weight that is attached to his opinion," said Miss Brown.
"I was not thinking of it in the least, Maria," said the modest Major; "but the fact is, it
     seems to have been that that decided Ashburton to stand; and after drawing a man in to
     such a thing, the least one can do is to back him out in it. Nobody had an idea then, you know,
     that you were coming back, my dear fellow. I assure you, if I had known——"
"But even if you had known, you know you never meant it, papa," said Maria. And Mr Cavendish
     sat on the arm of the sofa, and put his hands deep into his pockets, and dropped his upper lip,
     and knit his eyebrows a little, and listened to the anxious people excusing themselves. He did
     not make any answer one way or another. He was terribly mortified and disappointed, and it went
     against his pride to make further remonstrances. When they had done, he got down off his seat
     and took his right hand out of his pocket and offered it to Miss Brown, who, putting her own
     into it, poor soul! with the remembrance of her ancient allegiance, was like to cry.
"Well," he said, "if that is the case, I suppose I need not bother you any longer. You'll
     give me your good wishes all the same. I used to hear of Ashburton sometimes, but I never had
     the least idea he was so popular. And to tell the truth, I don't think he's any great things to
     brag of—though I suppose it's not to be expected I should appreciate his qualities,"
     Mr Cavendish added, with a laugh. As for Miss Brown, it was all she could do to keep from
     crying as he went away. She said she could see, by the way he left the drawing-room, that he
     was a stricken deer; and yet, notwithstanding this sympathetic feeling, she could not but
     acknowledge, when Miss Marjoribanks mentioned it, that, to have been such a handsome man, he
     was inconceivably gone off.
Mr Cavendish went up Grange Lane with his hands in his pockets, and tried to think that he
     did not care; but he did care all the same, and was very bitter in his mind over the failure of
     friends and the vanity of expectations. The last time he had walked past those garden walls he
     had thought himself sure of the support of Carlingford, and the personal esteem of all the
     people in all the houses he was passing. It was after the Archdeacon had broken down in his
     case against the man whom he called an adventurer, and when Mr Cavendish felt all the sweetness
     of being a member of an oligarchy, and entitled to the sympathy and support of his order. Now
     he went along the same path with his hat over his ears and his hands in his pockets, and rage
     and pain in his heart. Whose fault was it that his friends had deserted him and Carlingford
     knew him no more? He might as well have asked whose fault it was that he was getting stout and
     red in the face, and had not the same grace of figure nor ease of mind as he used to have? He
     had come very near to settling down and becoming a man of domestic respectability in this quiet
     place, and he had just escaped in time, and had laughed over it since, and imagined himself,
     with much glee, an old fogy looking after a lot of children. But the fact is that men do become
     old fogies even when they have no children to look after, and lose their figure and their
     elasticity just as soon and perhaps a little sooner in the midst of what is called life than in
     any milder scene of enjoyment. And it would have been very handy just now to have been sure of
     his election without paying much for it. He had been living fast, and spending a great deal of
     money, and this, after all, was the only real ambition he had ever had; and he had thought
     within himself that if he won he would change his mode of life, and turn over a new leaf, and
     become all at once a different man. When a man has made such a resolution, and feels not only
     that a mere success but a moral reformation depends upon his victory, he may be permitted to
     consider that he has a right to win; and it may be divined what his state of mind was when he
     had made the discovery that even his old friends did not see his election to be of any such
     importance as he did, and could think of a miserable little bit of self-importance or gratified
     vanity more than of his interests—even the women who had once been so kind to him! He had just
     got so far in his thoughts when he met Mr Centum, who stared for a moment, and then burst into
     one of his great laughs as he greeted him. "Good Lord! Cavendish, is this you? I never expected
     to see you like that!" the banker said, in his coarse way. "You're stouter than I am, old
     fellow; and such an Adonis as you used to be!" Mr Cavendish had to bear all this without giving
     way to his feelings, or even showing them any more than he could help it. Nobody would spare
     him that imbecile suggestion as to how things used to be. To be growing stouter than Centum
     without Centum's excuse of being a well-to-do householder and father of a family, and
     respectable man from whom stoutness was expected, was very bitter to him: but he had to gulp it
     down, and recollect that Centum was as yet the only influential supporter, except his
     brother-in-law, whom he had in Carlingford.
"What have you been doing with yourself since you came that nobody has seen you?" said Mr
     Centum. "If you are to do any good here, you know, we shall have to look alive."
"I have been ill," said the unfortunate candidate, with a little natural loss of temper. "You
     would not have a man to trudge about at this time of year in all weathers when he is ill."
"I would not be ill again, if I were you, till it's all over," said Mr Centum. "We shall have
     to fight every inch of our ground; and I tell you that fellow Ashburton knows what he's
     about—he goes at everything in a steady sort of way. He's not brilliant, you know, but he's
     sure——"
"Brilliant!" said Mr Cavendish, "I should think not. It is Lucilla Marjoribanks who is
     putting him up to it. You know she had an old grudge at me."
"Oh, nonsense about Lucilla," said Mr Centum. "I can tell you Ashburton is not at all a
     contemptible adversary. He is going to work in the cunningest way—not a woman's sort of thing,
     and he's not a ladies' man like you," the banker added, with a laugh.
"But I am afraid you can't go in for that sort of thing as you used to do, Cavendish. You
     should marry, and settle, and become a steady member of society, now you've grown so stout."
     This was the kind of way in which he was addressed even by his own supporter, who uttered
     another great laugh as he went off upon his busy way. It was a sort of thing Mr Cavendish was
     not used to, and he felt it accordingly. To be sure he knew that he was ten years older, and
     that there were several things which he could not do with the same facility as in his youth.
     But he had saved up Carlingford in his imagination as a spot in which he would always be young,
     and where nobody should find out the difference; and instead of that, it was precisely in
     Carlingford that he was fated to hear how changed he was, with a frankness which only old
     friends would have been justified in using. As for Lucilla Marjoribanks, she was rather better
     looking than otherwise, and absolutely had not gone off. It did not occur to Mr Cavendish that
     this might be because Lucilla at present was not still so old as he had been ten years ago, in
     the period which he now considered his youth. He was rather disposed, on the contrary, to take
     a moral view, and to consider that it was her feminine incapacity for going too far, which had
     kept years and amusements from having their due effect upon Miss Marjoribanks. And, poor
     fellow, he had gone too far. He had not been as careful in his life as he might have
     been had he stayed at Carlingford; and now he was paying the penalty. Such was the edifying
     state of mind which he had come to when he reached the top of Grove Street. And there a waft of
     soft recollections came across his mind. In the absence of all sympathy he could not help
     turning back to the thought of the enchantress of old who used to sing to him, and listen to
     him, and storm at him. Probably he would have ended by strolling along the familiar street, and
     canvassing for Mr Lake's vote, which would have done him no good in Carlingford, but just then
     Dr Marjoribanks stopped in his brougham. The Doctor was looking very strange that morning,
     though nobody had particularly remarked it—perhaps because he smoothed his countenance when he
     was out of the brougham, which was his refuge when he had anything to think about. But he
     stopped suddenly to speak to Mr Cavendish, and perhaps he had not time to perform that
     ceremony. He looked dark and cloudy, and constrained, and as if he forced himself to speak;
     which, to be sure, under the circumstances, was not so very strange.
"I am very glad to see you," the Doctor said, "though you were a day too late, you know. Why
     didn't you give us warning before we all went and committed ourselves? If we had known that you
     were coming——"
"Ah, that's what old Brown said," said Mr Cavendish, with a slight shrug of his shoulders;
     which was imprudent, for the Major was not so old as the Doctor, and besides was a much less
     important man in Grange Lane.
"So you have been to see old Brown," said Dr Marjoribanks, in his dry way. "He always was a
     great admirer of yours. I can't wish you luck, you know, for if you win we lose——"
"Oh, I don't want you to wish me luck. I don't suppose there can be much comparison between
     my chance and that of a new man whom nobody ever heard of in my time," said the candidate for
     Carlingford. "I thought you Scotchmen, Doctor, always liked to be on the winning side."
"We've a way of making our side the winning side," said Dr Marjoribanks grimly, for he was
     touchy where his nationality was concerned. "Health all right, I hope?" he added, looking at Mr
     Cavendish with that critical medical glance which shows that a verbal response is quite
     unnecessary. This time there was in the look a certain insinuation of doubt on the subject,
     which was not pleasant. "You are getting stout, I see," Dr Marjoribanks added—not laughing, but
     as if that too was poor Mr Cavendish's fault.
"Yes, I'm very well," he answered curtly; but the truth was that he did not feel sure that he
     was quite well after he had seen the critical look in Dr Marjoribanks's eye.
"You young men always go too fast," said the Doctor, with a strange little smile; but the
     term at least was consolatory; and after that Doctor Marjoribanks quite changed his tone. "Have
     you heard Woodburn talking of that great crash in town?" he said—"that India house, you know—I
     suppose it's quite true?"
"Quite true," said Mr Cavendish, promptly, and somehow he felt a pleasure in saying it. "I
     got all the particulars to-day in one of my letters—and lots of private people involved, which
     is always the way with these old houses," he added, with a mixture of curiosity and
     malice—"widows, and all sorts of superannuated folks."
"It's a great pity," said the Doctor: "I knew old Lichfield once, the chief partner—I am very
     sorry to hear it's true;" and then the two shook hands, and the brougham drove on. As for Mr
     Cavendish, he made up his mind at once that the Doctor was involved, and was not sorry, and
     felt that it was a sort of judicial recompense for his desertion of his friends. And he went
     home to tell his sister of it, who shared in his sentiments. And then it was not worth while
     going out any more that day—for the electioneering agent, who knew all about it, was not coming
     till the last train. "I suppose I shall have to work when he is here," Mr Cavendish said. And
     in the meantime he threw himself into an easy chair. Perhaps that was why he was getting so
     stout.
And in the meantime the Doctor went on visiting his patients. When he came back to his
     brougham between his visits, and went bowling along in that comfortable way, along the familiar
     roads, there was a certain glumness upon his face. He was not a demonstrative man, but when he
     was alone you could tell by certain lines about the well-worn cordage of his countenance
     whether all was right with the Doctor; and it was easy to see just at this moment that all was
     not right with him. But he did not say anything about it when he got home; on the contrary, he
     was just as usual, and told his daughter all about his encounter with Mr Cavendish. "A man at
     his time of life has no right to get fat—it's a sort of thing I don't like to see. And he'll
     never be a ladies' man no more, Lucilla," said the Doctor, with a gleam of humour in his
     eye.
"He is exactly like George the Fourth, papa," said Miss Marjoribanks; and the Doctor laughed
     as he sat down to dinner. If he had anything on his mind he bore it like a hero, and gave no
     sign; but then, as Mrs John very truly remarked, when a man does not disclose his annoyances
     they always tell more upon him in the end.
</div></body></text></TEI>