
(2) GEORGE GERMAINE WRITES THE HISTORY OF HIS FIRST LOVE.

LOOK back, my memory, through the dim labyrinth of the past, through the
                              mingling joys and sorrows of twenty years. Rise again, my boyhood’s
                              days, by the winding green shores of the little lake. Come to me once
                              more, my child-love, in the innocent beauty of your first ten years of
                              life. Let us live again, my angel, as we lived in our first paradise,
                              before sin and sorrow lifted their flaming swords and drove us out
                              into the world.
The month was March. The last wild fowl of the season were floating on
                              the waters of the lake which, in our Suffolk tongue, we called
                              Greenwater Broad.
Wind where it might, the grassy banks and the overhanging trees tinged
                              the lake with the soft green reflections from which it took its name.
                              In a creek at the south end, the boats were kept—my own pretty sailing
                              boat having a tiny natural harbor all to itself. In a creek at the
                              north end stood the great trap (called a “decoy”), used for snaring
                              the wild fowl which flocked every winter, by thousands and thousands,
                              to Greenwater Broad.
My little Mary and I went out together, hand in hand, to see the last
                              birds of the season lured into the decoy.
The outer part of the strange bird-trap rose from the waters of the lake
                              in a series of circular arches, formed of elastic branches bent to the
                              needed shape, and covered with folds of fine network, making the roof.
                              Little by little diminishing in size, the arches and their net-work
                              followed the secret windings of the creek inland to its end. Built
                              back round the arches, on their landward side, ran a wooden paling,
                              high enough to hide a man kneeling behind it from the view of the
                              birds on the lake. At certain intervals a hole was broken in the
                              paling just large enough to allow of the passage through it of a dog
                              of the terrier or the spaniel breed. And there began and ended the
                              simple yet sufficient mechanism of the decoy.
In those days I was thirteen, and Mary was ten years old. Walking on our
                              way to the lake we had Mary’s father with us for guide and companion.
                              The good man served as bailiff on my father’s estate. He was, besides,
                              a skilled master in the art of decoying ducks. The dog that helped him
                              (we used no tame ducks as decoys in Suffolk) was a little black
                              terrier; a skilled master also, in his way; a creature who possessed,
                              in equal proportions, the enviable advantages of perfect good-humor
                              and perfect common sense.
The dog followed the bailiff, and we followed the dog.
Arrived at the paling which surrounded the decoy, the dog sat down to
                              wait until he was wanted. The bailiff and the children crouched behind
                              the paling, and peeped through the outermost dog-hole, which commanded
                              a full view of the lake. It was a day without wind; not a ripple
                              stirred the surface of the water; the soft gray clouds filled all the
                              sky, and hid the sun from view.
We peeped through the hole in the paling. There were the wild
                              ducks—collected within easy reach of the decoy—placidly dressing their
                              feathers on the placid surface of the lake.
The bailiff looked at the dog, and made a sign. The dog looked at the
                              bailiff; and, stepping forward quietly, passed through the hole, so as
                              to show himself on the narrow strip of ground shelving down from the
                              outer side of the paling to the lake.
First one duck, then another, then half a dozen together, discovered the
                              dog.
A new object showing itself on the solitary scene instantly became an
                              object of all-devouring curiosity to the ducks. The outermost of them
                              began to swim slowly toward the strange four-footed creature, planted
                              motionless on the bank. By twos and threes, the main body of the
                              waterfowl gradually followed the advanced guard. Swimming nearer and
                              nearer to the dog, the wary ducks suddenly came to a halt, and, poised
                              on the water, viewed from a safe distance the phenomenon on the
                              land.
The bailiff, kneeling behind the paling, whispered, “Trim!”
Hearing his name, the terrier turned about, and retiring through the
                              hole, became lost to the view of the ducks. Motionless on the water,
                              the wild fowl wondered and waited. In a minute more, the dog had
                              trotted round, and had shown himself through the next hole in the
                              paling, pierced further inward where the lake ran up into the
                              outermost of the windings of the creek.
The second appearance of the terrier instantly produced a second fit of
                              curiosity among the ducks. With one accord, they swam forward again,
                              to get another and a nearer view of the dog; then, judging their safe
                              distance once more, they stopped for the second time, under the
                              outermost arch of the decoy. Again the dog vanished, and the puzzled
                              ducks waited. An interval passed, and the third appearance of Trim
                              took place, through a third hole in the paling, pierced further inland
                              up the creek. For the third time irresistible curiosity urged the
                              ducks to advance further and further inward, under the fatal arches of
                              the decoy. A fourth and a fifth time the game went on, until the dog
                              had lured the water-fowl from point to point into the inner recesses
                              of the decoy. There a last appearance of Trim took place. A last
                              advance, a last cautious pause, was made by the ducks. The bailiff
                              touched the strings, the weighed net-work fell vertically into the
                              water, and closed the decoy. There, by dozens and dozens, were the
                              ducks, caught by means of their own curiosity—with nothing but a
                              little dog for a bait! In a few hours afterward they were all dead
                              ducks on their way to the London market.
As the last act in the curious comedy of the decoy came to its end,
                              little Mary laid her hand on my shoulder, and, raising herself on
                              tiptoe, whispered in my ear:
“George, come home with me. I have got something to show you that is
                              better worth seeing than the ducks.”
“What is it?”
“It’s a surprise. I won’t tell you.”
“Will you give me a kiss?”
The charming little creature put her slim sun-burned arms round my neck,
                              and answered:
“As many kisses as you like, George.”
It was innocently said, on her side. It was innocently done, on mine.
                              The good easy bailiff, looking aside at the moment from his ducks,
                              discovered us pursuing our boy-and-girl courtship in each other’s
                              arms. He shook his big forefinger at us, with something of a sad and
                              doubting smile.
“Ah, Master George, Master George!” he said. “When your father comes
                              home, do you think he will approve of his son and heir kissing his
                              bailiff’s daughter?”
“When my father comes home,” I answered, with great dignity, “I shall
                              tell him the truth. I shall say I am going to marry your
                              daughter.”
The bailiff burst out laughing, and looked back again at his ducks.
“Well, well!” we heard him say to himself. “They’re only children.
                              There’s no call, poor things, to part them yet awhile.”
Mary and I had a great dislike to be called children. Properly
                              understood, one of us was a lady aged ten, and the other was a
                              gentleman aged thirteen. We left the good bailiff indignantly, and
                              went away together, hand in hand, to the cottage.

“HE is growing too fast,” said the doctor to my mother; “and he is
                              getting a great deal too clever for a boy at his age. Remove him from
                              school, ma’am, for six months; let him run about in the open air at
                              home; and if you find him with a book in his hand, take it away
                              directly. There is my prescription.”
Those words decided my fate in life.
In obedience to the doctor’s advice, I was left an idle boy—without
                              brothers, sisters, or companions of my own age—to roam about the
                              grounds of our lonely country-house. The bailiff’s daughter, like me,
                              was an only child; and, like me, she had no playfellows. We met in our
                              wanderings on the solitary shores of the lake. Beginning by being
                              inseparable companions, we ripened and developed into true lovers. Our
                              preliminary courtship concluded, we next proposed (before I returned
                              to school) to burst into complete maturity by becoming man and
                              wife.
I am not writing in jest. Absurd as it may appear to “sensible people,”
                              we two children were lovers, if ever there were lovers yet.
We had no pleasures apart from the one all-sufficient pleasure which we
                              found in each other’s society. We objected to the night, because it
                              parted us. We entreated our parents, on either side, to let us sleep
                              in the same room. I was angry with my mother, and Mary was
                              disappointed in her father, when they laughed at us, and wondered what
                              we should want next. Looking onward, from those days to the days of my
                              manhood, I can vividly recall such hours of happiness as have fallen
                              to my share. But I remember no delights of that later time comparable
                              to the exquisite and enduring pleasure that filled my young being when
                              I walked with Mary in the woods; when I sailed with Mary in my boat on
                              the lake; when I met Mary, after the cruel separation of the night,
                              and flew into her open arms as if we had been parted for months and
                              months together.
What was the attraction that drew us so closely one to the other, at an
                              age when the sexual sympathies lay dormant in her and in me?
We neither knew nor sought to know. We obeyed the impulse to love one
                              another, as a bird obeys the impulse to fly.
Let it not be supposed that we possessed any natural gifts, or
                              advantages which singled us out as differing in a marked way from
                              other children at our time of life. We possessed nothing of the sort.
                              I had been called a clever boy at school; but there were thousands of
                              other boys, at thousands of other schools, who headed their classes
                              and won their prizes, like me. Personally speaking, I was in no way
                              remarkable—except for being, in the ordinary phrase, “tall for my
                              age.” On her side, Mary displayed no striking attractions. She was a
                              fragile child, with mild gray eyes and a pale complexion; singularly
                              undemonstrative, singularly shy and silent, except when she was alone
                              with me. Such beauty as she had, in those early days, lay in a certain
                              artless purity and tenderness of expression, and in the charming
                              reddish-brown color of her hair, varying quaintly and prettily in
                              different lights. To all outward appearance two perfectly commonplace
                              children, we were mysteriously united by some kindred association of
                              the spirit in her and the spirit in me, which not only defied
                              discovery by our young selves, but which lay too deep for
                              investigation by far older and far wiser heads than ours.
You will naturally wonder whether anything was done by our elders to
                              check our precocious attachment, while it was still an innocent love
                              union between a boy and a girl.
Nothing was done by my father, for the simple reason that he was away
                              from home.
He was a man of a restless and speculative turn of mind. Inheriting his
                              estate burdened with debt, his grand ambition was to increase his
                              small available income by his own exertions; to set up an
                              establishment in London; and to climb to political distinction by the
                              ladder of Parliament. An old friend, who had emigrated to America, had
                              proposed to him a speculation in agriculture, in one of the Western
                              States, which was to make both their fortunes. My father’s eccentric
                              fancy was struck by the idea. For more than a year past he had been
                              away from us in the United States; and all we knew of him (instructed
                              by his letters) was, that he might be shortly expected to return to us
                              in the enviable character of one of the richest men in England.
As for my poor mother—the sweetest and softest-hearted of women—to see
                              me happy was all that she desired.
The quaint little love romance of the two children amused and interested
                              her. She jested with Mary’s father about the coming union between the
                              two families, without one serious thought of the future—without even a
                              foreboding of what might happen when my father returned. “Sufficient
                              for the day is the evil (or the good) thereof,” had been my mother’s
                              motto all her life. She agreed with the easy philosophy of the
                              bailiff, already recorded in these pages: “They’re only children.
                              There’s no call, poor things, to part them yet a while.”
There was one member of the family, however, who took a sensible and
                              serious view of the matter.
My father’s brother paid us a visit in our solitude; discovered what was
                              going on between Mary and me; and was, at first, naturally enough,
                              inclined to laugh at us. Closer investigation altered his way of
                              thinking. He became convinced that my mother was acting like a fool;
                              that the bailiff (a faithful servant, if ever there was one yet) was
                              cunningly advancing his own interests by means of his daughter; and
                              that I was a young idiot, who had developed his native reserves of
                              imbecility at an unusually early period of life. Speaking to my mother
                              under the influence of these strong impressions, my uncle offered to
                              take me back with him to London, and keep me there until I had been
                              brought to my senses by association with his own children, and by
                              careful superintendence under his own roof.
My mother hesitated about accepting this proposal; she had the advantage
                              over my uncle of understanding my disposition. While she was still
                              doubting, while my uncle was still impatiently waiting for her
                              decision, I settled the question for my elders by running away.
I left a letter to represent me in my absence; declaring that no mortal
                              power should part me from Mary, and promising to return and ask my
                              mother’s pardon as soon as my uncle had left the house. The strictest
                              search was made for me without discovering a trace of my place of
                              refuge. My uncle departed for London, predicting that I should live to
                              be a disgrace to the family, and announcing that he should transmit
                              his opinion of me to my father in America by the next mail.
The secret of the hiding-place in which I contrived to defy discovery is
                              soon told. I was hidden (without the bailiff’s knowledge) in the
                              bedroom of the bailiff’s mother. And did the bailiff’s mother know it?
                              you will ask. To which I answer: the bailiff’s mother did it. And,
                              what is more, gloried in doing it—not, observe, as an act of hostility
                              to my relatives, but simply as a duty that lay on her conscience.
What sort of old woman, in the name of all that is wonderful, was this?
                              Let her appear, and speak for herself—the wild and weird grandmother
                              of gentle little Mary; the Sibyl of modern times, known, far and wide,
                              in our part of Suffolk, as Dame Dermody.
I see her again, as I write, sitting in her son’s pretty cottage parlor,
                              hard by the window, so that the light fell over her shoulder while she
                              knitted or read. A little, lean, wiry old woman was Dame Dermody—with
                              fierce black eyes, surmounted by bushy white eyebrows, by a high
                              wrinkled forehead, and by thick white hair gathered neatly under her
                              old-fashioned “mob-cap.” Report whispered (and whispered truly) that
                              she had been a lady by birth and breeding, and that she had
                              deliberately closed her prospects in life by marrying a man greatly
                              her inferior in social rank. Whatever her family might think of her
                              marriage, she herself never regretted it. In her estimation her
                              husband’s memory was a sacred memory; his spirit was a guardian
                              spirit, watching over her, waking or sleeping, morning or night.
Holding this faith, she was in no respect influenced by those grossly
                              material ideas of modern growth which associate the presence of
                              spiritual beings with clumsy conjuring tricks and monkey antics
                              performed on tables and chairs. Dame Dermody’s nobler superstition
                              formed an integral part of her religious convictions—convictions which
                              had long since found their chosen resting-place in the mystic
                              doctrines of Emanuel Swedenborg. The only books which she read were
                              the works of the Swedish Seer. She mixed up Swedenborg’s teachings on
                              angels and departed spirits, on love to one’s neighbor and purity of
                              life, with wild fancies, and kindred beliefs of her own; and preached
                              the visionary religious doctrines thus derived, not only in the
                              bailiff’s household, but also on proselytizing expeditions to the
                              households of her humble neighbors, far and near.
Under her son’s roof—after the death of his wife—she reigned a supreme
                              power; priding herself alike on her close attention to her domestic
                              duties, and on her privileged communications with angels and spirits.
                              She would hold long colloquys with the spirit of her dead husband
                              before anybody who happened to be present—colloquys which struck the
                              simple spectators mute with terror. To her mystic view, the love union
                              between Mary and me was something too sacred and too beautiful to be
                              tried by the mean and matter-of-fact tests set up by society. She
                              wrote for us little formulas of prayer and praise, which we were to
                              use when we met and when we parted, day by day. She solemnly warned
                              her son to look upon us as two young consecrated creatures, walking
                              unconsciously on a heavenly path of their own, whose beginning was on
                              earth, but whose bright end was among the angels in a better state of
                              being. Imagine my appearing before such a woman as this, and telling
                              her with tears of despair that I was determined to die, rather than
                              let my uncle part me from little Mary, and you will no longer be
                              astonished at the hospitality which threw open to me the sanctuary of
                              Dame Dermody’s own room.
When the safe time came for leaving my hiding-place, I committed a
                              serious mistake. In thanking the old woman at parting, I said to her
                              (with a boy’s sense of honor), “I won’t tell upon you, Dame. My mother
                              shan’t know that you hid me in your bedroom.”
The Sibyl laid her dry, fleshless hand on my shoulder, and forced me
                              roughly back into the chair from which I had just risen.
“Boy!” she said, looking through and through me with her fierce black
                              eyes. “Do you dare suppose that I ever did anything that I was ashamed
                              of? Do you think I am ashamed of what I have done now? Wait there.
                              Your mother may mistake me too. I shall write to your mother.”
She put on her great round spectacles with tortoise-shell rims and sat
                              down to her letter. Whenever her thoughts flagged, whenever she was at
                              a loss for an expression, she looked over her shoulder, as if some
                              visible creature were stationed behind her, watching what she wrote;
                              consulted the spirit of her husband, exactly as she might have
                              consulted a living man; smiled softly to herself, and went on with her
                              writing.
“There!” she said, handing me the completed letter with an imperial
                              gesture of indulgence. “His mind and my mind are written there. Go, boy. I pardon
                              you. Give my letter to your mother.”
So she always spoke, with the same formal and measured dignity of manner
                              and language.
I gave the letter to my mother. We read it, and marveled over it
                              together. Thus, counseled by the ever-present spirit of her husband,
                              Dame Dermody wrote:
“MADAM—I have taken what you may be inclined to think a great liberty. I
                              have assisted your son George in setting his uncle’s authority at
                              defiance. I have encouraged your son George in his resolution to be
                              true, in time and in eternity, to my grandchild, Mary Dermody.
“It is due to you and to me that I should tell you with what motive I
                              have acted in doing these things.
“I hold the belief that all love that is true is foreordained and
                              consecrated in heaven. Spirits destined to be united in the better
                              world are divinely commissioned to discover each other and to begin
                              their union in this world. The only happy marriages are those in which
                              the two destined spirits have succeeded in meeting one another in this
                              sphere of life.
“When the kindred spirits have once met, no human power can really part
                              them. Sooner or later, they must, by divine law, find each other again
                              and become united spirits once more. Worldly wisdom may force them
                              into widely different ways of life; worldly wisdom may delude them, or
                              may make them delude themselves, into contracting an earthly and a
                              fallible union. It matters nothing. The time will certainly come when
                              that union will manifest itself as earthly and fallible; and the two
                              disunited spirits, finding each other again, will become united here
                              for the world beyond this—united, I tell you, in defiance of all human
                              laws and of all human notions of right and wrong.
“This is my belief. I have proved it by my own life. Maid, wife, and
                              widow, I have held to it, and I have found it good.
“I was born, madam, in the rank of society to which you belong. I
                              received the mean, material teaching which fulfills the worldly notion
                              of education. Thanks be to God, my kindred spirit met my spirit while I was still young. I knew true
                              love and true union before I was twenty years of age. I married,
                              madam, in the rank from which Christ chose his apostles—I married a
                              laboring-man. No human language can tell my happiness while we lived
                              united here. His death has not parted us. He helps me to write this
                              letter. In my last hours I shall see him standing among the angels,
                              waiting for me on the banks of the shining river.
“You will now understand the view I take of the tie which unites the
                              young spirits of our children at the bright outset of their lives.
“Believe me, the thing which your husband’s brother has proposed to you
                              to do is a sacrilege and a profanation. I own to you freely that I
                              look on what I have done toward thwarting your relative in this matter
                              as an act of virtue. You cannot expect me to
                              think it a serious obstacle to a union predestined in heaven, that
                              your son is the squire’s heir, and that my grandchild is only the
                              bailiff’s daughter. Dismiss from your mind, I implore you, the
                              unworthy and unchristian prejudices of rank. Are we not all equal
                              before God? Are we not all equal (even in this world) before disease
                              and death? Not your son’s happiness only, but your own peace of mind,
                              is concerned in taking heed to my words. I warn you, madam, you cannot
                              hinder the destined union of these two child-spirits, in after-years,
                              as man and wife. Part them now—and YOU will be responsible for the
                              sacrifices, degradations and distresses through which your George and
                              my Mary may be condemned to pass on their way back to each other in
                              later life.
“Now my mind is unburdened. Now I have said all.
“If I have spoken too freely, or have in any other way unwittingly
                              offended, I ask your pardon, and remain, madam, your faithful servant
                              and well-wisher, HELEN DERMODY.”
So the letter ended.
To me it is something more than a mere curiosity of epistolary
                              composition. I see in it the prophecy—strangely fulfilled in later
                              years—of events in Mary’s life, and in mine, which future pages are
                              now to tell.
My mother decided on leaving the letter unanswered. Like many of her
                              poorer neighbors, she was a little afraid of Dame Dermody; and she
                              was, besides, habitually averse to all discussions which turned on the
                              mysteries of spiritual life. I was reproved, admonished, and forgiven;
                              and there was the end of it.
For some happy weeks Mary and I returned, without hinderance or
                              interruption, to our old intimate companionship The end was coming,
                              however, when we least expected it. My mother was startled, one
                              morning, by a letter from my father, which informed her that he had
                              been unexpectedly obliged to sail for England at a moment’s notice;
                              that he had arrived in London, and that he was detained there by
                              business which would admit of no delay. We were to wait for him at
                              home, in daily expectation of seeing him the moment he was free.
This news filled my mother’s mind with foreboding doubts of the
                              stability of her husband’s grand speculation in America. The sudden
                              departure from the United States, and the mysterious delay in London,
                              were ominous, to her eyes, of misfortune to come. I am now writing of
                              those dark days in the past, when the railway and the electric
                              telegraph were still visions in the minds of inventors. Rapid
                              communication with my father (even if he would have consented to take
                              us into his confidence) was impossible. We had no choice but to wait
                              and hope.
The weary days passed; and still my father’s brief letters described him
                              as detained by his business. The morning came when Mary and I went out
                              with Dermody, the bailiff, to see the last wild fowl of the season
                              lured into the decoy; and still the welcome home waited for the
                              master, and waited in vain.

The narrative may now follow my little sweetheart and myself, on our way
                              to Dermody's cottage
As we approached the garden gate, I saw a servant from the house waiting
                              there. He carried a message from my mother—a message for me.
“My mistress wishes you to go home, Master George, as soon as you can. A
                              letter has come by the coach. My master means to take a post-chaise
                              from London, and sends word that we may expect him in the course of
                              the day.”
Mary’s attentive face saddened when she heard those words.
“Must you really go away, George,” she whispered, “before you see what I
                              have got waiting for you at home?”
I remembered Mary’s promised “surprise,” the secret of which was only to
                              be revealed to me when we got to the cottage. How could I disappoint
                              her? My poor little lady-love looked ready to cry at the bare prospect
                              of it.
I dismissed the servant with a message of the temporizing sort. My love
                              to my mother—and I would be back at the house in half an hour.
We entered the cottage.
Dame Dermody was sitting in the light of the window, as usual, with one
                              of the mystic books of Emanuel Swedenborg open on her lap. She
                              solemnly lifted her hand on our appearance, signing to us to occupy
                              our customary corner without speaking to her. It was an act of
                              domestic high treason to interrupt the Sibyl at her books. We crept
                              quietly into our places. Mary waited until she saw her grandmother’s
                              gray head bend down, and her grandmother’s bushy eyebrows contract
                              attentively, over her reading. Then, and then only, the discreet child
                              rose on tiptoe, disappeared noiselessly in the direction of her
                              bedchamber, and came back to me carrying something carefully wrapped
                              up in her best cambric handkerchief.
“Is that the surprise?” I whispered.
Mary whispered back: “Guess what it is?”
“Something for me?”
“Yes. Go on guessing. What is it?”
I guessed three times, and each guess was wrong. Mary decided on helping
                              me by a hint.
“Say your letters,” she suggested; “and go on till I stop you.”
I began: “A, B, C, D, E, F—” There she stopped me.
“It’s the name of a Thing,” she said; “and it begins with F.”
I guessed, “Fern,” “Feather,” “Fife.” And here my resources failed
                              me.
Mary sighed, and shook her head. “You don’t take pains,” she said. “You
                              are three whole years older than I am. After all the trouble I have
                              taken to please you, you may be too big to care for my present when
                              you see it. Guess again.”
“I can’t guess.”
“You must!”
“I give it up.”
Mary refused to let me give it up. She helped me by another hint.
“What did you once say you wished you had in your boat?” she asked.
“Was it long ago?” I inquired, at a loss for an answer.
“Long, long ago! Before the winter. When the autumn leaves were falling,
                              and you took me out one evening for a sail. Ah, George, you have forgotten!”
Too true, of me and of my brethren, old and young alike! It is always
                                   his love that forgets, and her love that remembers. We were only two
                              children, and we were types of the man and the woman already.
Mary lost patience with me. Forgetting the terrible presence of her
                              grandmother, she jumped up, and snatched the concealed object out of
                              her handkerchief.
“There!” she cried, briskly, “now do you know
                              what it is?”
I remembered at last. The thing I had wished for in my boat, all those
                              months ago, was a new flag. And here was the flag, made for me in
                              secret by Mary’s own hand! The ground was green silk, with a dove
                              embroidered on it in white, carrying in its beak the typical
                              olive-branch, wrought in gold thread. The work was the tremulous,
                              uncertain work of a child’s fingers. But how faithfully my little
                              darling had remembered my wish! how patiently she had plied the needle
                              over the traced lines of the pattern! how industriously she had
                              labored through the dreary winter days! and all for my sake! What
                              words could tell my pride, my gratitude, my happiness?
I too forgot the presence of the Sibyl bending over her book. I took the
                              little workwoman in my arms, and kissed her till I was fairly out of
                              breath and could kiss no longer.
“Mary!” I burst out, in the first heat of my enthusiasm, “my father is
                              coming home to-day. I will speak to him to-night. And I will marry you
                              to-morrow!”
“Boy!” said the awful voice at the other end of the room. “Come
                              here.”
Dame Dermody’s mystic book was closed; Dame Dermody’s weird black eyes
                              were watching us in our corner. I approached her; and Mary followed me
                              timidly, by a footstep at a time.
The Sibyl took me by the hand, with a caressing gentleness which was new
                              in my experience of her.
“Do you prize that toy?” she inquired, looking at the flag. “Hide it!”
                              she cried, before I could answer. “Hide it—or it may be taken from
                              you!”
“Why should I hide it?” I asked. “I want to fly it at the mast of my
                              boat.”
“You will never fly it at the mast of your boat!” With that answer she
                              took the flag from me and thrust it impatiently into the breast-pocket
                              of my jacket.
“Don’t crumple it, grandmother!” said Mary, piteously.
I repeated my question:
“Why shall I never fly it at the mast of my boat?”
Dame Dermody laid her hand on the closed volume of Swedenborg lying in
                              her lap.
“Three times I have opened this book since the morning,” she said.
                              “Three times the words of the prophet warn me that there is trouble
                              coming. Children, it is trouble that is coming to You. I look there,”
                              she went on, pointing to the place where a ray of sunlight poured
                              slanting into the room, “and I see my husband in the heavenly light.
                              He bows his head in grief, and he points his unerring hand at You.
                              George and Mary, you are consecrated to each other! Be always worthy
                              of your consecration; be always worthy of yourselves.” She paused. Her
                              voice faltered. She looked at us with softening eyes, as those look
                              who know sadly that there is a parting at hand. “Kneel!” she said, in
                              low tones of awe and grief. “It may be the last time I bless you—it
                              may be the last time I pray over you, in this house. Kneel!”
We knelt close together at her feet. I could feel Mary’s heart
                              throbbing, as she pressed nearer and nearer to my side. I could feel
                              my own heart quickening its beat, with a fear that was a mystery to
                              me.
“God bless and keep George and Mary, here and hereafter! God prosper, in
                              future days, the union which God’s wisdom has willed! Amen. So be it.
                              Amen.”
As the last words fell from her lips the cottage door was thrust open.
                              My father—followed by the bailiff—entered the room.
Dame Dermody got slowly on her feet, and looked at him with a stern
                              scrutiny.
“It has come,” she said to herself. “It looks with the eyes—it will
                              speak with the voice—of that man.”
My father broke the silence that followed, addressing himself to the
                              bailiff.
“You see, Dermody,” he said, “here is my son in your cottage—when he
                              ought to be in my house.” He turned, and looked at me as I stood with
                              my arm round little Mary, patiently waiting for my opportunity to
                              speak. “George,” he said, with the hard smile which was peculiar to
                              him, when he was angry and was trying to hide it, “you are making a
                              fool of yourself there. Leave that child, and come to me.”
Now, or never, was my time to declare myself. Judging by appearances, I
                              was still a boy. Judging by my own sensations, I had developed into a
                              man at a moment’s notice.
“Papa,” I said, “I am glad to see you home again. This is Mary Dermody.
                              I am in love with her, and she is in love with me. I wish to marry her
                              as soon as it is convenient to my mother and you.”
My father burst out laughing. Before I could speak again, his humor
                              changed. He had observed that Dermody, too, presumed to be amused. He
                              seemed to become mad with anger, all in a moment.
“I have been told of this infernal tomfoolery,” he said, “but I didn’t
                              believe it till now. Who has turned the boy’s weak head? Who has
                              encouraged him to stand there hugging that girl? If it’s you, Dermody,
                              it shall be the worst day’s work you ever did in your life.” He turned
                              to me again, before the bailiff could defend himself. “Do you hear
                              what I say? I tell you to leave Dermody’s girl, and come home with
                              me.”
“Yes, papa,” I answered. “But I must go back to Mary, if you please,
                              after I have been with you.”
Angry as he was, my father was positively staggered by my audacity.
“You young idiot, your insolence exceeds belief!” he burst out. “I tell
                              you this: you will never darken these doors again! You have been
                              taught to disobey me here. You have had things put into your head,
                              here, which no boy of your age ought to know—I’ll say more, which no
                              decent people would have let you know.”
“I beg your pardon, sir,” Dermody interposed, very respectfully and very
                              firmly at the same time. “There are many things which a master in a
                              hot temper is privileged to say to the man who serves him. But you
                              have gone beyond your privilege. You have shamed me, sir, in the
                              presence of my mother, in the hearing of my child—”
My father checked him there.
“You may spare the rest of it,” he said. “We are master and servant no
                              longer. When my son came hanging about your cottage, and playing at
                              sweethearts with your girl there, your duty was to close the door on
                              him. You have failed in your duty. I trust you no longer. Take a
                              month’s notice, Dermody. You leave my service.”
The bailiff steadily met my father on his ground. He was no longer the
                              easy, sweet-tempered, modest man who was the man of my
                              remembrance.
“I beg to decline taking your month’s notice, sir,” he answered. “You
                              shall have no opportunity of repeating what you have just said to me.
                              I will send in my accounts to-night. And I will leave your service
                              to-morrow.”
“We agree for once,” retorted my father. “The sooner you go, the
                              better.”
He stepped across the room and put his hand on my shoulder.
“Listen to me,” he said, making a last effort to control himself. “I
                              don’t want to quarrel with you before a discarded servant. There must
                              be an end to this nonsense. Leave these people to pack up and go, and
                              come back to the house with me.”
His heavy hand, pressing on my shoulder, seemed to press the spirit of
                              resistance out of me. I so far gave way as to try to melt him by
                              entreaties.
“Oh, papa! papa!” I cried. “Don’t part me from Mary! See how pretty and
                              good she is! She has made me a flag for my boat. Let me come here and
                              see her sometimes. I can’t live without her.”
I could say no more. My poor little Mary burst out crying. Her tears and
                              my entreaties were alike wasted on my father.
“Take your choice,” he said, “between coming away of your own accord, or
                              obliging me to take you away by force. I mean to part you and
                              Dermody’s girl.”
“Neither you nor any man can part them,” interposed a voice, speaking
                              behind us. “Rid your mind of that notion, master, before it is too
                              late.”
My father looked round quickly, and discovered Dame Dermody facing him
                              in the full light of the window. She had stepped back, at the outset
                              of the dispute, into the corner behind the fireplace. There she had
                              remained, biding her time to speak, until my father’s last threat
                              brought her out of her place of retirement.
They looked at each other for a moment. My father seemed to think it
                              beneath his dignity to answer her. He went on with what he had to say
                              to me.
“I shall count three slowly,” he resumed. “Before I get to the last
                              number, make up your mind to do what I tell you, or submit to the
                              disgrace of being taken away by force.”
“Take him where you may,” said Dame Dermody, “he will still be on his
                              way to his marriage with my grandchild.”
“And where shall I be, if you please?” asked my father, stung into
                              speaking to her this time.
The answer followed instantly in these startling words:
“You will be on your way to your ruin and your
                              death.”
My father turned his back on the prophetess with a smile of
                              contempt.
“One!” he said, beginning to count.
I set my teeth, and clasped both arms round Mary as he spoke. I had
                              inherited some of his temper, and he was now to know it.
“Two!” proceeded my father, after waiting a little.
Mary put her trembling lips to my ear, and whispered: “Let me go,
                              George! I can’t bear to see it. Oh, look how he frowns! I know he’ll
                              hurt you.”
My father lifted his forefinger as a preliminary warning before he
                              counted Three.
“Stop!” cried Dame Dermody.
My father looked round at her again with sardonic astonishment.
“I beg your pardon, ma’am—have you anything particular to say to me?” he
                              asked.
“Man!” returned the Sibyl, “you speak lightly. Have I spoken lightly to
                              You? I warn you to bow your wicked will before a Will that is mightier
                              than yours. The spirits of these children are kindred spirits. For
                              time and for eternity they are united one to the other. Put land and
                              sea between them—they will still be together; they will communicate in
                              visions, they will be revealed to each other in dreams. Bind them by
                              worldly ties; wed your son, in the time to come, to another woman, and
                              my grand-daughter to another man. In vain! I tell you, in vain! You
                              may doom them to misery, you may drive them to sin—the day of their
                              union on earth is still a day predestined in heaven. It will come! it
                              will come! Submit, while the time for submission is yours. You are a
                              doomed man. I see the shadow of disaster, I see the seal of death, on
                              your face. Go; and leave these consecrated ones to walk the dark ways
                              of the world together, in the strength of their innocence, in the
                              light of their love. Go—and God forgive you!” In spite of himself, my
                              father was struck by the irresistible strength of conviction which
                              inspired those words. The bailiff’s mother had impressed him as a
                              tragic actress might have impressed him on the stage. She had checked
                              the mocking answer on his lips, but she had not shaken his iron will.
                              His face was as hard as ever when he turned my way once more.
“The last chance, George,” he said, and counted the last number:
                              “Three!”
I neither moved nor answered him.
“You will have it?” he said, as he fastened his
                              hold on my arm.
I fastened my hold on Mary; I whispered to her,
                              “I won’t leave you!” She seemed not to hear me. She trembled from head
                              to foot in my arms. A faint cry of terror fluttered from her lips.
                              Dermody instantly stepped forward. Before my father could wrench me
                              away from her, he had said in my ear, “You can give her to me, Master George,” and had released his child
                              from my embrace. She stretched her little frail hands out yearningly
                              to me, as she lay in Dermody’s arms. “Good-by, dear,” she said,
                              faintly. I saw her head sink on her father’s bosom as I was dragged to
                              the door. In my helpless rage and misery, I struggled against the
                              cruel hands that had got me with all the strength I had left. I cried
                              out to her, “I love you, Mary! I will come back to you, Mary! I will
                              never marry any one but you!” Step by step, I was forced further and
                              further away. The last I saw of her, my darling’s head was still
                              resting on Dermody’s breast. Her grandmother stood near, and shook her
                              withered hands at my father, and shrieked her terrible prophecy, in
                              the hysteric frenzy that possessed her when she saw the separation
                              accomplished. “Go!—you go to your ruin! you go to your death!” While
                              her voice still rang in my ears, the cottage door was opened and
                              closed again. It was all over. The modest world of my boyish love and
                              my boyish joy disappeared like the vision of a dream. The empty outer
                              wilderness, which was my father’s world, opened before me void of love
                              and void of joy. God forgive me—how I hated him at that moment!

FOR the rest of the day, and through the night, I was kept a close
                              prisoner in my room, watched by a man on whose fidelity my father
                              could depend.
The next morning I made an effort to escape, and was discovered before I
                              had got free of the house. Confined again to my room, I contrived to
                              write to Mary, and to slip my note into the willing hand of the
                              housemaid who attended on me. Useless! The vigilance of my guardian
                              was not to be evaded. The woman was suspected and followed, and the
                              letter was taken from her. My father tore it up with his own
                              hands.
Later in the day, my mother was permitted to see me.
She was quite unfit, poor soul, to intercede for me, or to serve my
                              interests in any way. My father had completely overwhelmed her by
                              announcing that his wife and his son were to accompany him, when he
                              returned to America.
“Every farthing he has in the world,” said my mother, “is to be thrown
                              into that hateful speculation. He has raised money in London; he has
                              let the house to some rich tradesman for seven years; he has sold the
                              plate, and the jewels that came to me from his mother. The land in
                              America swallows it all up. We have no home, George, and no choice but
                              to go with him.”
An hour afterward the post-chaise was at the door.
My father himself took me to the carriage. I broke away from him, with a
                              desperation which not even his resolution could resist. I ran, I flew,
                              along the path that led to Dermody’s cottage. The door stood open; the
                              parlor was empty. I went into the kitchen; I went into the upper
                              rooms. Solitude everywhere. The bailiff had left the place; and his
                              mother and his daughter had gone with him. No friend or neighbor
                              lingered near with a message; no letter lay waiting for me; no hint
                              was left to tell me in what direction they had taken their departure.
                              After the insulting words which his master had spoken to him,
                              Dermody’s pride was concerned in leaving no trace of his whereabouts;
                              my father might consider it as a trace purposely left with the object
                              of reuniting Mary and me. I had no keepsake to speak to me of my lost
                              darling but the flag which she had embroidered with her own hand. The
                              furniture still remained in the cottage. I sat down in our customary
                              corner, by Mary’s empty chair, and looked again at the pretty green
                              flag, and burst out crying.
A light touch roused me. My father had so far yielded as to leave to my
                              mother the responsibility of bringing me back to the traveling
                              carriage.
“We shall not find Mary here, George,” she said, gently. “And we may hear of her in London. Come with me.”
I rose and silently gave her my hand. Something low down on the clean
                              white door-post caught my eye as we passed it. I stooped, and
                              discovered some writing in pencil. I looked closer—it was writing in
                              Mary’s hand! The unformed childish characters traced these last words
                              of farewell:
“Good-by, dear. Don’t forget Mary.”
I knelt down and kissed the writing. It comforted me—it was like a
                              farewell touch from Mary’s hand. I followed my mother quietly to the
                              carriage.
Late that night we were in London.
My good mother did all that the most compassionate kindness could do (in
                              her position) to comfort me. She privately wrote to the solicitors
                              employed by her family, inclosing a description of Dermody and his
                              mother and daughter and directing inquiries to be made at the various
                              coach-offices in London. She also referred the lawyers to two of
                              Dermody’s relatives, who lived in the city, and who might know
                              something of his movements after he left my father’s service. When she
                              had done this, she had done all that lay in her power. We neither of
                              us possessed money enough to advertise in the newspapers.
A week afterward we sailed for the United States. Twice in that interval
                              I communicated with the lawyers; and twice I was informed that the
                              inquiries had led to nothing.
With this the first epoch in my love story comes to an end.
For ten long years afterward I never again met with my little Mary; I
                              never even heard whether she had lived to grow to womanhood or not. I
                              still kept the green flag, with the dove worked on it. For the rest,
                              the waters of oblivion had closed over the old golden days at
                              Greenwater Broad.
The end of the prelude
