
CHAPTER XXII. SHE CLAIMS ME AGAIN.
THE moments passed; the silence between us continued. Miss Dunross
                                   made an attempt to rouse me.
“Have you decided to go back to Scotland with your friends at
                                   Lerwick?” she asked.
“It is no easy matter,” I replied, “to decide on leaving my friends
                                   in this house.”
Her head drooped lower on her bosom; her voice sunk as she answered
                                   me.
“Think of your mother,” she said. “The first duty you owe is your
                                   duty to her. Your long absence is a heavy trial to her—your
                                   mother is suffering.”
“Suffering?” I repeated. “Her letters say nothing—”
“You forget that you have allowed me to read her letters,” Miss
                                   Dunross interposed. “I see the unwritten and unconscious
                                   confession of anxiety in every line that she writes to you. You
                                   know, as well as I do, that there is cause for her anxiety. Make
                                   her happy by telling her that you sail for home with your
                                   friends. Make her happier still by telling her that you grieve no
                                   more over the loss of Mrs. Van Brandt. May I write it, in your
                                   name and in those words?”
I felt the strangest reluctance to permit her to write in those
                                   terms, or in any terms, of Mrs. Van Brandt. The unhappy
                                   love-story of my manhood had never been a forbidden subject
                                   between us on former occasions. Why did I feel as if it had
                                   become a forbidden subject now? Why did I evade giving her a
                                   direct reply?
“We have plenty of time before us,” I said. “I want to speak to you
                                   about yourself.”
She lifted her hand in the obscurity that surrounded her, as if to
                                   protest against the topic to which I had returned. I persisted,
                                   nevertheless, in returning to it.
“If I must go back,” I went on, “I may venture to say to you at
                                   parting what I have not said yet. I cannot, and will not, believe
                                   that you are an incurable invalid. My education, as I have told
                                   you, has been the education of a medical man. I am well
                                   acquainted with some of the greatest living physicians, in
                                   Edinburgh as well as in London. Will you allow me to describe
                                   your malady (as I understand it) to men who are accustomed to
                                   treat cases of intricate nervous disorder? And will you let me
                                   write and tell you the result?”
I waited for her reply. Neither by word nor sign did she encourage
                                   the idea of any future communication with her. I ventured to
                                   suggest another motive which might induce her to receive a letter
                                   from me.
“In any case, I may find it necessary to write to you,” I went on.
                                   “You firmly believe that I and my little Mary are destined to
                                   meet again. If your anticipations are realized, you will expect
                                   me to tell you of it, surely?”
Once more I waited. She spoke—but it was not to reply: it was only
                                   to change the subject.
“The time is passing,” was all she said. “We have not begun your
                                   letter to your mother yet.”
It would have been cruel to contend with her any longer. Her voice
                                   warned me that she was suffering. The faint gleam of light
                                   through the parted curtains was fading fast. It was time, indeed,
                                   to write the letter. I could find other opportunities of speaking
                                   to her before I left the house.
“I am ready,” I answered. “Let us begin.”
The first sentence was easily dictated to my patient secretary. I
                                   informed my mother that my sprained wrist was nearly restored to
                                   use, and that nothing prevented my leaving Shetland when the
                                   lighthouse commissioner was ready to return. This was all that it
                                   was necessary to say on the subject of my health; the disaster of
                                   my re-opened wound having been, for obvious reasons, concealed
                                   from my mother’s knowledge. Miss Dunross silently wrote the
                                   opening lines of the letter, and waited for the words that were
                                   to follow.
In my next sentence, I announced the date at which the vessel was
                                   to sail on the return voyage; and I mentioned the period at which
                                   my mother might expect to see me, weather permitting. Those
                                   words, also, Miss Dunross wrote—and waited again. I set myself to
                                   consider what I should say next. To my surprise and alarm, I
                                   found it impossible to fix my mind on the subject. My thoughts
                                   wandered away, in the strangest manner, from my letter to Mrs.
                                   Van Brandt. I was ashamed of myself; I was angry with myself—I
                                   resolved, no matter what I said, that I would positively finish
                                   the letter. No! try as I might, the utmost effort of my will
                                   availed me nothing. Mrs. Van Brandt’s words at our last interview
                                   were murmuring in my ears—not a word of my own would come to
                                   me!
Miss Dunross laid down her pen, and slowly turned her head to look
                                   at me.
“Surely you have something more to add to your letter?” she
                                   said.
“Certainly,” I answered. “I don’t know what is the matter with me.
                                   The effort of dictating seems to be beyond my power this
                                   evening.”
“Can I help you?” she asked.
I gladly accepted the suggestion. “There are many things,” I said,
                                   “which my mother would be glad to hear, if I were not too stupid
                                   to think of them. I am sure I may trust your sympathy to think of
                                   them for me.”
That rash answer offered Miss Dunross the opportunity of returning
                                   to the subject of Mrs. Van Brandt. She seized the opportunity
                                   with a woman’s persistent resolution when she has her end in
                                   view, and is determined to reach it at all hazards.
“You have not told your mother yet,” she said, “that your
                                   infatuation for Mrs. Van Brandt is at an end. Will you put it in
                                   your own words? Or shall I write it for you, imitating your
                                   language as well as I can?”
In the state of my mind at that moment, her perseverance conquered
                                   me. I thought to myself indolently, “If I say No, she will only
                                   return to the subject again, and she will end (after all I owe to
                                   her kindness) in making me say Yes.” Before I could answer her
                                   she had realized my anticipations. She returned to the subject;
                                   and she made me say Yes.
“What does your silence mean?” she said. “Do you ask me to help
                                   you, and do you refuse to accept the first suggestion I
                                   offer?”
“Take up your pen,” I rejoined. “It shall be as you wish.”
“Will you dictate the words?”
“I will try.”
I tried; and this time I succeeded. With the image of Mrs. Van
                                   Brandt vividly present to my mind, I arranged the first words of
                                   the sentence which was to tell my mother that my “infatuation”
                                   was at an end!
“You will be glad to hear,” I began, “that time and change are
                                   doing their good work.”
Miss Dunross wrote the words, and paused in anticipation of the
                                   next sentence. The light faded and faded; the room grew darker
                                   and darker. I went on.
“I hope I shall cause you no more anxiety, my dear mother, on the
                                   subject of Mrs. Van Brandt.”
In the deep silence I could hear the pen of my secretary traveling
                                   steadily over the paper while it wrote those words.
“Have you written?” I asked, as the sound of the pen ceased.
“I have written,” she answered, in her customary quiet tones.
I went on again with my letter.
“The days pass now, and I seldom or never think of her; I hope I am
                                   resigned at last to the loss of Mrs. Van Brandt.”
As I reached the end of the sentence, I heard a faint cry from Miss
                                   Dunross. Looking instantly toward her, I could just see, in the
                                   deepening darkness, t hat her head had fallen on the back of the
                                   chair. My first impulse was, of course, to rise and go to her. I
                                   had barely got to my feet, when some indescribable dread
                                   paralyzed me on the instant. Supporting myself against the
                                   chimney-piece, I stood perfectly incapable of advancing a step.
                                   The effort to speak was the one effort that I could make.
“Are you ill?” I asked.
She was hardly able to answer me; speaking in a whisper, without
                                   raising her head.
“I am frightened,” she said.
“What has frightened you?”
I heard her shudder in the darkness. Instead of answering me, she
                                   whispered to herself: “What am I to say to him?”
“Tell me what has frightened you?” I repeated. “You know you may
                                   trust me with the truth.”
She rallied her sinking strength. She answered in these strange
                                   words:
“Something has come between me and the letter that I am writing for
                                   you.”
“What is it?”
“I can’t tell you.”
“Can you see it?”
“No.”
“Can you feel it?”
“Yes!”
“What is it like?”
“Like a breath of cold air between me and the letter.”
“Has the window come open?”
“The window is close shut.”
“And the door?”
“The door is shut also—as well as I can see. Make sure of it for
                                   yourself. Where are you? What are you doing?”
I was looking toward the window. As she spoke her last words, I was
                                   conscious of a change in that part of the room.
In the gap between the parted curtains there was a new light
                                   shining; not the dim gray twilight of Nature, but a pure and
                                   starry radiance, a pale, unearthly light. While I watched it, the
                                   starry radiance quivered as if some breath of air had stirred it.
                                   When it was still again, there dawned on me through the unearthly
                                   luster the figure of a woman. By fine and slow gradations, it
                                   became more and more distinct. I knew the noble figure; I knew
                                   the sad and tender smile. For the second time I stood in the
                                   presence of the apparition of Mrs. Van Brandt.
She was robed, not as I had last seen her, but in the dress which
                                   she had worn on the memorable evening when we met on the
                                   bridge—in the dress in which she had first appeared to me, by the
                                   waterfall in Scotland. The starry light shone round her like a
                                   halo. She looked at me with sorrowful and pleading eyes, as she
                                   had looked when I saw the apparition of her in the summer-house.
                                   She lifted her hand—not beckoning me to approach her, as before,
                                   but gently signing to me to remain where I stood.
I waited—feeling awe, but no fear. My heart was all hers as I
                                   looked at her.
She moved; gliding from the window to the chair in which Miss
                                   Dunross sat; winding her way slowly round it, until she stood at
                                   the back. By the light of the pale halo that encircled the
                                   ghostly Presence, and moved with it, I could see the dark figure
                                   of the living woman seated immovable in the chair. The
                                   writing-case was on her lap, with the letter and the pen lying on
                                   it. Her arms hung helpless at her sides; her veiled head was now
                                   bent forward. She looked as if she had been struck to stone in
                                   the act of trying to rise from her seat.
A moment passed—and I saw the ghostly Presence stoop over the
                                   living woman. It lifted the writing-case from her lap. It rested
                                   the writing-case on her shoulder. Its white fingers took the pen
                                   and wrote on the unfinished letter. It put the writing-case back
                                   on the lap of the living woman. Still standing behind the chair,
                                   it turned toward me. It looked at me once more. And now it
                                   beckoned—beckoned to me to approach.
Moving without conscious will of my own, as I had moved when I
                                   first saw her in the summer-house—drawn nearer and nearer by an
                                   irresistible power—I approached and stopped within a few paces of
                                   her. She advanced and laid her hand on my bosom. Again I felt
                                   those strangely mingled sensations of rapture and awe, which had
                                   once before filled me when I was conscious, spiritually, of her
                                   touch. Again she spoke, in the low, melodious tones which I
                                   recalled so well. Again she said the words: “Remember me. Come to
                                   me.” Her hand dropped from my bosom. The pale light in which she
                                   stood quivered, sunk, vanished. I saw the twilight glimmering
                                   between the curtains—and I saw no more. She had spoken. She had
                                   gone.
I was near Miss Dunross—near enough, when I put out my hand, to
                                   touch her.
She started and shuddered, like a woman suddenly awakened from a
                                   dreadful dream.
“Speak to me!” she whispered. “Let me know that it is you who touched me.”
I spoke a few composing words before I questioned her.
“Have you seen anything in the room?”
She answered. “I have been filled with a deadly fear. I have seen
                                   nothing but the writing-case lifted from my lap.”
“Did you see the hand that lifted it?”
“No.”
“Did you see a starry light, and a figure standing in it?”
“No.”
“Did you see the writing-case after it was lifted from your
                                   lap?”
“I saw it resting on my shoulder.”
“Did you see writing on the letter, which was not your writing?”
“I saw a darker shadow on the paper than the shadow in which I am
                                   sitting.”
“Did it move?”
“It moved across the paper.”
“As a pen moves in writing?”
“Yes. As a pen moves in writing.”
“May I take the letter?”
She handed it to me.
“May I light a candle?”
She drew her veil more closely over her face, and bowed in
                                   silence.
I lighted the candle on the mantel-piece, and looked for the
                                   writing.
There, on the blank space in the letter, as I had seen it before on
                                   the blank space in the sketch-book—there were the written words
                                   which the ghostly Presence had left behind it; arranged once more
                                   in two lines, as I copy them here:
At the month’s end, In the shadow of Saint Paul’s.
