

FRIENDS IN COUNCIL
GOING out again, John?' spoke Mrs Hatfield, a little plaintively, as her husband rose and
     took down his hat from its peg, ten days after Thornsett Mill had been closed. Not closed for a
     day on account of a wedding, as had once been suggested, but closed, it might be for ten years,
     or practically for ever.
'Ay, lass,' said her husband shortly, but not unkindly; 'Ah should go clean daft if Ah stayed
     i' the house. Lazying about don't suit me—it's only my betters as takes their pleasure i' that
     way.'
'Tha'lt do no good down at t' Spotted Cow,' returned Mrs Hatfield, compressing her lips; 'tha
     might as well be idle i' tha own house as wi' all they gomerils—spending tha money too, as if
     tha was i' full work.'
'Well,' he said, pausing with his hand on the back of the settle where she sat, 'we'll all
     have to be shifting out o' this soon, and tha knows, lass, as Ah were never one to drink nor to
     talk out o' season. Ah mun hear where the lads is going for work. It won't ne'er do for us a'
     to be going the same way.'
'It seems hard tha should have to go after work at tha time o' life, John. But likely it's as
     hard for Rowley and Dick as for thee and me. Poor lads, poor lads! Ah, Heaven help us a' in
     this hard world.'
'They're fur enow fro' want, tha may be sure, or they wouldn't  ha' sacrificed
     the mill to their mucky pride. It's little they care who starves, so long as they have enow.
     Tha must remember as what they'd call being poor we'd call being rich. "Hard up" for a
     gentleman ud be enow and to spare for a working man.'
And he went out, slamming the door behind him, and his wife took up her knitting with a sigh.
     She could rarely follow her husband in his reasonings, but troubles are not the less hard to
     bear because we don't clearly see their causes. They had saved a little money, but that would
     soon be gone, and then there would be nothing before them but 'the house.' Both their sons were
     away—one a sailor, and the other in a warehouse in Liverpool—but neither was earning enough to
     be able to help their parents. Vaguely she hoped that her husband might take it into his head
     to go to London for work. An idea is prevalent in the provinces that in London there is work
     for every one, and besides, Alice had written from London, and there would be a chance of
     finding her poor lost child and bringing her back.
The sudden closing of the mill made affairs indeed terribly serious for most of the men in
     Thornsett. It was in the middle of winter, when journeying was not pleasant, nor work easy to
     get; and though the 'hands' employed in the mill had been told that it would close, very, very
     few among them had made any effort to secure other work before the time for closing came.
     Perhaps it had seemed to them that the closing of the mill was one of those calamities too
     terrible to happen. But it had happened, and after ten days of idleness the men were beginning
     to see clearly what it would mean to them. For there was no other work to be got within
     anything like easy reach of the village; and even if work could be obtained somewhere else, the
     little community must be broken up, and each family must separate itself from friends and
     neighbours and relatives in order to journey thither. This alone is thought a terrible calamity
     for middle-class men and women, but it is the least of the  troubles which are
     always hanging over the heads of the workers. The exodus that must shortly take place had not
     yet begun, but every one knew that it could not now be long delayed; and Potters and the few
     other tradespeople being, of course, involved in the general distress, could no longer give
     credit. This had never been withheld in slack times, when the shopkeepers knew that good ones
     were certain to come in which the scores would be wiped off or reduced very considerably; but
     now there was no chance of things growing brighter again, and even the small accounts then
     owing were not very likely ever to be paid.
During the past ten days, as the men's money was being spent, and as the want of work gave
     them more time to reason on the causes of their trouble, a strong feeling of resentment had
     been growing up among them against the two young masters, who had held, as it were, the
     happiness, the comfort, perhaps the lives, of all these men in their hands, and had thrown all
     to the dogs rather than humble their own insensate pride and abate their own insensate
     obstinacy. This feeling had found vent, not only in the scowls and black looks on which
     Litvinoff had commented, but in certain faint groans and hisses with which Roland had been
     greeted on more than one occasion when he passed down the village street.
What right had these two, on whose forbearance and good fellowship hung the fate of all these
     families, to go quarrelling with each other?
'It's a' their darn'd selfishness,' Murdoch was saying, just as Hatfield kicked open the door
     of the tap-room at the Spotted Cow, and passed in. 'What's the odds to them if we clem or if we
     dunna't?'
'It's my belief,' said Potters bitterly, 'as they done it to show their independence.'
'They might have hit on a cheaper way,' growled Hatfield, as Murdoch and Sigley made room for
     him to sit between them.

'Cheaper! why, what's cheaper nor our flesh and blood?' asked Murdoch, with a snarl. 'They
     can afford to chuck a little o' that away. They can get more of it when they want it easy
     enow.'
'Ay, that's it, lad,' said Hatfield. 'It's the flesh and blood o' some o' us that's here
     still, and more o' us that's dead and gone, that's made the bit o' money they'll live on for
     the rest o' their days.'
'Well, I don't quite see that,' muttered Sigley, with his usual meekness. 'They've always
     paid fair wages.'
'Yes,' answered Hatfield. 'Ah never said they took it for nothing. They paid for it right
     enow, but they bought it cheap, lad—they bought it cheap, and they sold it at a good profit.
     We've nowt but our flesh and blood to sell, and now we mun carry it to another market.'
'If you mean your work,' put in the landlord, 'I don't see as you ought to talk i' that way.
     They paid you your own price for your work, anyhow.'
'No,' said Hatfield. 'They paid us what we was forced to take.'
'Thou'dst always some sense i' tha head, John,' broke in old Murdoch approvingly. 'Tha was na
     here when.... D'ye mind, Bolt, the night after t'owd master's burying, tha made the lads drink
     t' young masters' health? Ask them to drink it now!'
The murmur of ironical assent which went round the room showed that Murdoch had expressed the
     sense of the meeting. He had been rising in importance daily, ever since the announcement of
     the mill's closing. He had always been the prophet of calamity, and now that his worst
     prophecies had been more than fulfilled he was looked upon as little less than inspired.
'Well,' said Bolt deprecatingly, 'who could ha' foreseen things turning out i' this way? And
     as for asking them to drink their healths, why they ain't their masters now. So where's the
     use?'
'It do seem hard, it do,' murmured Sigley, who went to chapel regularly, 'when a man have
     saved up a bit to have it  all swept away in a rushing, mighty wind, and us left,
     like Pharaoh's lean kine, to make bricks without straw. The whole creation groaneth!...'
'Well, don't groan here,' interrupted Murdoch grimly; 'tha'd best do tha groanin' wi' the
     rest o' creation at t' chapel; and well mayst tha groan there if tha hears tell o' cows makin'
     bricks.'
'Them as don't believe in the Bible,' said Sigley impressively, giving voice to a very
     popular belief, 'can't look for a blessing.'
'Nor yet them as does, it seems.'
'What ah was going to say was this—as we should take comfort, thinking as we ain't the only
     ones.'
'Comfort, tha loon!—that's the hell of it! Damn the man, says I, as can find comfort i' t'
     thought o' other men's misery!'
It was Hatfield who spoke, and as he spoke he brought his fist down on the table with a bang
     that made the glasses ring.
'How tha does take on, John,' said Bolt. 'What Sigley meant was only as it shows you ain't to
     blame, seeing as so many others is in the same fix.'
Sigley did not confirm this interpretation. He only shook his head, with the air of one who
     had meant something much more pious and profound.
'You're wrong again,' said Hatfield loudly. He had risen and faced the room, which
     was now pretty full. While this talk had been going on, men had dropped in by twos and threes,
     and all that had been said had been listened to with profound attention. 'You're wrong again!
     It is our faults, and the faults of all like us. Our fathers might have altered it. We
     might alter it now if we had but the spunk to take it in hand; and, if we don't, them as comes
     after us will, and'll curse us for leaving them the work to do. Didn't none o' ye ever hear
     tell o' the elephant that lets himself be led and mastered by one he could smash with a shake
     o' his poll? And why? Because, the books tell us, he doesna know his own strength. But
     he doesna fare so bad as we. He  gets well fed and well looked after because it
     costs summat to replace him, and we lets oursels be led and drove and starved, when it suits
     'em, by a set as we could chase out o' the world to-morrow if we but stood together and acted
     like men.'
A thrill of excited sympathy ran through the room as old Murdoch shouted,—
'Right again! That's it, John; tha's got it! A score thousand o' your pattern and there'd be
     an end to men being turned out o' their homes to clem i' midwinter because two young devils
     both wants the same lass!'
'It's all very well, Hatfield,' said Potters sourly; 'but tha's one face for us and another
     face for t' gentlefolk. That warn't no working man as I've see comin' out o' your house time
     and again this last three week.'
'No, he ain't. He's more o' the right stuff in his little finger nor you and all like you put
     together has got in your whole bodies. There, take that, Potters!'
'Whatever he's got in him, he seems pretty thick with young Roland Ferrier,' said a man who
     had not spoken before.
'He did his best to stop their quarrelling,' Hatfield answered hotly; 'because he knew what
     it would be for all o' us; and he's been chased out o' his own country and lost nearly all his
     brass for standing up for the likes o' we.'
'Yes, I've had a bit o' talk with him, too; that's true enough.'
'Ay! he's no fool, nor no coward neither.'
'He's a true friend o' working men, he is, if he is a Count.'
Litvinoff, it will be seen, had not lost his opportunities while he had been at Thornsett,
     for nearly every man present had something to say in his favour.
'But seeing as he's such a friend o' Mr Roland's, why don't he do something to stop this
     set-out?'
'What can he do?'
'He might speak to him about it.'

'Look'ee here, lads,' said Clayton, an old man who had not spoken before, 'ah've been
     a-turnin' o' this thing over i' my head, and this is what ah come to. If so be as young
     Ferrier's like to listen to any one, would he listen first to a new-fangled furrin' chap, or to
     all o' us honest lads as has known him since he was so high? Has any of you spoke to him? Has
     any one of you put it straight to him—this is the way of it, and this and this? M'appen this
     fooling o' theirs was just through ignorance. They might ha' thought it didna matter to any but
     them, and if once they knowed a' as it means, m'appen they'd think better owt, and let things
     go the old way.'
'Old heads is worth most, arter all,' said John Bolt, who was of a hopeful nature and turned
     to the new idea as a relief from his former visions of empty benches and deserted bar,—of a
     time when there would be nothing to chalk up but his own losses, and when adulterated beer
     would seem what it was, a drug in the market. 'Why shouldn't some of you do as he says, and go
     and see him and speak him reasonable?'
A great difference of opinion arose at once on the new idea, but nearly all were in their
     hearts glad to try a new chance, and at last old Clayton, from whom the suggestion had come,
     said,—
'Well, sithee, if any of you lads'll come wi' me, dang me if I'll not go this very night—this
     very minute.'
'You'd better all go,' advised Potters; 'it would be more telling like.'
'All o' us isn't here,' murmured Sigley.
'Get 'em here,' said Clayton shortly. 'If two or three o' ye was to go round and tell the
     other lads what's towards, they'd come too, and we'd have one more try at getting things
     righted here, afore we all turns different ways and never sees each other's faces again.'
No sooner said than done. Men are ready at all times to follow any one who will act, or even
     to act themselves if  prompted with sufficient energy. In less than half an hour
     over a hundred men were assembled outside the Spotted Cow, and were prepared to go up to
     Thornsett Edge to try to open again the doors of the workshop which a dead hand had closed
     against them. But their faith was strong in the power of a young and living hand, and they went
     with a new hope in their hearts.
'We'll all go up,' said old Clayton, who had assumed the position of leader, 'but only a few
     of us had best go in. Let's see—you, and you, and you. You'll be one, Hatfield, and Murdoch
     makes five.'
'Not me,' snarled Murdoch sourly; 'no eatin' dirt for me. I ain't never humbled myself to no
     man, and I ain't a-goin' to begin now, to a young chap as ah worked along o' his father manys a
     long day.'
'Not me, neither,' said Hatfield, 'for ah know aforehand as it's too late. But don't you mind
     us. Go your own way, and here's luck to you.'
He and Murdoch stood at the door with Bolt and Potters, and a few more who, not having been
     employed in the mill, were considered not to have any place in the deputation. They watched the
     crowd out of sight up the steep street, and the women turned out to watch their men go by. It
     was a clear, frosty night, and bitterly cold, but most of the women rolled their bare arms in
     their aprons and stood talking in little knots after the procession had passed out of sight.
     They were more hopeful than their husbands, for women are naturally more trusting than men and
     believe more in the possibility of altering facts by emotional influences.
To Murdoch and Hatfield, in spite of their assumption of indifference, the time seemed very
     long as it went by and brought them no news of their comrades. After half an hour Bill
     suggested that they should stroll up the hill to meet the others and learn how it fared with
     them.
