

AN OLD ACQUAINTANCE
AS a rule, it was not an easy matter to turn Richard Ferrier from any purpose of his, and
     when his purpose was that of visiting Miss Stanley and at the same time of putting a stop to
     any chance of a tête-à-tête between his divinity and his brother, no ordinary red
     herring would have drawn him off the track.
As he walked through the streets with Roland all his thoughts were with the girl he was going
     to see—all his longing was to hasten as much as might be the moment of their meeting. In his
     mind just then she was the only woman in the world; and yet it was a woman's face in the crowd
     that made him start so suddenly—a woman's figure that he turned to follow with so immediate a
     decision as to give his brother no time to notice his going until he had gone.
The street was one of those long, straight, melancholy streets, the deadly monotony and
     general seediness of which no amount of traffic can relieve—which bear the same relation to
     Regent Street and Oxford Street as the seamy side of a stage court suit does to the glitter and
     gaudiness that charm the pit, and stir the æsthetic emotions of the gallery. There are always
     plenty of people moving about in these streets whom one never sees anywhere else—and you may
     pass up and down  them a dozen times a day without meeting anyone whose dress does
     not bear tokens, more or less pronounced, of a hand-to-hand struggle with hard-upness. It is a
     peculiarity of this struggle that in it those who struggle hardest appear to get least, or at
     any rate those who get least have to struggle hardest. This Society recognises with unconscious
     candour—and when it sees a man or woman shabbily dressed and with dirty hands, it at once
     decides that he or she must belong to the 'working' classes; thus naïvely accepting the fact
     that those whose work produces the wealth are not usually those who secure it.
The face which had attracted Dick's notice was as careworn as any other in that crowd—the
     figure as shabbily clad as the majority. But the young man turned and followed with an interest
     independent of fair features or becoming raiment—an interest which had its rise in a
     determination to solve a problem, or at any rate to silence a doubt.
Yet it was a young woman he was following—more than that, a pretty young women; and the very
     evident fact that this handsome, well-dressed young man was openly following this shabby girl
     with a parcel inspired some of the loafers whom they passed to the utterance of comments, the
     simple directness of which would perhaps not have pleased the young man had he heard them. He
     heard nothing. He was too intent on keeping her in sight. Presently she passed into a quieter
     street, and Dick at once ranged alongside of her, and, raising his hat said, 'Why, Alice, have
     you forgotten old friends already?'
The girl turned a very white face towards him.
'Oh, Mr Richard! I never thought I should see you again, of all people.'
'Why, everybody is sure to meet everyone else sooner or later. How far are you going? Let me
     carry your parcel.'

'Oh, no, it's not heavy,' she said; but she let him take the brown-paper burden all the
     same.
'Not heavy!' he returned. 'It's too heavy for you.'
'I'm used to it,' she answered, with a little sigh.
'So much the worse. I'm awfully glad I've met you, my dear girl. Why did you leave us like
     that? What have you been doing with yourself?'
'Oh, Mr Richard, what does it matter now? And don't stand there holding that parcel, but say
     good-bye, and let me go home.'
'And where is home?'
'Not a long way off.'
'Well, I'll walk with you. Come along.'
They walked side by side silently for some yards. Then he said,—
'Alice, I want you to tell me truly how it was you left home.'
A burning blush swept over her face, from forehead to throat, and that was the only answer
     she gave him.
'Come, tell me,' he persisted.
'Can't you guess?' she asked in a low voice, looking straight before her.
'Perhaps I can.'
'Perhaps? Of course you can. Why do girls ever leave good homes, and come to such a home as
     mine is now?'
'Then he has left you?'
'No,' she said, hurriedly; 'no, no, I've left him. But I can't talk about it to you.'
'Why not to me, if you can to anyone?' he asked.
'Because—because— Don't ask me anything else;' and she burst into tears.
'There, there,' he said, 'don't cry, for heaven's sake. I didn't mean to worry you; but you
     will tell me all about it by-and-by, won't you? What are you doing now?'

'Working.'
'What sort of work? Come, don't cry, Alice. I hate to think I have been adding to your
     distress.'
She dried her eyes obediently, and answered:
'I do tailoring work. It seems to be the only thing I'm good for.'
'That's paid very badly, isn't it?' he asked, some vague reminiscences of "Alton Locke"
     prompting the question.
'Oh, I manage to get along pretty well,' she replied, with an effort at a smile, which was
     more pathetic in Dick's eyes than her tears had been. He thought gloomily of the time, not so
     very long ago either, when her face had been the brightest as well as the fairest in Thornsett
     village, and his heart was sore with indignant protest against him who had so changed her face,
     her life, her surroundings. He looked at her tired thin face, still so pretty, in spite of the
     grief that had aged and the want that had pinched it, and found it hard to believe that this
     was indeed the Alice with whom he had raced through the pastures at Firth Vale—the Alice who
     had taken the place in his boyish heart of a very dear little sister. Ah, if she had only been
     his sister really, then their friendship would not have grown less and less during his school
     and college days, and his protection would have saved her, perhaps, from this. These
     foster-relationships are uncomfortable things. They inflict the sufferings of a real blood tie,
     and give none of the rights which might mitigate or avert such suffering.
'How's mother and father?' she said, breaking in among his sad thoughts.
'They were well when I saw them, but I've not seen them lately. We've been in great
     trouble.'
'Yes. I saw in the papers. I was so sorry.'
'Then you read the papers?'
'I always try to see a weekly paper,' she said a little  confusedly. 'Then you
     don't know how they are at home?'
'I only know they're grieving after you still.'
'They know I'm not dead. I let them know that, and I should think that's all they care to
     know.'
'You know better than that. My dear child, why not go home to them? I believe the misery you
     have cost them—forgive me for saying it—will shorten their lives unless you do go back.'
'Go back? No! I've sowed and I must reap. I must go through with it. I live just down here.
     Good-night.'
It did not look a very inviting residence—a narrow street, leading into a court which was too
     dark and too distant to be seen into from the corner where she had stopped.
'I sha'n't say good-night till you say when I shall see you again.'
'What's the use? It only makes me more miserable to see you, though I can't help being glad I
     have seen you this once.'
'But I must try to do something for you. I think I've some sort of right to help you,
     Alice.'
'But I've no right to be helped by you. Besides, I really don't need help. I have all I want.
     I'd much better not see you again.'
'Well, I mean to see you again, anyway. I shall be in London for some time.
     When shall I see you?'
'Not at all.'
'Nonsense!' he said, authoritatively. 'You must promise to write, at any rate, or I shall
     come down here and wait from eight to eleven every evening till I see you.'
'Very well. I'll write, then. Good-bye!'
'But how can you write? You don't know my address. Here's my card;' and he scribbled the
     address in pencil. 'It's a promise, Alice. You'll write and you'll see me again?'

'Yes, yes; good-bye;' and she turned to leave him.
'Why, you're forgetting your parcel.'
'So I am. Thank you!' As she took it from him, he said suddenly, watching her keenly the
     while,—
'Roland is in town now. Shall I bring him to see you?'
'No, no; for God's sake, don't tell him you've seen me!'
And she left him so quickly as to give no time for another word. As she sped down the street
     a loitering policeman turned to look sharply at her, and two tidy-looking women who were
     standing at the opposite corner exchanged significant glances.
'I never thought she was one of that sort!' said one.
'Ah!' said the other, 'bad times drives some that way as 'ud keep straight enough with
     fair-paid work.'
