

SUNDAY EVENING IN SOHO
THE average English citizen and his wife have a certain method of spending Sunday which
     admits of no variation, and is as essential to their religion as any doctrine which that
     religion inculcates. Indeed, it is very often the only tribute which they pay to those
     supernatural powers who are supposed to smile upon virtue and to frown upon vice.
When church and chapel—St Waltheof's and Little Bethel—unite in teaching that ceremonial
     observance is at least as important as moral practice, is it to be wondered at that their
     congregations, feeling that it would be more than human to combine the two, choose to move
     along the line of least resistance? It is comparatively easy, though perhaps somewhat tiresome,
     especially in hot weather, to get up only a little late on Sunday mornings, instead of
     a good deal late, as the 'natural man' would prefer to do; to assume a more or less solemn
     aspect at the breakfast-table; to wear garments of unusual splendour, which do not see daylight
     during the week, and in assuming them to feel tremors of uneasiness lest they should be
     outshone by Mr Jones' wife, Mr Smith's daughter, Mr Brown's sister, or Mr Robinson's maiden
     aunt. It is not quite so easy, but still possible, to sit for two hours on a 
     narrow seat, evidently made by someone who knew he would never have to sit on it, and to keep
     awake (in the old pews this was not imperative), while a preacher, whom one does not care for,
     talks, in language one does not understand, on subjects in which one takes not the slightest
     interest. And then, as a compensation, one has the heavy early dinner and the afternoon sleep,
     in itself almost a religious exercise. Perhaps one's ungodly neighbours curse the day they were
     born as they hear one, after tea, playing long-drawn hymn tunes on a harmonium, till the bells
     begin to go for evening 'worship'; then one's wife goes to put on her bonnet (which has been
     lying in state all day on the best bed, covered with a white handkerchief), and one goes to
     one's 'sitting' again with a delicious sense that the worse of it is over. All this is not so
     difficult, and an eternity of bliss is cheap at the price—distinctly.
But to refrain from sanding the sugar or watering the milk—especially for a 'family man,' who
     has 'others to think of besides himself'—to keep one's hand from this, and one's tongue from
     evil-speaking, lying and slandering, to keep one's body in temperance and soberness, to be true
     and just in all one's dealings—this would be not only difficult but absurd, nowadays.
There are a good many who try to carry out the moral teachings and let the ceremonial
     observances alone, and there are far more who disregard the one and the other; and for both
     these classes there are ways of spending Sunday evening of which the strict Sabbatarian has no
     conception. Among others are the entertainments provided by working men's clubs. These are not
     the wildest form of dissipation; but, as a rule, they have some practical bearing on this world
     and its affairs and, though rather solid pudding, are appreciated by the audiences, mostly
     working men, who have a strong and increasing taste for solids, and no small discernment in the
     matter of flavours.

To-night the dish provided for the Agora Club was a Russian one, and was likely to be highly
     spiced.
'Do you expect a large audience?' Richard Ferrier asked Litvinoff, as they walked along.
'I hope so,' he said. 'I can always speak better to a full room. Perhaps the physical heat
     does something to grease one's tongue; and then, again, in a large audience, you're sure to
     have some people who agree with you, and you and they reflect enthusiasm backwards and forwards
     between you. We're close there now,' he added, as they turned down a narrow street of high,
     unhappy-looking houses.
'How in the world do you come to be lecturing at a place like this? How do you know anything
     about it?' asked Roland.
'There is a freemasonry among the soldiers of Liberty which holds good all over the world,
     and we who serve her are pledged to carry her light into the darkest corners.'
If this seemed somewhat rhetorical to the young Englishmen, they were ready enough to excuse
     it in a foreigner, and especially in a foreigner who was about to make a speech. It did occur
     to Dick that the locality in which they were at the moment was a dark corner which stood as
     much in need of the services of the Metropolitan Gas Company as of those of the torch-bearers
     of Freedom; but there was light enough in the room into which Count Litvinoff soon led
     them.
It was long and rather low, not unlike a certain type of dissenting meeting-room. At one end
     was a platform, on which stood two wooden chairs, and a deal table which had upon it a tumbler,
     a bottle of water, and a small wooden hammer, similar to those used by auctioneers. The room
     was well filled—so well filled that all the wooden forms and chairs were occupied, and even the
     standing room was so much taken up that the three young men found a little difficulty in
     working their way to the upper end of the room. Roland noticed,  with some
     surprise, that among the audience were several women, who seemed quite as much at home there as
     the husbands and brothers with whom they had come.
The two Ferriers were placed on a seat facing the platform, which Litvinoff at once ascended,
     in company with the chairman. The two were received with cheers and applause, which redoubled
     when the chairman in his opening remarks referred to the count as 'one who had suffered and
     worked for years for the cause he was about to advocate.'
Much as the Ferriers had already wondered at Litvinoff's mastery of English, they wondered
     still more after the first ten minutes on his speech. It is one thing to carry on a social
     conversation in a tongue not one's own; it is another and a widely different thing to be able
     to hold a foreign audience, and to sway and move it, to rouse its enthusiasm and to thrill it
     with horror, at one's will and pleasure. Yet such was the power of this young Russian rebel. He
     spoke without notes, and without the slightest hesitation. His voice in the opening sentences
     was very low, but so clear as to be heard distinctly all over the room.
The first part of his address was simply a narrative. In a calm, unimpassioned way he told
     his hearers the story, from its beginning, of a struggle for freedom; he told them how a
     movement which had begun in a spirit of love, enthusiasm, and self-sacrifice, had been turned
     by blind tyranny and brutal oppression into one of wild vengeance and bitter relentless hatred.
     He told them how, for a chance expression of sympathy with the down-trodden peasants; for the
     possession of a suppressed book; sometimes even for less than these offences, for having
     incurred the personal spite of some members of the police, aged men and tender girls had been,
     and were, at that moment while he spoke to them, being delivered over to the torture chambers
     of the Russian monarch, to be scourged and starved, to be devoured by disease and riven by
     madness. He  told them how tyranny always had treated—how while it exists, tyranny
     always will treat the sons of men.
Then, when many among his audience had broken out into groans of indignation and cries of
     'Shame!' the usual note of an indignant English audience, the speaker dropped the narrative
     tone and became argumentative. Here, when he justified the Nihilists' 'deeds of death' as the
     lawful punishment of criminals—punishment inflicted by the only power that has the right to
     execute vengeance, the outraged spirit of man—he seemed to lose for a moment the sympathy of
     some of his hearers, and certainly of the Ferriers, who like most Englishmen, believed in the
     efficacy of Parliamentary reforms, and also forgot, like most Englishmen, that these patent
     remedies for all the ills of life are hardly applicable to nations that have no parliament.
With the ready apprehension of a true orator, Litvinoff saw the slight shade of coldness as
     it passed over some of the upturned faces before him, and, with a consummate skill that was the
     result either of long practice or oratorical genius, he changed, without seeming to change, the
     argumentative and defensive attitude for one of stern and glowing denunciation. His voice rang
     through the room now like a trumpet-call. A very little of this sort of thing was sufficient to
     rouse the men before him to stormy approbation, and Richard whispered to his brother that if
     any Russian dignitary were to come in just then, while the speaker was in the full tide of his
     invective, he would have very much the sort of reception that was given to the Austrian
     woman-flogging general some years ago by the stalwart draymen of Messrs Barclay &
     Perkins.
Apparently satisfied with the applause of his audience, in which he seemed to delight and
     revel, Litvinoff turned from the present and the past, and invited his hearers to look with him
     into the future, 'not only of Russia, but of mankind,' he said; 'what the world might be—what
     it would be.' Then  were done into rhetorical English the concluding pages of that
     famous Russian pamphlet, 'A Prophetic Vision'—the pamphlet for whose sake Russian peasants had
     braved the spydom of the police, and to hear which read aloud by some of their fellows who
      could read, they had crowded together at nights in outhouses and sheds, by the dim
     light of tallow candles—the pamphlet for whose possession St Petersburg and Moscow students had
     quarrelled and almost fought, knowing all the time that the mere fact of its being found upon
     their persons or among their belongings meant certain imprisonment, and possible death—the
     pamphlet, in short, the discovery of whose authorship three years back had sent Count Litvinoff
     and his luckless secretary flying for the Austrian frontier.
It was certainly a pleasant vision this of the Russian noble, whether it was prophetic or no,
     a dream of a time when men would no longer sow for other men to reap, when the fruits of the
     earth would be the inheritance of all the earth's children, and not only of her priests and her
     rulers; when, in fact, rulers would be no more, for all would rule and each would obey; when
     every man would do as he liked, and every man would like to do well.
All this seemed very high-flown and remote to the young university critics on the front
     seats, though even they were moved for a moment or two, by the vibrating tones of the speaker,
     out of the attitude of English stolidity which they had carefully kept up during the evening.
     But those behind them were less reserved, and perhaps more credulous—more given to believing in
     visions; and when Litvinoff sat down, the walls of the Agora rang again and again with the
     cheers of a sympathetic and delighted audience.
When the chairman had announced that 'Mr' Litvinoff would be happy to answer any questions
     that might be sug gested by the lecture, there was a moment or two of that awkward
     silence which always occurs on these occasions, when everyone feels that there are at least
     half-a-dozen questions he would like to ask, but experiences the greatest possible difficulty
     in putting even one into an intelligible shape.
At length a man in one of the far corners of the room rose to put a question. His accent
     showed him to be a foreigner, but that was not a very remarkable thing in Soho. He had a
     scrubby chin and dirty linen, two other characteristics not uncommon in that region. After a
     preliminary cough he explained that his question was rather personal than general, and he quite
     allowed that the lecturer was not bound to answer it; but he said that, having been in Russia,
     he could bear testimony to the truth of all that had been said that evening, and that while in
     the south of Russia he had come across a small pamphlet, called 'A Prophetic Vision,' which he
     had been told had been written by a Count Michael Litvinoff. Some parts of the address to-night
     had reminded him of that excellent pamphlet, and he thought it would be interesting to the
     audience to know whether the author of that pamphlet was the speaker of the evening.
Litvinoff rose at once.
'I had no idea,' he said, 'that the little brochure would ever be heard of outside
     the country for whose children it was written; but since the question is asked me so frankly
     to-night, I will answer as frankly—Yes, I wrote it.'
An approving murmur ran through the room, and the foreigner rose again. He was sorry again to
     trouble Citizen Litvinoff, but was he right in supposing (it had been so reported) that the
     discovery of this pamphlet by the Russian Government had occasioned Count Litvinoff's
     exile?

Litvinoff was very pale as he answered,—
'Yes; it was that unhappy pamphlet which deprived me of the chance of serving my country on
     the scene of action, and which lost me a life I valued above my own—that of a fellow-countryman
     of the audience which I have the pleasure of addressing to-night—my secretary and friend, whom
     I loved more than a brother.' His voice trembled as he ended.
There was another round of applause, and, no more questions being forthcoming, the meeting
     broke up, and people stood talking together in little groups. Richard was discussing a knotty
     economic point with a sturdy carpenter and trades unionist, and Roland, close by, was earnestly
     questioning a French Communist to whom Litvinoff had introduced him, and was receiving an
     account of the so-called murder of the hostages very different from any which had appeared in
     the daily papers of the period, when the Count came up to them.
'Excuse me,' he said, 'I am désolé; but I shall be unable to stay longer. You will
     be able, doubtless, to pilot yourselves back to civilisation, and will pardon my abrupt
     departure. I have just seen someone going out of the door whom I've been trying to catch for
     the last three months, and I'm off in pursuit.'
And he was off. As he passed a small knot of youths outside the door they looked after him,
     and one of them said with a laugh, 'Blest if I don't believe he's after that handsome gal. What
     chaps these foreigners are for the ladies.'
The discerning youth was right. He was after that girl—but though he followed her and watched
     her into the house where she lived, he did not speak to her.
'Think twice before you speak once is a good rule,' he said  to himself, as he
     turned westwards, 'and I know where she lives, at any rate.'
Even discussions on political economy, and historical revelations by those who helped to make
     the history, must come to an end at last, and the Ferriers came away, after Dick had received a
     pressing invitation from the chairman to address the club, and to choose his own subject, and
     Roland, who had suddenly conceived a passion for foreigners of a revolutionary character, had
     made an appointment with his Communist acquaintance for an evening in the week.
As they passed down the street, two men standing under a lamp looked at them with interest.
     One was the man who had put the questions regarding the pamphlet. The other was a foreigner
     too, though he was clean in his attire and had not a scrubby chin, but a long, light silky
     beard. He wore the slouch hat so much affected by the High Church Clergy, and which is
     popularly supposed to mark any non-clerical wearer as a man of revolutionary views. He was
     tall, and pale, and thin, and had very deeply-set hollow eyes, which he kept fixed on the
     retreating millowners till they turned the corner and went out of sight. Then he said, in a
     Hungarian dialect,—
'Our pamphlet-writing friend doesn't seem to choose his friends solely among the poor and
     needy; and that is politic to say the least of it.'
'Money seeks money,' growled the other, 'and he has plenty.'
'Not so much as you'd suppose. The greater part of the Litvinoff property is quite out of his
     reach. Our "little father" takes good care of that.'
'That which he has he takes care to keep,' said the other.
'I'm not so sure; at anyrate, he uses his tongue, which is  a good one, in our
     cause. Speeches like that are good. A man who can speak so is not to be sneered at, and I'm
     certain he could not speak like that unless he felt some of it at least. He has done us good
     service before, and he will again. The Mantle of the Prophet fits him uncommonly well.'
