
CHAPTER IV.
MORNING is come again. The sun cannot bear to be long away from his young sweetheart, the
     earth, so he has come back hasting, with royal pomp, with his crown of gay gold beams on his
     head, with his flame-cloak about his strong shoulders, and with a great troop of light, flaky
     clouds—each with a reflex of his red smile on its courtier face—at his back. He has come back
     to see himself in the laughing blue eyes of her seas and streams, and to rest at noontide, like
     a sleepy giant, on her warm green lap.
The daily miracle—the miracle that none can contest, to which all are witness, has been
     worked—the resurrection of the world. And this resurrection is not partial, not limited to
     humanity, as that final one is towards which the eyes of the Christian church have been looking
     steadfastly for eighteen centuries and a half; but every beast and bird and flower has shaken
     off Death's sweet semblance, his gentle counterfeit, and is feeling, in bounding vein and
     rushing sap, the ecstatic bliss of the mystery of life. If we never slept, we should not know
     the joy of waking; if we never woke, we should not know the joy of sleep. How, I marvel, shall
     we feel the happiness of heaven, if we never lose, and consequently regain it?
The thrushes and blackbirds are already in the midst of their glees and madrigals and part
     songs. They sing the same songs every day, so that they are quite perfect in them; and they are
     all very joyful ones. In their sweet flute-language there are no words expressive of sorrow or
     pain; they know of no minor key. There were twenty roses born last night, and the flowers are
     all rejoicing greatly. They are smiling and whispering and gossiping together; the sweet peas,
     like pink and purple butterflies,
     

" .... on tiptoe for a flight,
With wings of delicate flush o'er virgin white," each half-inclined
     to hover away with the young west wind that is sighing such a little gentle story all about
     himself into their ears. The lambs, grown so big and woolly that one might almost mistake them
     for their mothers, are leaping and racing and plunging about in the field below the house, in
     the giddiness of youth, unprescient of the butcher. Hated of Miss Craven's soul as much as ever
     were the blind and lame of King David's are those too, too agile sheep. Grievously
     prone are they to ignore the low stone wall of partition, and work havoc and devastation among
     the aster tops and cabbage shoots of her garden.

"The king was in his counting-house,
Counting out his money;
The queen was in the parlour,
Eating bread and honey."
The King of Glan-yr-Afon is not counting out his money, because he has not any to count, poor
     young fellow. He is sitting on a garden-chair, reading the Times, and thinking how
     much better he would rule the Fatherland, how much less mean and shabby and selfish he would
     make her in other nations' eyes, if he might but have the whip and reins for six months or so.
     Old Luath lies at his feet, with dim eyes half closed, snapping lazily at the flies, and
     catching on an average about one every quarter of an hour. Esther is in the stack-yard, holding
     a levy of ravenous fowls. She has tied a large white kitchen-apron round her waist; with one
     hand she is holding it up, with the other she is scattering light wheat among a mixed
     multitude. Baby Cochins, in primrose velvet; hobbledehoy Cochins, au
      naturel, with not a stitch of clothes on their bare, indecent backs; adult Cochins,
     muffled and smothered up to the chin in a wealth
      of cinnamon feathers, and with cinnamon stockings down to
     their heels; Rouen ducks, and scraggy-necked turkeys. She is doing her very best to administer
     justice to her commonwealth, to protect the weak, to prevent aggression and violence; but like
     many another lawgiver she finds it rather up-hill work. Strive as she may, the ducks get far
     the best of it. They have no sense of shame, and can shovel up such a quantity at a time in
     their long yellow bills. The turkey-cock, on the other hand, gets much the worst, by reason of
     the long red pendant to his nose, that gets in his way and hinders him. They say that Nature
     never makes anything for ornament alone, divorced from use; but I confess to being ignorant as
     to what function that long flabby dangler has to fulfil. The stack-yard is all on the slant; it
     slopes down with its many stack-frames, to the old rough grey barn that is stained all
     over-walls and roof and door—with the stormy tears of a score of winters. There is no lack of
     voices all about the farm to-day: voice of Sarah chattering in the drying ground, where she is
     hanging Esther's cotton gowns and Jack's shirts on the lines; voice of Evan Evans, the carter,
     talking friendly to his heavy team in that deplorable tongue which, we trust, will soon be
     among the abuses of the past; voice of Seryn (Welsh for Star), from the pasture, lowing for her
     calf, which a day ago became veal, and a day hence (Oh blessed short memory! why cannot we take
     lessons from a cow?) she will have forgotten utterly. Presently comes another voice, clearer,
     stronger, nearer than the others—comes sailing up through the July air.
"Es—ther!"
"Ye—es!" responds Esther at the tip-top of her voice, and consequently not particularly
     harmonious. It is only the lark that can talk at the top of his voice and yet not be
     shrill.

"Where are you?" (Forte.)
"In the stack-yard." (Fortissimo).
Obedient to this direction, in about two minutes the owner of the voice, and of the excellent
     lungs which sent it out, makes his appearance in loose cool clothes and a smile—Jack, in fact,
     looking very ugly and pleasant and good-natured.
"Jack, dear boy, open the gate. Quick! Out of the way! Don't let him get under the
     stack-frame. Shoo!" cries Esther, in great excitement, rushing wildly about in her big apron,
     in pursuit of a large drake with a grasping soul, and a wonderful rainbow neck, who, with bill
     wide open and wings half extended, is waddling, flying, quacking away from Nemesis as hard as
     his splay feet and his full crop will let him.
Jack obeys. "There is a person in the drawing-room wanting to speak to you," he says, leaning
     his arms on the top of the gate, and looking rather malicious.
"What sort of a person?" Esther asks abstractedly, craning her long neck round the corner of
     the barn, to see whether the drake shows symptoms of returning. "There he is again! Shoo!"
"What was the name of Esther's husband? the man that bullied his first wife so. Oh! I know;
     his name, oh Queen Esther, is Ahasuerus, which, being interpreted, is Bob."
Esther's apron drops from her fingers and the wheat rolls down in a shower on to the broad
     backs of the Cochin householders. Fiercely the war of chickens—the pushing, the fluttering, the
     pecking—rages about her feet. "Already!" she says: and in her voice there is none of love's
     sweet quiver, nor on her cheeks is there any sign of love's pretty flag being hung out, neither
     the red nor the white one. She only looks a little blank—a little troubled.
"Yes, already," says Jack, mercilessly; "and not only
      has he come himself, but he has brought all his household
     gods with him. He has come with a great company of old women at his back. I fancy they have
     brought a notary or a scrivener, or what do you call it? with them, and that there is to be a
     grand betrothal in form."
"Nonsense!" says Esther, and she comes all over to the gate, and clasps two little
     petitioning hands on his shoulder. "You will come with me, won't you, Jack?"
"Not I!" says Jack, stoutly. "I would not trust myself with those old maids, in their present
     excited state, if you were to give me my next half-year's rent: they would be employing the
     notary in my case too before I knew where I was."
"Jack, is my hair pretty tidy?" stroking it down with the improvised brush and comb of her
     slim fingers.
"Extremely so: it looks as if the chickens had got into it, and been scratching there by
     mistake."
Meanwhile Master Brandon and his old women, to wit, his mother, Mrs. Brandon, and his
     sisters, the two Misses Brandon, are posed about the drawing-room, waiting. Waiting is always a
     painful process, from the modified form of suffering involved in the ten minutes before dinner,
     when every man's tongue is tied, and his wits congealed by the frost of expectant hunger;
     upward to the Gehenna of a dentist's antechamber. Robert is all on wires this morning: he
     cannot sit still; he keeps shuffling and twisting his long, awkward legs about, beating the
     devil's tattoo on the floor with his nailed boots, and hammering an ugly little tune with a
     paper knife on an old Book of Beauty on the table. "How you fidget, Bob!" cries his sister
     Bessy.
Miss Elizabeth Brandon is ten years older and about ten feet shorter than her brother; she is
     in process of souring, like cowslip wine that has been kept too long, or small beer in thunder.
     She is not so very sour, after all, poor little
      virgin! only ten years ago she was, and ten years hence she
     will be mellower than she is now.
"All right!" says Bob, "I won't;" and he stops, only to commence, two seconds later, a new
     noise, seven times worse than the first; a very disagreeable sort of scraping with the hind
     legs of his chair. Is not it one of Miss Yonge's goody heroes, who, when he feels disposed to
     be impatient, sits down and strums away at the "Harmonious Blacksmith?" Bob could not get
     through a bar of that soothing melody this morning. Mrs. Brandon is just beginning to say, "Do
     you think the servant could have told her?" when the door opens, and a little vision comes in
     with delicate hair ruffling about her sweet, shining eyes; a little vision that ought to be
     walking on rosy clouds, Bob thinks, with cherubim and seraphim holding up her train, instead of
     on shabby oil-cloth and faded carpet, dragging her train behind her.
"I—I'm very sorry; I'm afraid I have kept you waiting: I did not" (did not expect you so
     early is on the tip of her tongue, but she remembers just in time that it would be about the
     impolitest remark she could make. Never, until the millennium, will the marriage of Truth and
     Civility be solemnized)—"did not know you were here till Jack came and told me a moment ago,"
     she substitutes so adroitly that none of her auditors perceive the rivet that joins the two
     halves of her sentence together.
"I don't know what your brother will say to us for taking his house by storm, but you must
     blame him, my dear, you must blame him!" says Mrs. Brandon, nodding her head
     towards Bob, and looking as if there was something peculiarly humorous in the idea of Esther
     being in a condition to blame him for anything he could do or leave undone.
Mrs. Brandon is an old woman, with a smooth, holy face, and a villainous black poke bonnet:
     she kisses Esther, and the Misses Brandon likewise come forward and inflict a prim
      sisterly salute with their thin old-maid lips, on the velvet
     rose-leaf of her cheek. They had never kissed her before, and she felt as if the manacles were
     being fastened round her wrists, and the gyves about her ankles. She longs to cry out and say,
     "What are you all about? you are quite mistaken, every one of you; Mrs. Brandon, I am not your
     daughter; Miss Bessy, I am not your sister; I don't want to be: take back those kisses of
     yours, if you please, if they mean that!" Had she been alone with Robert, she would probably
     have said this; have said it without much difficulty, but now the words seemed infinitely,
     impossibly hard to frame. There is upon her the shyness of a young woman with an old one; the
     shyness of one against three. She feels, too, that it seems ungracious, churlish, when they are
     so glad to take her in to themselves, to adopt her as their own, not to be very glad too. When
     a person says to one, if not in words, yet with looks and gestures, "Our people shall be thy
     people, and our God thy God," it is not easy for a plastic, gracious nature to say "No, they
     shall not!" however little they may relish the arrangement. So, in her muteness, Esther accepts
     the Brandon God and people as hers.
Wordless and demure, she sits down on a little low seat as far removed as may be from Robert.
     Esther will, no doubt, be an ugly old woman; she makes rather an ugly photograph; but who can
     deny that she is a delicious bit of colour as she sits there right in the eye of the morning
     sun, and not at all afraid of his strict scrutiny? So many women, now-a-days, are
     neutral-tinted, drabbish, greyish, as if the colours that God painted with were not fast, but
     faded, like Reynolds'. Esther's colouring is as distinct, as decided, as clean and clear as
     that on a flower's petal or a butterfly's wing. Nobody speaks, except the clock with the
     short-waisted Minerva on it, and it does not say anything
      particularly original. Then the old woman bends towards the
     young one, and says in a kind, low voice, "You see Robert has told us his news, my dear." There
     is flowing in through the French window a broad river of yellow light from the great fountain
     in the sky; it is deluging Mrs. Brandon's bonnet and Esther's hair. The bonnet is black, and
     the hair is black; but there are blacks and blacks. The May grass is green, and a beer bottle
     is green; but the resemblance between the two is not striking. Esther has not the remotest idea
     what answer to make; so she chooses one of the shortest words she knows of, and says "Yes!"
     half-assentingly, half-interrogatively.
"And we could not rest till we came and told you what good news we thought it," pursues the
     old lady, encouragingly.
Esther says nothing. Her eyelids feel glued down to her cheeks; she is conscious, with inward
     rage and vexation, of looking blushing, bashful, everything that a young betrothed should
     look.
"I'm an old woman," concludes Mrs. Brandon, rather moved by her own eloquence, "and I cannot
     expect a great many more years of life. You know what the Psalmist sweetly says, love; but I
     trust I may be spared to see God bless both my children, and make them His happy servants for
     this world and the next."
As she speaks she lays one hand on Esther's head. Bob is happily too far off, or she would
     lay the other on his, while the two little virgin clerks from the sofa cry "Amen!" in a breath.
     Esther is half-frightened. What with the serious words, with the three women's solemn faces,
     she half feels as if she were being married on the spot; her thoughts fly to Jack and the
     notary; after that "Amen!" she is not quite sure that her name is not Esther Brandon She
     shrinks away a little, but not at all rudely.

"You are very kind," she says, in her gentle voice, "and it was so good of you coming all
     through the wood—such a long walk for you, too; but I think—I'm afraid that there is some
     mistake about—this—about me; there is nothing settled—nothing at all, I assure you. I told your
     son so yesterday quite plainly, only I'm afraid he did not understand me," she concludes,
     looking rather reproachfully over at him.
"I did understand you," protests poor Bob, eagerly, jumping up, upsetting his chair, and
     never thinking of picking it up again, "I did, indeed. I told mother your very words, only she
     would have it that they meant—what we all wished they should mean," he ends, looking very
     downcast and snubbed and disconsolate.
There is another pause, then Mrs. Brandon rises and puts out her hand to Esther—in farewell
     this time.
"I'm afraid I've been in too great a hurry, my dear," she says, trying not to speak stiffly,
     and not succeeding quite so well as she deserved. "But you'll forgive me, I'm sure; you see,
     mothers are apt to be partial people, and I could not imagine any one trying to love my boy,
     and not succeeding."
But Miss Craven can never let well alone. She would marry Old Nick himself sooner than that
     his mother or sister should look askance at her, or seem hurt and grieved with her for
     expressing any want of relish for him, hoofs and tail and horns and all.
"Oh no, you must not go!" she cries, in her quick, eager way, putting up two anxious hands in
     deprecation; "you must not be vexed with me; I did not mean to be disagreable. I shall like
     very much to belong to you, I'm sure. I was only afraid of your expecting more from me than I
     had to give yet," she ends, with head drooped a little, and cheeks reddened like a
     peach's that the sun has been kissing all the afternoon.

The stiffness goes away: nobody can be stiff for long with Esther Craven, any more than a
     snow-ball can remain a snow-ball under the fire's warm gaze.
"We don't want you to belong to us if you don't wish it yourself," the old woman says, very
     gravely, yet not ill-naturedly.
"I hardly know what I wish," answers the girl, naïvely, in a sort of bewilderment.
Then they go, and Robert walks off with his old mother on his arm. He would walk down Pall
     Mall with her in that identical poke bonnet, and the two little dowdy vestals pottering behind
     in the most perfect unconsciousness and simplicity, even if he were to know that his brother
     officers, to a man, were looking out at him from the "Rag" windows.
"Oh, my cheeks! my cheeks! will they ever get cool again!" cries Esther, flinging herself
     down on the oak bench in the porch, and laying her face against the cold ivy leaves.
"You look rather as if you had been poking your countenance between the bars of the kitchen
     grate," responds Jack, with all a brother's candour. Jack has been dodging behind the laurel
     bushes, after the fashion in which the English gentleman is fond of receiving his friends when
     they come to call on him.
"Why did not you come to my rescue, you unnatural brother? What chance had I, single-handed,
     against those three Gorgons? Pah! it makes my head ache to think of mamma's coiffure."
"When a person gets into a scrape themselves, I make it a rule to let them get out of it
     themselves, as it makes them more careful for the future," replies Jack, with philosophy. 
"But I'm not getting out of it; I'm floundering deeper and deeper and deeper in, like a man
     in an Irish bog," says Esther, ruefully. "Oh, Jack!" she concludes, laughing,
      yet vexed (laughter is as often the exponent of annoyance as
     of enjoyment, I think), "if you could have heard the stories I was forced to tell, I'm sure I
     deserve to be wound up, carried out, and buried, as much as ever Ananias did."
