
CHAPTER XXXVI.
THE frost goes, but so does not St. John. He hunts all day, and all the long evenings lounges
     sedulously on the sofa beside Constance, trying to feel affectionate: trying to make her
     talk—trying, metaphorically, to pull the string at his fine wax-doll's side, to make her say
     "Pap-pa" and " Mam-ma" prettily. "Since I am to spend my life with this woman," he says to
     himself, heavily, "I must try and make the best of her."
And, alas! alas! the best is not very good. He is thirty now, and—the Gerards are a
     long-lived, tough race—he may live till ninety. He asks himself, now and then, in a sort of
     startled terror, is he to see opposite him at breakfast, every day for the next sixty years,
     this carven face, changeless as the stone saints on the walls of Felton
      Church? Of all the one-half of creation, is this
     unsuggestive, unresponsive, negative woman to be his sole portion? "It is her misfortune
      that she is not a woman of science," as Mr. Shandy mildly remarked of his wife,
      "but she might ask a question." Strive as he may against the
     conviction, the yoke that he has taken upon himself in careless apathy has already begun to
     gall his withers. And yet it was not (as you may imagine) pique that first made Gerard Miss Blessington's lover. It was partly that numb
     indifference as to anything that might happen to him, that always follows a great blow, partly
     sheer weariness of his father's importunities upon the subject of his marriage.
He is the last scion of a family that has come down in direct male line from a Norman robber:
     if it be tersely predicated of him on his tombstone that he died S. P., the Hall, and the lake,
     and the wide fat lands will go to some distant needy cousins, with whom Sir Thomas is at
     dagger's drawing, and for whom he cherishes a hatred livelier even than that which poachers,
     Irish beggars, and vulpecides inspire in his gentle breast. The fact of his responsibilities
     has been chimed into St. John's ears till he is rather weary of it: he has been hearing it for
     the last five-and-twenty years—ever since indeed, that solemn day when, petticoats being cast
     aside, he was invested with the virile dignity of round jacket and breeches.
"Why don't we cut off the entail?" he asks impatiently, one day, shortly after Esther's
     visit—a visit which has naturally given him a greater distaste for the subject than he had ever
     before experienced. " You and I together can do it, cannot we, Sir Thomas, and leave the
     property to the Foundling, or Hanwell, or to some hospital or penitentiary, where it would do a
     deal more good, I don't doubt, than it ever has in our hands?" But he does not mean it; his
      pride in the old house and the old name is as great, though
     not as offensively shown, as his father's.
"It's all your cursed selfishness," says his parent, strutting and fuming about, one morning,
     over the crimson and ash-coloured squares of the library carpet; puffing out his feathers, as
     it were, and beginning to gobble-obble. "You prefer your lazy, lounging club life, your French
     chef, and d—d sybarite habits, to everything else under heaven; you don't reflect that, when a
     man has been given such advantages as yours, he owes corresponding duties to his country and
     his estate, and—and—and his father—" concludes Sir Thomas, rather at a loss for a
     peroration.
St. John lifts his eyebrows almost imperceptibly at the last clause. "If you like to look out
     for a wife for me," he says, flinging himself indolently into an arm-chair, and speaking
     half-seriously, half-derisively, "and will engage to undertake all the bore of the
     preliminaries—love-making, dancing attendance, etc.—I have no objection to marrying, since the
     duty of continuing this illustrious race has been perverse enough to devolve on me, who, God
     knows, am not ambitious of perpetuating myself."
"Love-making !—pooh !" repeats Sir Thomas, contemptuously; "we need have none of that
     rubbish; respect and esteem are a deal the best basis to go upon; that's what your mother and I
     began life with—"
"And have continued undiminished up to the present day," says St. John, with a slight sneer.
     "Well" (yawning), "if you can find, amongst the wide range of your acquaintance, any young lady
     who is willing io respect and esteem me—which is not likely—or to respect and esteem
     Felton—which is more probable, and, after all, comes to much the same in the end—she may have
     the felicity of being your daughter-in-law, for all I shall do to hinder it: anything for a
     quiet life."

Sir Thomas turns his bright little fierce eyes sharply upon his offspring, prepared, at a
     moment's notice, to precipitate himself into one of his blustering, sputtering, God damning
     rages if he detect the slightest sign of mirth or derision on the young man's face. But none
     such is to be found; his downcast eyes are fixed with lazy interest upon his own substantial
     legs, stretched in black-and-crimson-ribbed stockings, straight before him. The ire of his
     parent's gaze is mitigated. "If you are in earnest," he says, surlily, "and not making a jest
     of this, as you mostly do of every serious subject, why—why—there's no use in going far afield
     for what one has ready to one's hand."
"Where?" asks St. John, thoroughly mystified by the Delphic obscurity of his papa's remark,
     looking vaguely round the room, out on the terrace, at the laughing, tumbling fountain, at the
     garden roller.
"Where?" repeats Sir Thomas, rather irritated at his son's obtuseness. "Why, here! not five
     yards off! in this very house!" Then, seeing him still look puzzled: "God bless my soul, sir!
     where are your wits to-day? How can you do better than Conny? That bit of land of hers down at
     Four Oaks dovetails into ours as neatly as possible; it seems as if it were intended by
     Providence," ends Sir Thomas, piously.
St. John gives a long, low whistle. "Conny !" he repeats, in unfeigned surprise. "I should as
     soon have thought of marrying my mother. Why, we have been like brother and sister all our
     lives."
"Fiddlesticks!" says Sir Thomas, gruffly. "She is no more your sister than I am. When I was
     young, if people were born brothers and sisters they called themselves so, and if they were not
     they did not. I hate your adopted brother and sister and father and motherhoods."
"Conny!" ejaculates St. John, again, reflectively.

The idea is thoroughly new, certainly, but it does not altogether displease him.
He is thinking of her approvingly, as the one woman whom, above all others, it would be
     impossible for him to love. After all, it is not a wife for him that is required; God knows, he
     has no desire for such an appendage; it is a mother for the heir to Felton that is wanted; and
     for that purpose she will do as well as another—better than most, indeed, being statelier,
     fairer, of better growth. If she can transmit to her progeny her own straight features, instead
     of Sir Thomas's bottle nose, or St. John's long nondescript one, so much the better for
     them.
"Well?" says Sir Thomas, impatiently, strutting up and down, with his hands under his
     green-coat tails.
"If she have no objection, neither have I; 'one woman is as good as another, if not
      better,' as the Irishman said," answers the young man, indifferently. "Well, Sir
     Thomas," rising and looking excessively bored, "I suppose I may go now, mayn't I? I promised
     Bellew to go down to the kennels with him, and as it is past twelve o'clock, I'm afraid my
     bliss cannot well be consummated to-day."
He wants an heir, and she wants diamonds, and so the bargain is struck.
"She is good to look at, and she does not pretend to care two straws about me—both causes for
     special thankfulness," he says to himself, with a sort of sardonic philosophy, after his
     decisive interview with his betrothed. "'On this day two years I married: Whom the Lord
      loveth He chasteneth.' Will Byron's summary of wedded felicity be mine also ?
     Probably. I suppose one may think oneself tolerably lucky nowadays if one steer clear of Sir
     James Wilde, and if one's children do not bear a very striking resemblance to one's
     neighbour."


"And I know he's Mary's cousin;
For my firstborn son and heir
Much resembles that young guardsman,
With the selfsame curly hair."
Meanwhile Esther's little holiday is succeeded by no others; it remains one green oasis, with
     well and palmtrees, among long stretches of shifting, blinding, desert sand. Mr. Linley,
     indeed, has been to call, and has been rewarded for his attention by a
     three-quarters-of-an-hour téte-à-téte with Mrs. Blessington.
     Esther is aware of his presence; is visited, indeed, by a small and contemptible desire to go
     down and chat with the young fellow; feels a weak craving for the touch of a friendly hand, for
     the greeting of admiring eyes and courteous words. But, being dimly conscious that the small
     acquaintance she has already had with him has made Gerard conceive an even worse opinion of her
     than he had before nourished, she restrains herself, in her great, desire to prove to him that
     she is not the insatiable greedy coquette he falsely thinks her; and stays upstairs in the
     cold, in her great bare barrack, curled up on the broad paintless window-seat, and vainly
     trying to read " Pamela"—the hairbreadth escapes from RUIN (in big letters), in the shape of a
     handsome and generous master, of that most austerely virtuous and priggish of waiting-maids
     being one of the newest works of fiction in the Blessington library.
And St. John hears of Linley's visit, and does not hear of Esther's little self-abnegation;
     and, too proud to ask any questions about the matter, pictures to himself soft willades,
     challenging smiles, hand-pressures, under the purblind eyes of the old lady, and, so picturing,
     eats his heart out with a dumb gnawing jealousy.
One evening, in one of her late lonely saunters (Miss Blessington never accompanies her on
     her walks), Esther
      has strayed outside the park paling into the road, lured by
     the splendour of a great holly-bush, all afire with thousand clustered berries, amid the dark
     glister of varnished leaves. Now, although having well understood (as 
"Johnny and his sister Jane,
While walking down a shady lane," unfortunately for themselves, did
     not) that 
"Fruit in lanes is seldom good," Esther has coveted those berries.
     Fond of bright colours as a child or a savage, she has been wrestling obstinately with the
     stout tough stems, and has come off ultimately victor, with only one very considerable scratch,
     and several lesser ones on each bare hand. This spoil, robbed from niggard winter, will make
     the old rat palace at home so bravely, warmly gay. As she strolls slowly along, considering her
     treasures, the sound of a trotting horse on the road behind her reaches her ears. She turns,
     and sees a glimmer of scarlet flashing through the misty light. Is it St. John coming back from
     hunting? If St. John have a figure light and spare as a jockey's, have a large red moustache,
     and a small questioning retroussé face, this is he; if he have
     not, this is not he.
"How de-do, Miss Craven?" says Linley, throwing himself off his horse, and coming towards her
     with ready right; hand heartily outstretched. "Could not imagine who you were. I thought,
     perhaps, you were the spirit of a departed Blessington, and as I am rather nervous, and
     frightened out of my wits at ghosts, I had half a mind to turn and flee."
"Only curiosity got the better of fear," she says, smiling up at him, or rather down on him,
     through the steaming January evening; "you thought I might prove human, after all?"

"Why did not you come and see me the other day when I came to call upon you?" he asks,
     walking along beside her; "I believe you were at home all the time." In his heart he does not
     in the least believe it.
She does not answer; but, without thinking of what she is doing, picks off the berries, the
     procuring of which had cost her so many wounds, and strews them along the road.
"Were you really at home?" he repeats, a misgiving as to such having been the case
     crossing his mind, and giving his vanity a slight prick.
"Yes, I was."
"And knew I was there all the time?" 
"Yes."
"A prey to Mrs. Blessington—?"
"Yes."
"And never came to my rescue?" 
"Did you expect the butler and housekeeper to come and entertain you?" she asks, a little
     bitterly. "Have you forgotten what I told you the other day—that I am Mrs. Blessington's
      valet? I have as little concern with her visitors as the kitchen-maids have."
"But I was not her visitor," objects the young fellow, stoutly—"at least" (laughing)
     "I was, but Heaven knows I did not mean to be! However, 'God tempers the wind to the
      shorn lamb,' and I obtained a great deal of information gratis upon a subject on which
     I really never had reflected as seriously as, it appears, I ought to have done—"
"Draughts and sandbags! I know what you are going to say," interrupts Esther, breaking into a
     childish lighthearted laugh. "We do hear a great deal about them; but I don't mind now; I'm
     used to it. I fall into a sort of waking trance when the subject is first broached, and say
      'Yes' and 'No,' and 'H'm' and 'Oh,' at stated intervals; it
     does just as well as listening all through."
Linley laughs too. He is always glad of an excuse for laughing. Life has been to him as yet
     only laughable or smileable.
"Not a bad plan," he says, commendingly; "but, really now, I flattered myself I struck out
     one or two very original thoughts on the subject of sash-windows; I said several rather
     brilliant things, only she did not seem to see them. I hoped she would have found my
     conversation so improving that she would have asked me to come again; but she did not do
     anything of the kind."
"They never ask anybody to Blessington," says Esther, feeling the string of her tongue
     loosed, and experiencing, despite herself, great enjoyment in having some one to chatter to, at
     whom it is not necessary to bawl, and who does not answer her monosyllabically with
      fade chilly smiles. "They are too old to care for society; like Barzillai the
     Gileadite, they cannot hear any more ' the voice of singing men and singing
      women.' They have the clergyman and his wife to dine on Christmas Day, and there their
     gaiety for the year begins and ends."
"And yours too?"
"And mine too. But I don't wish for gaiety," she answers, gravely, with an involuntary glance
     at her crape, which has grown very brown, and rusty, and shabby genteel.
"It must be an awful fate being shut up with those two old mummies," says Linley,
     compassionately, his pity for Miss Craven made vivid by his personal recollections of Mrs.
     Blessington's conversational power. "I had rather live in a lighthouse, or sweep a crossing, by
     long odds."
"So would I," she answers, drily, "if any one would set on foot a subscription to buy me a
     broom."

"You have Miss Blessington now as a companion, at all events," rejoins he, glad to fix on any
     bright spot in his poor new acquaintance's mud-coloured life.
"Yes; she is pleasant to look at."
"And to talk to."
"She never talks."
"And Gerard? He is not particularly pleasant to look at, certainly—"
"Not particularly," she assents; feeling a hot glow steal all over her, as at an insult to
     herself.
"But when he is not in one of his sulks, as he was the other day—do you remember?—he is not a
     bad fellow, as fellows go."
"Isn't he?"
He looks at her with surprise. "Why, surely, living in the same house with him, you ought to
     know him, at least as well as I do?" 
"I never speak to him, and he never speaks to me," she answers, shortly.
Linley bursts out laughing. "Good heavens! what a horrible picture you draw! You remind one
     of Mr. Watts's pretty little hymn—
"'Where'er I take my walks abroad
How many poor I see!
And as I never speaks to them
They never speak to me.'" 
Esther laughs; but anyone listening might have heard a melancholy ring in her merriment.
"Does nobody speak to anybody then at Blessington? asks the young man,
     aghast at the state of things as revealed by his companion's answers.
"Mr. Blessington roars at Mrs. Blessington, and Mrs. Blessington roars at Mr. Blessington,
     and I roar at them both."

"And the other two—do not they speak?"
"We are, none of us, much addicted to conversation," she answers, grimly; "but, en revanche, what we do say we say very loud."
"Are you all deaf, then?"
"No; but when one lives with deaf people, one gets into the habit of thinking that the whole
     world is hard of hearing; one bawls at everyone."
"What an exhausting process!" he says, with a shrug; "takes a great deal out of you, doesn't
     it?"
"A good deal; lately, I have generally ended the day without any voice at all. I don't mind
     making short remarks at the top of my voice, but shouting out six columns of the
     Times, as is daily my pleasing task, is rather fatiguing."
"How inhuman of them to allow you!" he cries, indignantly, looking at the slender, fragile
     figure, at the childish face-so appealing, so touching in its utter paleness, now that he sees
     it without the temporary rose-flush of excitement.
"Not at all," she answers, simply; " they pay me for it."
"It would require very high pay to indemnify any one for the sacrifice of the best years of
     their lives to those two old fossils; I thought I was entitled to something considerable for
     standing the old woman for three-quarters of an hour the other day without uttering a groan,"
     answers the young man, more seriously than he generally takes the trouble of saying
     anything.
"My pay is fifty pounds a year," she answers, frankly, "if you call that high."
Fifty pounds! It would not find him in cigars. He has thrown away five times that sum, before
     now, at lansquenet at one sitting.
Involuntarily his thoughts glance back over his own life—
      the luxurious sybarite life in which, hitherto, the heaviest
     misfortunes have been a too-prolonged frost, a disease among the grouse, the coming in second
     at a steeplechase, or the pressure of a heavy helmet on his forehead when on duty on a hot
     summer afternoon. Involuntarily, he compares this life of his with the existence of the slight
     frail child beside him: but the comparison is disagreeable, and so he stifles it, as he always
     stifles, on principle, every painful thought, as a sin against his religion of ease.
"Fifty pounds!—what a pittance!" he ejaculates.
"Do you think so?" she answers, surprised. "I think it is a good deal. Considering that they
     find me in food and lodging, and that I do for them only what any charity- school boy could do
     nearly as well, it is surely enough."
Her companion differs widely in opinion from her, but 
"When ignorance is bliss
'Tis folly to be wise;"  and reflecting that it is fortunate that
     she is satisfied, on whatever insufficient grounds her satisfaction rests, he drops the
     subject, and continues his catechism on a different head.
"Have you no amusement of any kind—none?"
"Oh dear, yes! We drive into Shelford every day in a close carriage, with all the windows
     up."
"Terrific! And what do you do when you get there?"
"We come back again."
"And have you no visitors? Does no one ever come to call?"
"Yes; you came the other day."
"And am I a solitary instance of would-be sociability?"
"Not quite. Mr. Blessington gets into a panic about himself, sometimes, and thinks that he is
     drawing near his latter end; and he bids us all good-bye; and he cries, and
      we cry, and then Mr. Brand, the doctor, comes and reassures us."

"I had no idea that there was anything the matter with the old gentleman."
"No more there is. He has no more idea of dying really than you have; less,
     probably. You may break your neck out hunting, and he cannot well break his out of his
     armchair. When a person has got into such a confirmed habit of living as he has," she
     concludes, drily, "they find it extremely difficult to break themselves of it."
He smiles.
"After all," she continues, thoughtfully, "since it is wear-and-tear of mind, brain and
     heart-work, that drives people to the churchyard, I don't see any reason why mere sleeping and
     eating machines should not go on for ever."
It would be impossible to imagine a more innocent dialogue than the foregoing, would not it?
     But the interlocutors have involuntarily fallen into a very gentle saunter, as two people that,
     finding each other's society agreeable, are in no haste to part. With his horse's bridle
     carelessly thrown over his arm, a small muddy scarlet gentleman strolls along with his face
     turned with interest towards his companion, who is chattering away to him freely and
     readily—not as having any particular partiality for him, but as being something young,
     friendly, compassionate.
This is the picture—invested by twilight with an air of mystery that it would not have worn
     in daylight—that salutes the eyes of a second and larger scarlet gentleman, splashing home
     through the puddles on a tired horse. As he passes them, Gerard (for it is he) pulls up his
     horse into a walk, for he would not have the incivility to cover any woman with dirt, even
     though the woman in question be a vile greedy coquette, to whose insatiable vanity all men are
     meat. Then, raising his hat stiffly, he rides on without speaking. As he trots homeward through
     the dusk, the thought flashes into his writhing heart: "It was an assignation!
      She arranged it with him on the day he came to call.
     Damnable flirt! Is not she satisfied with two ruined lives? Is she fool enough to
     think that Linley will marry her? A nice time of night for a respectable young woman to be out
     walking with a man she has only seen twice in her life! And I heard her tell Mrs. Blessington
     the other day that she never went outside the park-gates! Liar! What man was ever deep enough
     to be up to a Woman's tricks? She'll go to the dogs, as sure as fate, if she is left to
     herself! Pshaw! I daresay she knows the way there already. She is so young; shall I
     warn her? Shall I speak to her? Not I. Thank God, it is no business of mine!" 
" Gerard!" says Linley, as, having passed them, he strikes into a brisk trot—looking as if he
     were going to his own funeral, and just about to join the cortège. "Certainly being in love don't improve him; he is not half the fellow he
     was last season."
But Esther, in the moment of his passing them, had caught a glimpse of the eager white anger
     of his face, and she hardly hears. "I'm afraid Mr. Gerard thought it odd my being out so late,"
     she says, trembling with recollected fear of those altered, wrathful eyes.
"Well, and if he did?" cries Linley, impatiently.
"It is very late," she says, looking round into the dusk; "it must be, by the light.
     I never noticed how dark it has grown since you overtook me."
"It is no darker than it was before Gerard passed us," he answers, rather nettled.
"No, but—"
"Why, how scared you look!" he interrupts her. "You don't mean to say you are
      afraid of him?" (incredulously.) "If I were you, I don't think I should pay much
     deference to the opinion of a person who, as you say, never has the civility even to speak to
     you."

She is silent.
"It is the authority of his eye that awes you, I suppose?" says the young man, vexed and
     sneering:— 
"'An eye like Mars', to threaten and command.'
      "Threaten! Yes—I can testify to that I"
Hearing his words, Esther recovers her self-possession, and speaks with some dignity: "You
     are quite wrong. Mr. Gerard's opinion has no influence whatever on my sayings or doings; it
     would be very ridiculous if it had. It was merely that his look of surprise reminded me of what
     I ought to have recollected without reminding, that I should have been home an hour ago."
"Wanted again, I suppose?" says the young man, with the air of an aggrieved person. "I wish
     you were not in quite such request; you are always being wanted."
"There is a stile close here," says Esther, evidently in a hurry to be off; "if I cross it,
     and make a short-cut across the park, I shall be home twenty minutes sooner than if I went by
     the road. Good-bye."
"Good-bye," he says, reluctantly. "I'm not a blood-thirsty fellow generally, but I wish that
     Gerard had broken his neck over that bullfinch that he came to grief over to day, before he had
     come poking his ugly nose here, where nobody wanted him; at least I did not, and, to judge by
     your face, neither did you. Well! when are we to meet again, I wonder?"
"Never!—some time or other—soon!" answers Esther, hastily and contradictorily, running up the
     gamut of adverbs in search of the one most likely to obtain her release. Having gained that
     object, she jumps over the stile, and disappears into a sea of mist.
Meanwhile St. John, having arrived at Blessington, and given up his horse to a groom, enters
     the house; but the
      confinement of roof and walls is insupportable to him. So he
     goes out again, and, walking up the avenue, stations himself at the gate. There, resting his
     arms on the topmost bar, he stands, straining his eyes down the road by which he expects to see
     Esther and her companion make their appearance.
"They will defer their parting to the last moment—that is of course," he says to himself, in
     his lonely pain. "Well," taking out his watch and minuting them, in order to drink the cup of
     his jealous misery to the dregs, "it is not more than a mile and a half from here to the place
     where I passed them; let us see how long a time they will manage to be in doing the
     distance."
He has not long to wait. Before five minutes are over he hears the sound of a horse's feet. "
     Linley must not see him watching them," he thinks, with a sort of shame at himself, and so
     steps back into the shade of a great tree.
Linley rides by alone. His face is turned towards the house, in whose great black
     facade the lighted windows make oblong-shaped red glories; his eyes are trying to fix upon
     Esther's casement. Of course he hits upon the wrong one, and directs his sentimental gaze
     towards the apartment where, with wig off and teeth out, Mrs. Blessington, aided by her maid,
     is slowly moving through the stages of her dinner toilette.
"She must have taken the short-cut across the park," thinks Gerard, with a sense of unwilling
     relief. "Afraid of my telling tales of her escapade, I suppose."
He retraces his steps down the avenue, and, following a back road that skirts the
     kitchen-garden, reaches another gate that leads into the park, and there stands and waits
     again.
The short-cut has proved rather a long one. Part of the park has been fenced off, to keep the
     deer and the Scotch
      cattle separate; a gate which she had reckoned upon finding
     open, she discovers to be padlocked, and has to make a long circuit round to another gate.
As she toils weary-footed through the wet grass, vague alarms assail him that watches for
     her. Can any evil have come to her in the darkness? Most improbably in that still, safe park.
     After a while, and when his reasonless fears are beginning to gather more strongly about his
     heart, he hears the sound as of some one running pantingly. Esther is not so good at running as
     she was in the old Glan-yr-Afon days. She has been flying along in hot haste, with a mixed fear
     of Scotch bulls and goblins in pursuit. As she approaches the gate, Gerard opens it for her.
     Seeing it swing open without any apparent cause, she gives a great nervous start; then,
     discovering the motive cause of the phenomenon, drops into a walk.
"It is rather late, Mr. Gerard, I'm afraid, isn't it so ?" she asks, with some hesitation at
     this disobedience to his command of silence. And yet, surely, if he had meant not to speak to
     her, he would not have come thither.
Two speech-gifted human beings could hardly be expected to meet with less civility than two
     pigs, who would at least exchange a grunt.
He looks at his watch again. "It is ten minutes to six," he replies with punctilious
     politeness.
"Is it really? I had no idea how the time went," she says, apologetically, "until
     your look of—of—surprise reminded me."
The line of defence she has hit upon is unlucky.
"Really!" he answers, stiffly.
"I had not noticed how the light had gone, nor anything about the matter," she continues,
     innocently, floundering at every word into deeper disgrace.
"I daresay not," he replies, freezingly.

She had addressed him, penitent and humble, willing to take a scolding in all submissiveness,
     but the chill brevity of his answers turns her meekness to gall.
"When one is in pleasant company," she remarks, with a rather hysterical laugh, " one forgets
     the flight of time."
"Undoubtedly," replies Gerard, endeavouring to conceal his anger under an appearance of
     calmness, and unable to manage more than one word at a time.
"If one has not taken a vow of perpetual silence, it is a great relief to have a little
     conversation with a person who is neither deaf nor dumb," she says,
     emboldened by exasperation.
"An immense relief, no doubt," he answers, in deep displeasure. "And yet, if you will allow
     me," he continues, unable to resist the temptation to lecture her—"who am so much older than
     you, and can have no interest in the matter but your own advantage—to give an opinion, I should
     recommend your choosing a fitter time of day for your meetings, even with so desirable and
     congenial a companion as Mr. Linley"
"Beggars must not be choosers," she answers, sulkily. "You seem to forget how very small a
     portion of the day I have at my own disposal."
He draws himself up to his full height, and a stern expression makes his lip thin. "I was
     right," he says internally; "it was no accident!" Then aloud: "I apologise, Miss Craven, for
     interfering in your affairs, in which, God knows, I have small concern. I only thought that, as
     you are so young, you might not be aware that nocturnal walks with a man of Linley's character
     are not advantageous to any woman's reputation."
"I know nothing about his character," retorts she, defiantly; "I daresay it is as good as
     other people's. All I
      know is, that he is very kind and civil to me, which is what
     nobody else is nowadays."
Then, to avoid the disgrace of seeming to court his compassion by tears, she darts from his
     side, and rushes to that harbour of refuge—her great, bare sleeping-chamber.
