
CHAPTER XV.
THE world's life is shorter by a fortnight than it was on that last day I told you of, and
     during that fortnight the ordinary amount of things have happened. The usual
      number of people have had their bodies knocked to atoms and
     their souls into eternity by express trains; the usual number of men and maids have come
     together in the Times column in holy matrimony; and the usual number of unwelcome
     babies have been consigned to the canals. A great many players have laid down their cards,
     risen up, and gone away from the game of life; but whether winners or losers, they tell us not,
     neither shall we know awhile; and other players have taken their places, and have sat down with
     the zest of ignorance. 
"Nature takes no notice of those that are coming or going." She
     is briskly occupied at her old business—the business that seems to us so purposeless,
     progressless, bootless—the making only to unmake; the beautifying only to make hideous; the
     magnifying only to debase. Oh life! life! Oh clueless labyrinth! Oh answerless riddle!
September is waning mellowly into death, like a holy man to whom an easy passage has been
     vouchsafed; the land has been noisy with guns, and many partridges have been turned into small
     bundles of ruffled features—little round, brown corpses. Bob Brandon walks stoutly up the furzy
     hill sides and along the stony levels after the shy, scarce birds; he is out and about all day,
     but you do not hear him whistling or humming so often as you used to do. "He goeth
      heavily, as one that mourneth." The fortnight is past, and yet another week, and still
     Esther holds no speech of returning; her letters have waxed fewer, shorter, colder. Since that
     first one, mention of Gerard's name is there in them none. Bob is not of a suspicious nature,
     but he can add two and two together. He has been doing that little dreary sum all the last ten
     days, till his head aches. But though he can do this sum himself, he will pot suffer any one
     else to do it—at least in his presence.

One day at dinner, when Bessy was beginning a little sour adaptation of the text, "The
      lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye," etc., to Esther, he interrupted her with
     downright outspoken anger and rebuke; and, though he apologised to her afterwards, and begged
     her pardon for having spoken rudely to her, yet she felt that that theme must not be dealt with
     again. He had promised to love her always in all loyalty, and whether she were loyal or
     disloyal to him made no difference. He will let no man, woman, or child speak evil of her in
     his hearing: 
"..... love is not love
That alters when it alteration finds,
Or bends with the remover to remove."
Jack Craven, too, is beginning to wonder a little when Esther is going to return to the old
     farmhouse—beginning to feel rather lonely as he sits by himself on the window-ledge of an
     evening, smoking his pipe, with no one to take it out of his mouth now, and thinking on his
     unpaid for steam ploughs and sterile mountain-fields, with no one to speak comfortably to him,
     or console him with sweet illogical logic.
"All is not gold that glitters." Care gets up behind the man, however fine a
     horse he may be riding. Care is sitting en croupe behind Miss
     Craven, and she cannot unseat him. It strikes her sometimes with a shock of fear that she is
     succeeding too well; that the admiration and liking and love she had hankered so
     greedily after, had striven unfairly for, had made wicked lightnings from her eyes to obtain,
     was ready to be poured out lavishly, eagerly, honestly at her feet, and she dare not put out a
     finger to take them up. She had been walking miles and miles of nights, up and down her
     bedroom, from door to window, from window to door, when all the rest of the house are abed and
     asleep.
 "What shall  I do?—what shall I do?" she cries out to
      her own heart, while her hands clasp one another hotly, and
     the candles, so tall at dressing time, burn short and low. "Oh! if I had some one to advise
     me!—not that I would take their advice, if it were to give up St. John! Give him up! How can I
     give up what I have not got? Oh Bob, Bob, if you only knew how I hate you!—Only less than I
     hate myself! Oh! why was not my tongue cut out before that unlucky day when I said I would
      try to like you? Try, indeed! If there is need for trying, one may know how the trial
     will end. Shall I tell St. John? What! volunteer an unasked confession? Warn him off Robert's
     territory when he is not thinking of trespassing? And if I were to tell him—oh Heaven! I had
     sooner put my hand into a lion's mouth—what would he think of me? He, with his
     fastidious, strict ideas of what a woman should be and do and look? Shall I write and ask Bob
     to let me off? It would not break his heart; he is too good; only bad people ever break their
     hearts, as I shall do some day, I dare say. Oh! poor Bob, how badly I am treating you! Poor
     Bob! and his yellow roses that St. John made such fun of! How I wish that the thoughts of your
     long legs and your little sour Puritan sisters did not make me feel so sick! Oh! if you would
     but be good enough to jilt me! What shall I do?—what shall I do ? Wait, wait,
     go on waiting for what will never come, probably, and when I have degraded myself by waiting
     till hope is quite dead, go back whence I came, and jig-jog through life alongside of Bob in a
     poke bonnet like his mamma's. Ah Jack, Jack! why did I ever leave you? How I wish that all Bobs
     and St. Johns and other worries were at the bottom of the Red Sea, and you and I king and queen
     of some desert island, where there was nothing nearer humanity than monkeys and macaws, and
     where there was no rent nor workmen's wages nor lovers to torment us!"

One must go to bed at some time or other, however puzzled and pondering one may be; and in
     furtherance of this end, Esther, having reached this turn in her reflections, begins to
     undress. In so doing she misses a locket containing Jack's picture, which she always wears
     round her neck. She must have dropped it downstairs, where perhaps some housemaid's clumsy foot
     may tread upon it, and mar the dear, ugly young face within. She must go and look for it,
     though the clock is striking one. She takes up her candle, and runs lightly downstairs. The gas
     is out. Great shadows from behind come up alongside, and then stretch ahead of her; the statues
     glimmer ghostly chill from their dark pedestals. With a shock of frightened surprise she sees a
     stream of light issuing through the half-open door of the morning-room. Is it burglars, or are
     the flowers giving a ball, as in Andersen's fair, fanciful tale? She creeps gently up, and
     peeps in. The lamp still burns on the centre table, and pacing up and down, up and down, as she
     has been doing overhead, is a man buried in deepest thought. Fear gives place to a great,
     pleasant shyness. "I—I—I have lost my locket," she stammers.
He gives a tremendous start. "You up still!" he says, in astonishment. "Lost your locket,
     have you? Oh! by-the-by, I found it just now; here it is. Do you know (with a smile) I could
     not resist the temptation of looking to see who you had got inside it. Are you very angry?"
"Very!" she answers, drooping her eyes under his. She could sit and stare into Bob's eyes by
     the hour together, if she liked, only that it would be rather a dull amusement; with St. John
     it is different.
"Don't go; stay and talk a minute. It is so pleasant to think that we are the only conscious,
     sentient beings in the house—all the others sleeping like so many pigs," he says, coming over
     to her with an excited loo1 on his face, such as
      calm, slow-pulsed English gentlemen are not wont to
     wear.
"No, no, I cannot—I must not."
She has taken the bracelets off her arms, and the rose from her hair : there she stands in
     her ripe, fresh beauty, with only the night and St. John to look at her.
"Five minutes," he says, with pleading, humility, but putting his back against the door as he
     speaks.
"If you prevent my going, of course I cannot help myself," she answers, putting on a
     little air of offended dignity to hide her tremulous embarrassment.
"Don't be offended! Do you know" (leaving his post of defence to follow her)—"do you know
     what I have been doing ever since you went—not to bed apparently?"
"Drinking brandy and soda-water, probably" (looking rather surly, and affecting to yawn).
"That would have been hardly worth mentioning. I have been wondering whether my luck is on
     the turn. I have been da— I mean very unlucky all my life. I never put any money on a horse
     that he was not sure to be nowhere. Luck does turn, sometimes, doesn't it ? Do you think mine
     is turning?"
"How can I tell?"
"You don't ask in what way I have been so unlucky. Why don't you? Have you no curiosity?"
"I never like to seem inquisitive," answers Esther, coldly, hoping that he does not notice
     how the white hands that lie on her lap are trembling.
"Do you recollect my telling you that I had made a great fool of myself once?" 
"Yes."
"Do you care to hear about it, or do you not?" pulling at his drooping moustache, in some
     irritation at her feigned indifference.

"Yes, I care," she answers, lighting up an eager, mobile face—fear, shyness, and the sense of
     the impropriety of the situation all ceding to strong curiosity.
"Well, it was about a woman, of course. Cela va sans dire; a
     man never can get into a scrape without a woman to help him, any more than he can be born, or
     learn his A B C."
"Was she handsome?" looking up, and speaking quickly.
That is always the first question a woman asks about a rival. I do not know why, I am sure,
     as many of the greatest mischiefs that have been done on earth have been done by ugly women.
     Rousseau's Madame d'Houdetot squinted ferociously.
"Pretty well. She had a thundering good figure, and knew how to use her eyes. By-the-by"
     (with an anxious discontent in his tone), "so do you. I often wish you did not; I hate being
     able to trace one point of resemblance between you and her."
"Did she refuse you?" asks Esther, hastily, too anxious for the sequel of the story to think
     of resenting the accusation made against her eyes.
"Not she! I should not have been the one to blame her if she had; one cannot quarrel with
     people for their tastes. She swore she liked me better than any one else in the world; that she
     would go down to Erebus with me, be flayed alive for me—all the protestations usual in such
     cases, in fact, I suppose," he ends bitterly.
"And threw you over?" says Essie, leaning forward with lips half apart, and her breast rising
     and falling in short, quick undulations.
"Exactly; had meant nothing else all along. I filled only the pleasant and honourable
     situation of decoy duck to lure on shyer game, and when the bird was limed—such a bird, too! a
     great, heavy, haw-haw brute in the Carabineers, with
      a face like a horse—she pitched me away as coolly as you
     would pitch an old shoe—or as you would pitch me, I dare say, if you had the
     chance."
"And what did you do ?" asks Essie, breathlessly, her great eyes, black as death, fastened on
     his face.
St. John smiles—a smile half fierce, half amused.
"Run him through the body, do you suppose?—spitted him like a lark or a woodcock?—cut out his
     heart and made her eat it, as the man did to his wife in that fine old Norman story? No; I
     could have done any of them with pleasure if I had had the chance; with all our veneering and
     French polish, I think the tiger is only half dead in any of us; but I did not; I did none of
     them: I—prepare for bathos, please—I went out hunting; it was in winter, and, as misfortunes
     never come singly, I staked one of the best horses I ever was outside of: that diverted the
     current of my grief a little, I think."
He speaks in a jeering, bantering tone, scourging himself with the rod of his own ridicule,
     as men are apt to do when they are conscious of having made signal asses of themselves in order
     to be beforehand with the world.
"And she told you she was fond of you " ejaculates Essie, raising her sweet face,
     sympathetic, indignant, glowing, towards him.
"Scores of times—swore it. I suppose it is no harder to tell a lie a hundred times than once;
      ce n'est que le premier pas que coûte. Tell me," he says,
     vehemently, leaning over her, and taking hold of her hand, as if hardly conscious of what he
     was doing—" you are a woman, you must know—tell me, is there no difference between truth and
     lies? have they both exactly the same face? How is a man to tell them apart?"
They are both speaking in a low key, almost under their breath, for fear of drawing down upon
     themselves the apparition
      of Sir Thomas in déshabille
     and a blunderbuss. Their faces are close together; she can see the lines that climate and grief
     and passion have drawn about his eyes and mouth—can see the wild, honest anxiety looking
     through his soul's clear windows.
"I—I—don't know," she answers, stammering, and shivering a little, half with fear at his
     vehemence, half with the strong contagion of his passion.
"Do you ever tell untruths?" he asks, hurriedly, scanning her face with anxious eyes, that
     try to look through the mask of fair, white flesh, and see the heart underneath. "Don't be
     angry with me, but I sometimes fancy that you might."
"I! what do you mean?" snatching away her hand, and the angry blood rushing headlong
     to her cheeks.
"Is thy servant a dog that he should do, this thing ?" Hazael was only the
     first of a long string who have asked that virtuously irate question.
His countenance clears a little. "You must forgive me," he says, repentantly. "I suppose it
     is my own unlucky experience that has made me so suspicious; because my own day has been
     cloudy, I have wisely concluded upon the non-existence of the sun. But, come" (smiling a
     little), "one good turn deserves another : have you nothing to tell me in return for the long
     list of successes I have been confiding to you?"
He watches her changing, flushing, paling face, with a keen solicitude which surprises
     himself. What can this downy, baby-faced rustic have to confess? Now for Bob! Now is the
     time—now or never! Sing, oh goddess, the destructive wrath of St. John, the son of Thomas! What
     time, place, situation, can be suitabler for such a tale? It is an hour and a half past
     midnight; they love one another madly, and they are alone.

Are they alone, though? Is this one of the statues stepped down from its pedestal in the hall
     that is coming in at the door, severely, chilly, fair, with a candle in its hand?
"Miss Craven!" ejaculates Constance (for it is she), stopping suddenly short, while a look of
     surprised displeasure ripples over her calm, smooth face.
Silence for a second on the part of everybody.
"It is a pity, St. John," says Miss Blessington, drawing herself up, and looking an
     impersonation of rigid, aggressive, pitiless virtue, "that you and Miss Craven should choose
     such a very unseasonable time for your interviews; it is not a very good example for the
     servants, if any of them should happen to find you here."
"The servants have something better to do than to come prying and eavesdropping upon their
     betters," retorts St. John, flushing angry-red to the roots of his hair, and not taking the
     most conciliatory line of defence.
"You are mistaken if you think I have been eavesdropping," says Constance, with dignified
     composure, her grave face looking out chastely cold from the down-fallen veil of her yellow
     hair. "I could not sleep, and came down to look for a book. Pray don't let me disturb your
      téte-à- téte" making a movement towards going.
"Don't be a fool, Conny!" cries St. John, hastily, in bitter fear of having compromised
     Esther by his ill-advised detention of her: "it is the purest accident your having found Miss
     Craven and me together here!"
"I am well aware of that," she answers, with a little smiling sneer.
"You know what I mean, perfectly well: it is the purest accident our being here.
     Miss Craven lost her locket, and—"
"And" (smiling still)—"and you have been helping her
      to look for it. Yes, I see. Well, I—hope you will find it.
     Good-night!" going out and closing the door behind her.
"What did she say?—what does she mean ?" cries Essie, panting, and with a face hardly less
     white than her dress.
"What does it matter what she means? She's a fool!" answers St. John, wrathfully. "Go to bed,
     and don't think about her; who cares?"
But he looks as if he did care a good deal.
