<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Clementina</title><author>Mason, Alfred Edward Woodley (1865-1948)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1901</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER II
Wogan mounted the stairs, not daring to speculate upon the nature of the bad news. But his
     face was pale beneath its sunburn, and his hand trembled on the balustrade; for he knew—in his
     heart he knew. There could be only one piece of news which would make his haste or tardiness
     matters of no account.
Both branches of the stairs ran up to a common landing, and in the wall facing him, midway
     between the two stairheads, was a great door of tulip wood. An usher stood by the door, and at
     Wogan's approach opened it. Wogan, however, signed to him to be silent. He wished to hear, not
     to speak, and so he slipped into the room unannounced. The door was closed silently behind him,
     and at once he was surprised by the remarkable silence, almost a cessation of life it seemed,
     in a room which was quite full. Wherever the broad bars of sunshine fell, as they slanted dusty
     with motes through the open lattices of the shutters, they striped a woman's dress or a man's
     velvet coat. Yet if anyone shuffled a foot or allowed a petticoat to rustle, that person
     glanced on each side guiltily. A group of people were gathered in front of the doorway. Their
     backs were towards Wogan, and they were
      looking towards the centre of the room. Wogan raised himself on his toes and
     looked that way too. Having looked he sank down again, aware at once that he had travelled of
     late a long way in a little time, and that he was intolerably tired. For that one glance was
     enough to deprive him of his last possibility of doubt. He had seen the Chevalier de St.
     George, his King, sitting apart in a little open space, and over against him a short squarish
     man, dusty as Wogan himself, who stood and sullenly waited. It was Sir John Hay, the man who
     had been sent to fetch the Princess Clementina privately to Bologna, and here he now was back
     at Bologna and alone.
Wogan had counted much upon this marriage, more indeed than any of his comrades. It was to be
     the first step of the pedestal in the building up of a throne. It was to establish in Europe a
     party for James Stuart as strong as the party of Hanover. But so much was known to everyone in
     that room; to Wogan the marriage meant more. For even while he found himself muttering over and
     over with dry lips, as white and exhausted he leaned against the door, Clementina's
     qualifications,—"Daughter of the King of Poland, cousin to the Emperor and to the King of
     Portugal, niece to the Electors of Treves, Bavaria, and Palatine,"—the image of the girl
     herself rose up before his eyes and struck her titles from his thoughts. She was the chosen
     woman, chosen by him out of all Europe—and lost by John Hay!

He remembered very clearly at that moment his first meeting with her. He had travelled from
     court to court in search of the fitting wife, and had come at last to the palace at Ohlau in
     Silesia. It was in the dusk of the evening, and as he was ushered into the great stone hall,
     hung about and carpeted with barbaric skins, he had seen standing by the blazing wood fire in
     the huge chimney a girl in a riding dress. She raised her head, and the firelight struck
     upwards on her face, adding a warmth to its bright colours and a dancing light to the depths of
     her dark eyes. Her hair was drawn backwards from her forehead, and the frank, sweet face
     revealed to him from the broad forehead to the rounded chin told him that here was one who
     joined to a royal dignity the simple nature of a peasant girl who works in the fields and knows
     more of animals than of mankind. Wogan was back again in that stone hall when the voice of the
     Chevalier with its strong French accent broke in upon his vision.
"Well, we will hear the story. Well, you left Ohlau with the Princess and her mother and a
     mile-long train of servants in spite of my commands of secrecy."
There was more anger and less despondency than was often heard in his voice. Wogan raised
     himself again on tiptoes and noticed that the Chevalier's face was flushed and his eyes bright
     with wrath.
"Sir," pleaded Hay, "the Princess's mother would not abate a man."
"Well, you reached Ratisbon. And there?"

"There the English minister came forward from the town to flout us with an address of welcome
     in which he used not our incognitos but our true names."
"From Ratisbon then no doubt you hurried? Since you were discovered, you shed your retinue
     and hurried?"
"Sir, we hurried—to Augsburg," faltered Hay. He stopped, and then in a burst of desperation
     he said, "At Augsburg we stayed eight days."
"Eight days?"
There was a stir throughout the room; a murmur began and ceased. Wogan wiped his forehead and
     crushed his handkerchief into a hard ball in his palm. It seemed to him that here in this room
     he could see the Princess Clementina's face flushed with the humiliation of that loitering.
"And why eight days in Augsburg?"
"The Princess's mother would have her jewels reset. Augsburg is famous for its jewellers,"
     stammered Hay.
The murmur rose again; it became almost a cry of stupefaction. The Chevalier sprang from his
     chair. "Her jewels reset!" he said. He repeated the words in bewilderment. "Her jewels reset!"
     Then he dropped again into his seat.
"I lose a wife, gentlemen, and very likely a kingdom too, so that a lady may have her jewels
     reset at Augsburg, where, to be sure, there are famous jewellers."
His glance, wandering in a dazed way about the
      room, settled again on Hay. He stamped his foot on the ground in a feverish
     irritation.
"And those eight days gave just the time for a courier from the Emperor at Vienna to pass you
     on the road and not press his horse. One should be glad of that. It would have been a pity had
     the courier killed his horse. Oh, I can fashion the rest of the story for myself. You trailed
     on to Innspruck, where the Governor marched out with a troop and herded you in. They let
      you go, however. No doubt they bade you hurry back to me."
"Sir, I did hurry," said Hay, who was now in a pitiable confusion. "I travelled hither
     without rest."
The anger waned in the Chevalier's eyes as he heard the plea, and a great dejection crept
     over his face.
"Yes, you would do that," said he. "That would be the time for you to hurry with a pigeon's
     swiftness so that your King might taste his bitter news not a minute later than need be. And
     what said she upon her arrest?"
"The Princess's mother?" asked Hay, barely aware of what he said.
"No. Her Highness, the Princess Clementina. What said she?"
"Sir, she covered her face with her hands for perhaps the space of a minute. Then she leaned
     forward to the Governor, who stood by her carriage, and cried, 'Shut four walls about me quick!
     I could sink into the earth for shame.'"

Wogan in those words heard her voice as clearly as he saw her face and the dry lips between
     which the voice passed. He had it in his heart to cry aloud, to send the words ringing through
     that hushed room, "She would have tramped here barefoot had she had one guide with a spirit to
     match hers." For a moment he almost fancied that he had spoken them, and that he heard the echo
     of his voice vibrating down to silence. But he had not, and as he realised that he had not, a
     new thought occurred to him. No one had remarked his entrance into the room. The group in front
     still stood with their backs towards him. Since his entrance no one had remarked his presence.
     At once he turned and opened the door so gently that there was not so much as a click of the
     latch. He opened it just wide enough for himself to slip through, and he closed it behind him
     with the same caution. On the landing there was only the usher. Wogan looked over the
     balustrade; there was no one in the hall below.
"You can keep a silent tongue," he said to the usher. "There's profit in it;" and Wogan put
     his hand into his pocket. "You have not seen me if any ask."
"Sir," said the man, "any bright object disturbs my vision."
"You can see a crown, though," said Wogan.
"Through a breeches pocket. But if I held it in my hand—"
"It would dazzle you."

"So much that I should be blind to the giver."
The crown was offered and taken.
Wogan went quietly down the stairs into the hall. There were a few lackeys at the door, but
     they would not concern themselves at all because Mr. Wogan had returned to Bologna. He looked
     carefully out into the street, chose a moment when it was empty, and hurried across it. He
     dived into the first dark alley that he came to, and following the wynds and byways of the town
     made his way quickly to his lodging. He had the key to his door in his pocket, and he now kept
     it ready in his hand. From the shelter of a corner he watched again till the road was clear; he
     even examined the windows of the neighbouring houses lest somewhere a pair of eyes might happen
     to be alert. Then he made a run for his door, opened it without noise, and crept secretly as a
     thief up the stairs to his rooms, where he had the good fortune to find his servant. Wogan had
     no need to sign to him to be silent. The man was a veteran corporal of French Guards who after
     many seasons of campaigning in Spain and the Low Countries had now for five years served Mr.
     Wogan. He looked at his master and without a word went off to make his bed.
Wogan sat down and went carefully over in his mind every minute of the time since he had
     entered Bologna. No one had noticed him when he rode in as the lady's postillion,—no one. He
     was sure of that. The lady herself did not know him from Adam, and fancied him an Italian into
     the bargain—of
      that, too, he had no doubt. The handful of lackeys at the door of the King's house
     need not be taken into account. They might gossip among themselves, but Wogan's appearances and
     disappearances were so ordinary a matter, even that was unlikely. The usher's silence he had
     already secured. There was only one acquaintance who had met and spoken with him, and that by
     the best of good fortune was Harry Whittington,—the idler who took his banishment and his
     King's misfortunes with an equally light heart, and gave never a thought at all to anything
     weightier than a gamecock.
Wogan's spirits revived. He had not yet come to the end of his luck. He sat down and wrote a
     short letter and sealed it up.
"Marnier," he called out in a low voice, and his servant came from the adjoining room, "take
     this to Mr. Edgar, the King's secretary, as soon as it grows dusk. Have a care that no one sees
     you deliver it. Lock the parlour door when you go, and take the key. I am not yet back from
     Rome." With that Wogan remembered that he had not slept for forty-eight hours. Within two
     minutes he was between the sheets; within five he was asleep.

</div></body></text></TEI>