
CHAPTER XV: DEUS E MACHINÂ
When Lancelot reached the banker’s a letter was put into his hand; it bore the Whitford
     postmark, and Mrs. Lavington’s handwriting.  He tore it open; it contained a letter from
     Argemone, which, it is needless to say, he read before her mother’s:—
‘My beloved! my husband!—Yes—though you may fancy me fickle and proud—I will call you so to
     the last; for were I fickle, I could have saved myself the agony of writing this; and as for
     pride, oh! how that darling vice has been crushed out of me!  I have rolled at my mother’s feet
     with bitter tears, and vain entreaties—and been refused; and yet I have obeyed her after all. 
     We must write to each other no more.  This one last letter must explain the forced silence
     which has been driving me mad with fears that you would suspect me.  And now you may call me
     weak; but it is your love which has made me strong to do this—which has taught me to see with
     new intensity my duty, not only to you, but to every human being—to my parents.  By this
     self-sacrifice alone can I atone to them for all my past undutifulness.  Let me, then, thus be
     worthy of you.  Hope that by this submission we may win even her to change.  How calmly I
     write! but it is only my hand that is calm.  As for my heart, read Tennyson’s Fatima, and then
     know how I feel towards you!  Yes, I love you—madly, the world would say.  I seem to understand
     now how women have died of love.  Ay, that indeed would be blessed; for then my spirit would
     seek out yours, and hover over it for ever!  Farewell, beloved! and let me hear of you through
     your deeds.  A feeling at my heart, which should not be, although it is, a sad one, tells me
     that we shall meet soon—soon.’
Stupefied and sickened, Lancelot turned carelessly to Mrs. Lavington’s cover, whose blameless
     respectability thus uttered itself:—
‘I cannot deceive you or myself by saying I regret that providential circumstances should
     have been permitted to break off a connection which I always felt to be most unsuitable; and I
     rejoice that the intercourse my dear child has had with you has not so far undermined her
     principles as to prevent her yielding the most filial obedience to my wishes on the point of
     her future correspondence with you.  Hoping that all that has occurred will be truly blessed to
     you, and lead your thoughts to another world, and to a true concern for the safety of your
     immortal soul,
‘I remain, yours truly,
‘C.  LAVINGTON.’
‘Another world!’ said Lancelot to himself.  ‘It is most merciful of you, certainly, my dear
     madame, to put one in mind of the existence of another world, while such as you have their own
     way in this one!’ and thrusting the latter epistle into the fire, he tried to collect his
     thoughts.
What had he lost?  The oftener he asked himself, the less he found to unman him.  Argemone’s
     letters were so new a want, that the craving for them was not yet established.  His intense
     imagination, resting on the delicious certainty of her faith, seemed ready to fill the silence
     with bright hopes and noble purposes.  She herself had said that he would see her soon.  But
     yet—but yet—why did that allusion to death strike chilly through him?  They were but words,—a
     melancholy fancy, such as women love at times to play with.  He would toss it from him.  At
     least here was another reason for bestirring himself at once to win fame in the noble
     profession he had chosen.
And yet his brain reeled as he went upstairs to his uncle’s private room.
There, however, he found a person closeted with the banker, whose remarkable appearance drove
     everything else out of his mind.  He was a huge, shaggy, toil-worn man, the deep melancholy
     earnestness of whose rugged features reminded him almost ludicrously of one of Land-seer’s
     bloodhounds.  But withal there was a tenderness—a genial, though covert humour playing about
     his massive features, which awakened in Lancelot at first sight a fantastic longing to open his
     whole heart to him.  He was dressed like a foreigner, but spoke English with perfect fluency. 
     The banker sat listening, quite crestfallen, beneath his intense and melancholy gaze, in which,
     nevertheless, there twinkled some rays of kindly sympathy.
‘It was all those foreign railways,’ said Mr. Smith pensively.
‘And it serves you quite right,’ answered the stranger.  ‘Did I not warn you of the folly and
     sin of sinking capital in foreign countries while English land was crying out for tillage, and
     English poor for employment?’
‘My dear friend’ (in a deprecatory tone), ‘it was the best possible investment I could
     make.’
‘And pray, who told you that you were sent into the world to make investments?’
‘But—’
‘But me no buts, or I won’t stir a finger towards helping you.  What are you going to do with
     this money if I procure it for you?’
‘Work till I can pay back that poor fellow’s fortune,’ said the banker, earnestly pointing to
     Lancelot.  ‘And if I could clear my conscience of that, I would not care if I starved myself,
     hardly if my own children did.’
‘Spoken like a man!’ answered the stranger; ‘work for that and I’ll help you.  Be a new man,
     once and for all, my friend.  Don’t even make this younker your first object.  Say to yourself,
     not “I will invest this money where it shall pay me most, but I will invest it where it shall
     give most employment to English hands, and produce most manufactures for English bodies.”  In
     short, seek first the kingdom of God and His justice with this money of yours, and see if all
     other things, profits and suchlike included, are not added unto you.’
‘And you are certain you can obtain the money?’
‘My good friend the Begum of the Cannibal Islands has more than she knows what to do with;
     and she owes me a good turn, you know.’
‘What are you jesting about now?’
‘Did I never tell you?  The new king of the Cannibal Islands, just like your European ones,
     ran away, and would neither govern himself nor let any one else govern; so one morning his
     ministers, getting impatient, ate him, and then asked my advice.  I recommended them to put his
     mother on the throne, who, being old and tough, would run less danger; and since then
     everything has gone on smoothly as anywhere else.’
‘Are you mad?’ thought Lancelot to himself, as he stared at the speaker’s matter-of-fact
     face.
‘No, I am not mad, my young friend,’ quoth he, facing right round upon him, as if he had
     divined his thoughts.
‘I—I beg your pardon, I did not speak,’ stammered Lancelot, abashed at a pair of eyes which
     could have looked down the boldest mesmerist in three seconds.
‘I am perfectly well aware that you did not.  I must have some talk with you: I’ve heard a
     good deal about you.  You wrote those articles in the --- Review about George Sand, did you
     not?’
‘I did.’
‘Well, there was a great deal of noble feeling in them, and a great deal of abominable
     nonsense.  You seem to be very anxious to reform society?’
‘I am.’
‘Don’t you think you had better begin by reforming yourself?’
‘Really, sir,’ answered Lancelot, ‘I am too old for that worn-out quibble.  The root of all
     my sins has been selfishness and sloth.  Am I to cure them by becoming still more selfish and
     slothful?  What part of myself can I reform except my actions? and the very sin of my actions
     has been, as I take it, that I’ve been doing nothing to reform others; never fighting against
     the world, the flesh, and the devil, as your Prayer-book has it.’
‘My Prayer-book?’ answered the stranger, with a quaint smile.
‘Upon my word, Lancelot,’ interposed the banker, with a frightened look, ‘you must not get
     into an argument: you must be more respectful: you don’t know to whom you are speaking.’
‘And I don’t much care,’ answered he.  ‘Life is really too grim earnest in these days to
     stand on ceremony.  I am sick of blind leaders of the blind, of respectable preachers to the
     respectable, who drawl out second-hand trivialities, which they neither practise nor wish to
     see practised.  I’ve had enough all my life of Scribes and Pharisees in white cravats, laying
     on man heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, and then not touching them themselves with one
     of their fingers.’
‘Silence, sir!’ roared the banker, while the stranger threw himself into a chair, and burst
     into a storm of laughter.
‘Upon my word, friend Mammon, here’s another of Hans Andersen’s ugly ducks!’
‘I really do not mean to be rude,’ said Lancelot, recollecting himself, ‘but I am nearly
     desperate.  If your heart is in the right place, you will understand me! if not, the less we
     talk to each other the better.’
‘Most true,’ answered the stranger; ‘and I do understand you; and if, as I hope, we see more
     of each other henceforth, we will see if we cannot solve one or two of these problems between
     us.’
At this moment Lancelot was summoned downstairs, and found, to his great pleasure, Tregarva
     waiting for him.  That worthy personage bowed to Lancelot reverently and distantly.
‘I am quite ashamed to intrude myself upon you, sir, but I could not rest without coming to
     ask whether you have had any news.’—He broke down at this point in the sentence, but Lancelot
     understood him.
‘I have no news,’ he said.  ‘But what do you mean by standing off in that way, as if we were
     not old and fast friends?  Remember, I am as poor as you are now; you may look me in the face
     and call me your equal, if you will, or your inferior; I shall not deny it.’
‘Pardon me, sir,’ answered Tregarva; ‘but I never felt what a real substantial thing rank is,
     as I have since this sad misfortune of yours.’
‘And I have never till now found out its worthlessness.’
‘You’re wrong, sir, you are wrong; look at the difference between yourself and me.  When
     you’ve lost all you have, and seven times more, you’re still a gentleman.  No man can take that
     from you.  You may look the proudest duchess in the land in the face, and claim her as your
     equal; while I, sir,—I don’t mean, though, to talk of myself—but suppose that you had loved a
     pious and a beautiful lady, and among all your worship of her, and your awe of her, had felt
     that you were worthy of her, that you could become her comforter, and her pride, and her joy,
     if it wasn’t for that accursed gulf that men had put between you, that you were no gentleman;
     that you didn’t know how to walk, and how to pronounce, and when to speak, and when to be
     silent, not even how to handle your own knife and fork without disgusting her, or how to keep
     your own body clean and sweet—Ah, sir, I see it now as I never did before, what a wall all
     these little defects build up round a poor man; how he longs and struggles to show himself as
     he is at heart, and cannot, till he feels sometimes as if he was enchanted, pent up, like folks
     in fairy tales, in the body of some dumb beast.  But, sir,’ he went on, with a concentrated
     bitterness which Lancelot had never seen in him before, ‘just because this gulf which rank
     makes is such a deep one, therefore it looks to me all the more devilish; not that I want to
     pull down any man to my level; I despise my own level too much; I want to rise; I want those
     like me to rise with me.  Let the rich be as rich as they will.—I, and those like me, covet not
     money, but manners.  Why should not the workman be a gentleman, and a workman still?  Why are
     they to be shut out from all that is beautiful, and delicate, and winning, and stately?’
‘Now perhaps,’ said Lancelot, ‘you begin to understand what I was driving at on that night of
     the revel?’
‘It has come home to me lately, sir, bitterly enough.  If you knew what had gone on in me
     this last fortnight, you would know that I had cause to curse the state of things which brings
     a man up a savage against his will, and cuts him off, as if he were an ape or a monster, from
     those for whom the same Lord died, and on whom the same Spirit rests.  Is that God’s will,
     sir?  No, it is the devil’s will.  “Those whom God hath joined, let no man put asunder.”’
Lancelot coloured, for he remembered with how much less reason he had been lately invoking in
     his own cause those very words.  He was at a loss for an answer; but seeing, to his relief,
     that Tregarva had returned to his usual impassive calm, he forced him to sit down, and began
     questioning him as to his own prospects and employment.
About them Tregarva seemed hopeful enough.  He had found out a Wesleyan minister in town who
     knew him, and had, by his means, after assisting for a week or two in the London City Mission,
     got some similar appointment in a large manufacturing town.  Of the state of things he spoke
     more sadly than ever.  ‘The rich cannot guess, sir, how high ill-feeling is rising in these
     days.  It’s not only those who are outwardly poorest who long for change; the middling people,
     sir, the small town shopkeepers especially, are nearly past all patience.  One of the City
     Mission assured me that he has been watching them these several years past, and that nothing
     could beat their fortitude and industry, and their determination to stand peaceably by law and
     order; but yet, this last year or two, things are growing too bad to bear.  Do what they will,
     they cannot get their bread; and when a man cannot get that, sir—’
‘But what do you think is the reason of it?’
‘How should I tell, sir?  But if I had to say, I should say this—just what they say
     themselves—that there are too many of them.  Go where you will, in town or country, you’ll find
     half-a-dozen shops struggling for a custom that would only keep up one, and so they’re forced
     to undersell one another.  And when they’ve got down prices all they can by fair means, they’re
     forced to get them down lower by foul—to sand the sugar, and sloe-leave the tea, and put—Satan
     only that prompts ’em knows what—into the bread; and then they don’t thrive—they can’t thrive;
     God’s curse must be on them.  They begin by trying to oust each other, and eat each other up;
     and while they’re eating up their neighbours, their neighbours eat up them; and so they all
     come to ruin together.’
‘Why, you talk like Mr. Mill himself, Tregarva; you ought to have been a political economist,
     and not a City missionary.  By the bye, I don’t like that profession for you.’
‘It’s the Lord’s work, sir.  It’s the very sending to the Gentiles that the Lord promised
     me.’
‘I don’t doubt it, Paul; but you are meant for other things, if not better.  There are plenty
     of smaller men than you to do that work.  Do you think that God would have given you that
     strength, that brain, to waste on a work which could be done without them?  Those limbs would
     certainly be good capital for you, if you turned a live model at the Academy.  Perhaps you’d
     better be mine; but you can’t even be that if you go to Manchester.’
The giant looked hopelessly down at his huge limbs.  ‘Well!  God only knows what use they are
     of just now.  But as for the brains, sir—in much learning is much sorrow.  One had much better
     work than read, I find.  If I read much more about what men might be, and are not, and what
     English soil might be, and is not, I shall go mad.  And that puts me in mind of one thing I
     came here for, though, like a poor rude country fellow as I am, I clean forgot it a thinking
     of—Look here, sir; you’ve given me a sight of books in my time, and God bless you for it.  But
     now I hear that—that you are determined to be a poor man like us; and that you shan’t be, while
     Paul Tregarva has ought of yours.  So I’ve just brought all the books back, and there they lie
     in the hall; and may God reward you for the loan of them to his poor child!  And so, sir,
     farewell;’ and he rose to go.
‘No, Paul; the books and you shall never part.’
‘And I say, sir, the books and you shall never part.’
‘Then we two can never part’—and a sudden impulse flashed over him—‘and we will not part,
     Paul!  The only man whom I utterly love, and trust, and respect on the face of God’s earth, is
     you; and I cannot lose sight of you.  If we are to earn our bread, let us earn it together; if
     we are to endure poverty, and sorrow, and struggle to find out the way of bettering these
     wretched millions round us, let us learn our lesson together, and help each other to spell it
     out.’
‘Do you mean what you say?’ asked Paul slowly.
‘I do.’
‘Then I say what you say.  Where thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will
     lodge.  Come what will, I will be your servant, for good luck or bad, for ever.’
‘My equal, Paul, not my servant.’
‘I know my place, sir.  When I am as learned and as well-bred as you, I shall not refuse to
     call myself your equal; and the sooner that day comes, the better I shall be pleased.  Till
     then I am your friend and your brother; but I am your scholar too, and I shall not set up
     myself against my master.’
‘I have learnt more of you, Paul, than ever you have learnt of me.  But be it as you will;
     only whatever you may call yourself, we must eat at the same table, live in the same room, and
     share alike all this world’s good things—or we shall have no right to share together this
     world’s bad things.  If that is your bargain, there is my hand on it.’
‘Amen!’ quoth Tregarva; and the two young men joined hands in that sacred bond—now growing
     rarer and rarer year by year—the utter friendship of two equal manful hearts.
‘And now, sir, I have promised—and you would have me keep my promise—to go and work for the
     City Mission in Manchester—at least, for the next month, till a young man’s place who has just
     left, is filled up.  Will you let me go for that time? and then, if you hold your present mind,
     we will join home and fortunes thenceforth, and go wherever the Lord shall send us.  There’s
     work enough of His waiting to be done.  I don’t doubt but if we are willing and able, He will
     set us about the thing we’re meant for.’
As Lancelot opened the door for him, he lingered on the steps, and grasping his hand, said,
     in a low, earnest voice: ‘The Lord be with you, sir.  Be sure that He has mighty things in
     store for you, or He would not have brought you so low in the days of your youth.’
‘And so,’ as John Bunyan has it, ‘he went on his way;’ and Lancelot saw him no more till—but
     I must not outrun the order of time.
After all, this visit came to Lancelot timely.  It had roused him to hope, and turned off his
     feelings from the startling news he had just heard.  He stepped along arm in arm with Luke,
     cheerful, and fate-defiant, and as he thought of Tregarva’s complaints,—
‘The beautiful?’ he said to himself, ‘they shall have it!  At least they shall be awakened to
     feel their need of it, their right to it.  What a high destiny, to be the artist of the people!
     to devote one’s powers of painting, not to mimicking obsolete legends, Pagan or Popish, but to
     representing to the working men of England the triumphs of the Past and the yet greater
     triumphs of the Future!’
Luke began at once questioning him about his father.
‘And is he contrite and humbled?  Does he see that he has sinned?’
‘In what?’
‘It is not for us to judge; but surely it must have been some sin or other of his which has
     drawn down such a sore judgment on him.’
Lancelot smiled; but Luke went on, not perceiving him.
‘Ah! we cannot find out for him.  Nor has he, alas! as a Protestant, much likelihood of
     finding out for himself.  In our holy church he would have been compelled to discriminate his
     faults by methodic self-examination, and lay them one by one before his priest for advice and
     pardon, and so start a new and free man once more.’
‘Do you think,’ asked Lancelot with a smile, ‘that he who will not confess his faults either
     to God or to himself, would confess them to man?  And would his priest honestly tell him what
     he really wants to know? which sin of his has called down this so-called judgment?  It would be
     imputed, I suppose, to some vague generality, to inattention to religious duties, to idolatry
     of the world, and so forth.  But a Romish priest would be the last person, I should think, who
     could tell him fairly, in the present case, the cause of his affliction; and I question whether
     he would give a patient hearing to any one who told it him.’
‘How so?  Though, indeed, I have remarked that people are perfectly willing to be told they
     are miserable sinners, and to confess themselves such, in a general way; but if the preacher
     once begins to specify, to fix on any particular act or habit, he is accused of personality or
     uncharitableness; his hearers are ready to confess guilty to any sin but the very one with
     which he charges them.  But, surely, this is just what I am urging against you Protestants—just
     what the Catholic use of confession obviates.’
‘Attempts to do so, you mean!’ answered Lancelot.  ‘But what if your religion preaches
     formally that which only remains in our religion as a fast-dying superstition?—That those
     judgments of God, as you call them, are not judgments at all in any fair use of the word, but
     capricious acts of punishment on the part of Heaven, which have no more reference to the fault
     which provokes them, than if you cut off a man’s finger because he made a bad use of his
     tongue.  That is part, but only a part, of what I meant just now, by saying that people
     represent God as capricious, proud, revengeful.’
‘But do not Protestants themselves confess that our sins provoke God’s anger?’
‘Your common creed, when it talks rightly of God as one “who has no passions,” ought to make
     you speak more reverently of the possibility of any act of ours disturbing the everlasting
     equanimity of the absolute Love.  Why will men so often impute to God the miseries which they
     bring upon themselves?’
‘Because, I suppose, their pride makes them more willing to confess themselves sinners than
     fools.’
‘Right, my friend; they will not remember that it is of “their pleasant vices that God makes
     whips to scourge them.”  Oh, I at least have felt the deep wisdom of that saying of Wilhelm
     Meister’s harper, that it is
“Voices from the depth of Nature borne Which woe upon the guilty head proclaim.”
Of nature—of those eternal laws of hers which we daily break.  Yes! it is not because God’s
     temper changes, but because God’s universe is unchangeable, that such as I, such as your poor
     father, having sown the wind, must reap the whirlwind.  I have fed my self-esteem with luxuries
     and not with virtue, and, losing them, have nothing left.  He has sold himself to a system
     which is its own punishment.  And yet the last place in which he will look for the cause of his
     misery is in that very money-mongering to which he now clings as frantically as ever.  But so
     it is throughout the world.  Only look down over that bridge-parapet, at that huge
     black-mouthed sewer, vomiting its pestilential riches across the mud.  There it runs, and will
     run, hurrying to the sea vast stores of wealth, elaborated by Nature’s chemistry into the ready
     materials of food; which proclaim, too, by their own foul smell, God’s will that they should be
     buried out of sight in the fruitful all-regenerating grave of earth: there it runs, turning
     them all into the seeds of pestilence, filth, and drunkenness.—And then, when it obeys the laws
     which we despise, and the pestilence is come at last, men will pray against it, and confess it
     to be “a judgment for their sins;” but if you ask what sin, people will talk about
     “les voiles d’airain,” as Fourier says, and tell you that it is presumptuous to pry into God’s
     secret counsels, unless, perhaps, some fanatic should inform you that the cholera has been
     drawn down on the poor by the endowment of Maynooth by the rich.’
‘It is most fearful, indeed, to think that these diseases should be confined to the poor—that
     a man should be exposed to cholera, typhus, and a host of attendant diseases, simply because he
     is born into the world an artisan; while the rich, by the mere fact of money, are exempt from
     such curses, except when they come in contact with those whom they call on Sunday “their
     brethren,” and on week days the “masses.”
‘Thank Heaven that you do see that,—that in a country calling itself civilised and Christian,
     pestilence should be the peculiar heritage of the poor!  It is past all comment.’
‘And yet are not these pestilences a judgment, even on them, for their dirt and
     profligacy?’
‘And how should they be clean without water?  And how can you wonder if their appetites,
     sickened with filth and self-disgust, crave after the gin-shop for temporary strength, and then
     for temporary forgetfulness?  Every London doctor knows that I speak the truth; would that
     every London preacher would tell that truth from his pulpit!’
‘Then would you too say, that God punishes one class for the sins of another?’
‘Some would say,’ answered Lancelot, half aside, ‘that He may be punishing them for not
     demanding their right to live like human beings, to all those social circumstances
     which shall not make their children’s life one long disease.  But are not these pestilences a
     judgment on the rich, too, in the truest sense of the word?  Are they not the broad,
     unmistakable seal to God’s opinion of a state of society which confesses its economic relations
     to be so utterly rotten and confused, that it actually cannot afford to save yearly millions of
     pounds’ worth of the materials of food, not to mention thousands of human lives?  Is not every
     man who allows such things hastening the ruin of the society in which he lives, by helping to
     foster the indignation and fury of its victims?  Look at that group of stunted, haggard
     artisans, who are passing us.  What if one day they should call to account the landlords whose
     coveteousness and ignorance make their dwellings hells on earth?’
By this time they had reached the artist’s house.
Luke refused to enter... ‘He had done with this world, and the painters of this world.’  ... 
     And with a tearful last farewell, he turned away up the street, leaving Lancelot to gaze at his
     slow, painful steps, and abject, earth-fixed mien.
‘Ah!’ thought Lancelot, ‘here is the end of your anthropology!  At first, your ideal
     man is an angel.  But your angel is merely an unsexed woman; and so you are forced to go back
     to the humanity after all—but to a woman, not a man?  And this, in the nineteenth century, when
     men are telling us that the poetic and enthusiastic have become impossible, and that the only
     possible state of the world henceforward will be a universal good-humoured hive, of the
     Franklin-Benthamite religion ... a vast prosaic Cockaigne of steam mills for grinding
     sausages—for those who can get at them.  And all the while, in spite of all Manchester schools,
     and high and dry orthodox schools, here are the strangest phantasms, new and old, sane and
     insane, starting up suddenly into live practical power, to give their prosaic theories the
     lie—Popish conversions, Mormonisms, Mesmerisms, Californias, Continental revolutions, Paris
     days of June ... Ye hypocrites! ye can discern the face of the sky, and yet ye cannot discern
     the signs of this time!’
He was ushered upstairs to the door of his studio, at which he knocked, and was answered by a
     loud ‘Come in.’  Lancelot heard a rustle as he entered, and caught sight of a most charming
     little white foot retreating hastily through the folding doors into the inner room.
The artist, who was seated at his easel, held up his brush as a signal of silence, and did
     not even raise his eyes till he had finished the touches on which he was engaged.
‘And now—what do I see!—the last man I should have expected!  I thought you were far down in
     the country.  And what brings you to me with such serious and business-like looks?’
‘I am a penniless youth—’
‘What?’
‘Ruined to my last shilling, and I want to turn artist.’
‘Oh, ye gracious powers!  Come to my arms, brother at last with me in the holy order of those
     who must work or starve.  Long have I wept in secret over the pernicious fulness of your
     purse!’
‘Dry your tears, then, now,’ said Lancelot, ‘for I neither have ten pounds in the world, nor
     intend to have till I can earn them.’
‘Artist!’ ran on Mellot; ‘ah! you shall be an artist, indeed!  You shall stay with me and
     become the English Michael Angelo; or, if you are fool enough, go to Rome, and utterly eclipse
     Overbeck, and throw Schadow for ever into the shade.’
‘I fine you a supper,’ said Lancelot, ‘for that execrable attempt at a pun.’
‘Agreed!  Here, Sabina, send to Covent Garden for huge nosegays, and get out the best bottle
     of Burgundy.  We will pass an evening worthy of Horace, and with garlands and libations honour
     the muse of painting.’
‘Luxurious dog!’ said Lancelot, ‘with all your cant about poverty.’
As he spoke, the folding doors opened, and an exquisite little brunette danced in from the
     inner room, in which, by the bye, had been going on all the while a suspicious rustling, as of
     garments hastily arranged.  She was dressed gracefully in a loose French morning-gown, down
     which Lancelot’s eye glanced towards the little foot, which, however, was now hidden in a tiny
     velvet slipper.  The artist’s wife was a real beauty, though without a single perfect feature,
     except a most delicious little mouth, a skin like velvet, and clear brown eyes, from which
     beamed earnest simplicity and arch good humour.  She darted forward to her husband’s friend,
     while her rippling brown hair, fantastically arranged, fluttered about her neck, and seizing
     Lancelot’s hands successively in both of hers, broke out in an accent prettily tinged with
     French,—
‘Charming!—delightful!  And so you are really going to turn painter!  And I have longed so to
     be introduced to you!  Claude has been raving about you these two years; you already seem to me
     the oldest friend in the world.  You must not go to Rome.  We shall keep you, Mr. Lancelot;
     positively you must come and live with us—we shall be the happiest trio in London.  I will make
     you so comfortable: you must let me cater for you—cook for you.’
‘And be my study sometimes?’ said Lancelot, smiling.
‘Ah,’ she said, blushing, and shaking her pretty little fist at Claude, ‘that madcap! how he
     has betrayed me!  When he is at his easel, he is so in the seventh heaven, that he sees
     nothing, thinks of nothing, but his own dreams.’
At this moment a heavy step sounded on the stairs, the door opened, and there entered, to
     Lancelot’s astonishment, the stranger who had just puzzled him so much at his uncle’s.
Claude rose reverentially, and came forward, but Sabina was beforehand with him, and running
     up to her visitor, kissed his hand again and again, almost kneeling to him.
‘The dear master!’ she cried; ‘what a delightful surprise! we have not seen you this
     fortnight past, and gave you up for lost.’
‘Where do you come from, my dear master?’ asked Claude.
‘From going to and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it,’ answered he,
     smiling, and laying his finger on his lips, ‘my dear pupils.  And you are both well and
     happy?’
‘Perfectly, and doubly delighted at your presence to-day, for your advice will come in a
     providential moment for my friend here.’
‘Ah!’ said the strange man, ‘well met once more!  So you are going to turn painter?’
He bent a severe and searching look on Lancelot.
‘You have a painter’s face, young man,’ he said; ‘go on and prosper.  What branch of art do
     you intend to study?’
‘The ancient Italian painters, as my first step.’
‘Ancient? it is not four hundred years since Perugino died.  But I should suppose you do not
     intend to ignore classic art?’
‘You have divined rightly.  I wish, in the study of the antique, to arrive at the primeval
     laws of unfallen human beauty.’
‘Were Phidias and Praxiteles, then, so primeval? the world had lasted many a thousand years
     before their turn came.  If you intend to begin at the beginning, why not go back at once to
     the garden of Eden, and there study the true antique?’
‘If there were but any relics of it,’ said Lancelot, puzzled, and laughing.
‘You would find it very near you, young man, if you had but eyes to see it.’
Claude Mellot laughed significantly, and Sabina clapped her little hands.
‘Yet till you take him with you, master, and show it to him, he must needs be content with
     the Royal Academy and the Elgin marbles.’
‘But to what branch of painting, pray,’ said the master to Lancelot, ‘will you apply your
     knowledge of the antique?  Will you, like this foolish fellow here’ (with a kindly glance at
     Claude), ‘fritter yourself away on Nymphs and Venuses, in which neither he nor any one else
     believes?’
‘Historic art, as the highest,’ answered Lancelot, ‘is my ambition.’
‘It is well to aim at the highest, but only when it is possible for us.  And how can such a
     school exist in England now?  You English must learn to understand your own history before you
     paint it.  Rather follow in the steps of your Turners, and Landseers, and Standfields, and
     Creswicks, and add your contribution to the present noble school of naturalist painters.  That
     is the niche in the temple which God has set you English to fill up just now.  These men’s
     patient, reverent faith in Nature as they see her, their knowledge that the ideal is neither to
     be invented nor abstracted, but found and left where God has put it, and where alone it can be
     represented, in actual and individual phenomena;—in these lies an honest development of the
     true idea of Protestantism, which is paving the way to the mesothetic art of the future.’
‘Glorious!’ said Sabina: ‘not a single word that we poor creatures can understand!’
But our hero, who always took a virtuous delight in hearing what he could not comprehend,
     went on to question the orator.
‘What, then, is the true idea of Protestantism?’ said he.
‘The universal symbolism and dignity of matter, whether in man or nature.’
‘But the Puritans—?’
‘Were inconsistent with themselves and with Protestantism, and therefore God would not allow
     them to proceed.  Yet their repudiation of all art was better than the Judas-kiss which
     Romanism bestows on it, in the meagre eclecticism of the ancient religious schools, and of your
     modern Overbecks and Pugins.  The only really wholesome designer of great power whom I have
     seen in Germany is Kaulbach; and perhaps every one would not agree with my reasons for admiring
     him, in this whitewashed age.  But you, young sir, were meant for better things than art.  Many
     young geniuses have an early hankering, as Goethe had, to turn painters.  It seems the shortest
     and easiest method of embodying their conceptions in visible form; but they get wiser
     afterwards, when they find in themselves thoughts that cannot be laid upon the canvas.  Come
     with me—I like striking while the iron is hot; walk with me towards my lodgings, and we will
     discuss this weighty matter.’
And with a gay farewell to the adoring little Sabina, he passed an iron arm through
     Lancelot’s, and marched him down into the street.
Lancelot was surprised and almost nettled at the sudden influence which he found this quaint
     personage was exerting over him.  But he had, of late, tasted the high delight of feeling
     himself under the guidance of a superior mind, and longed to enjoy it once more.  Perhaps they
     were reminiscences of this kind which stirred in him the strange fancy of a connection, almost
     of a likeness, between his new acquaintance and Argemone.  He asked, humbly enough, why Art was
     to be a forbidden path to him?
‘Besides you are an Englishman, and a man of uncommon talent, unless your physiognomy belies
     you; and one, too, for whom God has strange things in store, or He would not have so suddenly
     and strangely overthrown you.’
Lancelot started.  He remembered that Tregarva had said just the same thing to him that very
     morning, and the (to him) strange coincidence sank deep into his heart.
‘You must be a politician,’ the stranger went on.  ‘You are bound to it as your birthright. 
     It has been England’s privilege hitherto to solve all political questions as they arise for the
     rest of the world; it is her duty now.  Here, or nowhere, must the solution be attempted of
     those social problems which are convulsing more and more all Christendom.  She cannot afford to
     waste brains like yours, while in thousands of reeking alleys, such as that one opposite us,
     heathens and savages are demanding the rights of citizenship.  Whether they be right or wrong,
     is what you, and such as you, have to find out at this day.’
Silent and thoughtful, Lancelot walked on by his side.
‘What is become of your friend Tregarva?  I met him this morning after he parted from you,
     and had some talk with him.  I was sorely minded to enlist him.  Perhaps I shall; in the
     meantime, I shall busy myself with you.’
‘In what way,’ asked Lancelot, ‘most strange sir, of whose name, much less of whose
     occupation, I can gain no tidings.’
‘My name for the time being is Barnakill.  And as for business, as it is your English fashion
     to call new things obstinately by old names, careless whether they apply or not, you may
     consider me as a recruiting-sergeant; which trade, indeed, I follow, though I am no more like
     the popular red-coated ones than your present “glorious constitution” is like William the
     Third’s, or Overbeck’s high art like Fra Angelico’s.  Farewell!  When I want you, which will be
     most likely when you want me, I shall find you again.’
The evening was passed, as Claude had promised, in a truly Horatian manner.  Sabina was most
     piquante, and Claude interspersed his genial and enthusiastic eloquence with various wise saws
     of ‘the prophet.’
‘But why on earth,’ quoth Lancelot, at last, ‘do you call him a prophet?’
‘Because he is one; it’s his business, his calling.  He gets his living thereby, as the
     showman did by his elephant.’
‘But what does he foretell?’
‘Oh, son of the earth!  And you went to Cambridge—are reported to have gone in for the thing,
     or phantom, called the tripos, and taken a first class! . ..  Did you ever look out the word
     “prophetes” in Liddell and Scott?’
‘Why, what do you know about Liddell and Scott?’
‘Nothing, thank goodness; I never had time to waste over the crooked letters.  But I have
     heard say that prophetes means, not a foreteller, but an out-teller—one who declares the will
     of a deity, and interprets his oracles.  Is it not so?’
‘Undeniably.’
‘And that he became a foreteller among heathens at least—as I consider, among all peoples
     whatsoever—because knowing the real bearing of what had happened, and what was happening, he
     could discern the signs of the times, and so had what the world calls a shrewd guess—what I,
     like a Pantheist as I am denominated, should call a divine and inspired foresight—of what was
     going to happen.’
‘A new notion, and a pleasant one, for it looks something like a law.’
‘I am no scollard, as they would say in Whitford, you know; but it has often struck me, that
     if folks would but believe that the Apostles talked not such very bad Greek, and had some
     slight notion of the received meaning of the words they used, and of the absurdity of using the
     same term to express nineteen different things, the New Testament would be found to be a much
     simpler and more severely philosophic book than “Theologians” (“Anthropo-sophists” I call them)
     fancy.’
‘Where on earth did you get all this wisdom, or foolishness?’
‘From the prophet, a fortnight ago.’
‘Who is this prophet?  I will know.’
‘Then you will know more than I do.  Sabina—light my meerschaum, there’s a darling; it will
     taste the sweeter after your lips.’  And Claude laid his delicate woman-like limbs upon the
     sofa, and looked the very picture of luxurious nonchalance.
‘What is he, you pitiless wretch?’
‘Fairest Hebe, fill our Prometheus Vinctus another glass of Burgundy, and find your guitar,
     to silence him.’
‘It was the ocean nymphs who came to comfort Prometheus—and unsandalled, too, if I recollect
     right,’ said Lancelot, smiling at Sabina.  ‘Come, now, if he will not tell me, perhaps you
     will?’
Sabina only blushed, and laughed mysteriously.
‘You surely are intimate with him, Claude?  When and where did you meet him first?’
‘Seventeen years ago, on the barricades of the three days, in the charming little pandemonium
     called Paris, he picked me out of a gutter, a boy of fifteen, with a musket-ball through my
     body; mended me, and sent me to a painter’s studio...  The next séjour I had with him began in
     sight of the Demawend.  Sabina, perhaps you might like to relate to Mr. Smith that interview,
     and the circumstances under which you made your first sketch of that magnificent and
     little-known volcano?’
Sabina blushed again—this time scarlet; and, to Lancelot’s astonishment, pulled off her
     slipper, and brandishing it daintily, uttered some unintelligible threat, in an Oriental
     language, at the laughing Claude.
‘Why, you must have been in the East?’
‘Why not!  Do you think that figure and that walk were picked up in stay-ridden, toe-pinching
     England? ...  Ay, in the East; and why not elsewhere?  Do you think I got my knowledge of the
     human figure from the live-model in the Royal Academy?’
‘I certainly have always had my doubts of it.  You are the only man I know who can paint
     muscle in motion.’
‘Because I am almost the only man in England who has ever seen it.  Artists should go to the
     Cannibal Islands for that...  J’ai fait le grand tour.  I should not wonder if the prophet made
     you take it.’
‘That would be very much as I chose.’
‘Or otherwise.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘That if he wills you to go, I defy you to stay.  Eh, Sabina!’
‘Well, you are a very mysterious pair,—and a very charming one.’
‘So we think ourselves—as to the charmingness... and as for the mystery . .. “Omnia exeunt in
     mysterium,” says somebody, somewhere—or if he don’t, ought to, seeing that it is so.  You will
     be a mystery some day, and a myth, and a thousand years hence pious old ladies will be pulling
     caps as to whether you were a saint or a devil, and whether you did really work miracles or
     not, as corroborations of your ex-supra-lunar illumination on social questions...  Yes ... you
     will have to submit, and see Bogy, and enter the Eleusinian mysteries.  Eh, Sabina?’
‘My dear Claude, what between the Burgundy and your usual foolishness, you seem very much
     inclined to divulge the Eleusinian mysteries.’
‘I can’t well do that, my beauty, seeing that, if you recollect, we were both turned back at
     the vestibule, for a pair of naughty children as we are.’
‘Do be quiet! and let me enjoy, for once, my woman’s right to the last word!’
And in this hopeful state of mystification, Lancelot went home, and dreamt of Argemone.
His uncle would, and, indeed, as it seemed, could, give him very little information on the
     question which had so excited his curiosity.  He had met the man in India many years before,
     had received there from him most important kindnesses, and considered him, from experience, of
     oracular wisdom.  He seemed to have an unlimited command of money, though most frugal in his
     private habits; visited England for a short time every few years, and always under a different
     appellation; but as for his real name, habitation, or business, here or at home, the good
     banker knew nothing, except that whenever questioned on them, he wandered off into
     Pantagruelist jokes, and ended in Cloud-land.  So that Lancelot was fain to give up his
     questions and content himself with longing for the reappearance of this inexplicable sage.
