
CHAPTER IV
EIGHT THOUSAND YEARS AGO
NEXT morning Anthea got old Nurse to allow her to take up the “poor learned
     gentleman’s” breakfast. He did not recognize her at first, but when he did he was vaguely
     pleased to see her.
“You see I’m wearing the charm round my neck,” she said; “I’m taking care of it—like you told
     us to.”
“That’s right,” said he; “did you have a good game last night?”
“You will eat your breakfast before it’s cold, won’t you?” said Anthea. “Yes, we had a
     splendid time. The charm made it all dark, and then greeny light, and then it spoke. Oh! I wish
     you could have heard it—it was such a darling voice—and it told us the other half of it was
     lost in the Past, so of course we shall have to look for it there!”
The learned gentleman rubbed his hair with both hands and looked anxiously at Anthea.
“I suppose it’s natural—youthful imagina‐
      tion and so forth,” he said. “Yet someone must have ... Who
     told you that some part of the charm was missing?”
“I can’t tell you,” she said. “I know it seems most awfully rude, especially after you being
     so kind about telling us the name of power, and all that, but really, I’m not allowed to tell
     anybody anything about the—the—the person who told me. You won’t forget your breakfast, will
     you?”
The learned gentleman smiled feebly and then frowned—not a cross‐frown, but a
     puzzle‐frown.
“Thank you,” he said, “I shall always be pleased if you’ll look in—any time you’re passing
     you know—at least ...”
“I will,” she said; “goodbye. I’ll always tell you anything I may tell.”
He had not had many adventures with children in them, and he wondered whether all children
     were like these. He spent quite five minutes in wondering before he settled down to the
     fifty‐second chapter of his great book on “the Secret Rites of the Priests of Amen Rā.”
It is no use to pretend that the children did not feel a good deal of agitation at the
     thought of going through the charm into the Past. That idea, that perhaps they might stay in
     the Past and never get back again, was anything but pleasing. Yet no one would have dared to
     suggest that the charm should
      not be used; and though each was in its heart very frightened
     indeed, they would all have joined in jeering at the cowardice of any one of them who should
     have uttered the timid but natural suggestion, “Don’t let’s!”
It seemed necessary to make arrangements for being out all day, for there was no reason to
     suppose that the sound of the dinner‐bell would be able to reach back into the Past, and it
     seemed unwise to excite old Nurse’s curiosity when nothing they could say—not even the
     truth—could in any way satisfy it. They were all very proud to think how well they had
     understood what the charm and the Psammead had said about Time and Space and things like that,
     and they were perfectly certain that it would be quite impossible to make old Nurse understand
     a single word of it. So they merely asked her to let them take their dinner out into Regent’s
     Park—and this, with the implied cold mutton and tomatoes, was readily granted.
“You can get yourselves some buns or sponge‐cakes, or whatever you fancy‐like,” said old
     Nurse, giving Cyril a shilling. “Don’t go getting jam‐tarts, now—so messy at the best of times,
     and without forks and plates ruination to your clothes, besides your not being able to wash
     your hands and faces afterwards.”
So Cyril took the shilling, and they all started off. They went round by the Tottenham Court
     Road to buy a piece of waterproof
      sheeting to put over the Psammead in case it should be
     raining in the Past when they got there. For it is almost certain death to a Psammead to get
     wet.
The sun was shining very brightly, and even London looked pretty. Women were selling roses
     from big baskets‐full, and Anthea bought four roses, one each, for herself and the others. They
     were red roses and smelt of summer—the kind of roses you always want so desperately at about
     Christmas‐time when you can only get mistletoe, which is pale right through to its very scent,
     and holly which pricks your nose if you try to smell it. So now everyone had a rose in its
     buttonhole, and soon everyone was sitting on the grass in Regent’s Park under trees whose
     leaves would have been clean, clear green in the country, but here were dusty and yellowish,
     and brown at the edges.
“We’ve got to go on with it,” said Anthea, “and as the eldest has to go first, you’ll have to
     be last, Jane. You quite understand about holding on to the charm as you go through, don’t you,
     Pussy?”
“I wish I hadn’t got to be last,” said Jane.
“You shall carry the Psammead if you like,” said Anthea. “That is,” she added, remembering
     the beast’s queer temper, “if it’ll let you.”
The Psammead, however, was unexpectedly amiable.

“I don’t mind,” it said, “who carries me, so long as it doesn’t drop me. I can’t
     bear being dropped.”
Jane with trembling hands took the Psammead and its fish‐basket under one arm. The charm’s
     long string was hung round her neck. Then they all stood up. Jane held out the charm at arm’s
     length, and Cyril solemnly pronounced the word of power.
As he spoke it the charm grew tall and broad, and he saw that Jane was just holding on to the
     edge of a great red arch of very curious shape. The opening of the arch was small, but Cyril
     saw that he could go through it. All round and beyond the arch were the faded trees and
     trampled grass of Regent’s Park, where the little ragged children were playing Ring o’ Roses.
     But through the opening of it shone a blaze of blue and yellow and red. Cyril drew a long
     breath and stiffened his legs so that the others should not see that his knees were trembling
     and almost knocking together. “Here goes!” he said, and, stepping up through the arch,
     disappeared. Then followed Anthea. Robert, coming next, held fast, at Anthea’s suggestion, to
     the sleeve of Jane, who was thus dragged safely through the arch. And as soon as they were on
     the other side of the arch there was no more arch at all and no more Regent’s Park either, only
     the charm in Jane’s hand, and it was its proper size again. They were now in a light so bright
     that they
     
 winked and blinked and rubbed their eyes. During this
     dazzling interval Anthea felt for the charm and pushed it inside Jane’s frock, so that it might
     be quite safe. When their eyes got used to the new wonderful light the children looked around
     them. The sky was very, very blue, and it sparkled and glittered and dazzled like the sea at
     home when the sun shines on it.
They were standing on a little clearing in a thick, low forest; there were trees and shrubs
     and a close, thorny, tangly undergrowth. In front of them stretched a bank of strange black
     mud, then came the browny‐yellowy shining ribbon of a river. Then more dry, caked mud and more
     greeny‐browny jungle. The only things that told that human people had been there were the
     clearing, a path that led to it, and an odd arrangement of cut reeds in the river.
They looked at each other.
“Well!” said Robert, “this is a change of air!”
It was. The air was hotter than they could have imagined, even in London in August.
“I wish I knew where we were,” said Cyril. “Here’s a river, now—I wonder whether it’s the
     Amazon or the Tiber, or what.”
“It’s the Nile,” said the Psammead, looking out of the fish‐bag.
“Then this is Egypt,” said Robert, who had once taken a geography prize.

“I don’t see any crocodiles,” Cyril objected. His prize had been for natural history.
The Psammead reached out a hairy arm from its basket and pointed to a heap of mud at the edge
     of the water.
“What do you call that?” it said; and as it spoke the heap of mud slid into the river just as
     a slab of badly mixed mortar will slip from a bricklayer’s trowel.
“Oh!” said everybody.
There was a crashing among the reeds on the other side of the water.
“And there’s a river‐horse!” said the Psammead, as a great beast like an enormous slaty‐blue
     slug showed itself against the black bank on the far side of the stream.
“It’s a hippopotamus,” said Cyril; “it seems much more real somehow than the one at the Zoo,
     doesn’t it?”
“I’m glad it’s being real on the other side of the river,” said Jane.
And now there was a crackling of reeds and twigs behind them. This was horrible. Of course it
     might be another hippopotamus, or a crocodile, or a lion—or, in fact, almost anything.
“Keep your hand on the charm, Jane,” said Robert hastily. “We ought to have a means of escape
     handy. I’m dead certain this is the sort of place where simply anything might
     happen to us.”
“I believe a hippopotamus is going to
      happen to us,” said Jane—“a very, very big one.”
They had all turned to face the danger.
“Don’t be silly little duffers,” said the Psammead in its friendly, informal way; “it’s not a
     river‐horse. It’s a human.”
It was. It was a girl—of about Anthea’s age. Her hair was short and fair, and though her skin
     was tanned by the sun, you could see that it would have been fair too if it had had a chance.
     She had every chance of being tanned, for she had no clothes to speak of, and the four English
     children, carefully dressed in frocks, hats, shoes, stockings, coats, collars, and all the rest
     of it, envied her more than any words of theirs or of mine could possibly say. There was no
     doubt that hers was the right costume for that climate.
She carried a pot on her head, of red and black earthenware. She did not see the children,
     who shrank back against the edge of the jungle, and she went forward to the brink of the river
     to fill her pitcher. As she went she made a strange sort of droning, humming, melancholy noise
     all on two notes. Anthea could not help thinking that perhaps the girl thought this noise was
     singing.
The girl filled the pitcher and set it down by the river brink. Then she waded into the water
     and stooped over the circle of cut reeds. She pulled half a dozen fine fish out of the water
     within the reeds, killing each as she took it out, and threading it on a long osier
      that she carried. Then she knotted the osier, hung it on her
     arm, picked up the pitcher, and turned to come back. And as she turned she saw the four
     children. The white dresses of Jane and Anthea stood out like snow against the dark forest
     background. She screamed and the pitcher fell, and the water was spilled out over the hard mud
     surface and over the fish, which had fallen too. Then the water slowly trickled away into the
     deep cracks.
“Don’t be frightened,” Anthea cried, “we won’t hurt you.”
“Who are you?” said the girl.
Now, once for all, I am not going to be bothered to tell you how it was that the girl could
     understand Anthea and Anthea could understand the girl. You, at any rate, would
     not understand me, if I tried to explain it, any more than you can understand
     about time and space being only forms of thought. You may think what you like. Perhaps the
     children had found out the universal language which everyone can understand, and which wise men
     so far have not found. You will have noticed long ago that they were singularly lucky children,
     and they may have had this piece of luck as well as others. Or it may have been that ... but
     why pursue the question further? The fact remains that in all their adventures the
     muddle‐headed inventions which we call foreign languages never bothered them in the least. They
     could always understand and be under‐
      stood. If you can explain this, please do. I daresay I could
     understand your explanation, though you could never understand mine.
So when the girl said, “Who are you?” everyone understood at once, and Anthea replied—
“We are children—just like you. Don’t be frightened. Won’t you show us where you live?”
Jane put her face right into the Psammead’s basket, and burrowed her mouth into its fur to
     whisper—
“Is it safe? Won’t they eat us? Are they cannibals?”
The Psammead shrugged its fur.
“Don’t make your voice buzz like that, it tickles my ears,” it said rather crossly. “You can
     always get back to Regent’s Park in time if you keep fast hold of the charm,” it said.
The strange girl was trembling with fright.
Anthea had a bangle on her arm. It was a sevenpenny‐halfpenny trumpery brass thing that
     pretended to be silver; it had a glass heart of turquoise blue hanging from it, and it was the
     gift of the maid‐of‐all‐work at the Fitzroy Street house.
“Here,” said Anthea, “this is for you. That is to show we will not hurt you. And if you take
     it I shall know that you won’t hurt us.”
The girl held out her hand. Anthea slid the bangle over it, and the girl’s face lighted up
     with the joy of possession.
“Come,” she said, looking lovingly at
     
 the bangle; “it is peace between your house and mine.”
She picked up her fish and pitcher and led the way up the narrow path by which she had come,
     and the others followed.
“This is something like!” said Cyril, trying to be brave.
“Yes!” said Robert, also assuming a boldness he was far from feeling, “this really and truly
      is an adventure! Its being in the Past makes it quite different from the Phœnix
     and Carpet happenings.”
The belt of thick, growing acacia trees and shrubs—mostly prickly and
     unpleasant‐looking—seemed about half a mile across. The path was narrow and the wood dark. At
     last, ahead, daylight shone through the boughs and leaves.
The whole party suddenly came out of the wood’s shadow into the glare of the sunlight that
     shone on a great stretch of yellow sand, dotted with heaps of grey rocks where spiky cactus
     plants showed gaudy crimson and pink flowers among their shabby, sand‐peppered leaves. Away to
     the right was something that looked like a grey‐brown hedge, and from beyond it blue smoke went
     up to the bluer sky. And over all the sun shone till you could hardly bear your clothes.
“That is where I live,” said the girl pointing.
“I won’t go,” whispered Jane into the basket, “unless you say it’s all right.”

The Psammead ought to have been touched by this proof of confidence. Perhaps, however, it
     looked upon it as a proof of doubt, for it merely snarled—
“If you don’t go now I’ll never help you again.”
“Oh,” whispered Anthea, “dear Jane, don’t! Think of Father and Mother and all of
     us getting our heart’s desire. And we can go back any minute. Come on!”
“Besides,” said Cyril, in a low voice, “the Psammead must know there’s no danger or it
     wouldn’t go. It’s not so over and above brave itself. Come on!”
This Jane at last consented to do.
As they got nearer to the browny fence they saw that it was a great hedge about eight feet
     high, made of piled‐up thorn bushes.
“What’s that for?” asked Cyril.
“To keep out foes and wild beasts,” said the girl.
“I should think it ought to, too,” said he. “Why, some of the thorns are as long as my
     foot.”
There was an opening in the hedge, and they followed the girl through it. A little way
     further on was another hedge, not so high, also of dry thorn bushes, very prickly and
     spiteful‐looking, and within this was a sort of village of huts.
There were no gardens and no roads. Just huts built of wood and twigs and clay, and
      roofed with great palm‐leaves, dumped down anywhere. The
     doors of these houses were very low, like the doors of dog‐kennels. The ground between them was
     not paths or streets, but just yellow sand trampled very hard and smooth.
In the middle of the village there was a hedge that enclosed what seemed to be a piece of
     ground about as big as their own garden in Camden Town.
No sooner were the children well within the inner thorn hedge than dozens of men and women
     and children came crowding round from behind and inside the huts.
The girl stood protectingly in front of the four children, and said—
“They are wonder‐children from beyond the desert. They bring marvellous gifts, and I have
     said that it is peace between us and them.”
She held out her arm with the Lowther Arcade bangle on it.
The children from London, where nothing now surprises anyone, had never before seen so many
     people look so astonished.
They crowded round the children, touching their clothes, their shoes, the buttons on the
     boys’ jackets, and the coral of the girls’ necklaces.
“Do say something,” whispered Anthea.
“We come,” said Cyril, with some dim remembrance of a dreadful day when he had had to wait in
     an outer office while his father
      interviewed a solicitor, and there had been nothing to read
     but the Daily Telegraph —“we come from the world where the sun never sets. And
     peace with honour is what we want. We are the great Anglo‐Saxon or conquering race. Not that we
     want to conquer you,” he added hastily. “We only want to look at your houses and
     your—well, at all you’ve got here, and then we shall return to our own place, and tell of all
     that we have seen so that your name may be famed.”
Cyril’s speech didn’t keep the crowd from pressing round and looking as eagerly as ever at
     the clothing of the children. Anthea had an idea that these people had never seen woven stuff
     before, and she saw how wonderful and strange it must seem to people who had never had any
     clothes but the skins of beasts. The sewing, too, of modern clothes seemed to astonish them
     very much. They must have been able to sew themselves, by the way, for men who seemed to be the
     chiefs wore knickerbockers of goat‐skin or deer‐skin, fastened round the waist with twisted
     strips of hide. And the women wore long skimpy skirts of animals’ skins. The people were not
     very tall, their hair was fair, and men and women both had it short. Their eyes were blue, and
     that seemed odd in Egypt. Most of them were tattooed like sailors, only more roughly.
“What is this? What is this?” they kept
      asking touching the children’s clothes curiously.
Anthea hastily took off Jane’s frilly lace collar and handed it to the woman who seemed most
     friendly.
“Take this,” she said, “and look at it. And leave us alone. We want to talk among
     ourselves.”
She spoke in the tone of authority which she had always found successful when she had not
     time to coax her baby brother to do as he was told. The tone was just as successful now. The
     children were left together and the crowd retreated. It paused a dozen yards away to look at
     the lace collar and to go on talking as hard as it could.
The children will never know what those people said, though they knew well enough that they,
     the four strangers, were the subject of the talk. They tried to comfort themselves by
     remembering the girl’s promise of friendliness, but of course the thought of the charm was more
     comfortable than anything else. They sat down on the sand in the shadow of the hedged‐round
     place in the middle of the village, and now for the first time they were able to look about
     them and to see something more than a crowd of eager, curious faces.
They here noticed that the women wore necklaces made of beads of different coloured stone,
     and from these hung pendants of odd,
     
 strange shapes, and some of them had bracelets of ivory and
     flint.
“I say,” said Robert, “what a lot we could teach them if we stayed here!”
“I expect they could teach us something too,” said Cyril. “Did you notice that flint bracelet
     the woman had that Anthea gave the collar to? That must have taken some making. Look here,
     they’ll get suspicious if we talk among ourselves, and I do want to know about how they do
     things. Let’s get the girl to show us round, and we can be thinking about how to get the Amulet
     at the same time. Only mind, we must keep together.”
Anthea beckoned to the girl, who was standing a little way off looking wistfully at them, and
     she came gladly.
“Tell us how you make the bracelets, the stone ones,” said Cyril.
“With other stones,” said the girl; “the men make them; we have men of special skill in such
     work.”
“Haven’t you any iron tools?”
“Iron,” said the girl, “I don’t know what you mean.” It was the first word she had not
     understood.
“Are all your tools of flint?” asked Cyril.
“Of course,” said the girl, opening her eyes wide.
I wish I had time to tell you of that talk. The English children wanted to hear all about
     this new place, but they also wanted
      to tell of their own country. It was like when you come back
     from your holidays and you want to hear and to tell everything at the same time. As the talk
     went on there were more and more words that the girl could not understand, and the children
     soon gave up the attempt to explain to her what their own country was like, when they began to
     see how very few of the things they had always thought they could not do without were really at
     all necessary to life.
The girl showed them how the huts were made—indeed, as one was being made that very day she
     took them to look at it. The way of building was very different from ours. The men stuck long
     pieces of wood into a piece of ground the size of the hut they wanted to make. These were about
     eight inches apart; then they put in another row about eight inches away from the first, and
     then a third row still further out. Then all the space between was filled up with small
     branches and twigs, and then daubed over with black mud worked with the feet till it was soft
     and sticky like putty.
The girl told them how the men went hunting with flint spears and arrows, and how they made
     boats with reeds and clay. Then she explained the reed thing in the river that she had taken
     the fish out of. It was a fish‐trap—just a ring of reeds set up in the water with only one
     little opening in it, and in this opening, just below the water,
      were stuck reeds slanting the way of the river’s flow, so
     that the fish, when they had swum sillily in, sillily couldn’t get out again. She showed them
     the clay pots and jars and platters, some of them ornamented with black and red patterns, and
     the most wonderful things made of flint and different sorts of stone, beads, and ornaments, and
     tools and weapons of all sorts and kinds.
“It is really wonderful,” said Cyril patronizingly, “when you consider that it’s all eight
     thousand years ago—”
“I don’t understand you,” said the girl.
“It isn’t eight thousand years ago,” whispered Jane. “It’s now—and
     that’s just what I don’t like about it. I say, do let’s get home again before
     anything more happens. You can see for yourselves the charm isn’t here.”
“What’s in that place in the middle?” asked Anthea, struck by a sudden thought, and pointing
     to the fence.
“That’s the secret sacred place,” said the girl in a whisper. “No one knows what is there.
     There are many walls, and inside the insidest one It is, but no one knows what It
     is except the headsmen.”
“I believe you know,” said Cyril, looking at her very hard.
“I’ll give you this if you’ll tell me,” said Anthea taking off a bead‐ring which had already
     been much admired.
“Yes,” said the girl, catching eagerly at the
      ring. “My father is one of the heads, and I know a water
     charm to make him talk in his sleep. And he has spoken. I will tell you. But if they know I
     have told you they will kill me. In the insidest inside there is a stone box, and in it there
     is the Amulet. None knows whence it came. It came from very far away.”
“Have you seen it?” asked Anthea.
The girl nodded.
“Is it anything like this?” asked Jane, rashly producing the charm.
The girl’s face turned a sickly greenish white.
“Hide it, hide it,” she whispered. “You must put it back. If they see it they will kill us
     all. You for taking it, and me for knowing that there was such a thing. Oh, woe—woe! why did
     you ever come here?”
“Don’t be frightened,” said Cyril. “they shan’t know. Jane, don’t you be such a little
     jack‐ape again—that’s all. You see what will happen if you do. Now, tell me—” He turned to the
     girl, but before he had time to speak the question there was a loud shout, and a man bounded in
     through the opening in the thorn‐hedge.
“Many foes are upon us!” he cried. “Make ready the defences!”
His breath only served for that, and he lay panting on the ground.
“Oh, do let’s go home!” said Jane. “Look here—I don’t care—I
     will!”


She held up the charm. Fortunately all the strange, fair people were too busy to notice her.
     She held up the charm. And nothing happened.
“You haven’t said the word of power,” said Anthea.
Jane hastily said it—and still nothing happened.
“Hold it up towards the East, you silly!” said Robert.
“Which is the East?” said Jane, dancing about in her agony of terror.
Nobody knew. So they opened the fish‐bag to ask the Psammead.
And the bag had only a waterproof sheet in it.
The Psammead was gone.
“Hide the sacred thing! Hide it! Hide it!” whispered the girl.
Cyril shrugged his shoulders, and tried to look as brave as he knew he ought to feel.
“Hide it up, Pussy,” he said. “We are in for it now. We’ve just got to stay and
     see it out.”
