<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">
CHAPTER XXXIV.
THE new ménage went well. Therèse was a
       treasure, and Martha's willing slave. Expenses were kept fairly reasonable by her care and
       knowledge. Still it must not be forgotten that the little income needed supplementing. Hadria
       had been aware of this risk from the first, but had faced it, regarding it as the less
       perilous of the alternatives that she had to choose between. The income was small, but it was
       her own absolutely, and she must live on that, with such auxiliary sums as she could earn.
       She hoped to be able to make a little money by her compositions. The future was all vague and
       unknown, but one thing was at least certain: it cost money to live, and in some way or other
       it had to be made. She told her kind friend, Madame Vauchelet, of her plan. Madame Vauchelet
       consulted her musical friends. People were sympathetic, but rather vague in their advice. It
       was always difficult, this affair. The beginning was hard. M. Thillard, a kindly,
       highly-cultivated man of about sixty, who had heard Hadria play, took great interest in her
       talent, and busied himself on her behalf.
He said he would like to interest the great Jouffroy in this work. It had so distinct and
       remarkable an individuality that Dr. Thillard was sure Jouffroy would be enchanted with it.
       For himself, he held that it shewed a development of musical form and expression extremely
       remarkable. He could not quite understand it. There was, he knew not what, in it, of strange
       and powerful; a music of the North; something of bizarre, something of mysterious, even of
       terrible, “une emotion épouvantable,” cried Mr. Thillard,
       working himself
        to a climax as the theme inspired him, “There is genius in
       that work, but certainly genius.” Madame Vauchelet nodded gravely at this pronouncement. It
       ought to be published, she said. But this supreme recompense of genius was apparently hard to
       achieve. The score was sent from publisher to publisher: “from pillar to post,” said Hadria,
       “if one might venture on a phrase liable to misconstruction on the lips of disappointed
       ambition.”
But at the end of a long and wearisome delay, the little packet was returned in a tattered
       condition to its discouraged author. M. Thillard made light of this. It was always thus at
       first. One must have patience.
“One must live,” said Hadria, “or at least such is the prejudice under which one has been
       brought up.”
“All will come,” said M. Thillard. “You will see.”
On one sunny afternoon, when Hadria had returned, thrilled and inspired by a magnificent
       orchestral performance at the Châtelet, she found Madame Vauchelet, M. Thillard, and the
       great Jouffroy waiting in her salon. Jouffroy was small,
       eccentric, fiery, with keen eager eyes, thick black hair, and overhanging brows, M. Thillard
       reminded Madame Temperley of her kind permission to present to her M. Jouffroy. Madame
       Temperley was charmed and flattered by Monsieur's visit.
It was an exciting afternoon. Madame Vauchelet was eager to hear the opinion of the great
       man, and anxious for Hadria to make a good impression.
The warm-hearted Frenchwoman, who had lost a daughter, of whom Hadria reminded her, had
       been untiring in her kindness, from the first. Madame Vauchelet, in her young days, had
       cherished a similar musical ambition, and Jouffroy always asserted that she might have done
       great things, as a performer, had not the cares of a family put an end to all hope of
       bringing her gifts to fruition.
The piano was opened. Jouffroy played. Madame Vauchelet, with her large veil thrown back,
       her black cashmere folds
        falling around her, sat in the large arm-chair, a
       dignified and graceful figure, listening gravely. The kindly, refined face of M. Thillard
       beamed with enjoyment; an occasional cry of admiration escaping his lips, at some exquisite
       touch from the master.
The time slipped by, with bewildering rapidity.
Monsieur Thillard asked if they might be allowed to hear some of Madame's
       compositions—those which she had already been so amiable as to play to him.
Jouffroy settled himself to listen; his shaggy eyebrows lowering over his eyes, not in
       severity but in fixity of attention. Hadria trembled for a moment, as her hands touched the
       keys. Jouffroy gave a nod of satisfaction. If there had been no such quiver of nerves he
       would have doubted. So he said afterwards to Mr. Thillard and Madame Vauchelet.
After listening, for a time, without moving a muscle, he suddenly sat bolt upright and
       looked round at the player. The character of the music, always individual, had grown more
       marked, and at this point an effect was produced which appeared to startle the musician. He
       withdrew his gaze, after a moment, muttering something to himself, and resumed his former
       attitude, slowly and gravely nodding his head. There was a long silence after the last of the
       lingering, questioning notes had died away.
“Is Madame prepared for work, for hard, faithful work?”
The answer was affirmative. She was only too glad to have the chance to work.
“Has Madame inexhaustible patience?”
“In this cause—yes.”
“And can she bear to be misunderstood; to be derided for departure from old rules and
       conventions; to have her work despised and refused, and again refused, till at last the dull
       ears shall he opened and all the stupid world shall run shouting to her feet?”
The colour rushed into Hadria's cheeks. “Voila.”
       exclaimed Madame Vauchelet. M. Thillard beamed with satisfaction. “Did I not tell you?”

Jouffroy clapped his friend on the back with enthusiasm. “Il faut
        travailler,” he said, “mais travailler!” He
       questioned Hadria minutely as to her course of study, approved it on the whole, suggesting
       alterations and additions. He asked to look through some more of her work.
“Mon Dieu,” he ejaculated, as his quick eye ran over page
       after page.
“If Madame has a character as strong as her genius, her name will one day be on the lips of
       all the world.” He looked at her searchingly.
“I knew it!” exclaimed M. Thillard. “Madame, je vous
        félicite.”
“Ah!” cried Jouffroy, with a shake of his black shaggy head, “this is not a fate to be
       envied. C'est dur!”
“I am bewildered!” cried Hadria at last, in a voice that seemed to her to come from
       somewhere a long way off. The whole scene had acquired the character of a dream. The figures
       moved through miles of clear distance. Her impressions were chaotic. While a strange, deep
       confirmation of the musician's words, seemed to stir within her as if they had long been
       familiar, her mind entirely refused credence.
He had gone too far. Had he said a remarkable talent, but —
Yet was it not, after all, possible? Nature scattered her gifts wildly and cruelly:
       cruelly, because she cared not into what cramped nooks and crannies she poured her maddening
       explosive: cruelly, because she hurled this fire from heaven with indiscriminate hand, to set
       alight one dared not guess how many chained martyrs at their stakes. Nature did not pick and
       choose the subjects of her wilful ministrations. She seemed to scatter at random, out of
       sheer gaieté de coeur, as Jouffroy had said, and if some
       golden grain chanced to be gleaming in this soul or that, what cause for astonishment? The
       rest might be the worst of dross. As well might the chance occur to one of Nature's children
       as to another. She did not bestow even one golden grain for nothing, bien

sûr; she meant to be paid back with interest. Just one
       bright bead of the whole vast circlet of the truth: perhaps it was hers, but more likely that
       these kind friends had been misled by their sympathy.
M. Jouffroy came next day to have a long talk with Hadria about her work and her methods.
       He was absolutely confident of what he had said, but he was emphatic regarding the necessity
       for work; steady, uninterrupted work. Everything must be subservient to the one aim. If she
       contemplated anything short of complete dedication to her art—well (he shrugged his
       shoulders), it would be better to amuse herself. There could be no half-measures with art.
       True, there were thousands of people who practised a little of this and a little of that, but
       Art would endure no such disrespect. It was the affair of a lifetime. He had known many women
       with great talent, but, alas! they had not persistence. Only last year a charming, beautiful
       young woman, with—mon Dieu!—a talent that might have placed
       her on the topmost rank of singers, had married against the fervent entreaties of Jouffroy,
       and now he shrugged his shoulders with a gesture of pitying contempt—“elle est mère tout simplement.” Her force had gone from herself into the plump
       infant, whose “cris dechirants” were all that now remained
       to the world of his mother's once magnificent voice. Hélas!
       how many brilliant careers had he not seen ruined by this fatal instinct! Jouffroy's passion
       for his art had overcome the usual sentiment of the Frenchman, and even the strain of Jewish
       blood. He did not think a woman of genius well lost for a child. He grudged her to the fetish
        la famille. He went so far as to say that, even without
       the claims of genius, a woman ought to be permitted to please herself in the matter. When he
       heard that Madame had two children, and yet had not abandoned her ambition, he nodded gravely
       and significantly.
“But Madame has courage,” he commented. “She must have braved much censure.”

It was the first case of the kind that had come under his notice. He hoped much from it.
       His opinion of the sex would depend on Hadria's power of persistence. In consequence of
       numberless pupils who had shewn great promise, and then had satisfied themselves with “a
       stupid maternity,” Jouffrey was inclined to regard women with contempt, not as regards their
       talent, which he declared was often astonishing, but as regards their persistency of
       character and purpose.
One could not rely on them. They had enthusiasm—Oh, but enthusiasm à faire peur, but presently “un monsieur avec des
        moustaches seduisantes” approaches, and then “Phui, c'est
        tout fini!” There was something of fatality in the affair. The instinct was
       terrible; a demoniacal possession. It was for women a veritable curse, a disease. M. Jouffroy
       had pronounced views on the subject. He regarded the maternal instinct as the scourge of
       genius. It was, for women, the devil's truncheon, his rod of empire. This “reproductive rage”
       held them—in spite of all their fine intuitions and astonishing ability—after all on the
       animal plane; cut them off from the little band of those who could break up new ground in
       human knowledge, and explore new heights of Art and Nature.
“I speak to you thus, Madame, not because I think little of your sex, but because I grudge
       them to the monster who will not spare us even one!”
Hadria worked with sufficient energy to please even Jouffroy. Her heart was in it, and her
       progress rapid. Everything was organized, in her life, for the one object. At the School of
       Music, she was in an atmosphere of work, everyone being bent on the same goal, each detail
       arranged to further the students in their efforts. It was like walking on a pavement after
       struggling uphill on loose sand; like breathing sea-breezes after inhaling a polluted
       atmosphere.
In old days, Hadria used to be haunted by a singular recurrent nightmare: that she was
       toiling up a steep mountain made of hard slippery rock, the summit always receding as she
       advanced. Behind her was a vast precipice down which she must fall if
        she lost her footing; and always, she saw hands without
       bodies attached to them placing stones in the path, so that they rolled down and had to be
       evaded at the peril of her life. And each time, after one set of stones was evaded, and she
       thought there would be a time of respite, another batch was set rolling, amid thin, scarcely
       audible laughter, which came on the storm-wind that blew precipice-wards across the mountain;
       and invariably she awoke just as a final avalanche of cruel stones had sent her reeling over
       the hideous verge.
One is disposed to make light of the sufferings gone through in a dream, though it would
       trouble most of us to explain why, since the agony of mind is often as extreme as possibly
       could be endured in actual life. From the day of her arrival in Paris, Hadria was never again
       tormented with this nightmare.
Composition went on rapidly now. Soon there was a little pile of new work for M. Jouffroy's
       inspection. He was delighted, criticizing severely, but always encouraging to fresh efforts.
       As for the publishing, that was a different matter. In spite of M. Jouffroy's recommendation,
       publishers could not venture on anything of a character so unpopular. The music had merit,
       but it was eccentric. M. Jouffroy was angry. He declared that he would play something of
       Madame's at the next Châtelet concert. There would be opposition, but he would carry his
       point. And he did. But the audience received it very coldly. Although Hadria had expected
       such a reception, she felt a chill run through her, and a sinking of the heart. It was like a
       cold word that rebuffs an offer of sympathy, or an appeal for it. It sent her back into
       depths of loneliness, and reminded her how cut off she was from the great majority of her
       fellows, after all. And then Guy de Maupassant's dreadful “Solitude” came to her memory.
       There is no way (the hero of the sketch asserts) by which a man can break the eternal
       loneliness to which he is foredoomed. He cannot convey to others his real impressions or
       emotion, try as he may. By a series of assertions, hard to deny, the hero arrives at a
       terrible conclusion amounting to
        this: Art, affection, are in vain; we know not what we
       say, nor whom we love.
Jouffroy came out of the theatre, snorting and ruffled.
“But they are imbeciles, all!”
Hadria thought that perhaps she was the “imbecile”; it was a possibility to be
       counted with, but she dared not say so to the irate Jouffroy.
He was particularly angry, because the audience had confirmed his own fear that only very
       slowly would the quality of the music be recognized by even the more cultivated public. It
       had invaded fresh territory, he said, added to the range of expression, and was meanwhile a
       new language to casual listeners. It was rebel music, offensive to the orthodox. Hubert had
       always said that “it was out of the question,” and he appeared to have been right.
“Bah,ce ne sont que des moutons!” exclaimed Jouffroy. If
       the work had been poorer, less original, there would not have been this trouble. Was there
       not some other method by which Madame could earn what was necessary, en attendant?
In one of Professor Fortescue's letters, he had reminded Hadria of his eagerness to help
       her. Yet, what could he do? He had influence in the world of science, but Hadria could not
       produce anything scientific! She bethought her of trying to write light descriptive articles,
       of a kind depending not so much on literary skill as on subject and epistolary freshness of
       touch. These she sent to the Professor, not without reluctance, knowing how overburdened he
       already was with work and with applications for help and advice. He approved of her idea, and
       advised the articles being sent the round of the magazines and papers.
Through his influence, one of the shorter articles was accepted, and Hadria felt
       encouraged. Her day was now very full. The new art was laborious, severely simple in
       character, though she studiously made her articles. Her acquaintances had multiplied very
       rapidly of late, and although this brought into her experience much that was pleasant and
       interesting,
        the demands of an enlarging circle swallowed an
       astonishing number of hours. An element of trouble had begun to come into the life that had
       been so full of serenity, as well as of regular and strenuous work. Hadria was already
       feeling the effects of anxiety and hurry. She had not come with untried powers to the fray.
       The reserve forces had long ago been sapped, in the early struggles, beginning in her
       girlhood and continuing at increasing pressure ever since. There was only enough nerve-force
       to enable one to live from hand to mouth. Expenditure of this force having been so often in
       excess of income, economy had become imperative. Yet, economy was difficult. M. Jouffroy was
       always spurring her to work, to throw over everything for this object; letters from England
       incessantly urged a very different course; friends in Paris pressed her to visit them, to
       accompany them hither and thither, to join musical parties, to compose little songs (some
       bagatelle in celebration of a birthday or wedding), to drive to the further end of the town
       to play to this person or that who had heard of Madame's great talent. Hadria was glad to do
       anything she could to express her gratitude for the kindness she had received on all hands,
       but, alas! there were only a certain number of hours in the day, and only a certain number of
       years in one's life, and art was long. Moreover, nerves were awkward things to play with.
Insidiously, treacherously, difficulties crept up. Even here, where she seemed so free, the
       peculiar claims that are made, by common consent, on a woman's time and strength began to
       weave their tiny cords around her. She took warning, and put an end to any voluntary increase
       of her circle, but the step had been taken a little too late. The mischief was done. To give
       pain or offence for the sake of an hour or two, more or less, seemed cruel and selfish, yet
       Hadria often longed for the privilege that every man enjoys, of quietly pursuing his work
       without giving either.
A disastrous sense of hurry and fatigue began to oppress her. This was becoming serious.
       She must make a stand.
        Yet her attempts at explanation were generally taken as
       polite excuses for neglecting those who had been kind and cordial.
Jouffroy taxed her with looking tired. One must not be tired. One must arrange the time so
       as to secure ample rest and recreation after the real work was over. Women were so foolish in
       that way. They did everything feverishly. They imagined themselves to have inexhaustible
       nerves.
Hadria hinted that it was perhaps others who demanded of them what was possible only to
       inexhaustible nerves.
True; towards women, people behaved as idiots. How was it possible to produce one's best,
       if repose were lacking? Serenity was necessary for all production.
As well expect water perpetually agitated to freeze, as expect the crystals of the mind to
       produce themselves under the influence of incessant disturbance.
Work? Yes. Work never harmed any man or woman. It was harassment that killed. Work of the
       mind, of the artistic powers, that was a tonic to the whole being. But little distractions,
       irregular duties, worries, uncertainties—Jouffroy shook his head ominously. And not only to
       the artist were they fatal. It was these that drew such deep lines on the faces of women
       still young. It was these that destroyed ability and hope, and killed God only knew how many
       of His good gifts! Poverty: that could be endured with all its difficulties, if that were the
       one anxiety. It was never the one but the multitude of troubles that destroyed.
       Serenity there must be. A man knew that, and insisted on having it. Friends were no true
       friends if they robbed one of it. For him, he had a poor opinion of that which people called
       affection, regard. As for l'amour, that was the supreme
       egotism. The affections were simply a means to “make oneself paid.” Affection! Bah! One did
       not offer it for nothing, bien sûr! It was through this
       insufferable pretext that one arrived at governing others. “Comment? Your presence can give me happiness, and you will not remain
        always beside me? It is nothing to you how I suffer? To me
       whom you love you refuse this small demand?” Jouffroy opened his eyes, with a scornful glare.
       “It is in that fashion, I promise you, that one can rule!”
“Ah, monsieur,” said Hadria, “you are a keen observer. How I wish you could live a woman's
       life for a short time. You are wise now, but after that—”
“Madame, I have sinned in my day, perhaps to merit purgatorial fires; but, without false
       modesty, I do not think that I have justly incurred the penalty you propose to me.”
Hadria laughed. “It would be a strange piece of poetic justice,” she said, “if all the men
       who have sinned beyond forgiveness in this incarnation, should be doomed to appear in the
       next, as well-brought-up women.”
Jouffroy smiled.
“Fancy some conquering hero reappearing in ringlets and mittens, as one's maiden aunt.”
Jouffroy grinned. “Ce serait dur!”
“Ah, mon Dieu!” cried Madame Vauchelet, “if men had to
       endure in the next world that which they have made women suffer in this—that would be an
       atrocious justice!”
</div></body></text></TEI>