<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="42">
CHAPTER XLII.
IN the conversation with her sister, the name which Hadria had dreaded to hear had
       not been mentioned. She felt as if she could not have met her sister's eyes, at that moment,
       had she alluded to Professor Theobald; for only five minutes before, in the wood, he had
       spoken to her in a way that was scarcely possible to misunderstand, though his wording was so
       cautious that she could not have taken offence, had she been so minded, without drawing upon
       herself the possible retort. “My dear lady, you have completely misunderstood me.” The
       thought made her flush painfully. But suppose he really had meant what his words
       seemed to imply? He could intend no insult, because he despised, and knew that she despised,
       popular social creeds. Into what new realms was she drifting? There was something attractive
       to Hadria, in the idea of defying the world's laws. It was not as the dutiful property of
       another, but as herself, a separate and responsible individual, that she would act and feel,
       rightly or wrongly, as the case might be. That was a matter between herself and her
       conscience, not between herself and the world or her legal owner.
The Professor's ambiguous and yet startling speech had forced her to consider her position.
       She remembered how her instinct had always been to hold him aloof from her life, just
       because, as she now began to believe, there was something in him that powerfully attracted
       her. She had feared an attraction that appeared unjustified by the man's character. But now
       the fascination had begun to take a stronger grip, as the pre-occupying ideas of her life had
       been chased from
        their places. It had insensibly crept in to fill the empty
       throne. So long as she had cherished hope, so long as she was still struggling, this
       insidious half-magnetic influence had been easily resisted. Now, she was set adrift; her
       anchor was raised; she lay at the wind's mercy, half-conscious of the peril and not
       caring.
Professor Theobald had an acute perception of the strange and confused struggle that was
       going on in her mind. But he had no notion of the peculiar reasons, in her case, for an
       effect that he knew to be far from rare among women; he did not understand the angry,
       corroding action of a strong artistic impulse that was incessantly baulked in full tide. The
       sinister, menacing voices of that tide had no meaning for him, except as expressing a
        malaise which he had met with a hundred times before. He
       put it down to an excess of emotional or nervous energy, in a nature whose opportunities did
       not offer full scope to its powers. He had grasped the general conditions, but he had not
       perceived the particular fact that added tenfold to the evil which exists in the more usual,
       and less complicated case.
He thought but little of a musical gift, having no sympathy with music; and since he had
       never known what it was to receive anything but help and encouragement in the exercise of his
       own talents, the effect upon the mind and character of such an experience as Hadria's, was
       beyond the range of his conceptions. He understood subtly, and misunderstood completely, at
       one and the same time. But to Hadria, every syllable which revealed how much he did
       understand, seemed to prove, by implication, that he understood the whole. It never occurred
       to her that he was blinder than Henriette herself, to the real centre and heart of the
       difficulty.
It has been said that what the human being longs for above all things, is to be understood:
       that he prefers it infinitely to being over-rated. Professor Theobald gave Hadria this
       desired sensation. His attraction for her was composed of many elements, and it was enhanced
       by the fact that she
        had now grown so used to his presence, as to cease to
       notice many little traits that had repelled her, at the beginning. Her critical instincts
       were lulled. Thus had come to pass that which is by no means an uncommon incident in human
       history: a toleration for and finally a strong attraction towards a nature that began by
       creating distrust, and even dislike.
Hadria's instinct now was to hunt up reasons for desiring the society of Professor
       Theobald, for the gladness that she felt at the prospect of seeing him. She wished to explain
       to herself how it was that he had become so prominent a figure in her life. It was surprising
       how rapidly and how completely he had taken a central position. Her feeling towards him, and
       her admiring affection for Professor Fortescue, were as different as night from day. She
       shrank from comparing the two emotions, because at the bottom of her heart, she felt how
       infinitely less fine and sound was this latter attachment, how infinitely less to be
       welcomed. If any one spoke disparagingly of Professor Theobald, Hadria's instinct was to
       stand up for him, to find ingenious reasons for his words or his conduct that threw upon him
       the most favourable light, and her object was as much to persuade herself as to convince her
       interlocutor. What the Professor had said this afternoon, had brought her to a point whence
       she had to review all these changes and developments of her feeling. She puzzled herself
       profoundly. In remembering those few words, she was conscious of a little thrill of—not joy
       (the word was too strong), but of something akin to it. She thought—and then laughed at
       herself—that it had a resemblance to the sensation that is caused to the mind by the
       suggestion of some new and entrancingly interesting idea—say about astronomy! And if she
       consulted her mere wishes in the matter, apart from all other considerations, she would
       explore farther in this direction. Whether curiosity or sentiment actuated her, she could not
       detect. It would certainly be deeply exciting to find out what her own nature really was, and
       still more so to gain greater insight into his. Was this heartless, cold-blooded? Or was it
       that she felt a
        lurking capacity for a feeling stronger than—or at any
       rate different from—any that she had hitherto felt? This was a secret that she could not
       discover. Hadria gave a frightened start. Was she finding herself to be bad in a way that she
       had never suspected? If she could but fully and completely escape from tradition, so that her
       judgment might be quite unhampered. Tradition seemed either to make human beings blindly
       submissive, or to tempt them to act out of an equally blind opposition to its canons. One
       could never be entirely independent. In her confusion, she longed to turn to some clear mind
       and sound conscience, not so much for advice, as in order to test the effect upon such a mind
       and conscience of the whole situation.
Professor Fortescue was the only person upon whose judgment and feeling she could
       absolutely rely. What would he think of her? His impression would be the best possible guide,
       for no one opposed more strongly than he did the vulgar notion of proprietary rights between
       husband and wife, no one asserted more absolutely the independence of the individual. Yet
       Hadria could not imagine that he would be anything but profoundly sorry, if he knew the
       recklessness of her feeling, and the nature of her sentiment for Professor Theobald. But then
       he did not know how she stood; he did not know that the blue hopeful distance of life had
       disappeared; that even the middle-distance had been cut off, and that the sticks and stones
       and details of a very speckly foreground now confronted her immovably. She would like to
       learn how many women of her temperament, placed in her position, would stop to enquire very
       closely into the right and wrong of the matter, when for a moment, a little avenue seemed on
       the point of opening, misty and blue, leading the eye to hidden perilous distances.
And then Professor Theobald had, after all, many fine qualities. He was complex, and he had
       faults like the rest of us; but the more one knew him, the more one felt his kindness of
       heart (how good he was to little Martha), his
        readiness to help others, his breadth of view and his
       sympathy. These were not common qualities. He was a mall whom one could admire, despite
       certain traits that made one shrink a little, at times. These moreover had disappeared of
       late. They were accidental rather than intrinsic. It was a matter of daily observation that
       people catch superficial modes of thought and speech, just as they catch accent, or as women
       who have given no thought to the art of dress, sometimes misrepresent themselves, by
       adopting, unmodified, whatever happens to be in the fashion. Hadria had a wistful desire to
       be able to respect Professor Theobald without reserve, to believe in him thoroughly, to think
       him noble in calibre and fine in fibre. She had a vague idea that emphatic statement could
       conduce to making all this true.
She had never met him alone since that day of the picnic, except for a few chance minutes,
       when he had expressed over again, rather in tone than in words, the sentiment before
       implied.
Algitha and Miss Du Prel were relieved to see that Hadria had, after all, taken their
       advice. Without making any violent or obvious change in her conduct, she had ceased to cause
       her friends anxiety. Something in her manner had changed. Claude Moreton felt it instantly.
       He spoke of leaving Craddock Place, but he lingered on. The house had begun to empty. Lady
       Engleton wished to have some time to herself. She was painting a new picture. But Professor
       Theobald remained. Joseph Fleming went away to stay with his married sister. About this time
       Hubert had to go abroad to attend to some business matters of a serious and tedious
       character, connected with a law-suit in which he was professionally interested.
From some instinct which Hadria found difficult to account for, she avoided meeting the
       Professor alone. Yet the whole interest of the day centred in the prospect of seeing him. If
       by chance, she missed him, she felt flat and dull, and found herself going over in her mind
       every detail of their last
        meeting. He had the art of making his most trifling remark
       interesting. Even his comments on the weather had a colour and quality of their own. Lady
       Engleton admired his lightness of touch.
“Did you know that our amiable Professor shews his devotion to you, by devotion to your
        protégée?” she asked one day, when she met Hadria
       returning from the Priory with the two boys, whose holidays were not yet over. “I saw him
       coming out of the child's cottage this morning, and she shewed me the toy he had given
       her.”
“He is very fond of her, I know,” said Hadria.
“He gives her lots of things!” cried Jack, opening round and envious eyes.
“How do you know, sir?” enquired Lady Engleton.
“Because Mary says so,” Jack returned.
Hadria was pleased at the kindness which the act seemed to indicate.
The doctor had ordered her to be in the open air as much as possible, and to take a walk
       every day. Sometimes she would walk with the boys, sometimes alone. In either case, the
       thought of Professor Theobald pursued her. She often grew wearied with it, but it could not
       be banished. If she saw a distant figure on the road, a little sick, excited stir of the
       heart, betrayed her suspicion that it might be he. She could not sincerely wish herself free
       from the strange infatuation, for the thought of life without it, troublesome and fatiguing
       though it was, seemed inexpressibly dull. It had taken the colour out of everything. It had
       altered the very face of nature, in her eyes. Her hope had been to escape loneliness, but
       with this preposterous secret, she was lonelier than she had ever been before. She could no
       longer make a confidante of herself. She was afraid of her own ridicule, her own blame, above
       all of finding herself confronted with some accusation against the Professor, some
       overpowering reason for thinking poorly of him. Whenever they met, she was in terror lest he
       should leave her no
        alternative. She often opened conversational channels by
       which he could escape his unknown peril, and she would hold her breath till it was over. She
       dreaded the cool-headed, ruthless critic, lurking within her own consciousness, who would
       hear of no ingenious explanations of words or conduct. But she would not admit to this
       dread—that would have been to admit everything. She had not the satisfaction of openly
       thinking the matter out, for the suspicion that so profoundly saddened her, must be kept
       scrupulously hidden. Hadria was filled with dismay when she dared to glance at the future. No
       wonder Valeria had warned her against playing with fire! Was it always like this when people
       fell in love? What a ridiculous, uncomfortable, outrageous thing it was! How destructive to
       common sense and sanity and everything that kept life running on reasonable lines. A poor
       joke at best, and oh, how stale!

“Shall I tell you your ruling passion, Mrs. Temperley?”
“If you can, Professor Theobald.”
Before them stretched a woodland glade. The broad fronds of the bracken made bright patches
       of light where the sun caught them, and tall plants, such as hemlock and wild parsley, stood
       out, almost white against the shade; the flies and midges moving round them in the warmth. At
       some distance behind, the sound of voices could be heard through the windings of the wood.
       There were snatches of song and laughter.
“Your ruling passion is power over others.”
“It has been sadly thwarted then,” she answered, with a nervous laugh.
“Thwarted? Surely not. What more can you want than to touch the emotions of every one who
       comes across your path? It is a splendid power, and ought to be more satisfying to the
       possessor than a gift of any other kind.”
Professor Theobald waited for her reply, but she made none.

He looked at her fixedly, eagerly. She could do nothing but walk on in silence.
“Even an actor does not impress himself so directly upon his fellows as a woman of—well, a
       woman like yourself. A painter, a writer, a musician, never comes in touch at all with his
       public. We hear his name, we admire or we decry his works, but the man or the woman who has
       toiled, and felt, and lived, is unknown to us. He is lost in his work.”
Hadria gave a murmur of assent.
“But you, Mrs. Temperley, have a very different story to tell. It is you,
       yourself, your personality, in all its many-sided charm that we all bow to; it is
        you, not your achievements that—that we love.”
Hadria cleared her throat; the words would not come. A rebellious little nerve was
       twitching at her eye-lid. After all, what in heaven's name was she to say? It was too foolish
       to pretend to misunderstand; for tone, look, manner all told the same story; yet even now
       there was nothing absolutely definite to reply to, and her cleverness of retort had deserted
       her.
“Ah! Mrs. Temperley—Hadria—” Professor Theobald had stopped short in the path, and then
       Hadria made some drowning effort to resist the force that she still feared. But it was in
       vain. She stood before him, paler even than usual, with her head held high, but eye-lids that
       drooped and lips that trembled. The movement of the leaves made faint quivering little
       shadows on her white gown, and stirred delicately over the lace at her throat. The emotion
       that possessed her, the mixture of joy and dismay and even terror, passed across her face, in
       the moment's silence. The two figures stood opposite to one another; Hadria drawing a little
       away, swayed slightly backward, the Professor eagerly bending forward. He was on the point of
       speaking, when there came floating through the wood, the sound of a woman's voice singing.
       The voice was swiftly recognised by them both, and the song.

Hadria's eye-lids lifted for a second, and her breathing quickened.

“Oh, gather me the rose, the rose,
While yet in flower we find it;
For summer smiles, but summer goes,
And winter wails behind it.
“For with the dream foregone, foregone,
The deed foreborne for ever,
The worm regret will canker on,
And time will turn him never.”

Professor Theobald advanced a step. Hadria drew back.

“So well it were to love, my love,
And cheat of any laughter
The fate beneath us and above,
The dark before and after.
“The myrtle and the rose, the rose,
The sunshine and the swallow,
The dream that comes, the dream that goes,
The memories that follow!

The sweet cadence died away. A bird's note took up the dropped thread of music. The
       Professor broke into passionate speech.
“My cause is pleaded in your own language, Hadria, Hadria; listen to it, listen. You know
       what is in my heart; I can't apologize for feeling it, for I have no choice; no man has where
       you are concerned, as you must have discovered long ago. And I do not apologize for telling
       you the truth, you know it does you no wrong. This is no news to you; you must have guessed
       it from the first. Your coldness, your rebuffs, betrayed that you did. But, ah! I have
       struggled long enough. I can keep silence no longer. I have thought of late that your feeling
       for me had changed; a thousand things have made me hope—good heavens, if you knew what that
       means to a man who had lost it! Ah! speak—don't look like that, Hadria,—what is there in me
       that you always turn from? Speak, speak!”
“Ah! life is horribly difficult!” she exclaimed. “I wish
        to heaven I had never budged from the traditions in which
       I was educated—either that, or that everybody had discarded them. I feel one way and think
       another.”
“Then you do love me, Hadria,” he cried.
Her instinct was to deny the truth, but there seemed to her something mean in concealment,
       especially if she were to blame, especially if those who respected tradition, and made it
       their guide and rule through thick and thin, in the very teeth of reason, were right after
       all, as it seemed to her, at this moment, that they were. If there were evil in this strange
       passion, let her at least acknowledge her share in it. Let her not “assume a virtue though
       she had it not.”
Professor Theobald was watching her face, as for a verdict of life and death.
“Oh, answer me, answer me—Yes or no, yes or no?” She had raised her eyes for a moment,
       about to speak; the words were stifled at their birth, for the next instant she was in his
       arms. Again came the voice of the singer, nearer this time. The song was hummed softly.

“Oh, gather me the rose, the rose,
While yet in flower we find it,
For summer smiles, but summer goes,
And winter waits behind it.”

</div></body></text></TEI>