<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Daughters of Danaus : VWWP edition </title><author>Caird, Mona (1854-1932)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1894</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV.
MRS. FULLERTON had gone to the study, to consult with her husband on some matter
       of domestic importance. It was a long, low-pitched room, situated in the part of the house
       that stood at right angles to the central block, with long, narrow windows looking on to a
       rough orchard. A few old portraits, very yellow and somewhat grotesque, hung on the walls; a
       wood fire burnt on the hob-grate, and beside it stood a vast arm chair, considerably worn,
       with depressions shewing where its owner had been leaning his head, day after day, when he
       smoked his pipe, or took his after-dinner nap. The bookshelves were stocked with scientific
       works, and some volumes on philosophy of a materialistic character. With the exception of
       Robert Burns, not one poet was represented.
The owner of the house sat before a big writing-table, which was covered with papers. His
       face was that of a hard thinker; the head was fine in form, the forehead broad and high; the
       features regular, almost severe. The severity was softened by a genial expression. Mrs.
       Fullerton, though also obviously above the average of humanity, shewed signs of incomplete
       development. The shape of the head and brow promised many faculties that the expression of
       the face did not encourage one to expect. She was finely built; and carried herself with
       dignity. When her daughters accompanied her on a round of calls in the neighbourhood, they
       expressed a certain quality in her appearance, in rough and ready terms: “Other married women
       always look such fools beside mother!”
And they did.

Mrs. Fullerton wore her fine black hair brushed neatly over her forehead; her eyes were
       large, and keen in expression. The mouth shewed determination. It was easy to see that this
       lady had unbounded belief in her husband's wisdom, except in social matters, for which he
       cared nothing. On that point she had to keep her ambitions to herself. In questions of
       philosophy, she had imbibed his tenets unmodified, and though she went regularly every Sunday
       to the close little Scottish church at Ballochcoil, she had no more respect than her husband
       had, for the doctrines that were preached there.
“No doubt it is all superstition and nonsense,” she used to say, “but in this country, one
       can't afford to fly in the face of prejudice. It would seriously tell against the girls.”
“Well, have your own way,” Mr. Fullerton would reply, “but I can't see the use of always
       bothering about what people will think. What more do the girls want than a good home and
       plenty of lawn-tennis? They'll get husbands fast enough, without your asphyxiating yourself
       every Sunday in their interests.”
In her youth, Mrs. Fullerton had shewn signs of qualities which had since been submerged.
       Her husband had influenced her development profoundly, to the apparent stifling of every
       native tendency. A few volumes of poetry, and other works of imagination, bore testimony to
       the lost sides of her nature.
Mr. Fullerton thought imagination “all nonsense,” and his wife had no doubt he was right,
       though there was something to be said for one or two of the poets. The buried impulses had
       broken out, like a half-smothered flame, in her children, especially in her younger daughter.
       Singularly enough, the mother regarded these qualities, partly inherited from herself, as
       erratic and annoying. The memory of her own youth taught her no sympathy.
It was a benumbed sort of life that she led, in her picturesque old home, whose charm she
       perceived but dimly with the remnants of her lost aptitudes.

“Picturesque!” Mr. Fullerton used to cry with a snort; “why not say ‘unhealthy’ and be done
       with it?”
From these native elements of character, modified in so singular a fashion in the mother's
       life, the children of this pair had drawn certain of their peculiarities. The inborn strength
       and authenticity of the parents had transmuted itself, in the younger generation, to a spirit
       of free enquiry, and an audacity of thought which boded ill for Mrs. Fullerton's ambitions.
       The talent in her daughters, from which she had hoped so much, seemed likely to prove a most
       dangerous obstacle to their success. Why was it that clever people were never sensible?
The gong sounded for luncheon. Austin put his head in at the door of the study, to ask if
       his father would shew him a drop of ditch-water through the microscope, in the afternoon.
“If you will provide the ditch-water, I will provide the microscope,” promised Mr.
       Fullerton genially.
Luncheon, usually a merry meal at Dunaghee, passed off silently. There was a sense of
       oppression in the air. Algitha and her sister made spasmodic remarks, and there were long
       pauses. The conversation was chiefly sustained by the parents and the ever-talkative
       Fred.
The latter had some anecdotes to tell of the ravages made by wasps.
“If Buchanan would only adopt my plan of destroying them,” said Mr. Fullerton, “we should
       soon get rid of the pest.”
“It's some chemical, isn't it?” asked Mrs. Fullerton.
“Oh, no; that's no use at all! Wasps positively enjoy chemicals. What you do is this—.” And
       then followed a long and minute explanation of his plan, which had the merit of extreme
       originality.
Mr. Fullerton had his own particular way of doing everything, a piece of presumption which
       was naturally resented, with proper spirit, by his neighbours. He found it an expensive
       luxury. In the management of the estate, he had outraged the feelings of every landlord and
       land-agent within
        a radius of many miles, but he gained the affection of his
       tenants, and this he seemed to value more than the approval of his fellow-proprietors. In
       theory, he stuck out for his privileges; in practice, he was the friend and brother of the
       poorest on the estate. In his mode of farming he was as eccentric as in his method of
       management. He had taken Croachmore into his own hands, and this devoted farm had become the
       subject of a series of drastic scientific experiments, to the great grief and indignation of
       his bailiff.
Mrs. Fullerton believed implicitly in the value of these experiments, and so long as her
       husband tried science only on the farm she had no misgivings; but, alas, he had lately taken
       shares in some company, that was to revolutionize agriculture through an ingenious
       contrivance for collecting nitrogen from the atmosphere. Mr. Fullerton was confident that the
       new method was to be a gigantic success. But on this point, his wife uneasily shook her head.
       She had even tried to persuade Mr. Fullerton to rid himself of his liability. It was so
       great, she argued, and why should one be made anxious? But her husband assured her that she
       didn't understand anything about it; women ought not to meddle in business matters; it was a
       stupendous discovery, sure to make the fortunes of the original shareholders.
“When once the prejudice against a new thing has been got over,” said the man of science,
       “you will see—the thing will go like wild-fire.”
Many years afterwards, these words were remembered by Mrs. Fullerton, and she bitterly
       regretted that she had not urged the matter more strenuously.
“Well, Algitha,” said her father, wondering at her silence, “how are the roses getting on?
       And I hope you have not forgotten the sweet-brier that you promised to grow for me.”
“Oh, no, father, the sweet-brier has been ordered,” returned Algitha, without her usual
       brightness of manner.
“Have you a headache?” enquired Mrs. Fullerton. “I hope you have not all been sitting up
       talking in Hadria's
        room, as you are too fond of doing. You have the whole day
       in which to express your ideas, and I think you might let the remainder wait over till
       morning.”
“We were rather late last night,” Algitha confessed.
“Pressure of ideas overpowering,” added Fred.
“When I was young, ideas would never have been tolerated in young people for a
       moment,” said Mrs. Fullerton, “it would have been considered a mark of ill-breeding. You may
       think yourselves lucky to be born at this end of the century, instead of the other.”
“Indeed we do!” exclaimed Ernest. “It's getting jolly interesting!
“In some respects, no doubt we have advanced,” observed his mother, “but I confess I don't
       understand all your modern notions. Everybody seems to be getting discontented. The poor want
       to be rich, and the rich want to be millionaires; men want to do their master's work, and
       women want to do men's; everything is topsy-turvy!”
“The question is: What constitutes being right side up?” said Ernest. “One can't exactly
       say what is topsy-turvy till one knows that.”
“When I was young we thought we did know,” said Mrs. Fullerton, “but no doubt
       we are old-fashioned.”
When luncheon was over, Mr. Fullerton went to the garden with his family, according to a
       time-honoured custom. His love of flowers sometimes made Hadria wonder whether her father
       also had been born with certain instincts, which the accidents of life had stifled or failed
       to develop. Terrible was the tyranny of circumstance! What had Emerson been dreaming of?
Mr. Fullerton, with a rose-bud in his button-hole, went off with the boys for a farming
       walk. Mrs. Fullerton returned to the house, and the sisters were left pacing together in the
       sheltered old garden, between two rows of gorgeous autumn flowers.
Hadria felt sick with dread of the coming interview.

Algitha was buoyed up, for the moment, by a strong conviction that she was in the
       right.
“It can't be fair even for parents to order one's whole life according to their pleasure,”
       she said. “Other girls submit, I know—”
“And so the world is full of abortive, ambiguous beings, fit for nothing. The average woman
       always seem to me to be muffled—or morbid.”
“That's what I should become if I pottered about here much longer,” said
       Algitha—“morbid; and if there is one thing on the face of the earth that I loathe, it is
       morbidness.”
Both sisters were instinctively trying to buttress up Algitha's courage, by strengthening
       her position with additional arguments.
“Is it fair,” Hadria asked, “to summon children into the world, and then run up bills
       against them for future payment? Why should one not see the bearings of the matter?”
“In theory one can see them clearly enough; but it is poor comfort when it comes to
       practice.”
“Oh, seeing the bearings of things is always poor comfort!” exclaimed the
       younger sister, with sudden vehemence. “Upon my word, I think it is better, after all, to
       absorb indiscriminately whatever idiotcy may happen to be around one, and go with the
       crowd.”
“Nonsense!” cried Algitha, who had no sympathy with these passionate discouragements that
       alternated, in Hadria, with equally passionate exaltations.
“When you have gone, I will ask Mrs. Gordon to teach me the spirit of acquiescence, and one
       of those distracting games—bésique or halma, or some of the other infernal pastimes that
       heaven decrees for recalcitrant spirits in need of crushing discipline.”
“I think I see you!” Algitha exclaimed with a dispirited laugh.
“It will be a trial,” Hadria admitted; “but it is said that
        suffering strengthens the character. You may look forward
       before long, to claiming as sister a creature of iron purpose.”
“I wonder, I wonder,” cried Algitha, bending her fine head; “we owe everything to her.”
“I know we do. It's of no use disguising the unpleasant side of the matter. A mother
       disappointed in her children must be a desperately unhappy woman. She has nothing left; for
       has she not resigned everything for them? But is sacrifice for ever to follow on sacrifice?
       Is life to go rolling after life, like the cheeses that the idiot in the fable sent running
       downhill, the one to fetch the other back?”
“Yes, for ever,” said Algitha, “until a few dare to break through the tradition, and then
       everyone will wonder at its folly. If only I could talk the matter over, in a friendly
       spirit, with mother, but she won't let me. Ahl! if it were not that one is born with feelings
       and energies and ambitions of one's own, parents might treat one as a showman treats his
       marionettes, and we should all be charmed to lie prone on our backs, or to dance as may be
       convenient to our creators. But, as it is, the life of a marionette—how ever affectionate the
       wire-pullers—does become monotonous after a time.”
“As to that,” said the younger sister, with a little raising of the brows, as if half
       shrinking from what she meant to say, “I think most parents regard their children with such
       favourable eyes, not so much because they are they as because they are
       theirs.”
The sisters paced the length of the garden without speaking. Then Hadria came to a
       standstill at the sun-dial, at the crossing of the paths, and began absently to trace the
       figures of the hours, with the stalk of a rose.
“After all,” she said, “parents are presumably not actuated by humanitarian motives in
       bringing one into this wild world. They don't even profess to have felt an unselfish desire
       to see one enjoying oneself at their expense (though, as a matter of fact, what enjoyment one
       has generally is at their expense). People are always enthusiastically
       congratulated on the arrival
        of a new child, though it be the fourteenth, and the income
       two hundred a year! This seems to point to a pronounced taste for new children, regardless of
       the consequences!”
“Oh, of course,” said Algitha, “it's one of the canons! Women, above all, are expected to
       jubilate at all costs. And I think most of them do, more or less sincerely.”
“Very well then,” cried Hadria, “it is universally admitted that children are summoned into
       the world to gratify parental instincts. Yet the parents throw all the onus of existence,
       after all, upon the children, and make them pay for it, and apologise for it,
       and justify it by a thousand sacrifices and an ever-flowing gratitude.”
“I am quite ready to give gratitude and sacrifice too,” said Algitha, “but I don't feel
       that I ought to sacrifice everything to an idea that seems to me wrong. Surely a
       human being has a right to his own life. If he has not that, what, in heaven's name,
        has he?”
“Anything but that!” cried Hadria.

While the momentous interview was going on, Hadria walked restlessly up and down the
       garden, feverishly waiting. The borders were brilliant with vast sunflowers, white lilies,
       and blazing “red-hot pokers” tangled together in splendid profusion, a very type of richness
       and glory of life. Such was the sort of existence that Hadria claimed from Fate. Her eyes
       turned to the bare, forlorn hills that even the August sunshine could not conjure into
       sumptuousness, and there she saw the threatened reality.
When at last Algitha's fine figure appeared at the further end of the path, Hadria hastened
       forward and took her sister's arm.
“It was worse than I had feared,” Algitha said, with a quiver in her voice. “I
        know I am right, and yet it seems almost more than I am equal for. When I told
       mother, she turned deadly white, and I thought, for a moment, that she was going to faint.
       Let's sit down on this seat.”

“Oh, it was horrible, Hadria! Mother must have been cherishing hopes about us, in a way
       that I don't think she quite knew herself. After that first moment of wretchedness, she flew
       into a passion of rage—that dreadful, tearing anger that people only feel when something of
       themselves is being wrenched away from them. She said that her children were all bad and
       unnatural; that she had spent her whole life in their interests; that if it had not been for
       her, we should all of us have grown up without education or accomplishments, or looks, or
       anything else; that she watched over us incessantly when we were little children, denying
       herself, spending her youth in devotion to us, when she might have gone into the world, and
       had some brightness and pleasure. If we imagined that she had never felt the dulness of her
       life, and never longed to go about and see people and things, we were much mistaken. But she
       had renounced everything she cared for, from her girlhood—she was scarcely older than I when
       her sacrifices began—and now her children gave no consideration to her; they were ready to
       scatter themselves hither and thither without a thought of her, or her wishes. They even
       talked scoffingly of the kind of life that she had led for them—for
        them, she repeated bitterly.”
Hadria's face had clouded.
“Truly parents must have a bad time of it!” she exclaimed, “but does it really console them
       that their children should have a bad time of it too?”
Algitha was trembling and very pale.
“Mother says I shall ruin my life by this fad. What real good am I going to do? She says it
       is absurd the way we talk of things we know nothing about.”
“But she won't let us know about things; one must talk about something!” cried
       Hadria with a dispirited laugh.
“She says she has experience of life, and we are ignorant of it. I reminded her that our
       ignorance was not exactly our fault.”
“Ah! precisely. Parents thrown their children's ignorance
        in their teeth, having taken precious good care to prevent
       their knowing anything. I can't understand parents; they must have been young themselves
       once. Yet they seem to have forgotten all about it. They keep us hoodwinked and infantile,
       and then launch us headlong into life, with all its problems to meet, and all momentous
       decisions made for us, past hope of undoing.” Hadria rose restlessly in her excitement.
       “Surely no creature was ever dealt with so insanely as the well-brought-up girl! Surely no
       well-wisher so sincere as the average parent ever ill-treated his charge so
       preposterously.”
Again there was a long silence, filled with painful thought. “One begins to understand a
       little, why women do things that one despises, and why the proudest of them so often submit
       to absolute indignity. You remember when Mrs. Arbuthnot and—”
“Ah, don't!” cried Algitha, flushing. “Nothing ought to induce a woman to
       endure that.”
“H'm—I suspect the world that we know nothing about, Algitha, has ways and means of
       applying the pressure such as you and I scarcely dream of.” Hadria spoke with half-closed
       eyes that seemed to see deep and far. “I have read and heard things that have almost taken my
       breath away! I feel as if I could kill every man who acquiesces in the present
       order of things. It is an insult to every woman alive!”
In Hadria's room that night, Algitha finally decided to delay her going for another six
       months, hoping by that time that her mother would have grown used to the idea, and less
       opposed to it. Mr. Fullerton dismissed it, as obviously absurd. But this high-handed
       treatment roused all the determination that Algitha had inherited from her father. The six
       months had to be extended, in order to procure funds. Algitha had a small income of her own,
       left her by her godmother, Miss Fortescue. She put aside this, for her purpose. Further
       delay, through Mrs. Trevelyan, brought the season round again to autumn, before Algitha was
       able to make her final preparations for departure.

“Do try and reconcile them to the idea,” she said to her sister, as they stood on the
       platform of Ballochcoil station, very white and wretched-looking.
“It breaks my heart to see father look so fixed and angry, and mother so miserable. I am
       not going away for ever. Dear me, a day's journey will bring me back, at any time.”
“I'll do my best,” said Hadria, “here's your train; what a clumsy instrument of fate it
       does look!”
There was not much time for farewells. In a few minutes the train was steaming out of the
       station. A solitary figure stood on the platform, watching the monster curving and
       diminishing along the line, with its white smoke soaring merrily into the air, in great
       rolling masses, that melted, as if by some incantation, from thick, snow-like whiteness to
       rapid annihilation.
</div></body></text></TEI>