
CHAPTER II.
HAMLIN felt rather contrite and humiliated as he sat down at the square table, with
      the two eldest children, pert little rosy and flaxen things, on either side of him, and the
      three little ones staring at him, and then suddenly making convulsive dives under the
      table‐cloth and behind each other’s shoulders opposite. He was the furthest possible removed
      from the kind of young man who persecutes pretty housemaids. Whatever vagaries he might have
      had in his life, they were not of that sort; and now, although he had merely intended to ask
      for some breakfast, he found himself somehow in the position of pushing his presence upon a
      servant girl. He was vexed with himself, and became very grave, scarcely
       answering the chatter of the children by his side.
“And you know,” said the eldest child, a pretty little minx of eleven, fully conscious of
      her charms, “mamma told us you were the great poet, and she read us a poem of yours about Sir
      Troilus. Mamma always reads poetry to us—and we liked it so much,—and I liked all about where
      he kisses the lady so much, and her purple dress with the golden roses, and then about Love,
      where he comes and takes her by the throat, and chokes her, and makes her feel like a furnace.
      Mamma says it’s just like love. Mr Thaddeus Smith was in love with the gardener’s girl when he
      came here last year, mamma says.”
“Good heavens!” thought Hamlin, “what a mamma and what children!”
“And mamma told us to get some myrtles and put them in your room,” blurted out a smaller
      one.
“Hush, Winnie! You know you shouldn’t tell,” said the eldest.

“And you know,” insisted the younger, in her little, impertinent lisp, “mamma said we should
      put the myrtles, because you made poems about myrtles; and we were to have had on our best
      frocks, and met you in the hall, and—”
“Hush, Winnie!”
“And thrown roses on the floor before you; only then papa got a telegram saying you were
      coming by the late train, and we had to go to bed—”
Miss Winnie’s revelations and her sister’s expostulations were interrupted by the entry of
      the nurse, or governess, or whatever else she might be, carrying a large jug of milk. She had
      slipped on a skirt and loose jacket of striped peasant cotton, which at a distance looked like
      a dull, rich purple. She sat down at the head of the table, and began silently helping the hot
      milk.
“May I cut the bread for you?” asked Hamlin, feeling quite shy from her silence.
“I don’t think you will know how to do
       it,” she answered. “We have only yesterday’s bread at this
      hour, until the cook returns from market.” When the milk was helped and the bread cut, she
      said, rather sharply—
“Now, children, say your prayer.”
The children immediately set up a shrill chorus; the elder, who wished to show off,
      slowly—the little ones, who were hungry, quicker; an absurdly pseudo‐poetical thanksgiving,
      which reminded Hamlin of the sort of poetry presented to rich foreigners by needy Italians on
      creamy, embossed, and illuminated paper. He was struck by the fact that the girl did not join,
      but waited passively through this religio‐poetical ceremony; doubtless, he thought, because
      she was a Catholic.
“That’s mamma’s Tuesday hymn,” said Winnie; “she makes a different one for each day of the
      week.”
Whereupon the children fell vigorously to their breakfast of bread and milk. Heaven knows
      when Hamlin had eaten bread and milk last—probably, he thought, not since he
       had been out of frocks; but it seemed to him pleasant and
      pastoral. He would have enjoyed this improvised breakfast had the children chattered less
      incessantly (Hamlin did not care for children), and had he not continued to feel rather as if
      he had been courting a nursemaid. The young woman had as much as she could do in pouring out
      more milk, giving out more figs, and cutting more slices of bread and butter for the children;
      and her conversation was entirely engrossed in admonitions to them not to spill their milk,
      not to jump on their chairs, not to talk with their mouths full, and so forth. She seemed
      determined, in her sullen indifferent way, to make Hamlin understand that he might intrude his
      person at that breakfast‐table, but that he had no chance of intruding his personality upon
      her notice. But her very indifference afforded Hamlin an opportunity, and, as it were, a
      right, to examine her appearance: one may surely look at a person who obstinately refuses to
      notice one. She was very beautiful, and even more than
       beautiful—strange. She seemed very young, certainly, thought
      Hamlin—not more than nineteen at most; but her face, though of perfectly smooth complexion,
      without furrow or faintest wrinkle, was wholly unyouthful; the look was not of age, for you
      could not imagine her ever growing old, but of a perfect negation of youth. Hamlin tried to
      think what she might have been as a child, looking round on the childish faces about him, but
      in vain. The complexion was of a uniform opaque pallor, more like certain old marble than
      ivory; indeed you might almost imagine, as she sat motionless at the head of the table, that
      this was no living creature, but some sort of strange statue—cheek and chin and forehead of
      Parian marble, scarcely stained a dull red in the lips, and hair of dull wrought‐iron, and
      eyes of some mysterious greyish‐blue, slate‐tinted onyx: a beautiful and sombre idol of the
      heathen. And the features were stranger and more monumental even than the substance in which
      they seemed carved by
       some sharp chisel, delighting in gradual hollowing of cheek
      and eye, in sudden cutting of bold groove and cavity of nostril and lip. The forehead was high
      and narrow, the nose massive, heavy, with a slight droop that reminded Hamlin of the head of
      Antinous; the lips thick, and of curiously bold projection and curl; the faintly hollowed
      cheek subsided gradually into a neck round and erect like a tower, but set into the massive
      chest as some strong supple branch into a tree‐trunk. He wondered as he looked at her; and
      wondered whether this strange type, neither Latin nor Greek, but with something of Jewish and
      something of Ethiopian subdued into a statuesque but most un‐Hellenic beauty, had met him
      before. The nearest approach seemed to be certain mournful and sullen heads of Michaelangelo,
      the type was so monumental, and at the same time so picturesque; and as he looked at the girl,
      it seemed, despite its strangeness, as if, at some dim distant time, he had seen and known it
      well before.

He looked at her with the curiosity of an artist examining a model, or a poet trying to
      solve a riddle; there was, he felt conscious, nothing insolent or offensive in his stare. Yet
      he felt he must break the silence; so, with real indifference, he suddenly asked—
“ How is it that you speak English so marvellously well? No one would ever guess that you
      were not English.”
“I am English,” answered the girl.
English nationality had explained many otherwise unaccountable mixed types to Hamlin; but
      this took him by surprise, and left him utterly incredulous. This girl certainly was no
      Englishwoman—a Jewess, perhaps. No, never; no Jewess was ever so pure and statuesque of
      outline: some Eastern, dashed with Hindoo or Negro; they were much coarser, more common, of
      far more obvious, less subtle beauty.
“You mean English by adoption,” he suggested, “surely not by blood?”
“My mother was an Italian. I think her
       family came from Sicily or Sardinia, or somewhere,where
      there are Spaniards and Moors,” she answered; “but my father was Scotch. He came from
      Aberdeen.”
“Have you ever been in Scotland?” he asked, just by way of saying something to mitigate the
      personalness of his previous questions.
“No,” she answered, and her lips closed as with a spring; then she added, as if to close all
      further conversation, “I was born in Italy; my father was employed at Spezia in the
      docks.”
The eldest Miss Perry raised her pretty little sentimental head pertly.
“Annina’s father was one of those who make the big men‐of‐war at Spezia.”
“Oh, you know, we once went with papa, and saw a man‐of‐war, and all the boilers and big,
      big cannons,” interrupted a smaller one.
“And he was a bad, bad man,” went on the eldest, composedly. “He used to drink quantities of
       acquavite; and one day when he had
       drunk so much acquavite,
      do you know what he did? He tried to throw Annina’s mother out of the window, and then shot
      himself with a revolver.”
Hamlin listened as the cruel words dribbled out, and stared at the childish face. He had
      never taken any interest in children; but he had never thought that a child could be so
      deliberately (as it seemed to him) malignant. The words made his ears burn, and he felt
      indignant, confused, and humiliated, as if he were a party to them. He did not look at the
      girl; but he somehow saw, or felt, the sullen, suppressed bitterness of shame in her tragic
      face.
“And is it true,” interrupted Winnie, “that you are going to do our picture? Mamma said you
      would want to paint us angels or fairies. All the painters paint us, because, mamma says, we
      are the most beautiful children in Florence. They always give us chocolate and marrons glacés to keep us quiet.”
