
CHAPTER IV.
WHEN Chough first told her the story of Mademoiselle Aïssé, it was as if Anne had
      been suddenly confronted by her own wraith, surrounded by strange and tragic lights; and the
      shock was very violent. But Miss Brown was too honest not to see after a minute that between
      her and Aïssé there was an unfathomable difference. M. de Ferréol was a mere experimentalising
      old roué, who had had a mistress prepared as he might have
      had a goose fattened; and what he claimed of Aïssé was her infamy. Anne’s conscience smote
      her; she was very ungrateful. And she thought over all those scenes at the Villa Arnolfini, at
      Florence, nay, here in England not so long ago; she thought of Hamlin’s
       generosity and delicacy of mind—of the quixotic way in which
      he had bound himself while leaving her free—of the chivalrous way in which he had dowered her,
      making her feel almost as if all this money, which placed her on his own level, was her own
      inheritance, and not his charity. She remembered all the respect, which was more of a brother
      than of a lover, with which he treated her—the constant manner in which he hid all her
      obligations to him, never letting any taunt or harsh word of hers get the better of his
      resolution that Anne should feel that she owed nothing to him, and that he craved for her love
      as he might have done for that of a queen. And it came home to her how pure, nay, how
      poetically and romantically noble was the love which he asked for; and she felt almost wicked
      when she reflected that what he wanted was to make her into the very highest thing which a man
      can make a woman—a sort of Beatrice, a creature to love whom will be spiritual redemption. All
      these things did Anne say to herself; but
       it cost her an effort, and the strain could not be kept up.
      The fact was that she had, in her terror of being unjust, refused to listen to her own plea.
      But it came back to her like an overwhelming flood. She could not love Hamlin; her soul
      recoiled from contact with his as her body might have recoiled from the forced embrace of a
      corpse: such a union, it seemed, would mean the death of her own nature. To be Hamlin’s wife,
      to spend all her life by his side, hopelessly watching his growing callousness to everything
      for which she felt born,—to feel one generous impulse after another gradually waxing feebler,
      one energy after another for good becoming paralysed by the deathly moral chill of his utter
      heartlessness,—was this not much worse than any mere dishonour of the body, this prostitution
      of the spirit? Aïssé’s soul at least was free; her Ferréol could not deprive her of her moral
      freedom, her aspirations, her powers of self‐sacrifice; but with her, Anne Brown, it was
      different. And she repeated to herself with bitterness the
       warning words which Richard Brown had spoken in vain so
      long, long ago: “You will be his to do what he chooses; worse than his slave, his mere chattel
      and plaything.” How little Dick had guessed the much more terrible meaning which these words
      would come to have for her!
Unconsciously Anne’s mind reverted to the business of Marjory and Harry Collett; and her
      mind’s eye rested for a moment upon those two lovers, to each of whom, through whatsoever of
      discrepancy there might be, the other represented his or her highest ideal, that other’s
      opinion his or her highest conscience; not passionately in love, like Othello and Desdemona,
      or Romeo and Juliet, but persuaded to their inmost soul that in living by each other’s side,
      and sympathising with and helping in the other’s work, each would be fulfilling his or her
      best destiny in the world. Another woman situated like Anne might have let herself be tempted
      into cynicism by unconscious envy; but this was not
       within Miss Brown’s honest, and open‐eyed, and stern nature.
      She never once said to herself—“Marjory and Harry will awake one day from their dream.” She
      had dreamed, alas! and had awakened; but she recognised that these two were broad awake, and
      that their happiness was a reality. Anne looked at these two lovers for a moment, but without
      any envy or bitterness. It never even entered her mind to covet their happiness, to imagine
      that she might have a right to anything similar. Anne, though leaning towards socialism in her
      theories, was not in the least a communistic mind; she did not ask, “Why should I not get the
      same advantages as my neighbours?” She envied no one the prize in the lottery; she begged only
      for a chance. To be the wife of a man whom she loved, and who loved her—to be the companion
      and helpmate of some one who was striving after her own ideals; such hankerings had never
      passed through her mind—or, if they had, they had long since been banished. What
       Anne longed for, what her soul hungered after, was merely
      negative freedom. Freedom to sympathise and to aspire—to do whatever little she still might to
      carve herself out a spiritual life of her own, no matter how mean and insignificant; freedom
      to live in that portion of her which was most worthy of life. To gain her bread, no matter how
      harshly; to be of some use, to teach at a school or nurse at a hospital; nay, to be able
      merely to encourage others to do what she might not,—this was all that Anne asked; and this,
      in her future as the wife of Hamlin, as the queen of this æsthetic world, which seemed to
      poison and paralyse her soul, was what she knew she could not have, what she knew she must do
      without.
“I am a selfish brute,” she suddenly said to herself, “wasting the time which is still
      mine,”—and she took down her books of political economy, and tried to fix her attention upon
      them, and think out a scheme of the lessons and exercises which she would give to the
      shop‐girls at the Working Women’s Club.
       But what was the use of doing this? Hamlin, she knew,
      loathed the notion of her teaching at the Club; he would never let her teach there; and, once
      his wife, she understood him sufficiently to be fully aware that he would consider himself
      completely empowered to make her do or leave alone whatever he chose.
Still Anne tried to work on courageously. In the afternoon she went to hear one of Professor
      Richmond’s lectures. This was the fervent young positivist whom Cousin Dick so much admired,
      and whose intense moral convictions had done a good deal to keep Anne out of the slough of
      desponding pessimism round which she had been some time hovering. Andrew Richmond was a man
      who had many slanderers, many of whom he has now left behind him—their misrepresentations
      having been more long‐lived than he; for he had passed through many phases of thought, and,
      being perfectly honest, he had never been able to become unjust to any, and thus had made
      enemies not merely among the men whose
       beliefs he had abandoned, but among those also whose beliefs
      he had accepted without accepting their follies. He stood very alone; and it was perhaps this
      isolation—this obvious indifference of the man to all save his own reason and conscience—which
      added to the solemnity of his convictions; and made him appear, more than any one else, in the
      light of a priest of morality, of a prophet of the advent of justice. Anne had never spoken to
      Richmond; but she felt that, of all human souls, this one did the most to keep up the courage
      of her own. This was one of the last discourses which the poor dying positivist ever
      delivered; and it was the more earnest for the sense of his approaching end. He spoke this
      time, or, as his ridiculers called it, he preached upon the relation of duty to progress; upon
      the value of each good impulse carried out, and each evil one resisted, in making morality
      more natural and spontaneous in the world; and he insisted especially upon the danger, to
      people whose ideas of right and wrong rested
       no longer upon any priestly authority, of the individual
      sophisticating himself into the belief that in yielding to the preferences of his own nature
      he was following the highest law, and that any special usefulness ought legitimately to be
      bought at the expense of departing from the moral rules of the world.
“The danger of our epoch of moral transition,” he said, “lies in the temptation of the
      individual to say to himself—‘If I am willing to sacrifice myself, have I not a right also to
      sacrifice the established opinions of others?’”
“I detest that man Richmond,” Madame Elaguine had once said; “he puts an end to all
      self‐sacrifice.”
“If you mean the sacrifice of one’s peace of mind and social dignity to the passion of
      another person and to one’s own, he certainly does,” Richard Brown had answered sternly.
At the door of the lecture‐room Anne met her cousin.
“Are you driving to Hammersmith?” he asked.

“No; I am going to walk.”
Anne had made it a rule for the last two or three months to deprive herself of all luxuries.
      She did not wish to enjoy everything that she had a right to; she had also a stern pleasure in
      doing the things most repugnant to her; and a walk through the London streets, in murky spring
      weather, was to Anne’s Italian temper, nurtured with æsthetic delicacy, one of the most
      disagreeable of expeditions.
“But it is drizzling and horribly muddy,” said Richard Brown, looking at her as he buttoned
      her ulster over her massive figure. “Surely Hamlin will be very much shocked if you come into
      the house with mud on your shoes? But if you are really going to walk I will accompany you, if
      you don’t mind, because I’m going in that direction.”
“Where are you going?”
“To Hammersmith; I have some business there.” And Brown looked once more at his cousin as he
      opened his umbrella over her.
“Will you take my arm, Anne?” Richard
       Brown was not a lady’s man, and there was something awkward
      and unaccustomed in his request.
“I am big enough to take care of myself, I think, Dick. And I know you hate having women to
      drag along; I have watched you going into dinner‐parties often enough.”
“It is out of my line, you’re right.”
For some time they walked along in silence through the black oozy streets, crammed with
      barrows of fruit, round which gathered the draggled dripping women, their babies huddled up in
      their torn shawls, their hair untidy and dank beneath their once lilac or pale‐pink
      smut‐engrained bonnets; the cabs, shining blue‐black, ploughed through the mud; the heavy
      drays splashed from gutter to gutter; the houses were black and oozy; the very raindrops on
      the railings looked black; the sky was a dirty dull‐grey waste; only the scarlet letter‐boxes
      stood out coloured in the general smutty, foggy, neutral tint.
“Do you remark that public‐houses are the
       only places which make an attempt at architecture and
      ornament?” said Dick grimly, as they passed the ground‐glass windows and colonnade and
      coloured glass globes of one of these establishments. “Did it not strike you, Italian as you
      are, that in this country, which has invented high art, the only things called palaces, except
      those inhabited by royalty, are pot‐houses? Why do your æsthetic friends keep all their
      æstheticism for indoors? Why don’t they build themselves houses which will be some pleasure to
      the poor people who pass?”
Always that indirect attack upon Hamlin and his friends: it was just and reasonable; yet,
      coming from Brown, it somehow grated upon Anne.
“That will come later,” she said. “The first thing is that the upper classes become
      accustomed to beautiful things. You can’t expect them to mind hideous outsides to their houses
      if they are indifferent to hideous insides. I don’t think,” she added boldly, “that
       æstheticism has had much generosity of aspiration in it so
      far, except in isolated men like Ruskin and Morris; but I am sure it will eventually improve
      some matters even for the lower classes.”
“Nero rebuilt Rome, didn’t he,” sneered Brown, “after he had amused himself burning it
      down?”
They fell to talking about the lecture, and then about Richard Brown’s plans.
“I hope to get into Parliament next elections,” he said, “and then I shall retire from Mr
      Gillespie’s firm.”
“Why? They say you can make a big fortune if you keep on.”
“I have quite money enough; I am a rich man. You wouldn’t have thought that possible, would
      you, Nan, two or three years ago? Almost as rich as Hamlin, do you know, young woman?” and he
      turned and looked at her. There was a curious expression, what she could not understand,
      except that it was defiant, in Dick’s face.

“I am glad to hear it. It is a fine thing to have money; it enables one to do generous
      things—like what Mr Hamlin did for me, for instance.” Anne could not have explained why she
      felt bound, at this particular moment, to throw Hamlin’s generosity in her cousin’s face.
“Ah, well,” answered Brown, suppressing something he had been about to retort, “of course I
      could not formerly have done what he did for you; but I would have gladly spent every shilling
      I had, Anne, to educate you, so that your father might have been proud of you.”
“I know you would, Dick—you are very kind.” And yet, thought Anne, until he had been piqued
      by Hamlin’s offer, he had forgotten all about her. “But why do you intend to leave your
      business?”
“Because I want to give myself up entirely to studying social questions, and my business
      would suffer if I gave it only partial attention.”
And he proceeded to explain the various questions which he intended studying, the
       various evils into whose reason he wished to look.
“Reform has been too much the leisure‐time amusement of men,” he said. “People have thought
      that it requires less training to touch, nay, to sound, social wounds, than to set a broken
      arm or dress a wound. We must find the scientific basis for our art. And it is a very, very
      long art, and life is very, very short. For my part, I feel that my knowledge is to what it
      should be what the knowledge you may get out of a school primer of physiology is to the
      knowledge required by a great surgeon. I don’t suppose I or any of my generation will succeed
      in doing much practical good; but we shall have made the public ready for certain views on our
      subjects, and rendered it easier for our practical followers to get their education. There is
      nothing very glorious to be done at present: no giving out of brilliant new ideas or making of
      successful revolutions; only patient grubbing at facts and patient working on the public
      mind.”

“Is that enough for an ambitious man?”
“One must pocket one’s ambition. What we want is knowledge, not conspicuous
      personalities.”
Anne was silent. Dick’s words were like military music to her. Oh to be able to join him, to
      march by his side, to carry his arms!
“Go on Dick, please. It does one good to hear of these things.”
Dick went on.
“You must not overwork yourself,” said Anne, anxiously. “Just think if you were to break
      down, as so many men have done—as poor Richmond is doing.”
“Oh, I am strong. The only thing which concerns me is my sight. I find I am already unable
      to read of an evening. There’s no danger of blindness, but the doctor says I must not work by
      candle‐light. Oh, there’s no mischief. I shall engage a secretary. I know plenty of young men
      who would come, even for a small salary. There is the son of one of our head workmen, a very
      intelligent
       lad, of whom I am thinking; but perhaps he is not
      sufficiently educated yet. I must have some one who knows German and French, and so
      forth.”
Anne felt a lump in her throat. Oh that she had been a man, instead of being this useless,
      base creature of mere comely looks, a woman, set apart for the contemplation of æsthetes! If
      she had been a man, and could have helped a man like Richard Brown!
“But I am not certain of my plans just yet,” added Brown, and he dropped the subject. They
      walked on for some moments in silence; then he began questioning her about Lewis, and Chough,
      and Dennistoun.
“Chough is a dear good little man,” said Anne; “he is very absurd and vain, and fond of
      talking and writing about wicked things, which I am sure he doesn’t understand any more than
      I. But he is so self‐sacrificing, and warm‐hearted, and true. Dennistoun, poor creature, is
      very morbid and faddy, and, I think, hates me; but I am very sorry for him.
       As to Lewis, he may be a very good man, but I don’t like
      him—”
“I suppose you have heard what people say,—that Mr Lewis had rather a bad influence upon
      Hamlin some years ago—in short, made him take to eating opium, or haschisch, or something
      similar?”
“No—I had never heard that,” and Anne seemed suddenly to understand her instinctive horror
      of Lewis.
“Does Hamlin see much of him now?”
“A great deal—more than I can at all sympathise with. Lewis is rather a sore subject between
      us; he knows I don’t like him, and yet he is very fond of him.”
“I suppose Lewis flatters him very much.”
“I suppose so.”
Anne resented being thus cross‐questioned about Hamlin, but she was quite unable to
      prevaricate in her answers—her nature was too frank, and Richard’s questions were too
      direct.
“You are not very happy with Mr Hamlin,” he suddenly asked, or rather affirmed.

Anne flushed, but did not answer at once. “I have an unlucky temper,” she said, after a
      moment. “I am too exacting with people. I can’t get out of my own individuality sufficiently,
      I fear.”
Richard looked at her with pity, and at the same time with that implacable scrutiny of
      his.
“You feel your nature narrowed by all this æsthetic world around you,” he said. “You find
      these men selfish, mean, weak, shallow—”
“Chough is not selfish. As to Dennistoun and Lewis, I told you I disliked them.”
“You are equivocating, Anne. You know I am not speaking of Dennistoun, or Lewis, or Chough.
      You find that Hamlin drags you down, freezes all your best aspirations.”
Anne turned very white and trembled.
“Mr Hamlin is a poet, an artist; he is not a philanthropist or a thinker. But he has done
      for me more than I believe any man has ever done for any woman.”

“But—you don’t love him?”
Richard had stopped as they walked along the Hammersmith embankment. It was a very quiet
      spot, and not a soul was out in the thin, grey, drizzly fog.
Anne hesitated for a moment.
“I feel very much attached to Mr Hamlin on account of his generosity towards me—and I feel I
      can never repay it.” She did not look in Brown’s face as she answered, but stared vaguely at
      the river, at the dripping trees, the grey willow branches pulled backwards and forwards by
      the grey current; at the houses opposite, and the boats dim in the fog.
“You don’t love him?” repeated Richard in a whisper. “Anne, answer me.”
“I don’t see what right you have to ask me such a question, Richard.”
“No? Well, I do—and you shall see why. You are not his wife; why should you try and tell
      lies? Do you or do you not love Hamlin, Anne?”

Anne looked for a moment at the swirling waters, at the willow twigs whirled hither and
      thither.
“I suppose I do not.”
There was a pause.
“You do not love him, and you still contemplate marrying him?”
“I contemplate nothing at all. Mr Hamlin has not yet asked me to marry him, and perhaps he
      never may.”
“Nonsense, Anne. And when he does ask you, what will you answer?”
“I shall answer Yes. I am bound to do it. Mr Hamlin has done all, all for me. If he wish to
      marry me, I cannot refuse him the only thing which I can give in return for his
      generosity.”
Richard Brown burst into a strange shrill laugh.
“The only thing which you can give in return for his generosity!” he exclaimed, but always
      in the same undertone. “Who first made use of those words, Nan? The only
       thing which you can give in return for his generosity! Did
      not some one use those very words to you, long, long ago in Florence, when Mr Hamlin first
      proposed to educate you, and your cousin said that you were running the risk of selling
      yourself? But, by God! you shall not sell yourself, Anne. Do you know what you are giving him
      in return for what you call his generosity?—that is to say, in return for the whim which made
      him educate a beautiful woman, that he might show her off and have a beautiful wife, if he
      chose. Do you know what it is? Your love, eh? You have none to give; you have said so
      yourself. Your body? your honour? Nay, every prostitute, every kitchen slut can give him that.
      And I suppose such things do not exist for a delicately nurtured lady, a ward of Mr Walter
      Hamlin’s. No; you are giving him your soul, selling it to him, prostituting it as any common
      woman would prostitute her body.”
“Richard,” said Anne, hotly, “you are my
       cousin, and have been very good to me, but that gives you no
      right to insult me.”
“My words are ugly; and what are the things which you would do? Anne, you shall listen to
      me,” and he laid his hand heavily on her arm.
“You can make me stand here,” she answered icily, “but you cannot make me listen.”
“I can make you listen. Oh, Anne,” and his voice became suddenly supplicating,
      “do not be womanish, and refuse to listen because I speak disagreeable things. Answer me, on
      your honour: have I a right to let you sacrifice your happiness, your honour, your usefulness
      in the world, to let you defile and ruin all these, by becoming what is equivalent to a mere
      legalised mistress—the wife of a man whom you despise? You have a debt towards Hamlin: I grant
      it, though you must be well aware how little real generosity there was in his choice of you;
      but you have a debt also towards yourself. You have no right to pay for Hamlin’s kindness by
      the falsehood, the
       degradation, of marrying a man whom you do not love, by the
      sacrifice of all the nobler part of your nature which that man will crush out in you.”
“If there is anything noble in me, Dick, no one can ever crush it out; and I do not see what
      real degradation there will be in honestly carrying out my part of a bargain which has been
      honestly carried out towards me.”
Richard paused for a minute.
“But,” he cried, “you mistake, Anne; you forget what that bargain was.”
“No, I do not. Mr Hamlin promised to marry me whenever I should ask him to do so, and—”
“And he left you free, perfectly free to marry him or not as you pleased!”
“He left me free; and it is just that generosity of his, in binding himself,
      and not me, which obliges me, if he wants me, to say Yes.”
“That is an absurd quibble, Anne. If Hamlin’s leaving you free bound you all the more, why,
      then, he did not leave you free, and you
       need not be bound by a piece of magnanimity which never
      existed.”
“On the contrary, you are quibbling, Dick. You know very well that Mr Hamlin
      meant to leave me free; and it is for this intention that I am, more than for anything else,
      grateful.”
Richard turned round.
“Fool that I am!” he cried, “to believe in you and not see through your woman’s
      tergiversation! You say you do not love Hamlin, but you do; you may despise him, feel his
      emptiness—I grant it all—be dissatisfied with him. Oh, I know it! But you love him all the
      same, and you would not for the world give him up, even if he asked you to.”
Anne laughed bitterly. “The usual generalisations about women. Because I will not do a
      dishonourable thing, I must needs be a self‐deluding fool. No; I do not love
      Hamlin. I love him no more than this!” And Anne broke a twig off a bush and threw it into the
      stream.

“You do not? Then, if Hamlin were to release you,—if he were to say, ‘I want to marry some
      one else,’—would you—would you not regret him, his poetry, his good looks, his fame, his
      fortune?”
“It would be the happiest day of my life!” cried poor Anne, despairingly.
“Then that day must come. Anne, I cannot see you sacrificed. I cannot see you lost to
      yourself and to the world. You must not marry Hamlin. I will provide for you; I
      will take care of you. You shall help me in my work!”
“Poor Dick!” said Anne gently, touched by this enthusiasm, “you are very good; but I fear—I
      fear I shall never have any need of your help; and I would never burden another man—never have
      a debt again—if I were remitted this one.”
“You would have no debt,” cried Brown. “Anne, I am not a woman’s man. I don’t know how to
      say such things. But ever since I have got really to know you, I have felt if
       only I could have such a woman as that always by my side—to
      tell her all my plans, and be helped in all my work . . .”
Richard looked straight before him: Anne could see his face quiver. A coldness came all over
      her: a coldness and a heat. She felt as if she must cry out. It was too sudden, too wonderful.
      The vision of being Richard Brown’s wife overcame her like some celestial vision a fasting
      saint. But she made an effort over herself. “I am bound, bound,” she said; “but if ever I be
      released . . . ”
She hesitated: the longing for what she knew herself to be renouncing was too great.
“Anne,” cried Richard, seizing her hand, “I love you—I love you—I want you—I must have
      you!”
It was like the outburst of another nature, a strange, unsuspected ego, bursting out from
      beneath the philanthropist’s cool and self‐sacrificing surface.
That sudden contact gave Anne a shock which woke her, restored her to herself; it
       horrified her almost. She made him let go her hand.
“If ever I be released,” she said, “I will remain free. I do not love you, Dick.”
She was sorry the moment after she had said it.
“I have gone too far,” cried Richard.
“Good‐bye,” said Anne. “We have been talking too long—and—you won’t resume the subject, will
      you?”
There was a command, a threat implied in her voice. Brown somehow felt ashamed of
      himself.
“Not since you wish it,” he said flatly.
“Good‐bye,” said Anne. And she walked away and entered the house—Hamlin’s house.
