
CHAPTER V.
THE day after Hamlin’s departure to join Madame Elaguine, Richard Brown paid
      another visit at Hammersmith; and he dropped in frequently in the next few days. He never
      spoke of his hopes, he never inquired about Anne’s plans; he scarcely so much as alluded to
      Hamlin’s departure. He seemed satisfied to see his cousin, to explain to her all the things
      that he hoped some day to do. This forbearance, this delicate discretion, on the part of one
      of the most tactless and exacting of men; this something which implied that Cousin Dick had
      learned to consult her wishes, touched Miss Brown very much. Love, or by whatever other name
      (since the name of love was discredited to Anne) she might
       choose to call Richard’s strong and steady feeling, seemed
      to have purified this powerful and generous temper of that alloy of coarse and contemptuous
      suspicion that had occasionally repelled her so much.
Richard Brown had become comparatively quite charitable in his judgments, sincerely anxious
      to be just. He tried to see things a little from her point of view—nay, even to understand
      whatever good there was or had been in Hamlin. This big and self‐reliant man, who had already
      thought and done so much for himself and for others, began to appear to his cousin as less
      mature than she had fancied, and even less self‐reliant; new instincts and perceptions, new
      sides of his nature—making it fuller, richer, purer—developing under her influence. Anne did
      not love her cousin; she did not even anticipate loving him anything as she had once loved
      Hamlin. She recognised that, in her nature, love could exist only for an ideal, and in an
      ideal she could never again believe; but she became aware of
       a relation of frank comradeship, of mutual respect and
      attachment and usefulness, which warmed her nature, and made hopes and projects bud and
      blossom up. She was nervously anxious for that fortnight to have come to an end, to have
      Hamlin back, to speak to him; and yet, at the same time, it seemed to her dreadful that these
      few days of freedom from care, freedom from the shadow which had so long hung over her, should
      so soon come to an end.
The fortnight was drawing to a close; Hamlin would soon be back. Anne began to be filled
      with unendurable impatience; she even, once or twice, began a letter telling him everything,
      and tore it up only from the fear that it might seem harsh, ungrateful, that it might (and the
      idea was terrible to her) make him suppose that she was jealous, that she loved him. It was a
      great relief to her when there suddenly came a telegram, sent on from Hamlin’s lodgings, and
      opened by his servant, which announced for next evening the arrival
       of Melton Perry, who knew nothing of Hamlin’s momentary
      absence from town.
“Oh, Aunt Claudia,” cried Anne, “Mr Perry is coming to‐morrow evening! Do you think—oh, do
      you think you could have him to stay here till Mr Hamlin return?”
“Who is Mr Perry?” asked Chough, who was dining with them, suddenly pricking up his ears at
      Anne’s excited tone. Could he be the explanation of Anne’s indifference to
      Hamlin? thought the poet of the Eternal Feminine.
“Mr Perry,” answered Anne, “is the gentleman in whose house I was a servant until I met Mr
      Hamlin—the father of the little girls whose maid I was. He was very kind to me, and I am very
      fond of him.”
Cosmo Chough stared at her in amazement. He had quite forgotten, indeed he had never
      properly realised, that this queenly woman, this more than Dante’s Beatrice or Petrarch’s
      Laura, had actually been a nursemaid—a servant! She a servant! he repeated to himself,
       looking at Miss Brown as she sat opposite him; at this
      goddess, it seemed to him, with the wonderful face as of one of Michelangelo’s Titanesses; the
      solemn, mysterious, onyx‐grey eyes; the something superhumanly grand in person and movement.
      To have been a servant, and to remind people of it, was his next thought; and this Cosmo
      Chough, conscious of his supposed father the duke, and of his real father the apothecary at
      Limerick, was absolutely unable to comprehend.
“Mr Perry, except Miss Curzon, was the only friend I ever had, until—until I met Mr Hamlin,”
      went on Miss Brown. “You will give him the spare room, Aunt Claudia, for my sake, won’t you?
      And you will let me arrange it for him, and make it look a little untidy, and put match‐boxes
      and pipe‐lights about, so that he may feel a little comfortable.”
Mrs Macgregor laughed.
“Put as many pipe‐lights about as you please, my dear; but if he fill Watty’s studio with
      pipe‐smoke, you will be responsible, not I.”

The next afternoon Anne Brown was just in the midst of what she called making the spare room
      look untidy, taking out the superfluous æsthetic furniture which would, she knew, fidget her
      former master to death, dragging in leather arm‐chairs instead of imitation Queen Anne things,
      and piling newspapers and novels on the table, when a visitor was announced. She went down
      into the drawing‐room, and, to her surprise, found Edmund Lewis. An inexpressible sense of
      disgust came over her, This man personified all that she hated most of that past with which
      she was about to break for ever. The little man with the auburn beard and sealing‐wax lips was
      considerably less free‐and‐easy and sultan‐like than usual; his humiliation, whatever it was,
      had evidently done him good. Indeed, Miss Brown was almost beginning to ask herself whether
      she might not have been a little unjust towards him also, so respectful and amiable had he
      made himself, when it began to dawn upon her that there was an explanation
       for his visit much more in keeping with the character she
      had hitherto attributed to him.
“I hear that Walter Hamlin is in Paris with his cousin,” he had remarked, after a few
      minutes’ conversation. He had tried to say it in an off‐hand manner; but Anne had felt his
      green eyes fixed curiously upon her.
“Yes; they have gone to settle about sending Boris to the Lycée.”
Lewis hereupon made some remarks about English and French schools, and upon the education of
      Boris Elaguine; but slowly and dexterously he made the conversation return to Sacha and
      Hamlin; he made the conspicuous matter no longer the object of Madame Elaguine’s and Hamlin’s
      journey to Paris, but the journey itself.
“I don’t think Madame Elaguine’s Russian relations—her aunt who lives in Paris and Boris’s
      grandfather—will be particularly pleased at her going about like that with a young man,” he
      said. “Russians are such corrupt people, they see mischief in everything.”

Anne understood. Edmund Lewis, who always hated her, had been unable to resist the
      temptation, now that both Hamlin and Sacha were safe out of the way, of seeing the proud Miss
      Brown wince beneath his compassion. He was artistically playing upon the feelings of
      humiliation and anger with which he imagined her to be filled.
“Madame Elaguine is Mr Hamlin’s cousin, you must remember,” answered Anne, quietly bending
      over her embroidery.
“True; but the people who meet them in Paris won’t know that, or won’t believe it. Besides,
      it’s not as if they had always lived together and been as brother and sister, as some cousins
      have. I think Madame Elaguine is very rash to run the risk of unnecessary gossip; and I must
      say I can’t understand Hamlin being so dense as not to see that he was compromising his
      cousin, especially as people were beginning to notice his assiduity to his cousin even here.
      Of course, however,” added Lewis, fixing his eyes on Miss Brown,
       “being engaged, to you makes a difference to Hamlin. A man
      who is engaged to be married may, I suppose, go about with any woman—it is as if he were
      married. I am very sorry I shall be far away, somewhere in Central Asia or South America—I
      don’t know where—when your marriage will come off, Miss Brown. I must make my congratulations
      betimes.”
“There is nothing to congratulate about,” answered Anne, quietly; “there has been no
      question of my marrying Mr Hamlin. I am sorry such an idea should have got abroad. I was, you
      know, Mr Hamlin’s ward till lately, and I am now taking advantage of his aunt’s kindness to
      stay here till—till I settle what I am going to do; I may be going to Girton—I don’t
      know.”
“Oh, indeed!” exclaimed Lewis; “pray forgive my unintentional impertinence then. Girton?
      Ah—How long do you intend remaining there?”
“I don’t know. Nothing is settled yet.”
       Anne was determined not to let this man enjoy his
      impertinence and spitefulness: he should go away baffled.
“I may stay there altogether. I should rather like to be a teacher.”
“And I,” said Lewis, with one of his would‐be fascinating smiles, “would, in that case, like
      to be a pupil, Miss Brown.”
Anne did not answer. He must be disappointed, she thought. But he was determined to get some
      satisfaction out of her.
“I can’t get over Hamlin’s thoughtlessness in accompanying Madame Elaguine to Paris,” he
      said. “It would have been so simple to ask some lady to be of the party. I suppose you did not
      like leaving Mrs Macgregor? I was sorry to hear that she was ailing.”
“There was no question of my going,” answered Anne; “and I do think it is such silly
      nonsense about any one being required. If people choose to think that Mr Hamlin is going to
      marry his cousin—well, why not? It would be a very natural thing if he did.”

She looked Lewis boldly in the face. It was the first time that she had said the thing which
      she believed, hoped for, prayed for.
Edmund Lewis was evidently staggered; and Anne enjoyed watching his discomfiture. But a
      thought soon came into his subtle head.
“I suppose you see a good deal of Mr Richard Brown?” he asked; “he’s an extraordinarily
      clever man.”
“Yes; he is very able. I see him often enough. At present his electioneering business
      doesn’t leave him much time.”
“Ah, to be sure. It costs a lot of money, doesn’t it, to get into Parliament? But I suppose
      Mr Brown is rich now, is he not?”
“He is well off.”
“And he is sure to succeed. He has a fine career before him,” mused Lewis. He had, as he
      thought, grasped the situation: there had been an amicable exchange—Anne was to marry Richard
      Brown, and Sacha was to have Hamlin. All his enemies—for Sacha and Hamlin had evidently sent
      him to the right-about
      —were going to be happily settled. His paste‐coloured face
      grew pastier than ever; he bit his scarlet lips and auburn moustache; he looked horribly angry
      and malignant; wickeder than even Anne, who had always hated him, would have believed it
      possible.
But he kept his temper—nay, he was quite unusually deferential and sweet. He led the
      conversation to other topics; and Anne thought that his only object was now to talk no more
      about the affairs which he had so misjudged, when, she scarcely knew how, he began to talk
      about Wotton Hall—first about the scenery, then about the grounds, then the house, then their
      stay there, and finally about the incident of the burning bed.
He went over all the circumstances of it; he summed up all that he and Anne knew of Madame
      Elaguine’s persecution; and then, as if discussing a curious psychological problem, he asked
      her whether it had ever occurred to her that there was any possibility that the persecution
      should be a fraud, and that the bed
       had been set fire to by Madame Elaguine herself. “I don’t
      know whether you remarked at the time, that the flames burst out just two minutes after Madame
      Elaguine had fetched the cigarette‐papers out of her room, and that she had given orders to
      her maid not to come until she should be rung for,” said Lewis; “also, that Madame Elaguine
      seemed extremely unwilling that any inquiry should be made into the matter afterwards.”
Anne said nothing; the recollection of the precious lace‐trimmed dressing‐gown, placed
      carefully out of the way of the flames, and of that sentence, “And they never forgot, so long
      as they lived, that terrible burning bed,” which had caught her eye in little Hélène
      Elaguine’s story‐book, came into her mind. She had put that matter of the persecution behind
      her of late, and yet in her heart she felt that she believed it to be a fraud.
“I have had my doubts about it,” bending over her work lest Lewis should see her face.
      “Indeed,” she added boldly, indignant at her
       own want of frankness, “I am inclined to believe that
      Madame Elaguine did set that bed on fire. Several things have made me think so.”
Lewis smiled. “I am glad to find that you take my view of the case, Miss Brown. The chemist
      at Appledore—where, if you remember, Madame Elaguine went for some shopping the day before the
      fire—showed me himself the bottle of acid from which he had helped Madame Elaguine—I forget
      the name of the stuff—she said she wanted some to take spots out of a dress.”
“Indeed,” went on Lewis, “I think that we have in Madame Elaguine a very curious instance of
      a sort of monomania which has, I believe, its scientific name,”—and Lewis began to retail a
      variety of instances, culled out of some volume of ‘Causes célèbres,’ of persons who had
      elaborately made up persecutions of which themselves were victims. He had always been fond of
      talking as if he knew a great deal about morbid conditions of the brain, and, indeed, morbid
      things of all sorts; and he
       talked for some time as if he took a purely abstract
      interest in the case.
“One is apt to meet very singular types among Russian women, especially such as have led a
      wandering life like Madame Elaguine,” went on Lewis. “They are devoured by a passion for the
      forbidden, or at least for the unreal and theatrical; there is something strangely crooked in
      their moral vision, something discordant in their nature. They are extraordinary, charming,
      intelligent, depraved creatures. Only a Russian woman could be at once so childish and so
      theatrical and insincere, so full of idealism and of cynicism, as Madame Elaguine. Ah, she is
      a wonderful being! That matter of the burning bed finishes her off perfectly.”
Edmund Lewis fixed his green magnetic eyes on Anne. He still believed that she must hate
      Sacha, as it was clear that, for some reason or other, he hated the Russian; and he wished, by
      giving Miss Brown these notions about Madame Elaguine, to induce
       her to revenge herself and him. But Anne had become quite
      dense to his intentions. She did not connect these ideas with Lewis; his words seemed to her
      now the mere expression of all the things which her own instinct had revealed, and which she
      had put behind her in her desire that Sacha should relieve her of the intolerable debt to
      Hamlin. The creature described by this odious man was the real Sacha; she was Madame Elaguine
      as she now clearly appeared to Miss Brown. And yet how unjust! Lewis had wanted to torment her
      by making her jealous of Madame Elaguine; he now wished to pay off Madame Elaguine for having,
      in some manner, slighted his own vanity.
“I think you take a dreadful view of the matter,” she said; “you explain Madame Elaguine,
      who is only half a Russian, by all the horrible Russians you have ever met or imagined. I
      think there is a much simpler explanation. Madame Elaguine has been very strangely brought up;
      she has lived with very bad people; her husband was a
       horrible wretch, we all know. She is excessively
      hysterical—her mother, Mr Hamlin’s aunt, was so also—and we all know that the desire to be
      prominent, to deceive, is a common form of hysteria. And as she has never been brought up to
      restrain herself, she imagines herself to be persecuted, and makes up the persecution. She is
      much more to be pitied than to be blamed.”
Anne spoke rapidly. She seemed to be speaking fairly; and yet she knew she was wilfully
      misrepresenting, that Madame Elaguine was something more than a hysterical monomaniac: she
      remembered Mrs Macgregor’s stories of Sacha’s degraded childhood, all the accusations of her
      precocious lying and unchasteness, of her having led one of her cousins into mischief, and set
      the house by the ears. She was indignant with herself for defending this woman—out of charity?
      out of conviction? No. But merely because she required that this woman be sufficiently
      innocent to become Hamlin’s wife.

Edmund Lewis stroked his auburn beard meditatively.
“I don’t believe in praise and blame,” he answered; “I believe merely in fate. Some people
      are born noble, truthful, chaste—others just the reverse. It is the fault of neither; and
      each, in its way, is equally interesting and valuable to the artist or the psychologist. The
      curious thing about Madame Elaguine is, that she apparently stands half‐way; she is, according
      to the ideas of the world, half responsible and half irresponsible. We see in her a hysterical
      woman, troubled by a morbid love of deceit; and at the same time a woman to whom such deceit
      is or has been practically necessary. Madame Elaguine continues for her amusement, and
      develops to the utmost, an imaginary persecution, whose origin must be sought in some intrigue
      which it was her interest to veil by a mystification,” Lewis drawled on in his omniscient,
      half‐pedantic way, as if the intrigues of married women were the most usual subject of
       conversation between a man and a young lady, and as if to
      suggest that Madame Elaguine had led a loose life were the most obvious and inoffensive of
      proceedings.
Miss Brown blushed crimson; but she felt something more than insulted, something more than
      indignant. What right had this man to focus all her own suspicions concerning a woman whom she
      fervently wished not to suspect?
“Mr Lewis,” she said, “I don’t think those things should be listened to by me or said by
      you. I believe that Madame Elaguine is not sound in her mind, and that her persecution is a
      hoax; but I believe that she is an honest woman in other respects. She is a friend of mine,
      and I will not hear her slandered.”
“Heaven forbid that I should wish to slander her! I think she is a fascinating woman; and
      she is—at least she was—quite as great a friend of mine as of yours. I was only telling you
      how I explain her character.”
Lewis had always appeared a reptile in
       Anne’s eyes; but never so much as just now.
“I hate scandal,” he said, taking his hat, “and I am most grieved to have appeared to be
      talking scandal. People always misunderstand the sort of passionate interest I take in every
      kind of curious character. I suppose you would call it morbid, Miss Brown; but I really was
      considering Madame Elaguine merely as an interesting study.”
All this kind of talk, of which Hamlin was so fond, perfectly sickened Anne; and the sudden
      stirring up of all her old suspicions was exasperating.
“That is all very fine,” she said angrily; “but do you, or do you not, believe Madame
      Elaguine to be a dishonourable woman, apart from this monomania?”
“It is very hard to say. You know I disbelieve in what you call moral responsibilities. I
      imagine Madame Elaguine to have found her mania for persecution very convenient at one period
      of her life—yes, certainly
      . I think it is the only rational way to account for the
      beginning of it—don’t you?”
Miss Brown took no notice of Lewis’s insolent inquisitiveness of manner.
“If you think that, Mr Lewis,” she said, “may I ask how you reconciled with your notions of
      gentlemanly behaviour the calm way in which you let Mr Hamlin introduce such a woman as you
      describe to me, and let me continue to know her? No; you are perfectly aware that all this is
      merely trumped up at the moment.” And she put her hand on the bell‐handle, for the door to be
      opened to Lewis.
Edmund Lewis smiled.
“Walter Hamlin’s eyes are quite as good as mine. As regards my behaviour towards you, I
      cannot go into details, but you may understand, dear Miss Brown, that two or three months ago
      I may not, as a man of honour, have been at liberty to discuss Madame Elaguine’s character in
      the way that I
       have done now that Madame Elaguine’s relations with me have
      entirely changed their nature. Good‐bye, dear Miss Brown. I am most truly grieved if I have
      offended you in any way.”
Anne merely made an impatient gesture, a gesture almost of disgust, as Edmund Lewis left the
      room.
So this was the explanation of Edmund Lewis’s apparent disgrace! Sacha Elaguine had repelled
      his odious advances, she had closed her door to him, she had complained to Hamlin; and now, as
      soon as their backs were turned, Lewis had come to slander them without fear of a
      horsewhipping. Anne seemed to breathe once more—thank heaven that the wretch had overreached
      himself in his malice!
