
CHAPTER II.
“I WONDER whether Anne Brown has really spoken about that Cold Fremley business to
      Mr Hamlin,” remarked Marjory Leigh to her sister one day, soon after their return to town.
       “I think she’ll never do it, after all.”
“I don’t see how she can,” answered Mary; “at least I can’t conceive doing such a thing. But
      I don’t think we must judge Anne by ourselves: when once she thinks something ought to be
      done, she is quite capable of forcing herself to do it. Anne is quite unlike any one
      else.”
“Fiddlestick!” cried Marjory; “you don’t know anything about women, Mary.”
But despite her sister’s superior knowledge of womankind and of everything else, Mary
       Leigh was in the right; perhaps in some cases enthusiastic
      admiration gives a better clue to action than mere common‐sense. Anne really was made in such
      a way that when once she was persuaded that any course was the right one, no dislike which she
      might have to it, no thought of being considered queer, or improper, or quixotic, could
      restrain her from it. The thing became none the pleasanter to do; but it was done
      unflinchingly: indeed there was in Anne an almost destructive quality of will, a power of
      ruthlessly cutting through all obstacles, the passing consciousness of which, joined with the
      consciousness of the many disagreeable things which it might at any moment force her to go
      through, produced in her a curious kind of pessimism, which, while it recognised the evil of
      the world, made that very recognition an incitement to struggle for good. Anne had made up her
      mind that Hamlin must have the horrible condition of his Cold Fremley tenants explained to
      him. She fully appreciated the unseemliness, the painfulness
      , of such a revelation coming from her; but as there
      appeared to be no one else who could satisfactorily make it to him, it must be made by her.
      “It is very simple,” she said to herself: and this was the most characteristic remark that
      Anne could ever make; for it is curious how very much simpler life does become to people who
      are in the habit of acting without regard for their own feelings.
But it was, though simple, difficult, not on her own account, but on Hamlin’s. In the first
      few days after her return from Wotton, she had several times been on the point of broaching
      the subject, but she had desisted on noticing the absolute want of seriousness in Hamlin’s
      manner, the æsthetic vagueness and fickleness of his thoughts. “He will do nothing practical
      in this mood,” she said to herself; and as, time after time, she watched for a propitious
      moment without finding it, Anne became painfully aware, as one becomes aware of some
      deficiency in a valued piece of property only when it is pointed out, of Hamlin’s
       want of seriousness, of his utter want of any habit of
      asking himself about his responsibilities, or indeed of thinking about anything except himself
      and the beautiful and weird things which delighted him.
“Perhaps it is cowardice on my part,” Anne suddenly thought; “perhaps I find that he is not
      fit to attend to the subject because I dislike mentioning it.” So it must be done at once.
      Hamlin, she knew, was alone in his studio; he must have finished his afternoon’s work, or very
      nearly, and there was no Chough, or Lewis, or Dennistoun on the horizon. So Anne closed the
      piano at which she had been practising some of Chough’s favourite old music, and went
      down‐stairs. She had made up her mind; but, as she went slowly to the studio, she felt her
      heart begin to flutter and to beat, and a cold perspiration to start out in her forehead. For
      all her familiarity with the æsthetic world, in whose apprehension, as Thaddy O’Reilly’s
      Yankee friend had quietly remarked, “right or wrong don’t exist,”—for
       all her habit of reading poems in which every unmentionable
      shamefulness was used as so much vermilion or pale‐green or mysterious grey in a picturesque
      and suggestive composition,—Anne had retained a constitutional loathing for touching some
      subjects, which was like the blind instinctive horror of certain animals for brackish water or
      mud. When Marjory Leigh had first taken her into her confidence, and told her of the pools of
      sin which stagnated among the starving, unwashed, and unlettered million, Anne had recoiled,
      and felt a sort of momentary horror for Marjory, a sort of resentment at this foulness thus
      obtruded on to her; and this feeling, which would sometimes still recur while talking with her
      philanthropic friend, was perhaps the thing in all her life of which Anne was the most
      profoundly ashamed. The æsthetes all round her would let all the world rot away in physical
      hideousness rather than have that physical hideousness put before their eyes; and she, was she
      not even worse, in her cowardly horror of seeing moral wounds
       and leprosies? So Anne argued with herself; and she would
      now face anything; but the feeling of moral sickness was there, however bravely she might look
      at evil, and try and help to remedy it.
“I am a base creature,” Anne thought as she felt her heart fluttering as if it would break
      loose, as she stood and knocked at the studio door.
“Come in,” cried Hamlin.
He thought it was the servant, for at first he did not turn round, but continued writing at
      a beautiful, fantastically inlaid desk in a corner.
“It’s I,” said Anne.
He started up to meet her.
“How sweet of you to come, Madonna Anna!” he said, beaming; “I was just wanting so much to
      see you—I don’t know why—a sort of silly, nostalgic wish. It’s ridiculous to be nostalgic
      about a person who is on the first floor, when I am on the ground floor, isn’t it? and yet it
      is so. I was feeling quite an over‐
       powering desire to see you. And you seem to have felt it,
      through the ceiling, carpets and all, don’t you?”
Anne smiled faintly, but her heart sank.
“I also wanted you to see how I have been getting on with my Beatrice,” he said, and rolled
      an easel into the middle of the room. Anne stood for a moment before the almost
      Giorgionesquely magnificent picture, looking vaguely at the well‐known lady—with those
      strange, half‐classic, half‐Semitic, and yet a little Ethiopian, features, those wide grey
      eyes, that pent‐roof of crisp, lustreless, black hair, those hollowed cheeks and tragic lips
      which had by this time become so familiar to the artistic world of London. It never seemed to
      her that this could have anything to do with her, this sombre, mystic, wistful woman of
      unreality. But she was not thinking of that; she stood at the picture, but almost without
      seeing it.
Hamlin was standing a little aside, looking from her to the picture, and from the picture
       to her, and humming the lines from Dante’s sonnet, which
      Chough had set to music— 
“Ch’ogni lingua divien tremando muta,
Egli occhi non ardiscon di guardare.”
 “Certainly,” he said to himself, “Dante had not a better Beatrice than this.”
“I want to speak to you, Mr Hamlin,” said Anne, suddenly turning round.
Something in her voice took him by surprise.
“So much the better,” he said, pulling forward a heavy arm‐chair, covered with old‐fashioned
      green brocade.
Anne sat down. How was she to begin? She had intended to prelude with some sort of apology
      for entering on such a subject; but, somehow, now she could not apologise.
“Do you remember a hamlet near Wotton, close by the river, called Cold Fremley?” asked Anne,
      slowly.
Hamlin had just caught a look which he wanted for his picture, and he had taken up his
      painting things.
“Yes,” and he looked up from his palette in
       Anne’s pale face, with the almost monochrome faint‐red lips
      and the delicately hollowed cheeks. “What about it? I remember it quite well. Oh yes, a lovely
      spot; and we went there one evening together.”
“Just so; well, it appears that this hamlet, or rather group of six or seven cabins, belongs
      to you—is part of the Wotton property.”
“Is it? I didn’t know that. Fancy my being the unsuspecting proprietor of such a lovely
      place! I am so glad; I want to write a poem about it one day.”
“And it appears,” went on Anne, carefully steadying her voice, but keeping her eyes on the
      little cypress‐trees and conventional anemones of the Persian rug under her feet—“it appears
      that the condition of the people who live in those houses is very, very horrible; the cabins
      have barely more than one room, into which the whole family is piled.”
“Loathsome!” cried Hamlin, with a shudder, “and in such a lovely spot. Do you remember the
      thick clotted masses of the river dragging
       between the meadow‐sweet and willow‐herb?”
“It is very loathsome,” went on Anne, a coldness coming all over her. “’The
      people are very wretched, poor, always ill of fever, with no more sense of right and wrong
      than cattle.”
“Very dreadful indeed,” said Hamlin, mixing his paints. “Of course nothing can be
      done—nothing ever can, you know—”
“Something can and must be done!” cried Anne. “It appears that in consequence of this utter
      wretchedness and ignorance, and especially on account of the degrading effect of being all
      huddled together, men and women, boys and girls, all of them, in one room which is bedroom,
      kitchen, sitting‐room, everything at the same time,—it appears that these miserable creatures
      have gradually come to live worse than animals; they grow, and let their children in turn grow
      up in horrible, shameful sin.” The difficulty of saying it had vanished; Anne felt that,
      whether she would
       or would not, it must come out. Her voice had kept steady,
      but died out in terrible hoarseness; and her wide‐opened eyes fixed themselves upon
      Hamlin.
Hamlin let his hand with the palette drop on his knee, and listened with deep attention.
      “How very strange!” he said; “how very strange—how tragic!”
“It is tragic,” cried Anne. “Oh, I think nothing in the wide world can be more
      tragic! What is the murder of the body to this? or what is any crime which one man can commit
      towards another, compared with men and women being pushed into wickedness by mere external
      circumstances, being condemned without knowing it, mere blind, indifferent creatures, to
      befoul their souls in this way?”
Anne had not the slightest thought of being eloquent, but she was, not only in her words,
      but in her face and look. Hamlin appreciated it; he was struck. Such a view of evil and of
      fate had never presented itself to him; he recognised how much newer and grander it
       was than the usual platitude about fatal passion in which
      he and his school had indulged.
“Are you quite sure of this?” he asked, with some interest.
“Mrs Collett gave one of the Leighs all the details of it. If you would go to her, she would
      tell you all about it; she has been afraid, ashamed of mentioning it to you, so I have done
      it. But if only you would speak to Mrs Collett now, she would explain to you exactly that
      ought to be done.”
Hamlin did not seem to attend.
“It is awfully grand,” he mused—“all the grander for the utter unconsciousness,
      involuntariness. It would make a splendid subject for a poem. I always felt there must be
      something in that county which should correspond to the tragic look of everything. So much
      Dennistoun’s notion that there isn’t anything poetical or terrible in reality.”
A sickening fear came over Anne. But she drove it from her: she tried to say to herself
       that she had expected this; that Hamlin, being unaccustomed
      to any serious thought of the evil of others, and being a poet, would at first take things in
      this way.
“Mrs Collett says that there is hope of saving these miserable creatures by building better
      dwellings for them; trying to turn Cold Fremley into a village, and setting up a school. I
      have been thinking over it a great deal myself. Of course I’m very ignorant. But I’ve heard
      that the river ought to be valuable for water‐power, because there is no other one near; so I
      thought the simplest would be to try and induce some one—or do it yourself—to set up a factory
      there. That would give the people work, and give them ideas of decent living, and then a
      school would have to be opened.”
The word factory seemed to sear into Hamlin’s nerves.
“A factory on that river? on my property? to befoul all that pure and exquisite country with
      smoke and machine refuse!” he cried indignantly.

“One single factory need not befoul anything,” said Anne, sternly. “And all the smoke and
      machine refuse in the wide world could not make that neighbourhood one‐hundredth part as foul
      as it is made by the sin of Cold Fremley. No, not one‐thousandth part as foul as our own
      hearts, if we let such an evil exist under our eyes.”
Hamlin seemed moved and puzzled.
“It is very dreadful,” he mused. “I really had no notion that such things go on
      nowadays. One is apt to think the world much more commonplace than it is. I will go to Cold
      Fremley some day soon. I’ll take Lewis with me, he’ll be very much interested in it. I
      daresay,” he added, “that there’s a great deal of exaggeration about it. But as to the
      factory, I consider it would be against my conscience to permit such a thing: there is no
      greater pollution in England than factories; thank Heaven, there are as yet few in our county;
      and I would rather die than spoil that beautiful peaceful bit of ground.”

Against this Anne felt it useless to struggle.
“Since you will not hear of the only plan which would easily improve the condition of those
      people,” she went on, “let us leave the factory alone; it is not necessary: a few hundred
      pounds will amply pay for improving, enlarging the six or seven houses of which Cold Fremley
      consists. As to draining, every one says that were that county drained, it would amply repay
      the expense by the superior quality of the crops. All that is wanted for the present,”
      invocated Anne in despair, “is that the people should have more room—that they should not herd
      like cattle—that the growing children, at least, should not be forced into contact with all
      that vice. And all that can be gained by merely enlarging the cottages.”
“Such a thing as you suggest would—besides being, in my opinion, perfectly useless—involve a
      very heavy expense,” answered Hamlin, coldly.
“Not more,” cried Anne, blazing up—“not
       more than you have been at in educating me, Mr Hamlin!”
The words were scarcely out of her mouth when she repented of them.
“Perhaps,” she added sullenly, “that also has been a waste.”
Hamlin did not answer; he was taken by surprise, embarrassed.
“The cases are wholly dissimilar. The left hand may not ask the right hand what it has or
      has not been able to do.”
“What do you mean, Mr Hamlin? If you have been spending more than you can afford on me—oh,
      don’t think I’m not grateful—but please, please, spend no more. This house might be sold. You
      don’t live in it after all, and Aunt Claudia would be just as happy at Wotton. The house and
      furniture must be worth a good deal, and then there is the expense of housekeeping in London.
      Do think of it. I am sure you could raise money enough in that way.”
“This house is not mine, Miss Brown,”
       answered Hamlin, quietly; “it was bought out of your
      capital; and the expenses you mention are paid out of your income, not mine.”
He had wasted all this on her, and the people on his estate lived in foul, sinful hovels! A
      strange gratitude, mixed with horror, overcame Anne; all the beautiful things about her,—her
      beautiful fantastic dress, which Hamlin always designed for her, her knowledge and
      good‐breeding,—all that had been paid for with that money, became loathsome to her.
“It is not mine—not mine; I am a mere beggar living off your charity,” she exclaimed—“living
      off what I have no right to, what ought to go to them—to those poor sinful
      creatures at Cold Fremley. Oh, Mr Hamlin, sell this house, sell the furniture, all, all.
      Enough has been done for me; I don’t want all these beautiful things in order to be happy; I
      could be happy anywhere, doing anything, if I knew that there was one evil the less in the
      world. If there did not remain enough to live upon, I could go out as a governess, or a
       schoolmistress. I have learned quite enough to do
      that—indeed I am in earnest—I should be perfectly happy gaining my bread as I used to. Only
      let something be done for those people—don’t let me feel that every lovely thing I look at,
      every beautiful thing I hear, every word you say, every pleasure I feel, is as sinful as those
      sinful lives!”
Hamlin smiled; he admired and disbelieved; but what a magnificent woman she was! what
      passion, what fervour under that cold exterior!
“There is no need for that,” he said gently, looking at Anne with admiring and loving eyes.
      “I am not so poor as that, and I would starve rather than see you deprived of any single thing
      to which you have a right.”
“Then you will go to Cold Fremley? You will see about it?” He was good and generous at
      bottom—she knew it; and she could have fallen on her knees and cried like a child with her
      head upon his arm.
“I will go to Cold Fremley,” he answered
       with alacrity. “I want to go there. I want to study the
      whole matter—”
“What do you want to study it for?” asked Anne, suddenly and terribly; “to improve matters,
      or—to write a poem?”
“I do wish to write a poem,” answered Hamlin, who felt no shame for doing so, and resented
      being thus reproved. “Certainly I wish to write a poem. You made such a fuss about my tearing
      up that ‘Ballad of the Fens’—well, I now see my way to making use of all the best parts of it,
      and with a real tragic and passionate motive. As to improving matters, I will look about me.
      But I totally disbelieve in the utility of giving these people better dwellings. Of course,”
      he went on gently, but with that tone of knowledge of the evil of the world which Anne so much
      hated—“of course you, who are pure and upright, who cannot conceive the reality
      of lust and the fascination of evil—you can never understand the hold which evil
      has in this world; you cannot understand that the passion for sin may
       exist as there exists in you the passion for good; that
      most men receive in their father’s blood, in their mother’s milk, the haschisch of sinful
      desire,—that the more they grow, the more it grows in them—that it is their very life, and is
      perpetually seeking for aliment. Evil is; it cannot be stamped out.”
Hamlin’s eyes sparkled, and he spoke with a flush; but there was no excitement, no horror in
      his tone. Anne felt that he was reciting in prose what he would soon write in verse.
“In short,” she said, “you think the sinfulness of the people of Cold Fremley fits very well
      into the landscape? You think it, as you said, very picturesque and grand?”
Hamlin was a man who could not easily keep at high moral tension.
“Well, yes,” he answered; “of course it is very shocking, and if anything could
      be done, why, I should be glad. But I know nothing can be done; and although it
      is very much to be regretted, yet I don’t think you can deny
       that there is something very grand and tragic in this sin
      flowering like evil grasses in that marsh.”
“I see,” said Anne, faintly—everything seemed to be turning all round her; “good‐bye.”
“You mustn’t be angry with me,” said Hamlin, following her to the studio door. “You see I,
      unfortunately, have much more experience of life and evil than you will ever have. I know that
      fatality of sin; and that makes me take things in a different way from how you take them.”
Hamlin’s voice sounded faint and distant to Anne, hollow like an echo in a whispering
      chamber. She went mechanically up‐stairs; she did not know how she felt, but everything seemed
      surrounded by thick, clammy horror; the world was going to pieces. When she had shut the door
      of her room behind her, she threw herself with her face on her bed, and burst into an agony of
      half‐audible sobs. But when at length hours passed, and the maid
       came to ask whether she would come to tea, Anne felt no
      better; a black despair weighed upon her. On her dressing‐table stood a Japanese jar, filled
      with delicate autumnal roses; they had the pallor, the diaphanous purity which the frost gives
      to flowers, as approaching death gives it sometimes to human creatures. Anne looked at them;
      and then, without passion or excitement, she took them out of the vase, and threw them into
      the fire. She watched the petals shrivel and fall to black dust on the flame, and the leaves
      and stalks turn slowly, with a hissing noise, into glowing embers. Then she felt ashamed. The
      poor flowers were pure—they at least were clean—and she had destroyed them. And Anne buried
      her head in her hands, and began to sob once more.
