
CHAPTER IV.
ANNE BROWN found that Hamlin, or, as he studiously put it, Mrs Macgregor, had made
      several engagements for her before her arrival; and before she could thoroughly realise that
      the school, the journey from Coblenz, were things of the past, she found herself being led
      about, passively, half unconsciously, through the mazes of æsthetic London. It was all very
      hazy: Anne was informed that this and that person was coming to dinner or lunch at
      Hammersmith; that this or that person hoped she would come and dine or take tea somewhere or
      other; that such or such a lady was going to take her to see some one or other’s studio, or to
      introduce her at some other person’s house. She knew that they were all
       either distinguished poets, or critics, or painters, or
      musicians, or distinguished relations and friends of the above; that they all received her as
      if they had heard of her from their earliest infancy; that they pressed her to have tea, and
      strawberries, and claret‐cup, and cakes, and asked her what she thought of this picture or
      that poem; that they lived in grim, smut‐engrained houses in Bloomsbury, or rose‐grown
      cottages at Hampstead, with just the same sort of weird furniture, partly Japanese, partly
      Queen Anne, partly medieval; with blue‐and‐white china and embroidered chasubles stuck upon
      the walls if they were rich, and twopenny screens and ninepenny pots if they were poor, but
      with no further differences; and, finally, that they were all intimately acquainted, and spoke
      of each other as being, or just having missed being, the most brilliant or promising specimens
      of whatever they happened to be.
At first Anne felt very shy and puzzled; but after a few days the very vagueness which
       she felt about all these men and women, these artists,
      critics, poets, and relatives, who were perpetually reappearing as on a merry‐go‐round,—nay,
      the very cloudiness as to the identity of these familiar faces—the very confusion as to
      whether they were one, two, or three different individuals,—produced in Miss Brown an
      indifference, an ease, almost a familiarity, like that which we may experience towards the
      vague, unindividual company met on a steamer or at a hotel.
And little by little, out of this crowd of people who seemed to look, and to dress, and to
      talk very much alike,—venerable bearded men, who were the heads of great schools of painting,
      or poetry, or criticism, or were the papas of great offspring; elderly, quaintly dressed
      ladies, who were somebody’s wife, or mother, or sister; youngish men, with manners at once
      exotically courteous, and curiously free and easy, in velveteen coats and mustard‐coloured
      shooting‐jackets or elegiac‐looking dress‐coats, all rising in poetry, or art, or
       criticism; young ladies, varying from sixteen to
      six‐and‐thirty, with hair cut like medieval pages, or tousled like mœnads, or tucked away
      under caps like eighteenth‐century housekeepers, habited in limp and stayless garments,
      picturesque and economical, with Japanese chintzes for brocade, and flannel instead of stamped
      velvets—most of which young ladies appeared at one period, past, present, or future, to own a
      connection with the Slade school, and all of whom, when not poets or painters themselves, were
      the belongings of some such, or madly in love with the great sonneteer such a one, or the
      great colourist such another;—out of all this confusion there began gradually to detach
      themselves and assume consistency in Anne’s mind one or two personalities, some of whom
      attracted, and some of whom repelled her, as we shall see further on; but to all these people,
      vague or distinct, attractive or repulsive, Miss Brown felt a kind of gratitude—something, in
      an infinitesimal degree, of the thankfulness for undeserved kindness and courtesy which
       constituted a large part of her love for Hamlin.
It was a curious state of things, thus to be introduced by a man whom she knew at once so
      much and so little, to this exclusive and esoteric sort of people; and whenever the thought
      would come upon her how completely and utterly she, the daughter of the dockyard workman of
      Spezia, the former servant of the little Perrys, was foreign to all this, it made her feel
      alone and giddy, like one standing on a rock and watching the waters below.
Such was the condition of things when one morning, about three weeks after Anne’s arrival,
      Hamlin put upon the luncheon‐table a note addressed to Miss Brown.
“It’s an invitation to Mrs Argiropoulo’s big party on the twenty‐seventh,” he said; “you
      must go, Miss Brown. She’s an awful being herself; but you’ll see all the most interesting
      people in London at her house. Edith Spencer or Miss Pringle can take you, if Aunt Claudia
      feel too tired.”

“Aunt Claudia always feels too tired,” answered Mrs Macgregor, in a bitter little tone. Anne
      could not quite understand this amiable and cynical old lady, who was at once devotedly
      attached to her nephew, and perpetually railing at his friends. A fear seized her lest, in her
      vague, almost somnambulic introduction into æsthetic society, she might have unconsciously
      neglected the woman who, proud of her birth as she was, requested this workman’s daughter to
      address and consider her as her aunt.
“Oh, won’t you go?” cried Anne; “won’t you go, Mrs Macgregor?”
“The fact is,” hesitated Hamlin, “that—you see—Mrs Argiropoulo invites comparatively few
      people, and—”
“That she wants only celebrities, or great folk, or pretty girls,” interrupted Aunt Claudia,
      with her friendly cynicism, “or, as she expresses it, that she wants no padding. So you must
      go with Mrs Spencer or Miss Pringle, my dear.”

“But it is abominable; it is most rude of Mrs Argiropoulo; and I certainly won’t go anywhere
      where Aunt Claudia has not been invited.”
“Nonsense, Nan,” silenced the old lady; “you’re not up to this lion‐hunting world yet. Where
      there are so many geniuses on the loose, and so many professed beauties, there are no chairs
      for old women, except countesses or school board managers.”
“But since you think Mrs Argiropoulo hateful,” persisted Anne, addressing Hamlin, “why
      should you wish me to go? You know I would much rather not; and I think, considering her
      rudeness to your aunt, you ought not to wish me to go.”
“As you choose, Miss Brown,” cried Hamlin, peevishly.
“Don’t be absurd, Anne—you must go,” insisted Mrs Macgregor. “Listen: Watty has actually
      been addling his brains doing dressmaking; he has invented a dress for you to go to the party,
      so you will break his heart if you refuse.”

Anne looked in amazement; and Hamlin reddened.
“I hope you will not deem it a liberty on my part, Miss Brown,” he said; “but as I knew that
      this invitation was coming, I ventured to make a sketch of the sort of dress which I think
      would become you, and to give it to a woman who has made dresses from artists’ directions; of
      course, if you don’t think it pretty, you won’t dream of putting it on. But I could not resist
      the temptation.”
Miss Brown scarcely knew what to say or feel: there was in her a moment’s humiliation at
      being so completely Hamlin’s property as to warrant this; then she felt grateful and ashamed
      of her ingratitude.
“If you had shown me the sketch, I daresay I could have made up the dress myself,” she
      said.
“I fear my sketch might not have been very intelligible to any one who had not experience of
      making such things.”
“Perhaps not,” answered Anne, thinking of
       all the dresses for Miss Curzon and the little Perrys which
      she had made in her day. “It was very good of you, Mr Hamlin.”
“What an idiot I was to let the cat out of the bag!” exclaimed Mrs Macgregor when her nephew
      was out of hearing. “I’ve spoilt your pleasure in the frock; and there’s Walter sulking
      because he thinks you won’t like it.”
“I am very ungrateful,” said Anne, sighing as she stooped over her book, and feeling all the
      same that she wished Hamlin would let her make up her dresses herself.
A few days later the dressmaker came to try on the dress, or rather (perhaps because Hamlin
      did not wish Anne to see it before it was finished) its linings and a small amount of the
      Greek stuff of which it was made; but it was not till the very afternoon of Mrs Argiropoulo’s
      party that the costume was brought home finished. Miss Brown was by this time tolerably
      accustomed to the eccentric garb of æsthetic circles, and she firmly believed that it was the
      only one which a self‐respecting
       woman might wear; but when she saw the dress which Hamlin
      had designed for her, she could not help shrinking back in dismay. It was of that Cretan silk,
      not much thicker than muslin, which is woven in minute wrinkles of palest yellowy white; it
      was made, it seemed to her, more like a night‐gown than anything else, shapeless and yet
      clinging with large and small folds, and creases like those of damp sculptor’s drapery, or the
      garments of Mantegna’s women.
“I must get out a long petticoat,” said Anne, appalled.
“Oh please, ma’am, no,” cried the dressmaker. “On no account an additional petticoat—it
      would ruin the whole effect. On the contrary, you ought to remove one of those you have on,
      because like this the dress can’t cling properly.”
“I won’t have it cling,” cried Miss Brown, resolutely. “I will let alone the extra
      petticoat, but that’s as much as I will do.”
“As you please, ma’am,” answered the
       woman, and continued adjusting the limp garment with the
      maid’s assistance.
Anne walked to the mirror. She was almost terrified at the figure which met her. That
      colossal woman, with wrinkled drapery clinging to her in half‐antique, half‐medieval
      guise,—that great solemn, theatrical creature, could that be herself?
“I think,” she said in despair, “that there’s something very odd about it, Mrs Perkins. It
      looks somehow all wrong. Are you sure that something hasn’t got unstitched?”
“No indeed, madam,” answered the dressmaker, ruffled in her dignity. “I have exactly
      followed the design; and,” she added, with crushing effect, “as it’s I who execute the most
      difficult designs for the Lyceum, I think I may say that it could not be made
      differently.”
The Lyceum! Anne felt half petrified. What! Hamlin was having her rigged out by a stage
      dressmaker!
“Mr Hamlin is down‐stairs, Miss Brown,”
       hesitated the maid, as Anne bade her help her out of this
      mass of limp stuff. “He said he would wait to see you after the dressmaker had left, if you
      had no objection.”
“Watty wants to see you in your new frock, my dear,” said Mrs Macgregor, putting her head in
      at the door. “Come along.”
Anne followed down‐stairs, gathering all that uncanny white crape about her. For the first
      time she felt a dull anger against Hamlin.
He met her in the dim drawing‐room.
“My hair isn’t done yet,” was all Miss Brown could say, tousling it with her hands.
“Leave it like that—oh, do leave it like that!” exclaimed Hamlin; “you can’t think how”—and
      he paused and looked at her, where she stood before him, stooping her massive head
      sullenly—“you can’t think how beautiful you look, Anne!”
It was the first time he had called her by her Christian name since that scene, long ago, in
      the studio at Florence.
“Forgive me, dear Miss Brown,” he apologised
      . “I knew how such a dress must suit you, and yet it has
      given me quite a shock to see you in it.”
“It was very kind of you to have it made for me,” said Anne, “and the stuff is very pretty
      also; and—and I am so glad you like me in it.”
Hamlin kissed her hand. He was more than usually handsome, and looked very happy.
“Thank you,” he said; “I must now go home and dress for that stupid dinner‐party. I will
      meet you at Mrs Argiropoulo’s at half‐past ten or eleven. I suppose Edith Spencer will call
      for you soon after dinner. Good‐bye.”
He looked at her with a kind of fervour, and left the room.
Anne sat down. Why did that dress make such a difference to him? Why did he care so much
      more for her because she had it on? Did he care for her only as a sort of live picture? she
      thought bitterly. But, after all, it was quite natural on his part to be pleased, since he had
      invented the dress. And it was
       very good of him to have thought of her at all. And thus,
      in a state of enjoyable repentance, she awaited the hour to go to Mrs Argiropoulo.
Mrs Spencer, a very lovable and laughable little woman, whose soul was divided between her
      babies and fierce rancours against all enemies of pre‐Raphaelitism, hereditary, in virtue of
      her father, Andrew Saunders, in her family, came punctually, marvellously attired in grey
      cashmere medieval garments, a garland of parsley and gilt oak‐leaves in her handsome red hair.
      On seeing Anne, who stood awaiting her by the fireplace, she could not repress an exclamation
      of admiration.
“Yes,” answered Anne, unaccustomed to have her looks admired at Florence and at Coblenz; “it
      is a very wonderful costume, isn’t it? Mr Hamlin designed it for me. I think it was so kind of
      him; don’t you?”
“Kind? I see nothing kind about it. Walter” (she always spoke of him thus familiarly,
      because he had worked as a youth in
       her father’s studio) “is simply head over ears in love with
      you, my dear.”
Anne shook her head.
“Oh no,” she answered, with a sort of reasoned conviction, “he is merely very good to me,
      that’s all—and perhaps he likes me also, of course. But that’s all.”
“You know nothing of the world, Annie; and still less of Walter. He has never in his life
      been fond of any one except when in love. I’ve not known him these fifteen years for
      nothing.”
“I think you are mistaken,” said Anne, quietly.
“I think you are not aware, my dear girl, that you are the most beautiful woman Walter has
      ever seen.”
