
CHAPTER XXIII.
The wheat was reapen in the fields, and the brown earth turned afresh. The white and purple
     chrysanthemums bloomed against the flowerless rose-bushes, and the little gray Michaelmas daisy
     flourished where the dead carnations had spread their glories. Leaves began to fall and chilly
     winds to sigh among the willows; the squirrels began to store away their nuts, and the poor to
     pick up the broken bare boughs.
"He said he would come before winter," thought Bébée, every day when she rose and felt each
     morning cooler and grayer than the one before it; winter was near.
Her little feet already were cold in their wooden shoes; and the robin already sang in the
     twigs of the sear sweetbrier; but she had the brave sweet faith which nothing kills, and she
     did not doubt—oh! no, she did not doubt, she was only tired.
Tired of the strange, sleepless, feverish nights; tired of the long, dull, empty days: tired
     of watching down the barren, leafless lane: tired of hearkening breathless to each step on the
     rustling dead leaves; tired of looking always, always, always, into the ruddy autumn evenings
     and the cold autumn starlight, and never hearing what she listened for, never seeing what she
     sought; tired as a child may be lost in a wood, and wearily wearing its small strength and
     breaking its young heart in search of the track forever missed, of the home forever beyond the
     horizon.
Still she did her work and kept her courage.
She took her way into the town with her basket full of the ruby and amber of the dusky autumn
     blossoms, and when those failed, and the garden was quite desolate, except for a promise of
     haws and of holly, she went, as she had always done, to the lace-room, and gained her bread and
     the chickens' corn each day by winding the thread round the bobbins; and at nightfall when she
     had plodded home through the darksome roads and over the sodden turf, and had lit her rushlight
     and sat down to her books, with her hand buried in her hair, and her eyes smarting from the
     strain of the lace-work and her heart aching with that new and deadly pain which never left her
     now, she would read—read—read—read, and try and store her brain with knowledge, and try and
     grasp these vast new meanings of life that the books opened to her, and try and grow less
     ignorant against he should return.
There was much she could not understand, bait there was also much she could.
Her mind was delicate and quick, her intelligence swift and strong; she bought old books at
     bookstalls with pence that she saved by going without her dinner. The keeper of the stall, a
     shrewd old soul, explained some hard points to her, and chose good volumes for her, and lent
     others to this solitary little student in her wooden shoes and with her pale child's face.
So she toiled hard and learned much, and grew taller and very thin, and got a look in her
     eyes like a lost dog's, and yet never lost heart or wandered in the task that he had set her,
     or in her faith in his return.
"Burn the books, Bébée," whispered the children again and again, clinging to her skirts.
     "Burn the wicked, silent things. Since you have had them you never sing, or romp, or laugh, and
     you look so white—so white."
Bébée kissed them, but kept to her books.
Jeannot going by from the forest night after night saw the light twinkling in the hut window,
     and sometimes crept softly up and looked through the chinks of the wooden shutter, and saw her
     leaning over some big old volume with her pretty brows drawn together, and her mouth shut close
     in earnest effort, and he would curse the man who had changed her so and go away with rage in
     his breast and tears in his eyes, not daring to say anything, but knowing that never would
     Bébée's little brown hand lie in love within his own.
Nor even in friendship, for he had rashly spoken rough words against the stranger from Rubes'
     land, and Bébée ever since then had passed him by with a grave, simple greeting, and when he
     had brought her in timid gifts a barrow-load of fagots, had thanked him, but had bidden him
     take the wood home to his mother.
"You think evil things of me, Bébée?" good Jeannot had pleaded, with a sob in his voice; and
     she had answered gently,—
"No; but do not speak to me, that is all."
Then he had cursed her absent lover, and Bébée gone within and closed her door.
She had no idea that the people thought ill of her. They were cold to her, and such coldness
     made her heart ache a little more. But the one great love in her possessed her so strongly that
     all other things were half unreal.
She did her daily housework from sheer habit, and she studied because he had told her to do
     it, and because with the sweet, stubborn, credulous faith of her youth, she never doubted that
     he would return.
Otherwise there was no perception of real life in her; she dreamed and prayed, and prayed and
     dreamed, and never ceased to do either one or the other, even when she was scattering
     potato-peels to the fowls, or shaking carrots loose of the soil, or sweeping the snow from her
     hut door, or going out in the raw dark dawn as the single little sad bell of St. Guido tolled
     through the stillness for the first mass.
For though even Father Francis looked angered at her because he thought she was stubborn, and
     hid some truth and some shame from him at confession, yet she went resolutely and oftener than
     ever to kneel in the dusty, dusky, crumbling old church, for it was all she could do for him
     who was absent—so she thought—and she did not feel quite so far away from him when she was
     beseeching Christ to have care of his soul and of his body.
All her pretty dreams were dead.
She never heard any story in the robin's song, or saw any promise in the sunset clouds, or
     fancied that angels came about her in the night—never now.
The fields were gray and sad; the birds were little brown things; the stars were cold and far
     off; the people she had used to care for were like mere shadows that went by her meaningless
     and without interest, and all she thought of was the one step that never came: all she wanted
     was the one touch she never felt.
"You have done wrong, Bébée, and you will not own it," said the few neighbors who ever spoke
     to her.
Bébée looked at them with wistful, uncomprehending eyes.
"I have done no wrong," she said gently, but no one believed her.
A girl did not shut herself up and wane pale and thin for nothing, so they reasoned. She
     might have sinned as she had liked if she had been sensible after it, and married Jeannot.
But to fret mutely, and shut her lips, and seem as though she had done nothing,—that was
     guilt indeed.
For her village, in its small way, thought as the big world thinks.
