
CHAPTER IV
Bébée ran home as fast as her feet would take her.
The children were all gathered about her gate in the dusky dewy evening; they met her with
     shouts of welcome and reproach intermingled; they had been watching for her since first the sun
     had grown low and red, and now the moon was risen.
But they forgave her when they saw the splendor of her presents, and she showered out among
     them Père Melchior's horn of comfits.
They dashed into the hut; they dragged the one little table out among the flowers; the
     cherries and cake were spread on it; and the miller's wife had given a big jug of milk, and
     Father Francis himself had sent some honeycomb.
The early roses were full of scent in the dew; the great gillyflowers breathed\out fragrance
     in the dusk; the goat came and nibbled the sweetbrier unrebuked; the children repeated the
     Flemish bread-grace, with clasped hands and reverent eyes, "Oh, dear little Jesus, come and sup
     with us, and bring your beautiful Mother, too; we will not forget you are God." Then, that
     said, they ate, and drank, and laughed, and picked cherries from each other's mouths like
     little blackbirds; the big white dog gnawed a crust at their feet; old Krebs who had a fiddle,
     and could play it, came out and trilled them rude and ready Flemish tunes, such as Teniers or
     Mieris might have jumped to before an alehouse at the Kermesse; Bébée and the children joined
     hands, and danced round together in the broad white moonlight, on the grass by the water-side;
     the idlers came and sat about, the women netting or spinning, and the men smoking a pipe before
     bedtime; the rough hearty Flemish bubbled like a brook in gossip, or rung like a horn over a
     jest; Bébée and the children, tired of their play, grew quiet, and chanted together the "Ave
     Maria Stella Virginis"; a nightingale among the willows sang to the sleeping swans.
All was happy, quiet, homely; lovely also in its simple way.
They went early to their beds, as people must do who rise at dawn.
Bébée leaned out a moment from her own little casement ere she too went to rest.
Through an open lattice there sounded the murmur of some little child's prayer; the wind
     sighed among the willows; the nightingales sang on in the dark—all was still.
Hard work awaited her on the morrow, and on all the other days of the year.
She was only a little peasant—she must sweep, and spin, and dig, and delve, to get daily her
     bit of black bread,—but that night she was as happy as a little princess in a fairy tale; happy
     in her playmates, in her flowers, in her sixteen years, in her red shoes, in her silver
     buckles, because she was half a woman; happy in the dewy leaves, in the singing birds, in the
     hush of the night, in the sense of rest, in the fragrance of flowers, in the drifting changes
     of moon and cloud; happy because she was half a woman, because she was half a poet, because she
     was wholly a poet.
"Oh, dear swans, how good it is to be sixteen!—how good it is to live at all!—do you not tell
     the willows so?" said Bébée to the gleam of silver under the dark leaves by the water's side,
     which showed her where her friends were sleeping, with their snowy wings closed over their
     stately heads, and the veiled gold and ruby of their eyes.
The swans did not awake to answer.
Only the nightingale answered from the willows, with Desdemona's song.
But Bébée had never heard of Desdemona, and the willows had no sigh for her.
"Good night!" she said, softly, to all the green dewy sleeping world, and then she lay down
     and slept herself.—The nightingale sang on, and the willows trembled.
