
CHAPTER XV.
In the deserted lane by the swans' water, under the willows, the horses waited to take him to
     Mechlin; little, quick, rough horses, with round brass bells, in the Flemish fashion, and gay
     harness, and a low char-à-banc, in which a wolf-skin and red rugs, and all a painter's many
     necessities, were tossed together.
He lifted her in, and the little horses flew fast through the green country, ringing chimes
     at each step, till they plunged into the deep glades of the woods of Cambre and Soignies.
Bébée sat breathless with delight.
She had never gone behind horses in all her life, except once or twice in a wagon when the
     tired teamsters had dragged a load of corn across the plains, or when the miller's old gray
     mare had hobbled wearily before a cart-load of noisy, happy, mischievous children going home
     from the masses and fairs, and flags, and flowers, and church banners, and puppet-shows, and
     lighted altars, and whirling merry-go-rounds of the Fête Dieu.
She had never known what it was to sail as on the wings of the wind along broad roads, with
     yellow wheat-lands, and green hedges, and wayside trees, and little villages, and reedy canal
     water, all flying by her to the sing-song of the joyous bells.
"Oh, how good it is to live!" she cried, clapping her hands in a very ecstasy, as the clear
     morning broadened into gold and the west wind rose and blew from the sands by the sea.
"Yes—it is good—if one did not tire so soon," said he, watching her with a listless
     pleasure.
But she did not hear; she was beyond the reach of any power to sadden her; she was watching
     the white oxen that stood on the purple brow of the just reapen lands, and the rosy clouds that
     blew like a shower of apple-blossoms across the sky to the south.
There was a sad darkling Calvary on the edge of the harvest-field that looked black against
     the blue sky; its shadow fell across the road, but she did not see it: she was looking at the
     sun.
There is not much change in the great Soignies woods. They are aisles on aisles of beautiful
     green trees, crossing and recrossing; tunnels of dark foliage that look endless; long avenues
     of beech, of oak, of elm, or of fir, with the bracken and the brushwood growing dense between;
     a delicious forest growth everywhere, shady even at noon, and by a little past midday dusky as
     evening; with the forest fragrance, sweet and dewy, all about, and under the fern the stirring
     of wild game, and the white gleam of little rabbits, and the sound of the wings of birds.
Soignies is not legend-haunted like the Black Forest, nor king-haunted like Fontainebleau,
     nor sovereign of two historic streams like the brave woods of Heidelberg; nor wild and
     romantic, arid broken with black rocks, and poetized by the shade of Jaques, and swept through
     by a perfect river, like its neighbors of Ardennes; nor throned aloft on mighty mountains like
     the majestic oak glades of the Swabian hills of the ivory carvers.
Soignies is only a Flemish forest in a plain, throwing its shadows over corn-fields and
     cattle pastures, with no panorama beyond it and no wonders in its depth. But it is a fresh,
     bold, beautiful forest for all that.
It has only green leaves to give,—green leaves always, league after league; but there is
     about it that vague mystery which all forests have, and this universe of leaves seems
     boundless, and Pan might dwell in it, and St. Hubert, and John Keats.
Bébée, in her rare holidays with the Bac children or with Jeannot's sisters, had never
     penetrated farther than the glades of the Cambre, and had never entered the heart of the true
     forest, which is much still what it must have been in the old days when the burghers of Brabant
     cut their yew bows and their pike staves from it to use against the hosts of Spain.
To Bébée it was as an enchanted land, and every play of light and shade, every hare speeding
     across the paths, every thrush singing in the leaves, every little dog-rose or harebell that
     blossomed in the thickets, was to her a treasure, a picture, a poem, a delight.
He had seen girls thus in the woods of Vincennes and of Versailles in the student days of his
     youth: little work-girls fresh from châlets of the Jura or from vine-hung huts of the Loire,
     who had brought their poor little charms to perish in Paris; and who dwelt under the hot tiles
     and amidst the gilded shop signs till they were as pale and thin as their own starved balsams;
     and who, when they saw the green woods, laughed and cried a little, and thought of the broad
     sun-swept fields, and wished that they were back again behind their drove of cows, or weeding
     among the green grapes.
But those little work-girls had been mere homely daisies, and daisies already with the dust
     of the pavement and of the dancing-gardens upon them.
Bébée was as pure and fresh as these dew-wet dog-roses that she found in the thickets of
     thorn.
He had meant to treat her as he had used to do those work-girls—a little wine, a little
     wooing, a little folly and passion, idle as a butterfly and brief as a rainbow—one midsummer
     day and night—then a handful of gold, a caress, a good-morrow, and forgetfulness ever
     afterwards—that was what he had meant when he had brought her out to the forest of
     Soignies.
But—she was different, this child.
He made the great sketch of her for his Gretchen, sitting on a moss-grown trunk, with
     marguerites in her hand; he sent for their breakfast far into the woods, and saw her set her
     pearly teeth into early peaches and costly sweetmeats; he wandered with her hither and thither,
     and told her tales out of the poets and talked to her in the dreamy, cynical, poetical manner
     that was characteristic of him, being half artificial and half sorrowful, as his temper
     was.
But Bébée, all unconscious, intoxicated with happiness, and yet touched by it into that vague
     sadness which the summer sun brings with it even to young things, if they have soul in
     them,—Bébée said to him what the work-girls of Paris never had done.
Beautiful things: things fantastic, ignorant, absurd, very simple, very unreasonable
     oftentimes, but things beautiful always, and sometimes even very wise by a wisdom not of the
     world; by a certain light divine that does shine now and then as through an alabaster lamp,
     through minds that have no grossness to obscure them.
Her words were not equal to the burden of her thoughts at times, but he knew how to take the
     pearl of the thought from the broken shell and tangled sea-weed of her simple, untutored
     speech.
"If there be a God anywhere," he thought to himself, "this little Fleming is very near
     him."
She was so near that, although he had no belief in any God, he could not deal with her as he
     had used to do with the work-girls in the primrose paths of old Vincennes.
