<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER XLI.
THE rain ceases, and St. John endeavours to work off his disappointment and rage in a very
     long walk. When he at length re-enters the house, the two old people are hobbling into
     luncheon, and Miss Blessington sweeping, slowly and alone, after them. Her face is serene, and,
     to his surprise, wears no bellicose expression towards himself. To tell the truth, during three
     hours of point-lace work, the Gerard diamonds have kept flashing and gleaming, restless-bright,
     before her mind's eye. She has been telling herself that she was over-hasty in the
     relinquishment of them—has been resolving to make one effort, if consistent with dignity, for
     their recapture.
"Does Miss Craven know that luncheon is ready ?" asks St. John of the butler, when they have
     all been seated for some minutes.
"If you please, sir, I don't think that Miss Craven is coming to lunch."
"Why not?—is she ill?" he inquires, anxiously, perfectly indifferent as to whether his
     anxiety is remarked or no.
"I believe she is rather poorly, sir."
Luncheon over, the old people are convoyed back to their arm-chairs. Gerard stands with his
     back to the hall-fire, with the Times in his hand. Constance, under some pretext of
     looking over the day's papers, lingers near him.
"I have been telling my aunt about our alarm last night, St. John," she says, as sweetly as
     usual.
"Indeed!"
"And its tame prosaic dénouement."
"Indeed!"
"I am afraid I was unreasonably angry with you for what was evidently a mere accident; but
     when one is nervous
      and frightened, one really does not know what one says. I'm
     sure I have the vaguest recollection of what I said."
"I remember distinctly what you said, Constance."
"Indeed!" (with a smooth low laugh). "You don't bear malice, I hope? Things are much as they
     were before, I suppose?"
He lays down his paper, and looks at her steadily with his clear grey eyes. "Things are
     between us as they have been all our lives up to last October; as they have been since then,
     they will never be again."
She turns away quickly, to hide the mortification which even the cold pure mask of her face
     cannot wholly conceal.
"That is what I meant," she answers, quietly—with great presence of mind endeavouring to
     prevent her defeat from being converted into a rout; and though she deceives neither herself
     nor him, the effort to do both is at least laudable.
And Esther, interrupted midway in the packing of her few and paltry goods by the sharper
     recurrence of that pain in her side, lies on her bed, shut out by the strength of that bodily
     agony from all power of mental suffering. The excitement of the night—the exposure to the chill
     morning air—the thorough wetting undergone in her wild run through the park, amid the driving
     rain, have hastened the coming of that great sickness with which for weeks past she has been
     threatened.
Darkness falls: dinner-time comes. Presently the housemaid, who had formerly given her the
     laudanum, knocks at her door.
"Dinner, please, miss."
"I cannot go down," answers the poor child, rather piteously, sitting up, and pushing away
     the tumbled hair
      from her flushed cheeks, while her eyes blink in the candle.
     light. " I don't want any dinner; I'm ill!" 
"Dear me, 'm! you do look bad!" exclaims the woman, drawing nearer to the bed, and
     speaking with an accent half-shocked, half-pleased; for, in a servant's eyes, the next best
     thing to a death in the house is a serious illness. "Would not you like to have Mr. Brand sent
     for?"
"Oh, no—thanks!" replies the girl, sinking wearily back on her pillow. "I daresay it will go
     of itself."—"If I did send for him, I have no money to pay for him," is her mental
     reflection.
The evening drags away about as heavily as usual in the saloon. Gerard, having ascertained
     that Miss Craven is still in the house, and has consequently broken her resolution of not
     sleeping another night under the same roof with him, tries to content himself with the idea
     that to-morrow to-morrow—her temporary indisposition probably past—he will have another
     opportunity of reasoning and pleading with her. About nine o'clock Miss Blessington's maid
     appears at the door.
"Please 'm, might I speak to you for a moment?"
"Certainly," answers Constance, graciously, rising and walking off to the demanded
     conference.
Constance is always polite to her servants; it is a bad style, middle-class to be rude to
     one's inferiors.
"If you please, 'm, I really think as something oughter to be done for Miss Craven; she is
     uncommon bad, poor young lady!"
"What is the matter with her?" inquires the other, placidly; "nothing but influenza, I
     daresay; it always goes through a house."
"Indeed, 'm, I don't know ; but she has a hawful pain in her, side, and she can scarce draw
     her breath, and she is hot—as hot as fire."

"Good heavens!" cries Constance, thoroughly roused by this gay picture; "I hope it is not
     anything catching! "
Reassured on this point, and having ordered the attendance of Mr. Brand, she returns
     unruffled to the fireside.
"What was that mysterious communication, Constance?" asks St. John, lazily, quite willing to
     be amicable now that their relative positions are made clearly evident.
"She only came to tell me that Miss Craven was very unwell," she answers, carelessly.
     "Servants exaggerate so; I daresay it is nothing!" 
"What is the matter with her?" he asks, hurriedly.
"I really don't know," she replies, drily; "you had better wait till Mr. Brand comes, and ask
     him."
Ten o'clock! The old couple are trundled off to their separate apartments: and Miss
     Blessington, having bidden St. John a cold "good-night," sails, candle in hand, up the grand
     staircase, to that sleep that never fails to come at her calm bidding. Gerard foregoes his
     evening pipe, because the smoking-room does not look to the front. In painful unrest, he
     unfastens the shutters of one of the saloon-windows, and, raising the stiff and seldom-opened
     sash, leans out, looking and listening-looking at the maiden moon that rides, pale and proud,
     while black ruffian clouds chase each other to overtake her. Mr. Brand is out, apparently; for
     half-past ten has been struck, in different tones—bass and treble, deep and squeaky—by
     half-a-dozen different clocks, and still he has not arrived. At length, to the watcher's
     strained ear, comes the sound of wheels descending the steep pitch, from Blessington village;
     then a brougham's lamps gleam, issuing from between the rhododendron banks, and roll, like two
     angry eyes, to the door. In his feverish anxiety, and impatience at the long tarrying of the
     sleepy footman, St. John himself admits the doctor; and, following him at a little distance, as
     he is ushered
      upstairs, sits down in his own bedroom, with the door wide
     open, ready to pounce out upon the small Æsculapius, as he passes along the gallery at his
     departure, and learn his verdict.
The visit is rather a long one; to St. John, sitting still in his idle impatient misery, it
     seems as though the sound of Esther's opening door would never come; but never is a long day.
     At length the welcome sound is heard; and the young man, precipitating himself into the
     passage, comes face to face with a small elderly gentleman, shiveringly taking his way down the
     unwarmed ghostly old corridors.
"Is it a serious case?" he asks, abruptly, framing the simple words as they rise from his
     full heart.
Mr. Brand stares, surprised, at his questioner's blanched face. He had imagined that his
     patient was a little friendless orphan companion, whose life or death—save as a mere matter of
     compassion—were subjects of almost equal indifference to the people under whose roof she lies,
     panting out her young life.
"Serious? Well—oh! I assure you there is no cause for alarm, my dear sir," he says,
     imagining that he has got the key to the mystery; "it is nothing infectious, I assure
     you—nothing whatever!"
"That is not what I asked," rejoins Gerard, bluntly. "I don't care whether it is infectious
     or not; is it dangerous ?"
"Are you any relation of the young lady, may I ask?—brother, perhaps?" inquires the little
     doctor, peering inquisitively, though under difficulties—for the abundant wind is playing rude
     tricks with the flame of his candle—into St. John's sad brown face.
"No—none."
"Well, then, to be candid with you, it does look rather serious," he answers, with
     the careless deliberate calmnesa which those whose half-life is spelt in pronouncing death-
      warrants seem insensibly to acquire : "a sharp attack of
     inflammation of the lungs, brought on by neglect and exposure. By-the-by, can you inform me
     whether there is any predisposition to lung-disease in Miss—Miss Craven's family?"
"I know nothing about her family," replies the other, gloomily. He has no reason, beyond the
     probability of the thing, for supposing that she had ever had a father or mother, much less a
     grandfather or grandmother. Mr. Brand retires, completely mystified; and St. John, re-entering
     his room, throws himself into an arm-chair, and, covering his face with his hands, sends up
     violent voiceless prayers for the young life that is exchanging the first passes with that
     skilfulest of fencers, whom the nations have christened "Death!" In all his rough godless life
     he has had small faith in the efficacy of prayer; but, on the bare chance of there being some
     good in it, he prays wordlessly in his stricken heart for her.
Before they have done with him, the inmates of Blessington Hall have grown very familiar with
     Dr. Brand's face night and morning, night and morning, coming and going, coming and going,
     through many days; for the adversary with whom the child is wrestling has thrown many a better
     and stouter than she—and the battle is bitter. It is of little use now that she hate the
     shadowing ginger curtains of the vast old wooden four-poster; there must she lie, through all
     the weary twenty-four hours, in paroxysms of acutest pain, in fits of utter breathlessness, in
     agonies of thirst. Grief for Jack, love for St. John, shamed concern at Miss Blessington's
     damaging story and insulting words, are all swallowed up in the consuming craving for something
     to wet her parched lips, to cool her dry throat— something to drink! something to drink!
     By-and-by, with the pain, she becomes light-headed—wanders a little—
     
"babbles of green fields;" babbles to the uninterested ears of the sleepy tired
     nurse, of the twisted seat under the old cherry-tree, of the tea-roses up the kitchen-garden
     walk, of the yellow chickens in the rickyard. Then her delirium grows wilder: the green flabby
     Cupids on the walls come down out of the tapestry, and make at her. One, that is riding on a
     lion and blowing a horn, with fat cheeks puffed out, comes riding at her—riding up the
     bed-quilt, riding over her. Then the black and gold cocks on the old japan-chest, that, with
     neck-feathers ruffled, and heads lowered, stand ever, in act to fight, change their attitude:
     come pecking, pecking at her—pecking at her eyes; and she, with terrified hands stretched out,
     fights at them—thrusts them away.

"And thrice the double twilights rose and fell,
About a land where nothing seemed the same,
At morn or eve, as in the days gone by."
And it comes to pass, that there falls a day when these sick fancies pass—when the pain and
     breathlessness pass—and when Esther lies in utter exhaustion, weak as a day-old babe, whiter
     than any Annunciation lily, between her sheets. Eyes and ears and power of touch are still
     hers: but it seems as though all objects of sensation, of sight and sound and touch, reach her
     only through a thick blanket. She can see, as if at an immense distance off, shrouded in mist,
     the faces of doctor and nurse as they lean over her, and then, turning away, whisper together.
     She cannot hear what they say; she has no wish to hear—she has no wish for anything; only she
     lies, staring, with great eyes, straight before her at the bed-hangings, at the ceiling, at the
     little countless pigeon-holes in her toilet-table. One of the windows is open; and heaven's
     sweet breath circulates fresh and slow through the quiet room.
It is Sunday; the village people are clustering about the
      church-door; the violets, like blue eyes that have slept
     through winter's night, are opening under the churchyard wall. The bells are ringing; now, loud
     and clear—" ding-dong bell! ding-dong bell!" almost as if they were being rung in the still
     chamber itself—they come; now, faint and far; the wind has caught the sound in his rough hand,
     and carried it otherwhither. Whether they ring loud or faint, whether they ring or ring not at
     all, she has no care; she has no care for anything. She is very weary: it seems as if there
     were but a faint life-spark left in her; she can scarce lift her hand to her head. Now and then
     they raise her up, and, without asking her consent, pour brandy and beef-tea down her reluctant
     throat. She is so tired! Oh! why cannot they leave her alone! The slow hours roll themselves
     round; the people have gone into church, and have come out again.
Mr. Brand is here still; he is entering at the door; he is leaning over her. What can he have
     to say that he must needs look so solemn over "My dear Miss Craven," he begins, with slow
     distinctness, as if he imagined that her illness had carried away her powers of hearing, "Mr.
     Winter is here; would not you like to see him?"
Mr. Winter is the meek M.A., whose voice the old squire drowns.
She fixes her great eyes, 
"Yet larger through her leanness," upon his face—wondering as a
     child's just opened upon this strange green world. "I—why should I?" she asks, in a faint
     astonished whisper. She cannot speak above a whisper.
The good man looks embarrassed. "You are very ill," he says, indirectly.
"Am I?"

"And people in your situation generally wish for the holy offices of a minister of the
     Church."
"Do they?" She is too feeble to join one link to another in the simplest chain of reasoning.
     She has failed to grasp his meaning. He looks baffled, uneasy.
"My dear young lady," he says, very gravely, "it is very painful for me to have such a sad
     task to perform; but I cannot reconcile it with my conscience not to tell you that, in all
     human probability, you have not many more days to live."
Through the thick veil of her weakness and its attendant apathy pierces the sting of that
     awful news : her eyes dilate in their horror and fear, and she falls to weeping, feebly and
     helplessly.
"Don't say that—it is not true. How unkind you are! I don't want to die; I'm so young; I have
     had so little pleasure!" 
"We must submit to God's will," says the doctor, a little tritely. It is so easy to submit to
     God's will towards one's friends and acquaintance.
She does not answer, but raises her hands with difficulty to her wasted face, while the tears
     trickle hot and frequent through that poor white shield.
"Have you any relations that you would like to have sent for?" inquires Mr. Brand, not
     unkindly; stooping over her, rather moved, but not very much so. Often before has it been his
     portion to say, to youth and maid and stalwart man, "Thou must die!"
"I have no relations," she answers, almost inaudibly.
"Any friends?"
"I have no friends."
"You have, then, no wish to see any one?"
"No. Stay," she says, as he turns to leave her, reaching out her hand to detain him; "are you
      quite sure that I shall
      die? " (Her lips quiver, and a slight shudder passes over
     her form, as she utters the words, "Is it quite certain?")
"It is impossible to be quite certain in any case," he answers, slowly; "while there
     is life, there is hope, you know; but—but—I cannot buoy you up with a false confidence."
She lies quiet a moment or two, regathering her spent strength. "How long do you think I
     shall live?"
"It is impossible to say exactly," he replies, gravely. "A few days—a few hours; one cannot
     be certain which."
Again she is silent, exhausted with the slight effort of framing a sentence. "Ask Mr. Gerard
     to come and see me—now—at once—before I die! "
He looks at her in astonishment, with a half-suspicion that she is light-headed; but her eyes
     look back at him with such perfect sanity in their clear depths, that he must needs abandon
     that idea. He cannot choose but undertake her commission at her bidding.
And St. John comes. They are singing the "Nunc Dimittis," which, saith Bacon,  "is
      ever the sweetest canticle" in the Church, as he crosses the threshold of that room,
     and draws near that bed on which, but a few short nights ago, he had seen her, with his
     covetous lover's eyes, lying in all her round dimpled beauty. There comes no greeting blush
      now into her cheeks—the cheeks, that the sound of his far-off footfall had been wont
     to redden. How can she, that is the affianced of great Death, blush for any mortal
     lover? Her eyes lift themselves languidly to his face; and, even in the "valley of the
      shadow," dwell there comfortably; though in that countenance—never beautiful, and now
     made haggard by watching, with reddened eyelids and quivering muscles—a stranger would have
     seen small comeliness.
"So I am going to die, they tell me!" she says, whisperingly—says it simply and
     mournfully.

Gerard cannot answer; only he flings himself forward upon the bed, and devours her thin hand
     with miserable kisses.
"Perhaps it is not true! Oh, I hope it is not, St. John!" she says, falling to weeping; in
     her feebleness and great dread of that goal to which all our highways and byways and
     field-paths lead:

"Death, and great darkness after death!"
Still no answer.
"Cannot they do anything for me?" she asks piteously.
He lifts his head; and in his eyes—the eyes that have not wept more than twice since he was a
     little white-frocked child—stand heavy burning tears.
"Nothing, darling, I'm afraid," he answers, in a rough choked voice.
"There is no hope, then?"
"Oh, poor little one! why do you torture me with such questions? I dare not tell you
     a lie!"
"You mean that I am sure to die !" she says, faintly, with a slight shudder, while a
     look of utter hopeless fear comes into her wan face.
He throws his arms about her in his great despair. "Why do you make me tell you such news
      twice? Is not once enough?"
"It is quite sure! Oh, I wish I was not so frightened!"
His features contract in the agony of that moment; an overpowering temptation assails him, to
     tell her some pleasant falsehood about her state; but he resists it.
"As far as anything human can be sure, it is so," he says, turning away his
     head.
"Are you sure there is no mistake?—is it quite certain?" 
"Quite."
"Then"—essaying to raise herself in the bed, and reaching
      out her slight, weary arms to him—"then kiss me, St. John!" 
Without a word he gathers her to his breast; fully understanding, in his riven heart, that
     this embrace, which she herself can ask for, must indeed be a final one; his lips cling to hers
     in the wild silence of a solemn last farewell.
"I'm glad you are not angry with me now," she whispers, almost inaudibly; and then her arms
     slacken their clasp about his bronzed neck, and her head droops heavy and inert on his
     shoulder.
And so they find them half an hour later : he, like one crazed, with a face as ashen-white as
     her own, clasping a lifeless woman to his breast.
</div></body></text></TEI>