<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="27">
CHAPTER XXVII.
IN another week letters have passed, references been asked and given; Esther proved
     unimpeachably respectable; the amount of her salary agreed upon; the day of her journey into
     —shire fixed, and all preliminaries settled previous to her undertaking the agreeable, free,
     and independent office of companion to John Blessington, Esq., of Blessington Court, in the
     county of — , aged eighty-nine, and to Harriet Blessington his wife, aged eighty.
Miss Craven has but one good-bye to say, and on the afternoon of the day before her departure
     she stands in the churchyard ready to say it. It is only to a grave. Huge cloud headlands,
     great leaden capes and promontories, mournful and heavy with unwept snow-tears, heap and pile
     themselves up behind the dim mirk hills; it snowed last night, but the snow has nearly all
     melted; only enough remains to make the old dirty church-tower, from which great patches of
     whitewash have fallen, look dirtier than ever. Upon the broken headstones, all awry and askew
     with age and negligence, the lichens flourish dankly. Wet nettles and faded bents overlie,
     overcross each cold hillock. No one cares to weed in the garden of the dead. Each hillock is
     the last chapter in some forgotten history.
Oh! why must all stories that are told truly end amongst the worms? Why must death be always
     at the end of life? Oh! if we could but get it over, like some cruelest operation, in
     the middle or early part of our little day; so that we might have some half a life, some
     quarter or twentieth part even of one, to live merrily in, to breathe and laugh and be gay in,
     without, in our cheerfullest moments, experiencing the chilly fear of feeling the black-cloaked
     skeleton-headed phantom lay his bony finger on us, saying, "Thou art mine!"

Upon the grey flat tombstone near the church-gate the great grave yew has been dropping her
     scarlet berries, one by one—berries that shine, like little lights, amid the night of her
     changeless foliage: there they lie like a forgotten rosary, that some holy man, having prayed
     amongst the unpraying dead, going, has left behind him. Evening is closing in fast; the air is
     raw and chill; no one that can avoid it is outside a house's sheltering walls : there is no one
     to disturb Esther's meeting with her brother. What cares she for the cold, or for the six feet
     of miry earth that part them. She flings herself upon the sodden mound; stretching herself all
     along upon it, as the prophet stretched himself on the young dead child—hand to hand, heart to
     heart, mouth to mouth. She lays her lips upon the soaked soil, and whispers moaningly,
     "Good-bye, Jack—good-bye! Oh! why won't they let you answer me? Why have they buried you so
     deep that you cannot hear me?" 
Lord God! of what stuff can Mary and Martha have been made, to have overlived the awful
     ecstasy of seeing their dead come forth in warm supple life out of the four-days-holding grave!
     Their hearts must have been made of tougher fibre than ours, or, in the agony of that terrible
     rapture, soul and body must have sundered suddenly, and they fallen down into the arms of that
     tomb whence their brother had just issued in his ghastly cerements, in dazed, astonished
     gladness!
As Esther lifts her streaming eyes, they fall upon the inscription on the cross at the
     grave-head:

"HERE LIETH THE BODY
OF
JOHN CRAVEN,
WHO DEPARTED THIS LIFE
SEPT. 24TH, 186—. AGED 21 YEARS."
"Lord, have mercy upon me. a sinner!"


She casts her arms about the base of the holy symbol; she presses her panting breast against
     the stone. " Lord, have mercy upon me, a sinner!" she cries too; and surely the live sinner
     needs mercy as much as the dead one? And as she so lies prostrate, with her forehead leant
     against the white damp marble, a hideous doubt flashes into her heart—sits there, like a little
     bitter serpent, gnawing it : "What if there be no Lord ! What if I am praying and
     weeping to and calling upon nothing! 
". . . . . . . Let me not go mad!
Sweet Heaven, forgive weak thoughts! If there should be
No God, no heaven, no earth in the void world—
The wide, grave, lampless, deep, unpeopled world."
They tell us—don't they?—in our childhood, that wickedness makes people unhappy: I think the
     converse is full as often true—that unhappiness makes people wicked.
A little icy wind creeps coldly amongst the strong nettles and weak sapless bents, blowing
     them all one way—creeps, too, through Esther's mourning weeds, and makes a numbness about her
     shivering breast. For a moment an angry defiant despair masters her.
"What if this great distant being, who, without any foregone sin of ours, has laid upon us
     the punishment of life—in the hollow of whose hand we lie!—what if He be laughing at
     us all this while! What if the sight of our writhings, of our unlovely tears and grotesque
     agonies, be to Him, in His high prosperity, a pleasant diversion!" 
So thinking, against her will she involuntarily clasps closer the cross in her straining
     arms—involuntarily moans a second time, "Lord, have mercy upon me, a sinner!" No —no! it cannot
     be so! it is one of those things that are too horrible to be believed! There is no justice
      here! none! but it exists somewhere ! How else could we ever have conceived
     the idea of it? It is, then, in some other world: we
      shall find it on the other side of these drenched, nettly
     charnels—on the other side of corruption's disgrace and abasement: 
". . . . . . . . If this be all,
And other life await us not, for one
I say, 'tis a poor cheat, a stupid bungle,
A wretched failure 1 I, for one, protest
Against it—and I hurl it back with scorn!"
Despair never stays long with any one, unless it is specially invited. Struck with sudden
     horror at the daring blasphemy of her thoughts, wretched Esther, with clasped hands and a flood
     of penitential tears, sinks upon her trembling knees. God grant that the thoughts that come to
     us, we know not whence, that stab us in the dark, that we welcome not, neither cherish at
     all—yea, rather, drive them away rudely, hatingly—may not be counted to us for crimes in His
     great Day of Reckoning, any more than the sudden-smiting disease that makes the strong man flag
     in his noonday is counted to him! With a sudden revulsion of feeling, with a paroxysm of
     devotion, powerfuller than the former one of doubt had been, the desolate child,' prone on the
     grave of her one treasure, lifts quivering lips and emptied arms to Him who 
". . . . . For mankynde's sake
Justed in Jerusalem, a joye to us all!"— to Him of whom 
". . . . . They who loved Him said 'He wept,'
None ever said 'He smiled!'"
Perhaps the good Lord, who was sorry for Mary and Martha, may be sorry for her too. Perhaps,
     after all, her boy is well rid of troublesome breath—well rid of his cares, and his farm, and
     his useless loving sister! Perhaps she is falsely fond to desire him again—to be so famished
     for one
      sight more of his grey laughing eyes, of his smooth
     stripling face! Beyond her sight, he may be in the fruition of extremest good—in the sweet
     shade, beneath pleasant-fruited trees, beside great cool rivers. Would she tear him back again
     thence to toil in the broiling sun, because, so toiling, he would be in her sight? 
"If love were kind, why should we doubt
That holy death were kinder?" 
The night falls fast; she can scarcely any longer distinguish the clear, new black letters on
     the cross. Lights are twinkling from the village alehouse; the forge shines like a great
     dull-red jewel in the surrounding grey; laughing voices of boisterous men are wafted unseemly
     amongst the graves. Shuddering at the sound, she raises herself up quickly; then, stooping
     again, kisses yet once more the wet red earth that is now closest neighbour to her brother, and
     sobbing " Good-bye, my boy, good-bye!—God bless you, Jack!" gathers her dusky cloak about her
     slight shivering figure, and passes away through the darkness.
</div></body></text></TEI>