<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER VI.
"SOMETHING new! something new!" cried the Athenians; and across two thousand years we catch
     up and echo their greedy cry. But why do we? We all know well enough that there is nothing new;
     there was not even in King Solomon's time—not even in all his treasure-house, nor among his
     seven hundred wives. What an advantage those ancients who saw the world's infancy had over
     us—over us, who have to content ourselves with the lees of the wine, which the few dropped ears
     scattered about the great reaped
      harvest field! Who would not fain have lived in the days when
     nothing had yet been said—when everything, consequently, remained to be said? Who could be
     trite then, in that blest epoch when platitudes were unborn, when Tupper was an
     impossibility, and even the statement that two and two make four had something startlingly
     novel about it? Then a man's thoughts were his own, his very own, his own by
     the best of all rights—creation; now they are the bastard product of ten thousand
     buried men's dead ideas.
Original is a pleasant word, is it not?—fair and well-sounding; but it is like the sample
     figs at the top of the box: it represents nothing, or something infinitely smaller than itself
     behind and underneath it. Is it too much to say that it is impossible to find an original idea
     in any writer we wot of? You meet, perhaps, some day in a book a thought, an image that strikes
     you. You say, "This is this thinker's own; there is the stamp of this one individual mind upon
     it;" when lo! mayhap but a few hours later you are reading the thoughts of some elder scribe,
     one that has been dust nigh ten or twenty centuries back, and you find the same thought, half
     fledged or quarter fledged, only in the egg, perhaps—but still it is there. There is nothing
     new under the sun.
And if this is true of other subjects, how much truer of that most outworn, threadbare old
     theme, Love! The world has been spinning round six thousand years at the lowest, most exploded
     computation; in any thousand years there have been thirty or forty generations, and each unit
     in every one of those generations, if he has lived to man's estate, has surely loved after one
     fashion or another. Whosoever has done any worthy thing, whosoever has sent out his thoughts in
     writing or speech or action to the world, has felt the stirrings of this strange instinct;
     unconsciously
      it has moulded and permeated his deeds and his words: and
     yet, old as it is, we are not tired of it, any more than we are of the back-coming green of the
     spring, or the never-extinguished lamps of the stars.
"The harvest is past, the summer is ended;" at least well nigh ended. Jack and
     Esther are at breakfast: outside the scarlet geraniums are blazing away in the morning sun,
     trying their best to shine as brightly as he is doing, and the gnats are dancing round and
     round on the buoyant floor of their ball-room—the air. I wonder that that incessant valsing
     does not make them giddy. I am not sure that human beings, like the lions and tigers and uneasy
     black bears in the Zoological, look their best at feeding-time; but such as they are, here they
     are.
Esther in a chintz gown, sown all over with little red carnations as thickly as the firmament
     with heavenly bodies. She looks as fresh as a daisy—as an Englishwoman, to whom morning
      déshabille, wrapper, slippers, undressed hair, are unknown
     Gallic abominations—and is eating porridge with a spoon. Jack reading his letters, which look
     all bills and circulars, after the fashion of men's correspondence; for what man made after the
     fashion of a man, would sit down to indite an epistle to another man, were it his alter ego unless he had something to say about a horse or a dog or a
     gun? Presently he finishes this cursory survey, crumples up the last blue envelope in his hand,
     flings it with manly untidiness into the summer-dressed grate, and says, resuming a
     conversation which had been interrupted a quarter of an hour ago by the entrance of prayers and
     the urn, "I cannot imagine what you have done to the fellow! he used not to be half a bad
     fellow to talk to. Never a genius, you know, but still I used to like to have him to walk over
     the farm with me—not that he knows a swede from a mangold: don't see much sign of his old
     mother's
      farming mantle falling upon him. But now he has not a word to
     throw to a dog; he is as stupid as a stuck pig."
"I have not cut out his tongue or tied it up in a bag, if that is what you are hinting at,"
     says Esther, with a smile as confused as a dog's, when, not quite sure of his reception, he
     sneaks up to you sideways, lifting his upper lip, and from tail to muzzle one nervous wriggle.
     "Perhaps he is like the birds, and gets silent towards the end of the summer."
"Why you keep him dangling after you, like the tail of a kite, I cannot conceive," Mr. Craven
     cries, crumbling his bread with a little irritation. "It must be such a nuisance having a great
     long thing like him knocking about under your feet morning, noon, and night."
Esther is silent; only her head droops lower, lower, till her little nose almost immerses
     itself in her stirabout.
"Whereas," pursues Jack, helping himself to a great deal of cold beef, "if you were to give
     him his congé now (Jack is by no means neglectful of the
      g in the French word), he would be all right again in a fortnight, ready for the
     shooting."
"He would, would he?" says Esther, lifting up her nose and reddening with vexation.
No woman likes to think of her empire as anything short of eternal.
"If you don't like to do it yourself, I'll do it for you," pursues her brother, making a
     magnanimously handsome offer. "I would say to him, 'My dear fellow, it is no good, she does not
     seem to care about you,' as soon as look at him."
"What a delicate way of breaking the news!" cries Esther, ironically. "Commend me to a man
     for gentle finesse."
"I don't believe in breaking news," replies Jack, sturdily.
      "If you were to go off in a fit, or the bay colt was to break
     his leg, or anything to go wrong, I'd far sooner people would tell me so without any humming
     and hawing and keeping me on the tenter hooks. Breaking news is like half cutting your throat
     before you are hanged, making you die two deaths instead of one."
"But suppose I do seem to care a little about him?" suggests Esther, blushing furiously, but
     holding up her head bravely, and looking straight at her brother.
"Suppose the cow jumped over the moon," replies Jack with incredulity.
"I don't know whether the cow has accomplished her feat, but I have accomplished mine," says
     Esther, trying to make her face as brass, and failing signally.
Jack puts up his hand, and strokes the future birthplace of his moustache, to hide an
     unavoidable smile.
"I don't wish to be rude," he says; "but may I ask, since when? Was it a week ago, or less,
     that you requested me to accompany you on one of your joint excursions to that everlasting
     wood, and told me you thought your watch wanted cleaning, the time seemed to go so slow?"
"A week!" cries his sister, indignantly. "Three weeks, or a month, at least."
"Wrong, Essie, wrong; it was this day fortnight, Ryvel Horse Fair, which was the reason why I
     had to decline your invitation."
"What does a week one way or another signify" she cries, becoming irrational, as a worsted
     woman mostly does.
"Nothing to a woman or a—weathercock."
This last insult is too much for Miss Craven.
"I see you are determined to turn me into ridicule; I see you don't believe me!" she cries,
     preparing to rush from the room like a tornado.
"My good Essie," says Jack, jumping up, taking her two
      hands, and manfully repressing his inclination to laugh—"here
     I am; tell me anything, and I'll swear by the tomb of my grandmother to believe
     it."
"Why should not I like him? What is there in him so hateful as to make my being fond of him
     incredible?" asks Essie, unreasonable and sobbing.
"Nothing that I know of—except his boots, and you told me they were—"
"So they are," she says, smiling through her tears—"more than hateful; they haunt one like a
     bad dream."
"He is not the least penitent about them, I can tell you: only yesterday he showed them me
     with ungodly glee, told me he had got them at Hugh Hughes's, at Naullan, and advised me to go
     and do likewise."
"But—but—his boots are not he; he is not his boots, I mean," remarks Miss Craven, with meek
     suggestion; "mercifully, they are separable."
"He was not born in them, you mean? I did not suppose he was; he would have been worse than
     Richard the Third, who made his appearance with all his teeth in his head— didn't he?—if he
     had."
"It is quite true—perfectly true," continues Esther, leaning her two hands on the back of a
     chair, and tilting it up and down, "what you say about his being so stupid; he is extremely
     stupid: often I feel inclined to box his ears, for the thing he says, and for not understanding
     things, and having to have them explained to him; but after all, do you know, I am not sure
     that it is the people who say clever things, and snap one up all in a minute, that are the best
     to live with."
"You contemplate living with him then, eh? Last time I was favoured with your plans, you were
     to be a vestal to the end of the chapter."
"A provision for old age: I cannot expect you to be satisfied
      with me always," she answers, with rather a sad smile. "And
     when I am superseded, a good worthy simpleton, with obsolete chivalrous ideas of Woman
     in the abstract—Woman with a big W—who will laugh at my worst jokes whether
     he sees them or not, and make none himself, is better than nothing."
"All right," says Jack, calmly, walking towards the door, and unfolding the Times
     with a crackling that nearly drowns his voice: "please yourself and you'll please me: only be
     so good as to tell me when the wedding day is fixed, as I must get a new coat. I suppose that
     the one I had for Uncle John's funeral will not do, will it?"
Who is it says in the "Tempest," if neither Ferdinand nor any other beautiful young Prince
     had come on the scene, yet if Miranda had remained alone with her father, and the storms and
     winds and water-spirits, she would have ended by loving Caliban? I do not know about Miranda,
     but I am sure that if Esther had been in Miranda's place she would have so ended; would have
     carried faggots in her slender arms for the shaggy monster—have called him caressing
     diminutives, and asked him little interested questions about his dam Sycorax.
The desire to be loved is strong enough in us all; in this girl it amounted to madness: it is
     the key to all the foolish, wicked, senseless things you will find her doing through this
     history's short course. If she could have had her will, every man, Woman, and child, every cow
     and calf and dog and cat that met her, would have watched her coming with joy and her going
     with grief. Add to which, in the summer time most women like to have a lover; it is almost as
     necessary to them as warm clothes at Christmas. In winter the fire is lover enough for any one.
     The frosty splendour of the stars and the chill flashing of the northern lights provoke no
     yearning in any one human soul towards any
      other; we peep at them through our icy casements, then drop
     the curtain shivering, and leave them alone to their high cold play in the sky. But who can
     look at a July moon alone?
You will say that Esther was not alone, that she had her brother to look at it with her; but
     who will deny that a brother who makes agricultural remarks about the Queen of Night, and
     observes that the haze round her royal head looks well for the turnips, is worse, immeasurably
     worse than nobody? To me it seems that there is nothing absolute, positive in all this
     shifting, kaleidoscope world; everything is comparative. There is nothing either good, bad,
     pretty, ugly, large, small, except as compared with something better, worse, prettier, uglier,
     larger, smaller. Measure two men together, and you find one tall and the other short; put the
     short one by himself or among a world of pigmies, and straightway he grows tall. Lacking a
     standard to go by, we make egregious errors. I have known many a woman to pass through life
     with a pigmy beside her, taking him for a giant all the while, nor undeceived to the end.
     Esther has no man to measure her Robert by; none at all, save the cowman, the carter, and the
     groom. Intellectually, morally, physically, he outtops them in stature, and that is all she can
     as yet know about him. Moonlight, propinquity, total absence of objects of comparison—these
     three must be Esther's excuses.
Robert is not much like her ideal, certainly—the ideal whose picture she has been painting
     life-size on the canvas of her mind during the vacant moments of the last two transitional
     years; but if we all waited to be wed till our ideal came knocking at our doors, the world
     would be shortly dispeopled of legitimate inhabitants. Miss Craven's ideal is dark; at
     seventeen, most ideals are dark: he has long, fierce, sleepy, unfathomable eyes. Robert is
     straw-
      coloured: his eyes are blue; very wide awake: they say
     exactly what his tongue does, neither more nor less, and there is absolutely no harm in them—a
     doubtful recommendation to a woman. The ideal's nose is fine cut, delicately chiselled; his
     cheeks are a little haggard, slightly hollowed and paled by five and thirty years or so of the
     reckless life of one that has lived, not existed. Robert's nose is broad and blunt; his cheeks
     have the roundness and bloom of a countryman's five and twenty. The ideal breaks most of the
     commandments with easy grace; is inclined to be sceptical and a little sarcastic over the old
     world beliefs, and facts hoary with time and reverence. Robert nightly prays on bent knees to
     be "not led into temptation but delivered from evil;" he believes firmly every
     thing that he ever was taught, from the Peep of Day upwards, and he could no more shape his
     honest lips into a sneer than he could square the circle. Before the fell shafts of the ideal's
     eyes women lie slain as thick as Greeks lay beneath the arrows of Apollo in the Iliad's opening
     clash; the number of Robert's female victims is represented by a duck's egg.
"Je ne comprends pas l'amour sans effroi,"
     says one of the characters in the best French novel I have read this many a day. The ideal
     inspires fear equally with love; you can imagine his being harsh, fierce, cruel, to the woman
     he loves. In none of the most hard-hearted of created beings could Robert provoke alarm.
     Children who see him for the first time come and thrust their little dimpled hands into his,
     and laugh up with confident impudence in his face. Dogs to whom he has never been introduced
     come and rub their shaggy heads against his knees, and curl and wriggle about his friendly
     feet.
Esther can indulge no faintest hope that he will bully her. The ideal rides straight as a
     die, and is as much a part of his horse as a centaur. Robert is very fond of getting a
      day's hunting when he can afford the two guineas requisite
     for the hiring of a horse, which is not very often; and he likes to get his money's worth by
     blundering blindly over everything that comes in his way, but he has about as much idea of
      riding as a tailor or a cow. The ideal is an idol to be set up and worshipped—a Baal
     to be adored with tears and blood and knife-gashings. Robert is a worshipper to be encouraged
     by a cold look and smile flung to him every now and then, like a bone to a dog, or spurned away
     with disapproving foot, as Cain was from his unaccepted altar. To worship is to a woman always
     sweeter than to be worshipped. To worship one must look up; to be worshipped one must look
     down. . . .
Come with me this August Sunday through the wood from Glan-yr-Afon to Plas Berwyn—from
     Esther's home to Robert's. It is but a few hundred yards of shade and shine, a small, scarce
     trodden wood-path whose narrow, faint track the ripe grasses and the seeded ferns have
     well-nigh obliterated, flinging themselves across it in all the abandon of their
     unspeakable grace. The apples' round faces are reddening in the little Plas Berwyn orchard; the
     shorn fields slope barely, slantwise along the hill-side in their yellow stubble. For weeks and
     weeks the corn has been whitening under the sun's hard, veilless stare, and now at last it has
     fallen; the barley has bowed its bearded head beneath the sickle's stroke, and the oats their
     tremulous ringlets. They are all gathered in, and garnered in Mrs. Brandon's stout,
     well-thatched stacks; to thatch a stack is the one thing a Welshman can do.
It is an hour past noon, and the Reverend Evan Evans has released the bodies of his
     congregation from that white-washed, tumble-down old barn that he is pleased to call his
     church, and their minds from the tension necessary to take
      in the ill-strung-together, misapplied texts that he is
     pleased to call his sermon.
Plas Berwyn is a house of about the same size as Glan-yr-Afon, but the rooms do not look so
     large, they are so full of large things and large people. The dining-toom is crowded up with a
     great mahogany table, a great mahogany sideboard, great mahogany chairs—inconvenient relics,
     fondly clung to by people who from a larger house have subsided into a smaller one—a sort of
     warranty of past respectability like the cottager's japanned tea-tray and brass candlesticks.
     There is an atmosphere of lumbersome age and gravity about the whole place; none of the
     fragrance and light and melody that youth, sheer youth, even divorced from any other attractive
     qualities, brings with it.
Of all the gods of the Greek mythology I will bring my votive crowns and my salt cakes to
     Bacchus. Not the bloated old gentleman striding drunk over a barrel, as we figure him, but
     Bacchus eternally young. What is there so worthy of adoration in this aging, wrinkling world as
     never ending youth?
Most people are cross and most people are unusually hungry on Sunday. I do not know why it
     is, but if you observe your acquaintance you will find it to be true. Hungry or not, the
     Brandons are at dinner, dining frugally and sparely on cold roast beef and cold apple tart.
     Nothing hot ever figures on the Brandons' Sabbath table, not even potatoes; indeed, unless they
     boiled themselves, and hopped out of the pot judiciously when they found themselves done, I do
     not see how they could, as on the Sabbath morn every living soul at Plas Berwyn, every
     reluctant scullion and recalcitrant housemaid, is trundled off to church, the house-door
     locked, and the key deposited in Mrs. Brandon's pocket.
All the Brandons hate dining in the middle of the day,
      consequently they always dine in the middle of the day on
     Sunday. Everybody knows that there are few things more distinctly unpleasant than to sit in the
     same room in which you have your meals; to live with the unending smell and steam of departed
     viands up your nose and eyes and ears: consequently the Brandons always sit in the dining-room
     on Sunday. Sunday is to them a sort of aggravated Ash Wednesday and Good Friday rolled into
     one. On Saturday night Miss Bessy Brandon swoops down upon all novels, travels, biographies,
     magazines, poetry books, that may be lying about, makes a clean sweep of them and consigns them
     to disgrace and a cupboard till the return of Monday releases them.
The Brandon family at the present moment have got their Sunday faces and their Sunday clothes
     on, and they misbecome most of them very sorely. Very few men look their best in their
     Go-to-Meeting clothes. For some unexplained reason, a black coat made by a country tailor shows
     its shortcomings more plainly than a coloured one. The garment that cases Bob's broad shoulders
     would draw tears from Mr. Poole's eyes, could he see it. As for Mrs. Brandon, she always has
     more or less of a Sunday face on— which I do not say in any dispraise, but merely to express a
     sober, steadfast face, unfurrowed by any violent gust of mirth or blast of anger. She is like
     Enid and her mother, 
"clad all in faded silk," and on her breast she has a miniature
     of the departed Brandon, in Geneva gown and bands, about as big as a teacup, and with two small
     glutinous curls of the departed's hair at the back. It is so long ago since he died, that she
     must have forgotten all about him—what he was like, even; but site still wears his effigy, as
     an old inn continues to hang
      out the sign of the Saracen's Head, though it is centuries
     since ever a Saracen has been seen on the earth's face.
Opposite each other, like little bad mirrors of one another, sit the Misses Brandon, in
     melancholy little gowns of no particular stuff and no particular colour, and little wisps of
     thin, fine hair well down over their ears, and minute chig. nons on the napes of their
     necks—their little, bustless, waistless, hipless figures, long plaintive noses, and meek, dull
     eyes proclaiming them of that virgin band to whom St. Paul has awarded the palm of excellence.
     The Sunday literature is scattered about on the hard-bottomed chairs. "Stop the Leak" lies on
     the pit of its stomach, open at the spot where Miss Bessy abandoned it in favour of the cold
     beef; the "Saturday Night of the World," with its mouth open, and a paper-knife in it.
"Cut two or three good large slices, Bob, dear; they will be so nice for old John Owen," Mrs.
     Brandon is saying, in her benignant, cracked, old voice.
"We can leave them as we go by to church; Bob can carry them," says Miss Brandon, with
     authority.
Robert is silent.
"Bob does not like the idea of being seen carrying a basket; he thinks it would spoil his
     appearance."
"Hang the appearance!" says Bob, with an easy laugh. "If a man is a gentleman, it does not
     make him any the less a gentleman even if he were seen wheeling a perambulator down Regent
     Street; but, to tell the truth, I don't think I shall go to church this afternoon."
"Not go to church! Not go to church!! Not go to church!!!" in three different keys, rising
     from astonishment to horrified incredulity.
But seldom has Mr. Brandon missed attending divine service from the auspicious day, two and
     twenty years ago, when, at the tender age of three years, being, Eutychus-
      like, overcome with sleep, he fell down with much clamour
     from a high bench, and raised a mountainous red lump on his baby forehead, coming into contact
     with the hard pew floor: 
"And his head, as he tumbled, went knicketty-knock,
Like a pebble in Carisbrook well."
Robert feels the weight of public opinion to be heavy, but he sticks like a man to what he
     said.
"Not to-day, mother, I think. Esther said she would be coming in by-and-by to say good-bye to
     you all, and, as it is her last day, I thought I might as well have as much as I could of
     her."
"What do you mean, Bob? Is the girl going to die to-night?" inquires Miss Brandon,
     perking up her little tow-coloured head sharply.
"God forbid!" he cries, with a hasty shudder; "don't suggest anything so frightful; but she
     is off to-morrow for a week or ten days on a visit to some friends."
"Going away without mentioning a word about it!"
"Going away now!"
These two sentences shoot out with simultaneous velocity from two mouths.
"Are you surprised at her not telling us where she is going? Does she ever tell
      us anything? Does she make us her confidants!" subjoins Miss Bessy, with
     mild spite.
Spite is permissible on the Sabbath, though hot potatoes and novels are not.
"She did not know herself till yesterday," says Bob, briefly, cutting away rather viciously
     at the beef.
"But who are these sudden friends that have sprung up all at once? What are their names?
     Where do they live? Tell us all about them, dear boy," says the old woman, gently, seeing that
     her son is chafed.
"Their names are Sir Thomas and Lady Gerard; they
      are old friends of the Cravens' father, and they live in
     —shire; that is all I know about them."
"A steady-going old couple, I suppose? Will not that be rather dull for a little gay thing
     like Esther?"
"There is a girl of about her own age, I believe, a ward of Sir Thomas's."
"A ward!—oh!"
"And also a son."
"A son! o—h!"
"Well, why should not there be a son? What harm is there in that?" asks Robert, raising his
     voice a little in irritation.
"No harm whatever! Much better thing than a daughter! Can push his own way in the world. Not
     that I know in the least what you are talking about," cries a young, saucy voice, which, with
     the little sleek, dark head it belongs to, appears uninvited at the door at this juncture. "Oh!
     I see you are all at dinner, so I'll stay outside till you have finished; it is so horrible to
     be watched when one is eating, isn't it? I hate it myself." And the head and the voice
     disappear again as quickly as they came.
A ruddier tinge rushes into Robert's already ruddy cheek—ruddy as King David's when he tended
     his few sheep in the Syrian pastures, before the weight of the heavy Israelitish crown, and of
     his own wars and murders had blanched it. Down go the carving knife and fork with a clatter,
     and, "like a doting mallard," he flies after the little vision, banging the door
     behind him with an impetus that makes his sisters bound up from their horsehair chairs like two
     small parched peas. Presently he brings her back in triumph.
"So you are going to run away from us, my love?" says Mrs. Brandon, holding Esther's young
     white hand in her old veiny one.
"Yes, I'm afraid so; it is a great bore, isn't it?" answers
      Esther, trying her best to lengthen her round face and look
     miserable.
"If it is a bore, why do you go?" inquires Miss Bessy, drily.
"Because I think I ought to make some friends for myself; I never met anybody before that had
     no friends, as Jack and I have not; we literally have not one—except all of you, of course,"
     she ends with a happy after-thought.
"When you come to my age, my dear," says Mrs. Brandon, shaking her head, and all the
     innumerous stiff frillings of her cap, and bringing to bear on Esther's sanguine youth the
     weight of her own gloomy experiences, in the infuriating way that old people do, "you will have
     found out that a few good friends are worth more than a great many indifferent ones."
"But why should not these people be good friends?" asks the girl, a little incredulously.
     "Who knows? Surely there must be more good people in the world than bad ones; so the chances
     are in favour of them."
"We are expressly forbidden to judge," begins Miss Bessy, charitably; "otherwise—There's the
     first bell beginning; we had better go and put on our things, Jane."
</div></body></text></TEI>