<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER XIX.
AND so that act of the play is finished: all the actors have strutted and fumed and
     fretted through their little parts, and now the curtain has fallen. When next it rises, the
     principal actress in this tragic drama is discovered lying full-dressed on her bed; her pretty
     face buried—eyes, nose, and mouth—in the tumbled pillow; her little neat-shod feet hanging over
     the bedside. She looks as if she had been thrown there, an inert, passive mass, by some
     spiteful giant. Six miles away, at Lord —'s ball, the fiddles are squeaking, and the
     pink-and-green Chinese lanterns swinging to and fro among the orange boughs in the slight wind
     made by the rustling dresses and passing men and women. Sir Thomas, with his hands in their
     burst white gloves under his coat tails, and his blue-cloth back leaning against a marble
     mantel-piece, is talking sweetly, in his hard, rasping voice, of scab and foot-rot. Miladi is
     gone down to supper for the sixth time on the sixth devoted married man's arm; she is eating
     game pie, and drinking sherry and champagne and moselle in turns. Miss Blessington, sweeping
     about on the arm of a small white gentleman, whose estate is as large as his person is minute,
     is responding a little superciliously to a presumptuous younger son, who, annihilated by her
     Greek profile and Juno bust, has invited her to tread a measure with him.
"No, tha—anks; I never da—ance round da—ances."
Meanwhile Esther lies stretched upon the counterpane, while a gloomy pageant of all that she
     has lost passes before her eyes. Greedier than the dog in the fable, she had tried to keep
     shadow and substance: Gerard's love, Brandon's liking. Now, lo! both have fallen into the
     water. There
      are a few circles, a few rising bubbles; then all is
     over—gone, sunk to the bottom, to come up again never more. Vanished from her grasp is the
     great house—are the buhl and marqueterie cabinets—are the "Venus surprised by Satyrs" and the
     "Susanna and the Elders"—are the vineries, pineries, peacheries. Did they ever exist? or were
     they only a mirage, such as the sky presents to us sometimes—a mirage of ships shocking
     together, of armed men meeting in fight?
"Go back to your pigstye!" said the magic fish to Ilsabil, the fisherman's wife, when she
     modestly requested to be made lord of the sun and moon. " Go back to your pigstye!" cries Fate
     to Esther. At any other time the subsiding from the prospect of being rather a great lady into
     the certainty of being a very small one would have caused considerable annoyance to Esther's
     aspiring soul. Now, the things she has lost merge and lose themselves in the
      person she has lost. But is he lost necessarily, irrecoverably? Despite the forlorn
     attitude, the tear-swollen face, trying to suffocate itself in down, Hope is busy whispering, "
     You will see him again to-morrow: men in real life are not like men in novels—changeless of
     purpose, hard as iron or adamant. What they are one half-hour, they are the exact reverse of
     the next; what they swear to-night they will unswear to-morrow." As Hope, the deceiver, thus
     murmurs, there comes to her ear the sound of wheels briskly rolling to the door. "Is the ball
     over so early? are they come back already? or—" She does not give herself time to speculate on
     any other hypothesis, but, springing from the bed, runs to the window, draws aside curtain and
     blind, and looks out. The hall-door is open; a vehicle stands before it. The moonlight and the
     light shed from the hanging-lamp in the portico are fighting together, struggling for
     possession of a horse and dog-cart, of two footmen's floured
      heads, and of a portmanteau and hat-box that they are
     carrying out. "Thud! thud!" she hears the portmanteau go in at the back of the cart. Then a man
     comes out—a man in hat and overcoat—drawing on dogskin gloves, and saying, "John, go and look
     for my box of cigar-lights; I left it on the smoking-room table." It is St. John, speaking in
     much his usual voice. He is going away! going away! and he can think of his cigar-lights! Her
     heart stops pulsing for a second, then sets off galloping at the rate of a hundred and twenty a
     minute. Going without making any sign! She leans further out of the window, and rests her white
     arms, that look whiter than any lilies in the moonlight, on the sill. He is so close beneath
     her, if the servants were not there, she might call to him; as it is, he will never know that
     she has watched his departure. A sudden impulse prompts her to throw up the window higher, to
     rustle her dress, to cough, in order to attract his attention. At the unexpected noise John and
     Thomas turn their heads and look up, but their master does not. He gives a slight start, but,
     instantly recovering himself, walks steadily to the cart and gets in. Then she knows that he
     knows that she is looking at him—knows that he is resolute to part from her—
"taking no farewell—" as Lancelot took none of Elaine.
The horse is a little fidgety at starting. "Wo-o-o! Gently, old lass!" This is the affecting
     form that St. John's last words take. She cranes her neck out of the window; she leans out her
     lithe body, reckless of the danger of losing her balance and tumbling on the hard gravel drive
     below, in her eagerness to catch the last glimpse of the lessening, dwindling bulk; then,
     forgetting to shut the window, careless of any cold or stock of rheumatism that she might be
      laying up for herself, she returns to her former position,
     flings herself again prone on her bed, again buries her face in the pillow; but this time no
     beguiling hope sits and whispers pleasant falsities to her. Hope got up upon the dog-cart, and
     drove away with Gerard.
The night wanes; morning dreams, that they say come true, invade many sleepers' brains. At
     Lord —'s ball people are still dancing with the fury produced by champagne and supper; but Sir
     Thomas, Miladi, and Miss Blessington, are at home again, and in bed. Constance is not one of
     those hard dancers who think that one after supper- galop is worth ten ante-cœnal ones. Not for
     all the entrancing valses Strauss ever composed would she run the risk of damaging the
     freshness of her toilette, nor the still more serious risk of exchanging the marble coolness of
     her cheeks for the unsightly flush of heat or the ugly pallor of exhaustion.
Dawn is just beginning stealthily to unlatch the eastern gate; her torch, new-lit, makes but
     a puny opponent for the night's one great and myriad lesser lamps. Esther has fallen into an
     uneasy doze, her damp brow and loosened hair resting on her bare, outflung arm. Suddenly a
     knock at her door makes her start up in a vague, confused horror. Is it St. John come back? Is
     it some one come to murder her? A thousand impossibilities flash across her bewildered brain.
     Without waiting for permission, the person who knocked enters; not St. John, nor a
     murderer—only a dishevelled housemaid, who has evidently just thrown a gown over her night
     attire, and endeavoured abortively to gather up the straggling hair out of her sleepy eyes
     under a muslin cap put on awry.
"A tallygraph for you, miss!" says she, coming forward, holding in one hand a blue envelope,
     and in the other a tall, solemn tallow candle, as sleepy as herself.

A telegraphic message! Oh hateful telegraph! Cruellest of modern inventions ! Oh hastener of
     evil tidings, that, without you, come all too speedily! Oh maker of sick hearts and blanched
     cheeks and arrested pulses!
Esther snatches it, while a sudden, awful cold grasps her heart, and reads by the wavering,
     feeble light these words, in a scrawly clerk's hand:
"Robert Brandon to Esther Craven. Come home instantly; Jack is very ill."
With how few pen-strokes can a death-warrant be written! For a moment she sits bolt upright,
     void of breath or motion, as a white dead woman, from the house of whose fair body the spirit
     departed an hour ago; the telegram grasped in a stiff hand that knows not of it. Then
     consciousness returns, brought back by a huge, tearing, killing agony; then even the agony
     yields to one intense, consuming longing—one all-dominating purpose-the longing to slay time
     and space; to be with him now, this instant; to be beside Jack dying, not Jack
     dead.
"Can I see Sir Thomas?" she asks collectedly, but in a rough, deep voice. "I have had bad
     news from home : my brother is very ill."
"Indeed, 'm, you don't say so;" replies the servant, growing broadly awake under the
     delightful excitement of a calamity having happened to somebody, and of herself being the first
     recipient of the news.
"I must see Sir Thomas!" Esther says, putting her hand up in a bewildered way to her
     head, and then springing off the bed and walking quickly towards the door.
"See Sir Thomas," repeats the woman, the most unfeigned alarm painting itself on her broad
     face—" now! Indeed, ma'am, you must be mad to think of such a thing! It would be as
     much as all our places are worth if he were to be disturbed before his usual time,"

Esther turns and clutches her arm, while her great eyes brimful of despair, burn on her face.
     "I tell you my brother is dying!" she says, hoarsely—"I know he is; I must go to him
      this minute; for God's sake help me to get to the station!"
"Indeed, 'm, I'm sorry to see you in such trouble, that I am!" answers her
     companion, moved to compassion by the terrible, haggard misery of the young, round face, that
     she, in company with her fellow-servants, had often admired in its happy, dewy rosiness at
     prayers on Sunday evenings; "but, you see, all the men are in bed, and Simpson 'ud cut off his
     own 'ead afore he'd venture to take out the carriage without Sir Thomas's orders."
The tall, yellow candle flares between them: lights up the tortured beauty of the one woman,
     the placid stolidity of the other. Esther groans, and smites her hands together.
"Is there no vehicle I can have?" she asks in impatient agony—"no cart?—no anything?
     I'd give all I have in the world to any one who would take me. Oh God! how many minutes I am
     wasting."
The housemaid puts down her flat candlestick on the table, and rubs her forehead with her
     rough fore-finger to aid her thinking powers. "There's the dog-cart that the under-servants
     goes to church in," she says, presently, with an uncertain suggestion: "if we could knock the
     men up, you might have it, perhaps."
" Knock them up this instant, then!" cries Esther, with passionate urgency—" now, this
      minute! Go, for God's sake!" 
So saying, she almost pushes the woman out of the room, and herself follows her. Through long
     passages and corridors, full of emptiness and darkness—darkness utter and complete, save where
     through the gallery's high-stained east window the chilly. chilly dawn comes peeping, with a
      grey glimmer, about the black frames, never closing eyes,
     and stiff, prim simpers of the family portraits—down to the lower regions, where the huge
     kitchen-grate yawns, black as Erebus—up steep back-stairs along other passages. In one of these
     passages Esther stands, her frame trembling and teeth chattering with cold and nervous
     excitement, while her companion raps with broad, hard knuckles on a door, and loudly calls on
     Simpson to awake. But hard workers are hard sleepers, and it is some time before the coachman
     can be induced to leave the country of slumber. When at length he is aroused, and has come out
     to them, in all the yawning sulkiness of disturbed sleep, it is a still longer time before he
     can be induced to admit the possibility of any vehicle whatever being put at Esther's disposal.
     with so righteous a fear of his wrath has Sir Thomas succeeded in inspiring his
     subordinates.
It is not without the aid of all her remaining money, with the exception of what is needed
     for the purchase of her railway ticket—not without the aid of all that is left of poor Jack's
     hardly-spared five-pound note—that she is able at length to induce him to consent to the
     getting ready of the dog-cart "in which the under-servants goes to church." Fully
     three-quarters of an hour more elapse before one of the helpers can be knocked up, can dress
     himself, can harness the oldest and screwiest horse in the stables, and put him, with many a
     muttered grumble, into the cart. Wretched Esther follows the man and his lanthorn to the
     stable-yard, with the vain idea that her presence may hurry his movements. During most of the
     three-quarters of an hour she walks quickly up and down over the hard, round stones with which
     the yard is paved, or stands watching, with greedy eyes, every step in the harnessing process;
     while her hands clench themselves, as his are clenched who is dead by some very cruel, violent
      death, and a pain like a red-hot, two-bladed knife keeps
     running through her heart. Before the horse is well between the shafts, she has climbed into
     the cart and taken her seat.
"The luggage is not in yet, 'm," suggests the groom, respectfully.
"Oh! never mind the luggage," cries Esther, feverishly; "I don't want it! I don't want
     anything! I'm ready! Get in, please, and set off this minute!"
Dawn is breaking, slowly, coldly, greyly, without any of the rose-coloured splendours that
     mostly gild the day's childhood, as the glorious delusions of youth gild our morning, There has
     not been a positive, actual frost in the night—not frost enough to congeal the wayside pools or
     to kill the dahlias—but the air has, for all that, a frosty crispness, as of the first breath
     of coming winter. The trees and hedgerow holly-bushes loom gigantic, formless, treble and
     quadruple their real size, folded round and round in a mantle of mist; the meadows are like
     lakes of mist; sheets of vapour steaming damply up to the shapeless, colourless, low-stooping
     heavens. Esther has forgotten to take any wrap: through the poor protection of her thin cotton
     dress and jacket the mist creeps slowly, searchingly, making her limbs shake and shudder; but
     she herself is unconscious of it—she could not have told you afterwards whether she had been
     warm or cold.
At the turnpike gate a sleepy old man comes hobbling out (men at toll-gates are mostly
     one-legged), in his hand a candle, to which the white morning is beginning to give a very
     sickly, yellow look : it seems to Esther that he will never have done fumbling in his
     breeches-pocket for the sixpence of change that eludes his search.
"Why do you stop? Cannot you go a little quicker?" asks Esther, hoarsely, her teeth
     chattering with cold and
      misery, as the groom allows his horse to walk up a long,
     gentle incline.
"Sir Tummas allus gives pertikler herders as we should walk the 'orses up this 'ill," replies
     the man; " you see, 'm, it's collar-work pretty nigh all the way from our place to
     Brainton."
"But it is such a little hill, and Sir Thomas need never know," pleads Esther, imploringly.
     "I have not got any money now, but if you'll take me quicker—a good deal quicker—I will send
     you five shillings—ten shillings—by post, when I get home."
"Much obliged to you, ma'am," answers the man, touching his hat, and giving another instance
     of the influence of filthy lucre by whipping up his horse.
"When is the next train to Berwyn?" cries Esther, almost before they had pulled up at the
     station, to a porter, who stands waiting to receive any arriving passengers.
"7.20," replies the man, briefly.
"And what time is it now?"
"6.15."
"Is not there one before 7.20?" 
"None; you are just too late for the 6.10 one; it has been gone about five minutes."
Unmindful of the presence of the careless, indifferent onlookers, Esther clasps her cold
     hands together and groans. In a great despair, as in a great bodily agony, we do not much mind
     who sees or hears us.
"Too late!" she says, with a heavy, tearless sob—" five minutes too late! Oh God, it
      is hard!"
"Any luggage, Miss?" asks the porter, in his civil, matter-of-fact voice.
The common-place question brings her back to life. "No, none," she answers, collecting
     herself; and so saying walks
      into the station, and, taking refuge in the waiting-room,
     sinks down upon a green Utrecht velvet chair.
Owing to the earliness of the hour, other occupant of the room is there none; neither is
     there any fire (a fire always looks in good spirits; it never has the blues). Alongside of the
     empty fire-place stands a stiff, green Utrecht velvet sofa, and round the bare table more green
     Utrecht velvet chairs. Opposite to Esther, against the wall, hangs a roll of texts.
     Involuntarily her haggard eyes lift themselves to them, and light upon this one—which, under
     the slightly inappropriate title of "Encouragements to Repentance," heads the list: "Woe
      to me, for I am undone!"  She shudders, "Is it an omen?" turns away her head quickly,
     and tries to look out of window, but the wire-blind hinders her gaze. Once again, "Woe
      is me, for I am undone!" standing out clear and black in large type from the white
     paper, greets her eyes. She can bear it no longer, but rising hastily, runs out, and begins to
     walk swiftly up and down the platform.
Brainton is a large station—a junction of many lines. Engines are snorting and puffing about;
     boilers letting off steam, with a noise calculated to break the drum of any ear;
     tarpaulin-covered waggons standing shunted on side lines. A train has just come in, and is
     disgorging its human load; a man with a hammer is walking along by the side of it, stooping and
     tapping the wheels; porters are driving luggage-piled trucks before them, and shouting out, "By
     your leave!" to any unwary traveller who may cross the relentless path of their Juggernaut:
     other parties are enduring and answering, with angelic patience and bonhomie, the agitated and incoherent questions of unprotected females in
     waterproof cloaks and turn-down hats. Everybody and everything is rampantly alive;
     even to his handiwork, man seems to have imparted some of his own intense vitality;
      to the engines he has given motion and voice—motion and
     voice ten thousandfold stronger than his own.
In her hurried walks, Esther suddenly comes face to face with a fair-haired youth, who,
     followed by a porter carrying a gun-case, is walking lightly along with his hands in his
     pockets, whistling for very lightheartedness, 
"I paddle my own canoe."
Jack's tune! What business has he to whistle it? All fair-haired youths, with nothing very
     prominent in any of their features, are more or less alike; and this amount of resemblance the
     unknown bears to her boy. Long after he has passed her, amid the shrieking of the engines, the
     shouts of the porters—"Take your seats for Wolverhampton, Birmingham!" "All here for Chester,
     Warrington, and Manchester?"—the well-known tune echos faintly back to her ears. An
     overpowering, blinding, deafening rush of feeling comes over her; she sits down hastily on a
     bench that is near at hand, in close proximity to an Irish labourer, with a blue-spotted
     bundle, and, careless of the contaminating contact, buries her head in her hands, and rocks to
     and fro in a paroxysm of despair.
It is one of those incontrovertible facts that we all know to be true, and that we all feel
     to be false, that every hour is of the same length; that in an hour of Elysium there are sixty
     whole minutes, and that in an hour of Hades there are only sixty. In Esther's hour of waiting
     there are, however, seventy-five minutes, as the train is a quarter of an hour late.
"Is it a fast train?" she asks eagerly of the bearded guard, who, with the politeness inborn
     in guards, opens the carriage-door for her.
"No, miss," he answers, with suavity—"slow train,
      miss; stops at every station; 6.10 was the fast train,
     miss!" 
Off at last, sliding slowly at first past platform, officials, trucks, book-stalls, dowdy
     women and dusty men; then the wind comes beating with a strong rush against Esther's cheeks,
     blowing back her hair, as they fly through the air at the rate of fifty miles an hour.
The transit from Brainton to Berwyn occupies three hours, and during the greater part of that
     time Miss Craven maintains almost exactly the same attitude; with her greedy eyes devouring
     every field and tree and homestead as they run past—each village spire and bridge a finger-post
     to tell her that she is so much nearer her boy. She does not cry at all, or groan. Even had she
     wished to do so, conventionality—that makes us laugh when we would fain weep, makes us weep
     when we would fain laugh—would have forbidden her, for she is not alone in the carriage. Two
     other travellers share it with her—two extremely cheerful young men, to whom it is a matter of
     supreme indifference how many hedges and meadows are before, how many behind them. They are not
     exactly gentlemen: and indeed it is a matter of almost as curious inquiry as what becomes of
     all the pins that are made and lost, in what part of the train, if it be not in the guard's
     van, gentlemen and ladies travel, as assuredly they are but seldom to be met with in
     first-class carriages. The two youths have made themselves and their hat-boxes, rugs, etc.,
     luxuriously comfortable, and seem rather disposed to be funny—to "show off," as children say,
     for the benefit of the lovely girl, who looks so disconsolate and dishevelled, who seems so
     unflatteringly unaware of their presence. They eat sandwiches and drink sherry; they are
     provided with a large stock of all the morning papers, and by-and-by the eldest and boldest of
     them proffers Punch, Fun, and half-a-dozen other dreary comicalities
      to Esther. She looks at him for a second with her large
     wistful eyes as she declines the offered civility, and then resumes her watch. Having obtained
     that one short glance, he ceases from his witticisms, half-conscious of being in the company of
     a great sorrow—as we involuntarily hush our voices and speak softly in the presence of our
     great master and owner—Death. Perhaps, cowardly slaves as we are, we fear lest, if we should
     speak loudly, he might be reminded of our existence—might lay his heavy hand on our shoulders
     also.
Another hour of waiting at Berwyn—another hour before there is any train for the branch line
     that leads to Glan-yr-Afon—any train, at least, that stops at so insignificant a station.
     Another hour of tramping in forlorn, impotent impatience up and down the platform, hustled by a
     hurrying crowd, who know nothing, and care, if possible, less, about her and her grief. Well,
     if every one in England wept for every one else's sorrows, the noise of tears and sobbings
     would drown the whirring of all the mills in Leeds and Manchester—the booming of all the cannon
     at Shoeburyness. It is half an hour past noon, when, almost before the train has stopped at the
     little wayside station, Esther springs out. She is the only passenger for Glan-yr-Afon; and the
     man who unites in himself the functions of station-master and porter looks at her with a
     recognising eye. He must know whether Jack is alive or dead. He looks much as usual, but so he
     would whether Jack were alive or dead. Feeling an overmastering sense of fear of and repugnance
     from the news he may have to give her, she runs to the little wicket that leads out into the
     road.
"Your ticket, please, miss!" cries the man, following her.
She had forgotten it; it takes a minute to extricate it from her glove; she thinks that he
     looks as if he were going to speak; and, in a blind terror of what he might
      say, turns from him and rushes down the road. Any suspense
     is better than some certainties.
</div></body></text></TEI>