<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XVI.
THE weekly clearance of mundane books has been made at Plas Berwyn; the skimp drab gowns, and
     the ill-made frock coat, whose flaps lap over one another so painfully behind, have been
     endured by the Misses Brandon and their brother respectively. At church has been all the
     Brandon household: son and daughters, man-servant and maid-servant, ox and sheep, camel and
     ass. I need hardly say that the last quartette have been introduced merely for the sake of
     euphony, and to give a fuller rhythm to the close of the sentence. The Misses Brandon always
     stand as stiff as pokers during the creed, with their backs to the altar. It amuses them, and
     it does not do anybody else any harm, so why should not they, poor women? Bob truckles to the
     Scarlet Woman; he bows, and turns his honest, serious face to the east. The service is in
     Welsh, of which he does not understand a word. He can pick his way pretty well through the
     prayers, however, by the help of a Welsh and English prayer book. There are several landmarks
     that he knows, whose friendly faces beam upon him now and again when he is beginning to
     flounder hopelessly among uncouth words of seven consonants and a vowel. These are his chief
     finger-posts: " Gogoniant ir Tad, ac ir Mab, ac ir Yspryd
        Glan;" that is, "Glory be to the
      Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost."
"Gwared ni, Arglywd daionus!"
" Good Lord, deliver us!"
"Na Ladratta!" 
"Thou shalt not steal!"
Jack Craven has been to church too, and has, as he always does, been reading the inscriptions
     on the coffin-plates, nailed up, Welsh fashion, against the dilapidated, whitewashed walls, in
     lieu of monumental tablets. Esther has also been to church; has been in state in a great, close
     carriage, in company with Sir Thomas, Miladi, and Miss Blessington. Sir Thomas has been
     storming the whole way about a gap he detected in a hedge that they passed, through which some
     cattle have broken, so that they all arrive at the church door in that calmly devout state of
     quietude which is the fittest frame of mind for the reception of Divine truth.
The Gerard pew in Felton church is as large as a moderate-sized room, and is furnished with
     arm-chairs and a fireplace. In winter, Sir Thomas spends fully half the service time in poking
     the fire noisily and raking out the ashes. There is no fire now, and he misses it. A high red
     curtain runs round the sacred enclosure, and through it the farmers' wives and daughters strain
     their eyes to catch a glimpse of Miladi's marabout feathers, and Miss Blessington's big, golden
     chignon, and little green aerophane bonnet. St. John generally pulls the brass rings of his bit
     of curtain aside along the brass rods, to make a peep-hole for himself over the congregation.
     The shape and size of the pew do away with the necessity for any wearisome conformity of
     attitude among the inmates. During the prayers, Sir Thomas stands bolt upright, with one bent
     knee resting on his chair; his bristling grey head, shaggy brows, and fierce spectacles looming
     above the red curtain, to the admiration and terror of the row of little charity girls beneath.
     Constance kneels forward on a hassock, with a large, ivory
      prayer book, gold-crossed, red-edged, in one hand, and a
     turquoise and gold-topped double scent-bottle and cobweb cambric handkerchief in the other. She
     confesses in confidence to her pale lavender gloves that shehas done that which she ought not
     to have done, and has left undone that which she ought to have done; making graceful little
     salaams and undulations of head and body every two minutes. Miladi confesses that she has gone
     to sleep. St. John makes no pretence of kneeling at all: he leans, elbow on knee and head on
     hand, and looks broken-hearted, as men have a way of doing in church.
In the afternoon, no one at Felton thinks of attending Divine service. It is a fiat of Sir
     Thomas's that no carriage, horses, or servants are to be taken out more than once a day, and
     the two miles' walk is an insuperable impediment to Lady Gerard, and hardly less so to
     Constance.
After luncheon the three ladies are sitting in the garden, with the prospect of four unbroken
     hours of each other's companionship before them. Masses of calceolarias, geraniums, lobelias,
     are flaring and flaunting around them—masses in which the perverted eye of modern horticulture
     sees its ideal of beauty. Nature, in her gardening, never plants great, gaudy squares and ovals
     and rounds of red and blue and yellow, without many shades of tenderest grey and green to
     soften and relieve them. Across the grass St. John comes lounging; his Sunday frock coat
     sitting creaseless to his spare, sinewy figure. Esther hates the sight of that coat: it reminds
     her so painfully, by its very unlikeness, of the singular garment that forms the head and crown
     of her betrothed's scant wardrobe.
"Do you know, I have half a mind to go to Radley church this afternoon. Will any one come
     with me?—will you, Conny?" turning, mindful of last night, with a conciliatory smile to Miss
     Blessington.

"How far is it?" she asks, indolently, divided between her hatred of walking and her desire
     to frustrate the téte-à- téte she sees impending between St.
     John and Esther.
"Three or four miles; four, I suppose."
She lifts her large blue eyes languidly, " Four miles there, and four miles back! Are you
     mad, St. John? What do you suppose one is made of?"
Will you take pity on me then, Miss Craven?" turning eagerly to Esther.
She tilts her hat low down over her little, straight, Greek nose, looks up at him with shy
     coquetry under the brim, but answers not.
"A man who delights in solitude must be either a wild beast or a god, don't you know? I have
     no pretence to be either: I hate my own society cordially. Come" (with a persuasive ring in his
     pleasant voice); "you had much better."
"Don't be so absurd, St. John !" cries Miss Blessington, pettishly. "Miss Craven would far
     rather be left in peace."
"Would you?" (appealing to her.)
"No—o; that is—I mean—I think I should like the walk, if I may. May I, Lady Gerard? do you
     mind?" (turning sweet red cheeks and quick eyes towards her hostess.)
"I, my dear! Why should I mind ?" responds Miladi, leaning back and fanning herself with a
     large fan (I believe that fat women often suffer a foretaste of the torments of the damned in
     the matter of heat)—"so as you don't ask me to go with you (with a fat smile). And, St. John,
     be sure that you are back in time for dinner, there's a good boy! You know what a fuss Sir
     Thomas is always in on Sunday evening ?"
"I know that Sir Thomas is digging his grave with his teeth as fast as he can," answers St.
     John, disrespectfully.

"Shall not we be rather late for church if we have four miles to go?" asks Esther, as she
     steps out briskly beside her companion, while heart and conscience keep up a quarrelsome
     dialogue within her.
"It is not four miles; it is only three."
"You told Miss Blessington four?"
"So I did; but I drew for the extra mile upon the rich stores of my imagination."
"Why did you?" she asks, turning a wondering rosy face set in the frame of a minute white
     bonnet towards him.
"Did you ever hear of the invitations that the Chinese give one another?" he asks, laughing,
     and switching off a fern-head with a baby umbrella—" which, however pressing they may be, are
     always expected by the giver to be declined. My invitation to Conny was a Chinese one: I was
     not quite sure that she would understand it as such, and I was so afraid that she would yield
     to my importunities, that I had to embroider a little in the matter of distance; do you
     see?"
There has been rain in the morning; now the clouds have rent themselves asunder, and broken
     up into great glistering rocks, peaks, and spires, such as no fuller on earth could white: 
"Blue isles of heaven laugh between." The breeze comes more
     freshly over the wet grasses and flowers, and blows in little fickle puffs against St. John's
     bronzed cheeks and Esther's carnation ones. The girl's heart is pulsing with a keen, sharp joy;
     all the keener, as the heaven's blue is deeper for the clouds that hover about it.
"I shall have him all to myself for three hours," she is saying inwardly; "he will speak to
     no one but me ; he will
      hear no one else's voice (she forgets the parson and the
     clerk). Surely Bob may spare me these three hours, and just a few more, out of the great long
     life during which I shall tramp-tramp at his side! Three hours: 
"Then let come what come may
No matter if I go mad,
I shall have had my day."
"Let me carry your prayer book?" 
"No, thanks; it is not heavy" (retaining it, mindful of a certain inscription in the
     fly-leaf).
"I am like a retriever; I like to have something to carry" (taking it from her with gentle
     violence).
"'Esther Craven from Robert Brandon.' Who is Robert Brandon when he is at
     home?" (speaking rather shortly.)
Esther's heart leaps into her mouth. Shall she tell him now, this minute, without giving
     herself time for second thoughts, which are not by any means always best? Shall she lift off
     the weight of compunction, anxiety, shame, that has been pressing upon her for the last
     fortnight?—let it fall down, as the dead albatross fell from the Ancient Mariner's neck—
"Like lead into the sea?" The subject has introduced itself
     naturally, easily, without any of the dragging in by the head and shoulders of the
     officiously-volunteered confessions that she had salved her conscience by deprecating. Shall
     she, with strong, brave hand; push away all hope of the fine house and the broad lands, of the
     carriages and horses, the roses and pine-apples, the down pillars and fragrances of life? Shall
     she courageously, nobly, and yet in mere bare duty, turn away from the fairy prince and return
     to her hovel and scullionship? Shall she, or shall she not?

"Who is Robert Brandon " repeats St. John, rather crossly.
In the second that follows Esther's life destiny is settled. She refuses the good and chooses
     the evil. ("He is the man I am engaged to," that is what she ought to have said.)
" He is in the —th foot." This is what she does say, blushing till the tears come into her
     eyes, turning away her head, and feeling stabbed through and through with shame.
"An ally of yours?" (quickly.)
"I have known him all my life," she answers, evasively.
"I thought he was a very young child, from this specimen of his caligraphy," remarks Gerard,
     superciliously, examining Bob's sprawly, slanty characters. "He would be none the worse for a
     few writing lessons."
Esther is a mean young woman : she feels ashamed of her poor lover, and his pothooks and
     hangers, and yet vexed with St. John for sneering at them.
"It was a fact worth inscribing, I must say," continues he, ironically—"the making of such a
     very handsome present," holding the poor little volume between his lavender kid finger and
     thumb, and surveying it with a disparaging smile. " He must have had a great deal of change out
     of sixpence, I should think."
"If you have nothing better to do than abuse my property," cries Esther, impulsively,
     snatching it out of his hand, "you may give it me back," looking half disposed to whimper.
"I apologise," responds St. John, gravely. "I did not mean to offend you ; I give you
      carte blanche to insult mine" (holding out a very minute
     Russia leather one). "But may I ask, is Mr. Robert Blandon, or Brandon, or what's his name,
     your godfather?"
"No; why?"

"Because I never heard of any one being given a prayer book except as a wedding present, or
     by their godfathers and godmothers at their baptism. As you are not married, I know it could
     not have been the first case, and so I concluded it must be the last."
"Robert is not old enough to be my godfather," says Essie, overcoming by a great
     effort the repugnance to pronouncing the fateful name: "he is quite young; a great deal younger
     than you," she ends, rather spitefully.
"He might easily be that," replies St. John, coldly. "Once, not so very many years ago, in
     whatever company I was, I always was the youngest present; now, on the contrary, in whatever
     company I am, I always feel the eldest present. I don't suppose I always am, but I always feel
     as if I were."
"I believe old people have the best of it, after all," says Esther, recovering a little of
     her equanimity: "they have certainly fewer troubles than young ones. I should say that Sir
     Thomas was decidedly a happier man than you are."
"A man's happiness is proportioned to the simplicity of his tastes, I suppose," answers St.
     John, sardonically. "Sir Thomas's happiness lies in a nutshell: he has two ruling
     passions—eating and bullying; he has a very fair cook to satisfy the one, and my mother always
     at hand for the gratification of the other."
"We have all our ruling passions," rejoins Esther, with a light laugh, "only very often we
     will not own them. Mine is burnt almonds; what is yours?"
"Going to church," he replies, in the same tone; "as you may perceive by the strenuous
     efforts I have made to get there this afternoon."
Radley church stands on a knoll. Radley parishioners have to go upwards to be buried—a happy
     omen, it is to be boped, for the destination of their souls. The church has
      a little grey tower, pretty, old, and squat, and a peal of
     bells—these are its claim to distinction—a merry peal, as people say; but to me it seems that
     in all the gamut of sad sounds there is nothing sadder, sorrowfuller, than bells chiming out
     sweetly and solemnly across the summer air.
Rung in by the grave music of their invitation, St. John and Esther enter. Verger or
     pew-opener is there none, so they slip into the first of the open sittings that presents
     itself. The clergyman is young and energetic: he has rooted up the tall, worm-eaten, oak
     pews—disfiguring compromises between cattle-pen and witness-box—has clothed several 
"Dear little souls
In nice white stoles,—" and is trying to teach himself intoning. He
     produces at present only prolonged whining groans, but it is a step in the right direction.
Rest is good after exertion, and so Essie thinks. The south wind has been playing tricks with
     the dusk riches of her hair. Nature has been laying on her bistre under the great liquid eyes,
     and emptying a whole potful of her rouge on the rose velvet round of her cheeks. She is not in
     apple-pie order at all, and yet 
"She was most beautiful to see,
Like a lady from a far countree." If Esther were to murder any one,
     and her guilt were to be brought home to her as plainly as the eye of day shines in the sky at
     noon, judge and jury would combine to acquit her.
"Blessed be God, who has made beautiful women!" says the Bedouin, and Gerard echoes the
     benediction, as he stands with his big lavender thumb on one side of the hymn
      book, and her small, lavender thumb on the other, while the
      "dear little souls" are singing sweetly and quickly: 
"There God for ever sitteth,
Himself of all the Crown;
The Lamb, the Light that shineth,
And goeth never down." Grand words, that make one feel almost good
     and almost happy merely to say them!
There is only one hymn-book in the pew, and St. John is glad of it. There is something
     pleasant in the sense of union and partnership, though it be only a three minutes' partnership
     in a dog's-eared psalter.
"Is not there some different way of going home?" asks Essie, as they stand side by side,
     after service, in the high churchyard, looking down on the straggling damson trees, the grey
     smoke spiring northwards under the south wind's faint blowing, the dark-blue green of the
     turnip fields. "I hate going back the same way one came; it shows such a want of
     invention!"
"There is another way," answers St. John, scooping out a little plump green moss from a chink
     in the wall with the point of his umbrella, while the parson and the parson's sister, on their
     homeward way, turn their heads to look at them—the parson at Esther, the parson's sister at St.
     John—Jack at Jill, and Jill at Jack as is the way of the world; "but it is a good deal longer
     and a great deal muddier than the one we came by."
"I like mud," says Essie, gaily, stooping and picking a daisy from a little child's grave at
     her feet; "it is my native element; at home we are up to our knees in mud in winter, and over
     our ankles in summer."
So they chose the longer and the muddier way. It is its length that is its recommendation to
     them both, I think.

Down the village street, past the Loggerheads and the Forge, and along a long country lane,
     paved unevenly with round stones after a way our forefathers in some of the northern counties
     had of paving, in imperfect prophetic vision of MacAdam. To-day no broad waggon-wheel groans,
     nor hoofed foot clatters along; only a few cottagers and smart-bonneted servant girls trudge
     along to the Primirive Wesleyan Methodist Chapel, built A.D. 1789, that stands in simple,
     dissenting ugliness at the hill-foot, while over its newly-painted, gingerbread-coloured door
     stands this modest announcement: "This is the Gate of Heaven."
"It strikes me," says St. John, rousing himself out of a reverie which has lasted a quarter
     of an hour—"it strikes me as one of the few instances in which one's experience tallies with
     what one reads in novels, the awkward knack people have of interrupting one at the wrong
     moment."
"How do you mean " asks Essie, coming out of a reverie, too.
"I never," pursues he, taking off his hat, and passing his hand over the broad red mark it
     has made on his forehead—"I never read aloud to any one in my life—I was rather fond of reading
     poetry at one period of my history, I leave you to guess which—not that she cared about it—she
     did not know Milton from Tommy Moore ; but I never read to her in the course of my life without
     the footman coming in to put coals on at the most affecting passages—Arthur's parting from
     Guinivere, say, or Medora's death—and clattering down the tongs and shovel, making the devil's
     own row."
Esther laughs.
"These reflections are à propos of—what?"
"Of Conny's most ill-timed entry last night," he answers, with energy. "I don't suppose she
     makes such a midnight raid once in five years, and she certainly could not have
      found you and me téte-à-téte at two in the morning more than once in fifty years. Why could not she
     leave us in peace that once? We did not grudge her any amount of pleasant dreams; why need she
     grudge us our pleasant wakefulness?"
"Do you think she came on purpose, then?" asks Essie, her eyes opening as round in alarmed
     surprise as a baby's when a grown-up person makes ugly faces at it.
He shrugs his shoulders slightly. "Cannot say, I'm sure. Conny is not much in the habit of
     burning the midnight oil in the pursuit of knowledge generally. If it was accident, she came in
     at a wonderfully à propos, or rather mal à propos, moment. Tell me," he says, crossing over to her side of the road, and
     fixing frankly-asking eyes upon her; "I may be mistaken—it is a misfortune to which I am often
     incident—but I could not help thinking that, just as that unlucky candle appeared round the
     corner last night, you were going to tell me something—something about yourself? I thought I
     saw it in your face. I think I deserved some little reward for raking up for your behoof the
     ashes of that old fire that I burnt my fingers at so badly once."
Esther still remains silent, but turns her long neck from one side to the other with a
     restless, uneasy motion.
"Are lamplight and the small hours indispensable accessories " he asks, with gentle pleading
     in look and words—"or could not you tell me as well now?"
"Tell you what" she says, turning round sharp upon him, and snapping, as a little cross dog
     snaps at the heels of the passer-by—" must I invent something? "
"Are you sure that it is necessary to invent?" he asks, scanning the fair, troubled
     face with searching gaze.
She pulls a bunch of nuts out of the hedge from among their rough-ribbed green leaves, and
     begins to pick them out
      of their sheath. "What am I to tell you?" she says,
     petulantly, a suspicion that he may have heard a rumour of her engagement crossing her mind: "
     that I live in an old farm-house with my brother Jack, and that we are very hard up—you know
     already; that 'Sudrydachi' is Welsh for 'How do you do ' and
     that our asparagus has answered very badly this year?"
"Of course, I cannot force your confidence," he answers, rather coldly.
"Why do you insist upon my having something to confide? What reason have you for supposing
     that I have?" she cries, with increased irritation.
"None whatever, but what you yourself have given me!"
"I!"
"Yes, you; not your words, but your face now and then. Don't think me impertinent.
     You know what unhappy reason I have had to be suspicious. But tell me" (trying his best to get
     a look round the corner into the averted, perturbed face of his companion)—"tell me whether
     there is not something between you and—and—that fellow that gave you the prayer-book?"
Esther's heart gives one great bounding throb; the thin muslin of her dress but poorly
     conceals its hard, quick pulsings.
One more chance for her! Fate generally gives us two or three chances before it allows us to
     consign ourselves irrecoverably to the dogs. One more choice between loyalty and disloyalty—a
     plain question, to be answered plainly, unequivocally—Yes or No; Robert or St. John. The man
     whose conversation bores her, whose proximity and whose gaze leave her colder than snow on an
     alp's high top an hour before sunrise, and with whom she has promised to live till death do
     them part; or the man, no whit better or handsomer, whose coming, felt, though unseen, makes
     her
      whole frame vibrate, as a harp's strings vibrate under the
     player's hands—beneath whose eyes hers sink down bashful, yet passionate—the man whom, after
     this week, she must see never again until death do them unite. Woman-like, she tries to avoid
     the alternative.
"What is that to you ?" she retorts, abruptly, endeavouring to be playful, and succeeding
     only in being rude.
"Nothing whatever," he replies, flushing angrily; and then they walk on for some distance in
     silence.
"Are you angry?" asks Esther, presently, with a smile, half saucy, half frightened.
"I? not in the least," he replies, with an air of ostentatious indifference, but
     with a complexion undoubtedly florider than nature made his.
"You look excessively cross, and have not uttered a word for the last half mile," she says,
     pouting out her full red under-lip, and then looking (a little alarmed at her own audacity) to
     see in what spirit he takes her impertinence.
"When I do not get civil answers to civil questions, I think it best to hold my tongue," he
     says, stalking along with his head up, and hitting viciously with his umbrella at the tall,
     yellow mulleins in the hedge.
"People's ideas differ as to what are civil questions," says Essie, trying to stalk
     too, and to elevate nose and chin in emulation of his. "Suppose that I had asked you how many
     times you had been refused, would you have answered me?"
"Undoubtedly I should," he replies, gravely.
"How many times have you?" she asks, coming down from her elevation of offended dignity with
     a jump, and looking up at him with naïve, eager curiosity.
"Questions should be answered in the order of priority in which they are asked," he replies,
     with a smile of amusement at her simplicity, but with a good deal of dissatisfied
      doubt underlying the smile. "Answer my question, and I'll
     answer yours."
Esther turns away, and passes her hand along the hedge, catching idly at any grasses or
     flowers that come in her way, to the great detriment of her Sunday gloves. His anxiety
     overcomes his hurt pride.
"Give me an answer one way or another," he says, breathing rather short. "Is there not
     something between you and him?"
Esther is silent. "No" is a plain downright lie, at which conscience demurs, and "Yes" a
     cannon-ball that will knock her away from St. John's side out into the drear, great world for
     ever.
"For God's sake answer me!" he says again, in great agitation at a dumbness that seems to him
     ominous.
Hearing the sharp pain and angry fear in his voice, she hesitates no longer. Lie or no lie,
     she takes the plunge. "Nothing!" she says, faintly, turning first milk-white, then red as a
     rose in her burning prime.
"Why do you turn away your face? Are you quite certain?" he asks, quickly, only half
     convinced by her weak negation.
"Certain," she replies, indistinctly, as if just able to echo his words, but not to frame any
     of her own.
"Why do you stammer and blush, then, whenever his name is mentioned?" he asks, with jealous
     impatience.
"I won't stand being catechised in this way," she cries, blazing out angrily, and stopping
     short, while sparks of fire, half quenched in tears of vexation, dart from the splendid night
     of her eyes. "I have answered a question which you ought never to have asked; you must be a
     person of very little observation," she continues, sharply, "not to have discovered during the
     three weeks that I have been with you that I blush at everything and nothing; I should
      be as likely as not to blush when Sir Thomas's name was
     mentioned, or—or—"
"Or mine," suggests St. John, ironically; "put it as strongly as you can."
"Or yours, if you like," she answers, hardily, but crimsoning painfully meanwhile in
     confirmation of her words.
At a little distance farther on, their path forsakes the road and leads across a line of
     grass fields. St. John crosses the first stile, and waits politely on the other side to help
     Esther over.
"No, no !" she cries, petulantly, withdrawing her foot from the first rung—"I hate being
     helped over stills. Go on, please."
He obeys, and walks on. Her dignity does not allow her to hurry her pace to overtake him, nor
     does his permit him to slacken his steps till she come up with him; and they walk on in single
     file, goose-fashion, through two fields and a half.
Dividing and watering the third field, as the four ancient rivers divided and watered the
     rose gardens and asphodel fields of Paradise, a little beck, with many turns and bends and
     doublings back upon itself, strays babbling, like a silver ribbon twisted among the meadow's
     green hair. It is not like the Welsh brooks, fretful and brawling, making little waterfalls and
     whirlpools and eddies over and about every water-worn stone; smoothly it flows on, as a holy,
     eventless life flows towards the broad sea whose tides wash the shores of Time. In dry weather
     it is slow-paced enough, and crystal clear; now the late heavy rains have quickened its
     current, and rolled it along, turbid and muddy. Even though swollen, however, it is still but a
     narrow thread, and St. John clears it at a jump.
"Shall I go on still?" he asks, with a malicious smile from the other side, addressing
     Esther, who stands looking
      down rather ruefully at the quick, brown water at her
     feet.
"I believe you knew of this, and brought me here on purpose to make a fool of me," she cries,
     reproachfully.
"I did nothing of the kind," he answers, quietly. "Last time I was here there was a plank
     thrown across; but you see the stream has been higher than it is now" (pointing to the drenched
     grass and little deposit of sticks and leaves on the bank), " and has probably carried it
     away."
"How am I to get over?" she asks, hopelessly, with a look of childish distress on
     her face.
"I'll carry you," he answers, springing back to her side; "the brook is shallower farther
     down; I can lift you over with the greatest ease imaginable."
" That you shan't!" answers Esther, civilly turning her back upon him.
"May I ask why?" he asks, coolly. "After the number of times I have carried you up and down
     stairs at Felton, you can hardly be afraid of my letting you fall?"
"The very fact of my having already had so many obligations to you makes me resolved not to
     add to their number," she replies, stiffly, with an effort to look dignified, which her
     laughing, débonnaire, seductive style of beauty tenders
     peculiarly unsuccessful.
"If you can suggest any better plan, I shall be delighted to assist you in carrying it out,"
     rejoins he, smothering a smile.
"I'll jump!" she says, desperately, eyeing meanwhile the hurrying stream and space between
     bank and bank with calculating look.
"You cannot," he cries, hastily; " you'll get a ducking as sure as I stand here. Don't be so
     silly!" 
The word "silly" acts as a whip and spur to Essie's flagging courage. She retreats a few
     yards from the
      edge, in order to get a little run to give her a better
     spring.
"As headstrong as an allegory on the banks of the Nile !" remarks Gerard, resignedly, quoting
     Mrs. Malaprop and folding his arms.
Neither the preparatory run, nor the tremendous bound she takes, avail to save Miss Craven
     from the fate which her obstinacy and the comparative shortness of her legs render unavoidable.
     She jumps short, and falls forward on the wet bank; her lavender kid gloves digging
     convulsively into it, and her legs disporting themselves fish-like in the brook.
He is at her side in an instant, raises gently and lifts her on to the grass, unmindful of
     the pollution caused to his coat by the muddy contact.
"What a fool I was!" she cries, passionately, sinking down among a grove of huge burdock
     leaves, smothered in shame and angry blushes.
St. John thinks it rude to disagree with her, so holds his peace.
"Why don't you laugh at me? why don't you jeer me?" she continues, vehemently; "why don't you
     tell me you are very glad of it, and that I richly deserve it, as I see you are longing to do?
     Anything would be better than standing there like a stock or a stone!"
"It is not of much consequence how I stand or how I look," he replies, coldly. "It would be
     more to the purpose to know how you are to get home!" 
"I will walk as I am," she cries impulsively, springing to her feet; "it will be a fit
     penance for my idiocy, and you shall go on ahead. I don't want you to be disgraced by being
     seen in company with such an object."
"That is very probable, isn't it?" he answers, laughing good-humouredly. "No, I have a better
     proposition than that, I think. It has just occurred to me that an old servant
      of ours lives at no great distance from here, her cottage is
     not more than three or four fields off. If you can manage to get there she would dry your
     clothes for you in a minute."
Rendered docile by her late disaster, feeling very small, and hanging her head, Esther
     acquiesces. Her gown, from which every particle of starch or stiffness has fled, clings to her
     limbs and defines their form; the water drips down from her in a thousand little spouts and
     rivulets; bang, bang, go her soaked petticoats against her ankles at every step she takes.
"You have had almost enough of taking me out to walk, I expect," she remarks presently,
     rather grimly.
"You have had almost enough of jumping brooks, I expect," he retorts, drily; and then they
     walk on in silence till they reach a little whitewashed cottage, with its slip of potato ground
     and plot of pinks and marigolds and larkspurs—an oasis of tilled ground among the wilderness of
     pasturage.
St. John knocks at the half-open door and puts his head in. "Are you at home, Mrs. Brown ?
     How are you?" says he, in that frank, friendly voice that goes far to make the Felton tenants
     wish that Sir St. John reigned in Sir Thomas's stead.
"Quite well, thank you, Mr. St. John; I hope I see you the same," replies the person
     addressed, coming to the door with a jolly red face and a voluminous widow's cap that
     contradict one another; "it's a long time since we've seen you come our way."
"So it is, Mrs. Brown; but, you see, I have been after the partridges."
"And Sir Thomas, I hope he keeps pretty well, Mr. St. John?"
"Yes, thanks."

"And Miladi, I hope she has her health."
"Yes, thanks."
"And Miss Bl—?""
"Yes, thanks," interrupts St. John, rather impatiently, breaking through the thread of her
     interrogatories. "Do you see, Mrs. Brown, that this young lady has met with an accident: she
     has tumbled into the brook. Do you think you could let her dry herself at your fire a bit?"
"Eh dear, Miss, you are in a mess!" !" ejaculates Mrs. Brown, walking round Esther, and
     surveying her curiously, as she stands close behind Gerard, dripping still, with a hang-dog air
     and chattering teeth. "Why, you have not a dry stitch upon you; you are one mask of
     mud! Would you please to step in?"
Mrs. Brown and Essie retire into an inner chamber for the purpose of removing the wet clothes
     and replacing them temporarily with some of the contents of Mrs. Brown's wardrobe.
St. John remains in the outer room, looks at the clock, behind whose dial-plate a round
     china-moon-face peeps out; takes up the mugs on the dresser: "For a Good Boy," "A Keepsake from
     Melford," "A Present from Manchester," hiding amongst numberless gilt flourishes; chivies the
     tabby cat; counts the flitches of bacon hanging from the rafters; walks to the door, and
     watches the bees crawling in and out of the low door of their straw houses, and the maroon
     velvet nasturtiums trailing along the borders, and lifting their round leaves and dark faces up
     to the knees of the standard rose.
As he so stands, whistling softly and musing, some one joins him in the doorway. He turns and
     beholds Esther, bashful, shame-faced, metamorphosed. To Mrs. Brown's surprise, she has declined
     the magnanimous offer of her best black silk. There is nothing coquettish or picturesque,
      as she is aware, about an ill-made dress that tries to
     follow the fashion and fails—destined, too, for a woman treble her size. She has chosen in
     preference, a short, dark, linsey petticoat and lilac cotton bedgown, which, by its looseness,
     can adapt itself to the round slenderness of her tall, lissom figure. Her bonnet was not
     included in the ruin of her other garments, but she has taken it off, as destructive to the
     harmony of her costume.
St. John surveys her for some moments: looks upward from petticoat to bedgown, and downward
     from bedgown to petticoat, but observes a discreet silence.
"Does it become me?" she asks at last, with shy vanity. "Why do not you say something?" 
"I have been so unlucky in two or three of my remarks lately," replies he, with a concluding
     glance at the round, bare arms that emerge whitely from the short cotton sleeves, "that I have
     become chary of making any more."
"You need not be afraid of offending me by telling me that it is unbecoming," she says,
     gravely— "quite the contrary. I "—she continues rather discontentedly— "think that it suits me
      too well, as if it were a dress that I ought to have been born to. Upon Miss
     Blessington now such a costume would look utterly incongruous."
St. John bursts out laughing. "A goddess in a bed-gown! Diana of the Ephesians in a linsey
     petticoat! Perish the thought!"
Esther looks mortified, and turns away.
The cleansing of Miss Craven's garments is a lengthy operation. Mrs. Brown retreats into her
     back kitchen, draws forward a washtub, kneels down beside it, turns up her sleeves, and with
     much splashing of hot water and lathering of soap, rubs and scrubs, rings out, dries, and irons
     the luckless gown and petticoat.
It is latish and duskish by the time that St. John and
      his companion set out on their homeward way. Two or three
     starflowers have already stolen out, and are blossoming, infinitely distant, in the meadows of
     the sky. They are not loquacious: it is the little shallow rivulet that brawls; the great deep
     river runs still. Silently they walk along; her little feet trip softly through the rustling
     grass beside him: the evening wind blows her light garments against him. He has taken her
     little gloveless hand as he helps her over a stile (adversity has made her abject, and she no
     longer spurns his assistance), and now retains it, half absently. Bare palm to bare palm, they
     saunter through the rich, dim land. It is dusk, but not so dusk but that they can see their
     dark eyes flashing into one another: sharp, stinging pleasure shoots along their young, full
     veins. The vocabularies of pain and of delight are so meagre, that each has to borrow from the
     other to express its own highest height and deepest depth. As they pass along a lane, whose
     high grass banks and overgrown hawthorn hedges make the coming night already come, Esther's
     foot stumbles over a stone. The next moment she is in his arms, and he is kissing her
     repeatedly.
"Esther, will you marry me?" he asks, in a passionate whisper, forgetting to make any
     graceful periphrasis to explain his meaning, using the plain words as they rise in his
     heart.
No answer. Emotions as complicated as intense check the passage of her voice. Even here, on
     this highest pinnacle of bliss—pinnacle so high that she had hardly dared hope ever to climb
     there—the thought of Bob and his despair flashes before her: her own remarks about the
     senselessness of kissing—about its being a custom suited only to savages, and her own great
     aversion to it—recur to her with a stab of remorse.
"You won't?" cries St. John, mistaking the cause of her
      silence, in a voice in which extreme surprise and profound
     alarm and pain are mixed in equal quantities.
Still no answer.
"If you have been making a fool of me all this time, you might, at least, have the civility
     to tell me so," he says, in a voice so sternly cold that remorse, coyness, and all other
     feelings merge into womanish fear.
"Don't blame me before I deserve it," she says, with a faint smile. "I will mar—"
She finishes her sentence on his breast.
Perfect happiness never lasts more than two seconds in this world; at the end of that time
     St. John's doubts return. He puts her a little way from him, that she may be a freer agent. "
     Esther," he says, "I half believe that you said 'yes' out of sheer fright; you thought I was
     going to upbraid you; and I am aware " (with a half smile) "that there are few things you would
     not do or leave undone to avoid a scolding; you did not say it readily, as if you were glad of
     it. I know that you have only known me three weeks, that I am not particularly likeable,
     especially by women, and that I always show to the worst possible advantage at home. All I beg
     of you is, tell me the truth: Do you like me, or do you not ?"
"I do like you."
"Like is such a comprehensive word," he says, with a slight, impatient contracting of his
     straight brows. "You like Mrs. Brown, I suppose, for washing your clothes?"
"I like you better than Mrs. Brown."
"I did not doubt that," he answers, laughing; "probably you like me better than Sir Thomas,
     than my mother, than Constance, perhaps; but such liking as that I would not stoop to pick off
     the ground. I must be first or nowhere. Am I first?"
"No, you are not," she answers firmly.

His countenance falls, as Cain's did.
" I am not !" he repeats, in a constrained voice. "Who is then, may I ask?"
"Jack, my brother—he is, and always will be!"
"Bah!" cries Gerard, laughing, and looking immensely relieved. "How you frightened me! I
     believe you did it on purpose, as you said to me about the brook this afternoon. After him, am
     I first?" 
"Yes."
"Before—what's his name?—the fellow that writes such a remarkably good hand—before Brandon?" 
"Why do you always worry me about him?" she exclaims, angrily, turning away.
"Why do you so strongly resent being worried about him?" retorts St. John suspiciously.
"It is wearisome to hear a person always harping on one string," she answers coldly. "Believe
     me or not, as you choose; but please spare me the trouble of these repeated and useless
     asseverations."
"I beg your pardon!" he says, his countenance clearing, and passing his arm round her
     half-shrinking, half-yielding form. "I will never dig him up as long as I live. Peace to his
     ashes! Oh darling!" he continues, his voice changing to an emphatic, eager, impassioned key—"I
     have been so little used to having things go as I wish, that I can hardly believe it is I that
     am standing here. Pinch me, that I may be sure that I am awake! Oh Esther! is it really true?
     Can you possibly be fond of me? So few people are! Not a soul in the wide world, I do believe,
     except my old mother. The girl that I told you about last night lay in my arms, and let me kiss
     her as you are doing; she kissed me back again, as you do not do; I looked into her eyes, and
     they seemed true as truth itself, and all the
      while she was lying to me : my very touch must have
     been hateful to her, as it is to you, perhaps?" 
"You are always referring to that—that person," says Esther, lifting great jealous
     eyes, and a mouth like a ripe cleft cherry, through the misty twilight towards him. "I perceive
     that I am only a pis aller after all. If you had ceased to
     care for her, you would have forgiven her long ago, and have given up measuring everybody else
     by her standard."
"I have forgiven her fully and freely," he answers, magnanimously, and standing heart to
     heart with a woman 
".....fairer than the evening air,
Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;
More lovely than the monarch of the sky,
In wanton Arethusa's azured arms."
He may afford to be magnanimous. "I not only forgive her, but hale down blessings on her own
     and her plunger's ugly head. To be candid," he ends, laughing, "I forgave her a year ago, when
     I met her at Brainton Station, grown fat, with a red nose, and a tribe of squinting children,
     who, but for the finger of Providence interposing, might have been mine."
Speaking, he lays his lips upon the blossom of her sweet red mouth; but she, pricked with the
     sudden smart of recollected treachery, draws away from him.
"Come," she says, with a slight shiver, "let us go home. We shall get into dreadful disgrace
     as it is; what will Sir Thomas say?"
"I can tell you beforehand," says St. John, gaily; "he will say, with his usual charming
     candour, that, if we ask his opinion, we are a couple of fools to go gadding about to strange
     churches just to see a parcel of lighted candles and squeaking little boys and popish
     mummeries; that, for his
      part, he has stuck to his parish church for the last fifty
     years, and means to do so to the end of the chapter; and that, if we don't choose to conform to
     the rules of his house, etc."
"Does he always say the same?" asks Esther, smiling.
"Always. A long and affectionate study of his character has enabled me to predicate with
     exactness what he will say on any great subject, Esther."
"How do you know that my name is Esther?" she asks naïvely. "You have never heard any one
     call me so."
"Do you forget the flyleaf of the Prayer-book that—Hang it! I was on the point of uttering
     the forbidden name!"
Smiling, he looks for an answering smile from her, but finds none.
"I have heard of you as Esther Craven from my youth up," he continues. "Before you came we
     speculated as to what 'Esther' Craven would be like; it was only when you arrived in
      propriá personá that you rose into the dignity of 'Miss' Craven."
"I hate being called Esther," she says, plaintively, with eyes down-drooped to the lush-green
     grasses that bow and make obeisance beneath her quick feet; "it always makes me feel as if I
     were in disgrace. Jack never calls me Esther unless he is vexed with. me. Call me
      Essie, please."
"Essie, then."
"Well?"
"I think it right to warn you" putting an arm of resolute possession, bolder than ever poor
     Brandon's had been, round her supple figure—for who is there in these grey evening fields to
     witness the embrace?)—"I think it right to warn you that I may very possibly grow like Sir
     Thomas in time; they tell me that I have a look of him already. I
      do not see that myself; but, even if that does come to pass,
     can you promise to like me even then?" 
"Even then."
"I may very probably d—n the servants, and be upset for a whole evening if there are lumps in
     the melted butter; I may very probably insist on your playing backgammon with me every evening,
     and insist, likewise, on your being invariably beaten. Can you bear even that?" 
"Even that."
They both laugh; but in Esther's laugh there is a ring of bitterness, which she herself
     hears, and wonders that he does not.
As they near the house, they see thin slits of crimson light through the dining-room
     shutters. Esther involuntarily quickens her pace.
"Why are you in such a hurry?" he asks, his eyes shining eager with reproachful passion in
     the passionless white starlight. "Who knows? to-morrow we may be dead; to-day we are as gods,
     knowing good and evil. This walk has not been to you what it has to me, or you would be in no
     haste to end it."
"I don't suppose it has," she answers, half-absently, with a sigh.
He had expected an eager disclaimer, and is disappointed.
"There can be but one explanation of that," he says, angrily.
"If you only knew—," begins Esther, with an uncertain half-inclination to confess, though
     late.
"If you are going to tell me anything disagreeable," he says, quickly putting his hand before
     her mouth, "stop! Tell me to-morrow, or the day after, but not now—not now! Let there be one
     day of my life on which I may look back and say, as God said when he looked back upon His new
     world, 'Behold, it is very good!'"

She is silent.
"And yet, perhaps, it would be better if I knew the end of your sentence; if I only
     knew—what?—how little you care about me?"
"You are mistaken," she answers, roused into vehemence. "I love you so well, that I have
     grown hateful to myself!" and having spoken thus oracularly, she raises herself on tip-toe,
     lifts two shy burning lips to his, and kisses him voluntarily. Then, amazed at her own
     audacity, clothed with shame as with a garment, she tears herself out of his arms, as in
     delightful surprise he catches her to his heart, and flies with frenzied haste into the
     house.
</div></body></text></TEI>