<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Red as a rose is she : VWWP edition </title><author>Broughton, Rhoda (1840-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1887</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X.
LUNCHEON comes, but no St. John. After luncheon Sir Thomas, Miss Blessington, and Miss Craven
     go out riding. Miss Craven's knowledge of horsemanship is confined to her exploits on a small,
     shaggy, down-hearted Welsh pony, concerning whom it would be difficult to predicate which he
     was fullest of, years or grass. Miss Blessington has lent her an old habit; it is much too big
     in the waist and shoulders for her, but a well-made garment always manages to adapt itself more
     or less to any figure, and she does not look amiss in it. It is a matter of very little
     consequence to her at the present moment how she looks; she is the arrantest coward in
     Christendom, and her heart sinks down to the bottom of her boots as she sees three horses that
     look unnaturally tall and depressingly cheerful issue through the great folding-doors that open
     into the stable-yard.
"Oh, Sir Thomas! it is a chesnut, is it? Don't they say that chesnuts always have very
     uncertain tempers? Oh!
      please—I'm rather frightened. I think, if you don't mind, I'd
     almost as soon—"
"Fiddlesticks!" answers Sir Thomas, roughly. "Cannot have my horses saddled and unsaddled
     every half-hour because you don't know your own mind. God bless my soul, child! Don't look as
     if you were going to be hanged! Why, you might ride her with a bit of worsted. Here, Simpson,
     look sharp, and put Miss Craven up."
After two abortive attempts, in the first of which she springs short, and glides ignobly to
     earth again, and in the second takes a bound that goes near to carrying her clean over her
     steed, after having given Simpson a kick in the face, and torn a hole in her borrowed habit,
     Miss Craven is at length settled in her seat.
It is a hot afternoon; after all, I think that miladi has the best of it, sitting in a
     garden-chair under a tulip tree, eating apricots. The deer, with dappled sides and heavy-
     horned heads, are herding about the rough, knotted feet of the great trees that stand here and
     there in solitary kingship about the park. They spread their ancient, out-stretched arms
     between earth and heaven, and man and beast rejoice in the shade thereof. The dust lies a
     hand-breadth thick upon the road; the nuts in the hedgerow, the half-ripe blackberries, the
     rag-wort in the grass—all merge their distinctive colours in one dirty-white mask.
" Is she going to kick, do you think?" asks Esther, in a mysterious whisper of Miss
     Blessington, across Sir Thomas. "Does not it mean that when they put their ears back?"
" I don't think you need be alarmed," answers Constance, with politely-veiled contempt; "it
     is only the flies that tease her."
The animal that inspires such alarm in Esther's mind, is a slight, showy thing, nearly
     thoroughbred; a capital lady's park hack. It is quiet enough, only that the quietness of
      a young, oats-fed mare, and of an antediluvian Welsh pony
     blown out with grass, are two different things. She is sidling along now, half across the road,
     coquetting with her own shadow.
"Oh, Sir Thomas!" (in an agonised voice) "why does not she walk straight? Why does she go
     like a crab?" 
"Pooh!" answers Sir Thomas, in his hard, loud voice; "it's only play!"
"If I'm upset, I don't much care whether it is in play or earnest," rejoins Esther,
     ruefully.
The glare from the road, the dust and the midges, make people keep their eyes closed as
     nearly as they can: so that it is not till they are close upon him that they perceive that the
     man who is dawdling along to meet them on a stout, grey cob, with his hat and coat and whiskers
     nearly as white as any miller's, is St. John. He looks rather annoyed at the rencontre.
"I have been over to Melford, Sir Thomas, to see that pointer of Burleigh's. It will not do
     at all; it's not half broken."
"You had better turn back with us, St. John," suggests Constance, graciously.
"No, thanks; much too hot!" 
"Au revoir, then," nodding her head and her tall hat, and
     about a million flies that are promenading on it, gracefully.
Esther's fears vanish.
"Three is no company," she says in a low voice, and making rather a plaintive little face as
     he passes her.
Drawn by the magnet that has succeeded in drawing to itself most things that it wished—viz.,
     a woman's inviting eyes—he turns the cob's head sharp round.
"But four is," he answers, with an eager smile, putting his horse alongside of hers.

She was rather compunctious the moment she had said it. It is reversing the order of
     things—the woman after the man;" the haystack after the cow;" as the homely old
     proverb says.
The road is broad, and for a little while they all four jog on abreast, as in a Roman
     chariot-race or a city omnibus—rather a dreary squadron.
"This is very dull," thinks Esther. "Oh! if I could lose my handkerchief, or my veil, or my
     gloves! Why cannot I drop my whip?"
No sooner said than done.
"Oh! Mr. Gerard, I am so sorry, I have dropped my whip!"
Mr. Gerard, of course, dismounts and picks it up; Sir Thomas and his ward pass on.
"What a happy thought that was of yours!" says St. John, wiping the little delicate switch
     before giving it back to her.
"Happy thought! What do you mean?" (reddening).
"Oh! it was accident, was it? I quite thought you had dropped it on purpose, and was lost in
     admiration of your ingenuity."
He looks at her searchingly as he speaks.
"I did drop it on purpose," she answers, blushing painfully. "Why do you make me
     tell the truth, when I did not mean to do so?"
"Don't you always tell truth?" (a little anxiously),
"Does anybody?"
"I hope so. A few men do, I think."
"As I have no pretensions to being a man, you cannot be surprised that my veracity is not my
     strongest point."
"You are only joking" (looking at her with uneasy intentness). " Please reassure me, by
     saying that you do not
      tell any greater number of fibs than every one is compelled
     to contribute towards the carrying on of society."
"Perhaps I do, and perhaps I do not."
He looks only half-satisfied with this oracular evasion; but does not press the point
     farther.
"It is not often that my papa and I take the air together; we think we have almost enough of
     each other's society in-doors."
"He is your father," says Esther, rather snappishly; a little out of humour with him for
     having put her out of conceit with herself.
"I never could see what claim to respect that was," answers he, gravely; " on the contrary I
     think that one's parents ought to apologise to one for bringing one, without asking one's
     leave, into such a disagreeable place as this world is."
"Disagreeable!" cries Esther, turning her eyes, broad open, in childish wonder upon him.
     "Disagreeable to you! Young and—"
"Beautiful, were you going to say?" 
"No, certainly not—and with plenty of money to make it pleasant?"
"But I have not plenty of money. I shall have, probably, when I'm too old to care
     about it! he is good for thirty years more, you know," nodding respectfully at Sir
     Thomas's broad, blue back.
"It must be tiring, waiting for dead men's shoes," says Esther, a little
     sardonically.
"Tiring! I believe you," says St. John, energetically; "it is worse than tiring—it
     is degrading. Do you suppose I do not think my own life quite as contemptible as you can? Take
     my word for it" (emphasising every syllable), "there is no class of men in England so much to
     be pitied
      as heirs to properties. We cannot dig; to beg we are
     ashamed."
"I never was heir to anything, so I cannot tell."
"I should have been a happier fellow, and worth something then, perhaps, if I had been
     somebody's tenth son, and had had to earn my bread quill-driving, or soap-boiling, or
     sawbones-ing. I think I see myself pounding away at a pestle and mortar in the
     surgery"(laughing). "I should have had a chance, then, of being liked for myself too, even if I
     did smell rather of pills and plaister; whereas now, if anybody looks pleasant at me, or says
     anything civil to me, I always think it is for love of Felton, not of me.""
"You should go about incognito, like the Lord of
     Burleigh."
"He was but a landscape painter, you know. Do you know that once, not a very many years ago,
     I had a ridiculous notion in my head that one ought to try and do some little good in the
     world? Thanks to Sir Thomas's assistance and example, I have very nearly succeeded in getting
     rid of that chimera. If I am asked at the Last Day how I have spent my life, I can say, I have
     shot a few bears in Norway, and a good many turkeys and grebe in Albania; I have killed several
     salmon in Connemara: I have made a fool of myself once, and a beast of myself many times."
"How did you make a fool of yourself?" pricking up her ears.
"Oh! never mind; it is a stupid story without any point, and I have not quite come to the
     pitch of dotage of telling senile anecdotes about myself. Here, let us turn in at this gate,
     and take a cut across the park: it is cooler, and we can have a nice gallop under the trees,
     without coming in for the full legacy of Sir Thomas's and Conny's dust, as we are doing
     now."
"But—but—is not it rather dangerous?" objects Esther,
      demurring. "Don't they sometimes put their feet into
     rabbit-holes, and tumble down and break their legs?"
"Frequently, I may almost say invariably," answers St. John, laughing, and opening
     the gate with the handle of his whip.
The soft, springy, green turf is certainly pleasanter than the hard, whity-brown turnpike
     road, and so the horses think as they break into a brisk canter. The quick air freshens the
     riders' faces—comes to them like comfortable words from Heaven to a soul in Purgatory—as they
     dash along under the trees, stooping their heads every now and then to avoid coming into
     contact with the great, low-spreading boughs.
Laughing, flushed, half-fright, half-enjoyment: 
" She looked so lovely as she swayed
The rein with dainty finger-tips; 
A man had given all other bliss,
And all his worldly worth for this—
To waste his whole heart in one kiss
Upon her perfect lips."
"Delicious! I'm not a bit afraid now; I bid defiance to the rabbit-holes," she cries, with
     little breathless pauses between the words.
Let no one shout before they are out of the wood. Hardly have the words left her mouth, when
     all at once, at their very feet almost, from among the seven-foot-high fern, where they have
     been crouching, rise a score of deer with sudden rustling; and, their slender knees bent,
     spring away with speedy grace through the mimic forest. Esther's mare, frightened at the sudden
     apparition (many horses are afraid of deer), swerves violently to the left; then gets her head
     down, and sets to kicking as if she would kick herself out of her skin.

"Mind! Take care! Hold tight! Keep her head up!" shouts St. John, in an agony.
Next moment the chesnut, with head in the air, nostrils extended, and bridle swinging to and)
     fro against her fore legs, tears riderless past him. In a second he is off, and at the side of
     the heap of blue cloth that is lying motionless among the buttercups.
"I'm not dead," says the heap, raising itself, and smiling rather a difficult smile up at
     him, as he leans over it or her, his burnt face whitened with extremest fear. " Don't look so
     frightened!" 
"Thank God!" he says, hardly above his breath, and more devoutly than he is in the habit of
     saying his prayers. "When I saw you there, lying all shapeless, I half thought—Oh !" (with a
     shudder) "I don't know what I thought."
"I must be tied on next time, mustn't I?" says Essie, putting up her hand to her head with an
     uncertain movement, as if she were not quite sure of finding it there. "Oh! Mr. Gerard,"—the
     colour coming back faintly to her lips and cheeks—"I do hate riding! it's horribly
     dangerous! quite as bad as a battle!"
"Quite!" acquiesces St. John, laughing heartily in his intense relief. "And you are quite
     sure you are not hurt?"
"Quite!"
"Really?"
"Really!"
To prove how perfectly intact she is, she jumps up; but, as she does so, her face grows
     slightly distorted with a look of pain, and she sinks back on her buttercup bed.
"Not quite sure, either; I seem to have done something stupid to my foot—turned it or twisted
     it."
So saying, she thrusts out from under her habit a small foot. It is a small—a
      very small—foot; but the boot in which it is cased is country made, and about three
     times
      too big for it; so that it might rattle in it, like a pea in
     a drum. Even at this affecting moment St. John cannot repress a slight feeling of
     disappointment.
"I'm awfully sorry! Whereabouts does it hurt? There?" putting his fingers gently on the
     slender, rounded ankle.
"Yes, a little."
"I'm awfully sorry!" (You see there is not much variety in his laments.) "What can I do for
     it? gallop home as hard as I can, and make them send the carriage?"
"With a doctor, a lawyer, and a parson in it? No, I think not."
"But you cannot sit here all night. Could you ride home, do you think?"
"On that dreadful beast?" with a horrified intonation.
"But if I lead her all the way?" 
"Very well" (reluctantly); "but (brightening a little) I cannot ride her; she is not
     here."
"I suppose I must be going to look after her," says St. John, dragging himself up very
     unwillingly. "Brute! she is as cunning as Old Nick ! And you are sure you don't mind being left
     here by yourself for a minute or two?"
"Not if there are no horses within reach," she answers, with an innocent smile, which he
     carries away with him through the sunshine and the fern and the grass.
Essie spends full half an hour pushing out, pinching in, smoothing and stroking Miss
     Blessington's caved-in hat; full a quarter of an hour in picking every grass and sedge and
     oxeye that grew within reach of her destroying arm; and full another quarter in thinking what a
     pleasant, manly, straightforward face St. John's is—what a thoroughly terrified face it looked
     when she met it within an inch of her own nose after her disgraceful bouleversement—what a much better height five feet ten is for all practical
     purposes than six feet four.

At the end of the fourth quarter Mr. Gerard returns, with a fire hardly inferior to St.
     Anthony's in his face; with his hair cleaving damply to his brows, and without the mare.
"Would not let me get within half a mile of her! far too knowing! Brute! and now she'll be
     sure to go and knock the saddle to pieces, and then there'll be the devil to pay!" 
"I'm so sorry," says Esther, looking up sympathisingly, with her lap full of decapitated
     oxeyes.
"So am I, for your sake: you'll have to ride the cob home."
"I shall have to turn into a man, then," she says, glancing rather doubtfully at the male
     saddle.
"No, you won't," (laughing).
He rises, and unfastens the cob from the tree-branch to which he has been tied. He has been
     indulging a naturally greedy disposition—biting off leaves and eating them—until he has made
     his bit and his mouth as green as green peas.
"You must let me put you up, I think," says Gerard bending down and looking into his
     companion's great, sweet eyes, under the rim of her battered, intoxicating-looking hat.
"Must I?" (lowering her eyelids shyly.)
"Yes; do you mind much?"
"No—o."
He stoops and lifts her gently. He is not a Samson or a prize-fighter, and well grown young
     women of seventeen are not generally feather-weights; but yet it seems to him that the second
     occupied in raising her from the ground and placing her in the saddle was shorter than other
     seconds.
A man's arms are not sticks or bits of iron, that they can hold a beautiful woman without
     feeling it. St. John's blood is giving little quick throbs of pleasure. His arms seem to feel
     the pressure of that pleasant burden long after they have been emptied of it.

"I think you must let me hold you," he says, gently and very respectfully passing his arm
     round her waist.
"No, no!" she cries, hastily, pulling herself away—"no need!—no need at all! I shall not
     fall."
She feels an overpowering shrinking from the enforced, unavoidable familiarity. It does not
     arise from any distaste for St. John certainly, nor yet from any quixotic loyalty to Bob; it
     springs from a new, unknown, uncomprehended shyness.
"Very well," he answers, quietly, releasing her instantly, and taking the bridle in his hand.
     " But I'm afraid you will find that you are mistaken."
They set forward across the park, at a foot's pace and in silence. Esther twists her hands in
     the cob's mane, and tries to persuade herself that pommelless pigskin does not make a slippery
     seat. Every two paces she slides down an inch or so, and then recovers herself with an awkward
     jerk. The sun is hot. Now and then, as the cob puts his foot on a mole-hill, or some other
     slight inequality in the ground, her ankle bumps against the saddle-flap. She feels turning
     giddy and sick with the heat and the pain.
"Mr. Gerard! Mr. Gerard! I'm falling!" she calls out loud, stretching out her arms to him,
     and clutching hold of his shoulder with a violence and tenacity that she herself is not in the
     least aware of.
He is magnanimous. He does not exult over her; he does not say, "I knew how it would be; I
     told you so!" He only says, in a kind, anxious voice, and plainlier still with kind, anxious
     eyes, "I'm afraid you are in great pain?" and replaces the rejected arm in its former obnoxious
     position.
As they enter the lodge gate, they see Sir Thomas and his ward advancing down the avenue
     towards them. Miss Blessington is a great favourite of Sir Thomas's. She is
      good to look at, and hardly ever speaks; or, if she does, it
     is only to say, "Yea, yea, and Nay, nay."
"Now for an exchange of civilities," says Gerard, rather bitterly; "even at this distance I
     can see him getting the steam up."
" Miss Craven has had a fall, Sir Thomas, and hurt herself," he remarks, explanatorily, as
     soon as the two parties come within speaking distance.
"Broken the mare's knees, I suppose?" cries Sir Thomas, loudly, taking no notice whatever of
     Miss Craven's casualties. "Some fool's play, of course; larking over the palings, I dare say.
     Well, sir, what have you done with her? where have you left her? out with it!" (lashing himself
     up into an irrational turkeycock fury.)
"Damn the mare!" answered St. John in a rage, growing rather white, and forgetting his
     manners.
St. John's rages, when he does get into them, which is not very often, are far worse ones
     than his papa's, and so the latter knows, and is cowed by the first symptoms of the approach of
     one.
Miss Blessington looks up shocked. This jeune personne bien
      élevée always is shocked at whatever people ought to be shocked at—Colenso,
     Swinburne, skittles, etc.
"You are not much hurt, really, I hope?" she says, suavely, walking along beside
     Esther, while Sir Thomas and his heir wrangle in the background. "Which way did you come, and
     what has become of your horse?" 
"We came through the park," answers Esther, holding on by her eyelids to the cob's slippery
     back; "so I suppose the horse is there still. Mr. Gerard tried to catch it, and could not."
"Through the park!" repeats Miss Blessington, with a slight smile of superior intelligence.
     "Oh! I see; a short cut home! Poor St. John has such a horror of taking a
      ride for riding's sake, that he always tries to shorten his
     penance as much as possible!"
</div></body></text></TEI>