<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Marriage, by H. G.
      Wells</title><author>Wells, Herbert George (1866-1946)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1912</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER THE FIRST
Settling Down

It was in a boat among reeds upon the lake of Orta
       that Trafford first became familiarized with the idea that Marjorie was capable
      of debt.
"Oh, I ought to have told you," she began, apropos of nothing.
Her explanation was airy; she had let the thing slip out of her mind for a time. But there
      were various debts to Oxbridge tradespeople. How much? Well, rather a lot. Of course, the
      tradespeople were rather enticing when first one went up——How much, anyhow?
"Oh, about fifty pounds," said Marjorie, after her manner. "Not more. I've not kept
      all the bills; and some haven't come in. You know how slow they are."
"These things will happen," said Trafford, though, as a matter of fact, nothing of
      the sort had happened in his case. "However, you'll be able to pay as soon as you get home,
      and get them all off your mind."
"I think fifty pounds will clear me," said Marjorie, clinging to her long-established total,
      "if you'll let me have that."
"Oh, we don't do things like that," said Trafford. "I'm arranging that my current account
      will be a sort of joint account, and your signature will be as good as mine—for the purpose of
      drawing, at least. You'll have your own cheque-book——"
"I don't understand, quite," said Marjorie.
"You'll have your own cheque-book and write
       cheques as you want them. That seems the simplest way to me."
"Of course," said Marjorie. "But isn't this—rather unusual? Father always used to allowance
      mother."
"It's the only decent way according to my ideas," said Trafford. "A man shouldn't marry when
      he can't trust."
"Of course not," said Marjorie. Something between fear and compunction wrung her. "Do you
      think you'd better?" she asked, very earnestly.
"Better?"
"Do this."
"Why not?"
"It's—it's so generous."
He didn't answer. He took up an oar and began to push out from among the reeds with
      something of the shy awkwardness of a boy who becomes apprehensive of thanks. He stole a
      glance at her presently and caught her expression—there was something very solemn and intent
      in her eyes—and he thought what a grave, fine thing his Marjorie could be.
But, indeed, her state of mind was quite exceptionally confused. She was disconcerted—and
      horribly afraid of herself.
"Do you mean that I can spend what I like?" asked Marjorie.
"Just as I may," he said.
"I wonder," said Marjorie again, "if I'd better."
She was tingling with delight at this freedom, and she knew she was not fit for its
      responsibility. She just came short of a passionate refusal of his proposal. He was still so
      new to her, and things were so wonderful, or I think she would have made that refusal.
"You've got to," said Trafford, and ended the
       matter.
So Marjorie was silent—making good resolutions.

Perhaps some day it may be possible to tell in English again, in the language of Shakspeare
      and Herrick, of the passion, the tenderness, the beauty, and the delightful familiarizations
      of a happy honeymoon; suffice it now, in this delicate period, to record only how our two
      young lovers found one day that neither had a name for the other. He said she could be nothing
      better than Marjorie to him; and she, after a number of unsuccessful experiments, settled down
      to the old school-boy nickname made out of his initials, R. A. G.
"Dick," she said, "is too bird-like and boy-like. Andrew I can't abide. Goodwin gives one no
      chances for current use. Rag you must be. Mag and Rag—poor innocents! Old rag!"
"Mag," he said, "has its drawbacks! The street-boy in London says, 'Shut your mag.' No, I
      think I shall stick to Marjorie...."
All honeymoons must end at last, so back they came to London, still very bright and happy.
      And then, Marjorie, whose eyes had changed from flashing stones to darkly shining pools of
      blue, but whose soul had still perhaps to finds its depths, set herself to the business of
      decorating and furnishing the little house Mrs. Trafford had found for them within ten minutes
      of her own. Meanwhile they lived in lodgings.
There can be no denying that Marjorie began her furnishing with severely virtuous
      intentions. She was very particular to ask Trafford several times what he thought she might
      spend upon the enterprise. He had
       already a bedroom and a study equipped, and he threw out three hundred pounds as
      his conception of an acceptable figure. "Very well," said Marjorie, with a note of great
      precision, "now I shall know," and straightway that sum took a place in her imagination that
      was at once definitive and protective, just as her estimate of fifty pounds for her Oxbridge
      debts had always been. She assured herself she was going to do things, and she assured herself
      she was doing things, on three hundred pounds. At times the astonishment of two or three
      school friends, who joined her in her shopping, stirred her to a momentary surprise at the way
      she was managing to keep things within that limit, and following a financial method that had,
      after all, in spite of some momentary and already nearly forgotten distresses, worked very
      well at Oxbridge, she refrained from any additions until all the accounts had come to
      hand.
It was an immense excitement shopping to make a home. There was in her composition a strain
      of constructive artistry with such concrete things, a strain that had hitherto famished. She
      was making a beautiful, secure little home for Trafford, for herself, for possibilities—remote
      perhaps, but already touching her imagination with the anticipation of warm, new, wonderful
      delights. There should be simplicity indeed in this home, but no bareness, no harshness, never
      an ugliness nor a discord. She had always loved colour in the skies, in the landscapes, in the
      texture of stuffs and garments; now out of the chaotic skein of countless shops she could
      choose and pick and mingle her threads in a glow of feminine self-expression.
On three hundred pounds, that is to say—as a maximum.
The house she had to deal with was, like Mrs.
       Trafford's, old and rather small; it was partly to its lack of bedroom
      accommodation, but much more to the invasion of the street by the back premises of Messrs.
      Siddons & Thrale, the great Chelsea outfitters, that the lowness of the rent was due, a
      lowness which brought it within the means of Trafford. Marjorie knew very clearly that her
      father would say her husband had taken her to live in a noisy slum, and that made her all the
      keener to ensure that every good point in the interior told to its utmost, and that whatever
      was to be accessible to her family should glow with a refined but warm prosperity. The room
      downstairs was shapely, and by ripping off the papered canvas of the previous occupier, some
      very dilapidated but admirably proportioned panelling was brought to light. The dining-room
      and study door on the ground floor, by a happy accident, were of mahogany, with really very
      beautiful brass furnishings; and the dining-room window upon the minute but by no means
      offensive paved garden behind, was curved and had a little shallow balcony of ironwork, half
      covered by a devitalized but leafy grapevine. Moreover, the previous occupier had equipped the
      place with electric light and a bathroom of almost American splendour on the landing,
      glass-shelved, white-tiled, and white painted, so that it was a delight to go into.
Marjorie's mind leapt very rapidly to the possibilities of this little establishment. The
      panelling must be done and done well, anyhow; that would be no more than a wise economy,
      seeing it might at any time help them to re-let; it would be painted white, of course, and
      thus set the key for a clean brightness of colour throughout. The furniture would stand out
      against the softly shining white, and its line and proportions must be therefore the primary
      qualities to consider as
       she bought it. The study was much narrower than the dining-room, and so the
      passage, which the agent called the hall, was much broader and more commodious behind the
      happily wide staircase than in front, and she was able to banish out of the sight of the
      chance visitor all that litter of hat-stand and umbrella-stand, letters, boxes arriving and
      parcels to post, which had always offended her eye at home. At home there had been often the
      most unsightly things visible, one of Theo's awful caps, or his school books, and not
      infrequently her father's well-worn and all too fatally comfortable house slippers. A good
      effect at first is half the victory of a well done house, and Marjorie accomplished another of
      her real economies here by carpeting hall and staircase with a fine-toned, rich-feeling and
      rather high-priced blue carpet, held down by very thick brass stair-rods. She hung up four
      well-chosen steel engravings, put a single Chippendale chair in the hall, and a dark old Dutch
      clock that had turned out to be only five pounds when she had expected the shopman to say
      eleven or twelve, on the half-landing. That was all. Round the corner by the study door was a
      mahogany slab, and the litter all went upon a capacious but very simple dark-stained hat-stand
      and table that were out of the picture entirely until you reached the stairs.
Her dining-room was difficult for some time. She had equipped that with a dark oak Welsh
      dresser made very bright with a dessert service that was, in view of its extremely decorative
      quality, remarkably cheap, and with some very pretty silver-topped glass bottles and flasks.
      This dresser and a number of simple but shapely facsimiles of old chairs, stood out against a
      nearly primrose paper, very faintly patterned, and a dark blue carpet with a margin of dead
      black-stained wood. Over the mantel was a German
       colour-print of waves full of sunlight breaking under cliffs, and between this
      and the window were dark bookshelves and a few bright-coloured books. On the wall,
      black-framed, were four very good Japanese prints, rich in greenish-blues and blueish-greys
      that answered the floor, and the window curtains took up some of the colours of the German
      print. But something was needed towards the window, she felt, to balance the warmly shining
      plates upon the dresser. The deep rose-red of the cherries that adorned them was too isolated,
      usurped too dominating a value. And while this was weighing upon her mind she saw in a window
      in Regent Street a number of Bokhara hangings very nobly displayed. They were splendid pieces
      of needlework, particularly glorious in their crimsons and reds, and suddenly it came to her
      that it was just one of these, one that had great ruby flowers upon it with dead-blue
      interlacings, that was needed to weld her gay-coloured scheme together. She hesitated, went
      half-way to Piccadilly Circus, turned back and asked the prices. The prices were towering
      prices, ten, fifteen, eighteen guineas, and when at last the shopman produced one with all the
      charm of colour she sought at eight, it seemed like ten guineas snatched back as they dropped
      from her hands. And still hesitating, she had three that pleased her most sent home, "on
      approval," before she decided finally to purchase one of them. But the trial was conclusive.
      And then, struck with a sudden idea, she carried off a long narrow one she had had no idea of
      buying before into the little study behind. Suppose, she thought, instead of hanging two
      curtains as anybody else would do in that window, she ran this glory of rich colour across
      from one side on a great rod of brass.
She was giving the study the very best of her
       attention. After she had lapsed in some other part of the house from the
      standards of rigid economy she had set up, she would as it were restore the balance by adding
      something to the gracefully dignified arrangement of this den he was to use. And the brass rod
      of the Bokhara hanging that was to do instead of curtains released her mind somehow to the
      purchase of certain old candlesticks she had hitherto resisted. They were to stand, bored to
      carry candle electric lights, on either corner of the low bookcase that faced the window. They
      were very heavy, very shapely candlesticks, and they cost thirty-five shillings. They looked
      remarkably well when they were put up, except that a sort of hollowness appeared between them
      and clamoured for a delightful old brass-footed workbox she had seen in a shop in Baker
      Street. Enquiry confirmed her quick impression that this was a genuine piece (of quite
      exceptional genuineness) and that the price—they asked five pounds ten and came down to five
      guineas—was in accordance with this. It was a little difficult (in spite of the silent hunger
      between the candlesticks) to reconcile this particular article with her dominating idea of an
      austerely restrained expenditure, until she hit upon the device of calling it a hors
       d'œuvre, and regarding it not as furniture but as a present from herself to Trafford
      that happened to fall in very agreeably with the process of house furnishing. She decided she
      would some day economise its cost out of her dress allowance. The bookcase on which it stood
      was a happy discovery in Kensington, just five feet high, and with beautiful oval glass
      fronts, and its capacity was supplemented and any excess in its price at least morally
      compensated by a very tall, narrow, distinguished-looking set of open shelves that had been
      made for some special corner in another house, and which anyhow
       were really and truly dirt cheap. The desk combined grace and good proportions
      to an admirable extent, the fender of pierced brass looked as if it had always lived in
      immediate contact with the shapely old white marble fireplace, and the two arm-chairs were
      marvels of dignified comfort. By the fireplace were a banner-shaped needlework firescreen, a
      white sheepskin hearthrug, a little patch and powder table adapted to carry books, and a
      green-shaded lamp, grouped in a common inaudible demand for a reader in slippers. Trafford,
      when at last the apartment was ready for his inspection, surveyed these arrangements with a
      kind of dazzled admiration.
"By Jove!" he said. "How little people know of the homes of the Poor!"
Marjorie was so delighted with his approval that she determined to show Mrs. Trafford next
      day how prettily at least her son was going to live. The good lady came and admired
      everything, and particularly the Bokhara hangings. She did not seem to appraise, but something
      set Marjorie talking rather nervously of a bargain-hunter's good fortune. Mrs. Trafford
      glanced at the candlesticks and the low bookcase, and returned to the glowing piece of
      needlework that formed the symmetrical window curtain in the study. She took it in her hand,
      and whispered, "beautiful!"
"But aren't these rather good?" asked Mrs. Trafford.
Marjorie answered, after a little pause. "They're not too good for him," she
      said.

And now these young people had to resume life in London in earnest. The orchestral
      accompaniment of the world at large began to mingle with their hitherto
       unsustained duet. It had been inaudible in Italy. In Chelsea it had sounded,
      faintly perhaps but distinctly, from their very first inspection of the little house. A
      drawing-room speaks of callers, a dining-room of lunch-parties and dinners. It had swayed
      Marjorie from the front door inward.
During their honeymoon they had been gloriously unconscious of comment. Now Marjorie began
      to show herself keenly sensitive to the advent of a score of personalities, and very anxious
      to show just how completely successful in every sense her romantic disobedience had been. She
      knew she had been approved of, admired, condemned, sneered at, thoroughly discussed. She felt
      it her first duty to Trafford, to all who had approved of her flight, to every one, herself
      included, to make this marriage obviously, indisputably, a success, a success not only by her
      own standards but by the standards of anyonesoever who chose to sit in judgment on her.
There was Trafford. She felt she had to extort the admission from every one that he was the
      handsomest, finest, ablest, most promising and most delightful man a prominent humorist was
      ever jilted for. She wanted them to understand clearly just all that Trafford was—and that
      involved, she speedily found in practice, making them believe a very great deal that as yet
      Trafford wasn't. She found it practically impossible not to anticipate his election to the
      Royal Society and the probability of a more important professorship. She felt that anyhow he
      was an F.R.S. in the sight of God....
It was almost equally difficult not to indicate a larger income than facts justified.
It was entirely in Marjorie's vein in those early days that she would want to win on every
      score and by every standard of reckoning. If Marjorie had
       been a general she would have counted no victory complete if the struggle was
      not sustained and desperate, and if it left the enemy with a single gun or flag, or herself
      with so much as a man killed or wounded. The people she wanted to impress varied very widely.
      She wanted to impress the Carmel girls, and the Carmel girls, she knew, with their racial
      trick of acute appraisement, were only to be won by the very highest quality all round. They
      had, she knew, two standards of quality, cost and distinction. As far as possible, she would
      give them distinction. But whenever she hesitated over something on the verge of cheapness the
      thought of those impending judgments tipped the balance. The Carmel girls were just two
      influential representatives of a host. She wanted to impress quite a number of other school
      and college friends. There were various shy, plastic-spirited, emotional creatures, of course,
      for the most part with no confidence in their own appearance, who would be impressed quite
      adequately enough by Trafford's good looks and witty manner and easy temper. They might
      perhaps fall in love with him and become slavish to her after the way of their kind, and
      anyhow they would be provided for, but there were plenty of others of a harder texture whose
      tests would be more difficult to satisfy. There were girls who were the daughters of prominent
      men, who must be made to understand that Trafford was prominent, girls who were well
      connected, who must be made to realize the subtle excellence of Trafford's blood. As she
      thought of Constance Graham, for example, or Ottiline Winchelsea, she felt the strongest
      disposition to thicken the by no means well authenticated strands that linked Trafford with
      the Traffords of Trafford-over-Lea. She went about the house dreaming a little apprehensively
      of these coming
       calls, and the pitiless light of criticism they would bring to bear, not indeed
      upon her happiness—that was assured—but upon her success.
The social side of the position would have to be strained to the utmost, Marjorie felt, with
      Aunt Plessington. The thought of Aunt Plessington made her peculiarly apprehensive. Aunt
      Plessington had to the fullest extent that contempt for merely artistic or scientific people
      which sits so gracefully upon the administrative English. You see people of that sort do not
      get on in the sense that a young lawyer or barrister gets on. They do not make steps; they
      boast and quarrel and are jealous perhaps, but that steady patient shove upward seems beyond
      their intelligence. The energies God manifestly gave them for shoving, they dissipate in the
      creation of weak beautiful things and unremunerative theories, or in the establishment of
      views sometimes diametrically opposed to the ideas of influential people. And they are
      "queer"—socially. They just moon about doing this so-called "work" of theirs, and even when
      the judgment of eccentric people forces a kind of reputation upon them—Heaven knows why?—they
      make no public or social use of it. It seemed to Aunt Plessington that the artist and the
      scientific man were dealt with very neatly and justly in the Parable of the Buried Talent.
      Moreover their private lives were often scandalous, they married for love instead of interest,
      often quite disadvantageously, and their relationships had all the instability that is natural
      upon such a foundation. And, after all, what good were they? She had never met an artist or a
      prominent imaginative writer or scientific man that she had not been able to subdue in a
      minute or so by flat contradiction, and if necessary slightly
       raising her voice. They had little or no influence even upon their own public
      appointments....
The thought of the invasion of her agreeable little back street establishment by this
      Britannic system of judgments filled Marjorie's heart with secret terrors. She felt she had to
      grapple with and overcome Aunt Plessington, or be for ever fallen—at least, so far as that
      amiable lady's report went, and she knew it went pretty far. She wandered about the house
      trying to imagine herself Aunt Plessington.
Immediately she felt the gravest doubts whether the whole thing wasn't too graceful and
      pretty. A rich and rather massive ugliness, of course, would have been the thing to fetch Aunt
      Plessington. Happily, it was Aunt Plessington's habit to veil her eyes with her voice. She
      might not see very much.
The subjugation of Aunt Plessington was difficult, but not altogether hopeless, Marjorie
      felt, provided her rejection of Magnet had not been taken as an act of personal ingratitude.
      There was a case on her side. She was discovering, for example, that Trafford had a really
      very considerable range of acquaintance among quite distinguished people; big figures like
      Evesham and MacHaldo, for example, were intelligently interested in the trend of his work. She
      felt this gave her a basis for Plessingtonian justifications. She could produce those
      people—as one shows one's loot. She could imply, "Oh, Love and all that nonsense! Certainly
      not! This is what I did it for." With skill and care and good luck, and a word here
      and there in edgeways, she believed she might be able to represent the whole adventure as the
      well-calculated opening of a campaign on soundly Plessingtonian lines. Her marriage to
      Trafford, she tried to persuade herself, might be presented as something almost as brilliant
      and startling as her aunt's swoop
       upon her undistinguished uncle.
She might pretend that all along she had seen her way to things, to coveted dinner-tables
      and the familiarity of coveted guests, to bringing people together and contriving
      arrangements, to influence and prominence, to culminations and intrigues impossible in the
      comparatively specialized world of a successful humorist and playwright, and so at last to
      those high freedoms of authoritative and if necessary offensive utterance in a strangulated
      contralto, and from a position of secure eminence, which is the goal of all virtuously
      ambitious Englishwomen of the governing classes—that is to say, of all virtuously ambitious
      Englishwomen....

And while such turbid solicitudes as these were flowing in again from the London world to
      which she had returned, and fouling the bright, romantic clearness of Marjorie's life,
      Trafford, in his ampler, less detailed way was also troubled about their coming re-entry into
      society. He, too, had his old associations.
For example, he was by no means confident of the favourable judgments of his mother upon
      Marjorie's circle of school and college friends, whom he gathered from Marjorie's talk were
      destined to play a large part in this new phase of his life. She had given him very ample
      particulars of some of them; and he found them interesting rather than richly attractive
      personalities. It is to be noted that while he thought always of Marjorie as a beautiful,
      grown-up woman, and his mate and equal, he was still disposed to regard her intimate friends
      as schoolgirls of an advanced and aggressive type....
Then that large circle of distinguished acquaintances
       which Marjorie saw so easily and amply utilized for the subjugation of Aunt
      Plessington didn't present itself quite in that service to Trafford's private thoughts. He
      hadn't that certitude of command over them, nor that confidence in their unhesitating approval
      of all he said and did. Just as Marjorie wished him to shine in the heavens over all her
      people, so, in regard to his associates, he was extraordinarily anxious that they should
      realize, and realize from the outset without qualification or hesitation, how beautiful, brave
      and delightful she was. And you know he had already begun to be aware of an evasive feeling in
      his mind that at times she did not altogether do herself justice—he scarcely knew as yet how
      or why....
She was very young....
One or two individuals stood out in his imagination, representatives and symbols of the
      rest. Particularly there was that old giant, Sir Roderick Dover, who had been, until recently,
      the Professor of Physics in the great Oxford laboratories. Dover and Trafford had one of those
      warm friendships which spring up at times between a rich-minded man whose greatness is assured
      and a young man of brilliant promise. It was all the more affectionate because Dover had been
      a friend of Trafford's father. These two and a group of other careless-minded, able,
      distinguished, and uninfluential men at the Winton Club affected the end of the smoking-room
      near the conservatory in the hours after lunch, and shared the joys of good talk and fine
      jesting about the big fireplace there. Under Dover's broad influence they talked more ideas
      and less gossip than is usual with English club men. Twaddle about appointments, about
      reputations, topics from the morning's papers, London architecture, and the commerce in "good
       stories" took refuge at the other end in the window bays or by the further
      fireplace. Trafford only began to realize on his return to London how large a share this
      intermittent perennial conversation had contributed to the atmosphere of his existence. Amidst
      the romantic circumstances of his flight with Marjorie he had forgotten the part these men
      played in his life and thoughts. Now he was enormously exercised in the search for a
      reconciliation between these, he felt, incommensurable factors.
He was afraid of what might be Sir Roderick's unspoken judgment on Marjorie and the house
      she had made—though what was there to be afraid of? He was still more afraid—and this was even
      more remarkable—of the clear little judgments—hard as loose, small diamonds in a bed—that he
      thought Marjorie might pronounce on Sir Roderick. He had never disguised from himself that Sir
      Roderick was fat—nobody who came within a hundred yards of him could be under any illusion
      about that—and that he drank a good deal, ate with a cosmic spaciousness, loved a cigar, and
      talked and laughed with a freedom that sometimes drove delicate-minded new members into the
      corners remotest from the historical fireplace. Trafford knew himself quite definitely that
      there was a joy in Dover's laugh and voice, a beauty in his face (that was somehow mixed up
      with his healthy corpulence), and a breadth, a charity, a leonine courage in his mind (that
      was somehow mixed up with his careless freedom of speech) that made him an altogether
      satisfactory person.
But supposing Marjorie didn't see any of that!
Still, he was on the verge of bringing Sir Roderick home when a talk at the club one day
      postponed that introduction of the two extremes of Trafford's existence for quite a
      considerable time.
Those were the days of the first enthusiasms of
       the militant suffrage movement, and the occasional smashing of a Downing Street
      window or an assault upon a minister kept the question of woman's distinctive intelligence and
      character persistently before the public. Godley Buzard, the feminist novelist, had been the
      guest of some member to lunch, and the occasion was too provocative for any one about Dover's
      fireplace to avoid the topic. Buzard's presence, perhaps, drove Dover into an extreme position
      on the other side; he forgot Trafford's new-wedded condition, and handled this great argument,
      an argument which has scarcely progressed since its beginning in the days of Plato and
      Aristophanes, with the freedoms of an ancient Greek and the explicitness of a modern
      scientific man.
He opened almost apropos of nothing. "Women," he said, "are inferior—and you can't get away
      from it."
"You can deny it," said Buzard.
"In the face of the facts," said Sir Roderick. "To begin with, they're several inches
      shorter, several pounds lighter; they've less physical strength in footpounds."
"More endurance," said Buzard.
"Less sensitiveness merely. All those are demonstrable things—amenable to figures and
      apparatus. Then they stand nervous tensions worse, the breaking-point comes sooner. They have
      weaker inhibitions, and inhibition is the test of a creature's position in the mental
      scale."
He maintained that in the face of Buzard's animated protest. Buzard glanced at their moral
      qualities. "More moral!" cried Dover, "more self-restraint! Not a bit of it! Their desires and
      passions are weaker even than their controls; that's all. Weaken restraints and they show
      their quality. A
       drunken woman is far worse than a drunken man. And as for their biological
      significance——"
"They are the species," said Buzard, "and we are the accidents."
"They are the stolon and we are the individualized branches. They are the stem and we are
      the fruits. Surely it's better to exist than just transmit existence. And that's a woman's
      business, though we've fooled and petted most of 'em into forgetting it...."
He proceeded to an attack on the intellectual quality of women. He scoffed at the woman
      artist, at feminine research, at what he called the joke of feminine philosophy. Buzard broke
      in with some sentences of reply. He alleged the lack of feminine opportunity, inferior
      education.
"You don't or won't understand me," said Dover. "It isn't a matter of education or
      opportunity, or simply that they're of inferior capacity; it lies deeper than that. They don't
       want to do these things. They're different."
"Precisely," ejaculated Buzard, as if he claimed a score.
"They don't care for these things. They don't care for art or philosophy, or literature or
      anything except the things that touch them directly. That's their peculiar difference. Hunger
      they understand, and comfort, and personal vanity and desire, furs and chocolate and husbands,
      and the extreme importance conferred upon them by having babies at infrequent intervals. But
      philosophy or beauty for its own sake, or dreams! Lord! no! The Mahometans know they haven't
      souls, and they say it. We know, and keep it up that they have. Haven't all we scientific men
      had 'em in our laboratories working; don't we know the papers they turn out? Every sane
       man of five and forty knows something of the disillusionment of the feminine
      dream, but we who've had the beautiful creatures under us, weighing rather badly, handling
      rather weakly, invariably missing every fine detail and all the implications of our
      researches, never flashing, never leaping, never being even thoroughly bad,—we're specialists
      in the subject. At the present time there are far more educated young women than educated
      young men available for research work—and who wants them? Oh, the young professors who've
      still got ideals perhaps. And in they come, and if they're dull, they just voluminously do
      nothing, and if they're bright, they either marry your demonstrator or get him into a mess.
      And the work——? It's nothing to them. No woman ever painted for the love of painting, or sang
      for the sounds she made, or philosophized for the sake of wisdom as men do——"
Buzard intervened with instances. Dover would have none of them. He displayed astonishing
      and distinctive knowledge. "Madame Curie," clamoured Buzard, "Madame Curie."
"There was Curie," said Dover. "No woman alone has done such things. I don't say women
      aren't clever," he insisted. "They're too clever. Give them a man's track or a man's intention
      marked and defined, they'll ape him to the life——"
Buzard renewed his protests, talking at the same time as Dover, and was understood to say
      that women had to care for something greater than art or philosophy. They were custodians of
      life, the future of the race——
"And that's my crowning disappointment," cried Dover. "If there was one thing in which you
      might think women would show a sense of some divine purpose in life, it is in the matter of
      children—and they
       show about as much care in that matter, oh!—as rabbits. Yes, rabbits! I stick to
      it. Look at the things a nice girl will marry; look at the men's children she'll consent to
      bring into the world. Cheerfully! Proudly! For the sake of the home and the clothes. Nasty
      little beasts they'll breed without turning a hair. All about us we see girls and women
      marrying ugly men, dull and stupid men, ill-tempered dyspeptic wrecks, sickly young fools,
      human rats—rats!"
"No, no!" cried Trafford to Dover.
Buzard's voice clamoured that all would be different when women had the vote.
"If ever we get a decent care for Eugenics, it will come from men," said a white-faced
      little man on the sofa beside Trafford, in the confidential tone of one who tells a
      secret.
"Doing it cheerfully!" insisted Dover.
Trafford in mid-protest was suddenly stricken into silence by a memory. It was as if the
      past had thrown a stone at the back of his head and hit it smartly. He nipped his sentence in
      the bud. He left the case for women to Buzard....
He revived that memory again on his way home. It had been in his mind overlaid by a
      multitude of newer, fresher things, but now he took it out and looked at it. It was queer, it
      was really very queer, to think that once upon a time, not so very long ago, Marjorie had been
      prepared to marry Magnet. Of course she had hated it, but still——....
There is much to be discovered about life, even by a brilliant and rising young Professor of
      Physics....
Presently Dover, fingering the little glass of yellow chartreuse he had hitherto forgotten
      in the heat of controversy, took a more personal turn.
"Don't we know," he said, and made the limpid
       amber vanish in his pause. "Don't we know we've got to manage and control
      'em—just as we've got to keep 'em and stand the racket of their misbehaviour? Don't our
      instincts tell us? Doesn't something tell us all that if we let a woman loose with our honour
      and trust, some other man will get hold of her? We've tried it long enough now, this theory
      that a woman's a partner and an equal; we've tried it long enough to see some of the results,
      and does it work? Does it? A woman's a prize, a possession, a responsibility, something to
      take care of and be careful about.... You chaps, if you'll forgive me, you advanced chaps,
      seem to want to have the women take care of you. You seem always to want to force decisions on
      them, make them answerable for things that you ought to decide and answer for.... If one
      could, if one could! If!... But they're not helps—that's a dream—they're distractions,
      gratifications, anxieties, dangers, undertakings...."
Buzard got in his one effective blow at this point. "That's why you've never married, Sir
      Roderick?" he threw out.
The big man was checked for a moment. Trafford wondered what memory lit that instant's
      pause. "I've had my science," said Dover.

Mrs. Pope was of course among the first to visit the new home so soon as it was open to
      inspection. She arrived, looking very bright and neat in a new bonnet and some new black furs
      that suited her, bearing up bravely but obviously in a state of dispersed and miscellaneous
      emotion....
In many ways Marjorie's marriage had been a
       great relief to her mother. Particularly it had been a financial relief.
      Marjorie had been the most expensive child of her family, and her cessation had led to
      increments both of Mrs. Pope's and Daphne's all too restricted allowances. Mrs. Pope had been
      able therefore to relapse from the orthodox Anglicanism into which poverty had driven her, and
      indulge for an hour weekly in the consolations of Higher Thought. These exercises in
      emancipated religiosity occurred at the house of Mr. Silas Root, and were greatly valued by a
      large circle of clients. Essentially they were orgies of vacuity, and they cost six guineas
      for seven hours. They did her no end of good. All through the precious weekly hour she sat
      with him in a silent twilight, very, very still and feeling—oh! "higher" than anything, and
      when she came out she wore an inane smile on her face and was prepared not to worry, to lie
      with facility, and to take the easiest way in every eventuality in an entirely satisfactory
      and exalted manner. Moreover he was "treating" her investments. Acting upon his advice, and
      doing the whole thing quietly with the idea of preparing a pleasant surprise for her husband,
      she had sold out of certain Home Railway debentures and invested in a company for working the
      auriferous waste which is so abundant in the drainage of Philadelphia, a company whose
      shareholders were chiefly higher thought disciples and whose profits therefore would
      inevitably be greatly enhanced by their concerted mental action. It was to the prospective
      profits in this that she owed the new black furs she was wearing.
The furs and the bonnet and the previous day's treatment she had had, all helped to brace
      her up on Marjorie's doorstep for a complex and difficult situation, and to carry her through
      the first tensions of
       her call. She was so much to pieces as it was that she could not help feeling
      how much more to pieces she might have been—but for the grace of Silas Root. She knew she
      ought to have very strong feelings about Trafford, though it was not really clear to her what
      feelings she ought to have. On the whole she was inclined to believe she was experiencing
      moral disapproval mixed up with a pathetic and rather hopeless appeal for the welfare of the
      tender life that had entrusted itself so recklessly to these brutal and discreditable hands,
      though indeed if she had really dared to look inside her mind her chief discovery would have
      been a keenly jealous appreciation of Trafford's good looks and generous temper, and a feeling
      of injustice as between her own lot and Marjorie's. However, going on her assumed basis she
      managed to be very pale, concise and tight-lipped at any mention of her son-in-law, and to put
      a fervour of helpless devotion into her embraces of her daughter. She surveyed the house with
      a pained constrained expression, as though she tried in vain to conceal from herself that it
      was all slightly improper, and even such objects as the Bokhara hangings failed to extort more
      than an insincere, "Oh, very nice, dear—very nice."
In the bedroom, she spoke about Mr. Pope. "He was dreadfully upset," she said. "His first
      thought was to come after you both with a pistol. If—if he hadn't married you——"
"But dear Mummy, of course we meant to marry! We married right away."
"Yes, dear, of course. But if he hadn't——"
She paused, and Marjorie, with a momentary flush of indignation in her cheeks, did not urge
      her to conclude her explanation.
"He's wounded," said Mrs. Pope. "Some day
       perhaps he'll come round—you were always his favourite daughter."
"I know," said Marjorie concisely, with a faint flavour of cynicism in her voice.
"I'm afraid dear, at present—he will do nothing for you."
"I don't think Rag would like him to," said Marjorie with an unreal serenity;
      "ever."
"For a time I'm afraid he'll refuse to see you. He just wants to forget——. Everything."
"Poor old Dad! I wish he wouldn't put himself out like this. Still, I won't bother him,
      Mummy, if you mean that."
Then suddenly into Mrs. Pope's unsystematic, unstable mind, started perhaps by the ring in
      her daughter's voice, there came a wave of affectionate feeling. That she had somehow to be
      hostile and unsympathetic to Marjorie, that she had to pretend that Trafford was wicked and
      disgusting, and not be happy in the jolly hope and happiness of this bright little house, cut
      her with a keen swift pain. She didn't know clearly why she was taking this coldly hostile
      attitude, or why she went on doing so, but the sense of that necessity hurt her none the less.
      She put out her hands upon her daughter's shoulders and whimpered: "Oh my dear! I do wish
      things weren't so difficult—so very difficult."
The whimper changed by some inner force of its own to honest sobs and tears.
Marjorie passed through a flash of amazement to a sudden understanding of her mother's case.
      "Poor dear Mummy," she said. "Oh! poor dear Mummy. It's a shame of us!"
She put her arms about her mother and held her for awhile.
"It is a shame," said her mother in a muffled
       voice, trying to keep hold of this elusive thing that had somehow both wounded
      her and won her daughter back. But her poor grasp slipped again. "I knew you'd come to see
      it," she said, dabbing with her handkerchief at her eyes. "I knew you would." And then with
      the habitual loyalty of years resuming its sway: "He's always been so good to you."...
But Mrs. Pope had something more definite to say to Marjorie, and came to it at last with a
      tactful offhandedness. Marjorie communicated it to Trafford about an hour later on his return
      from the laboratory. "I say," she said, "old Daffy's engaged to Magnet!"
She paused, and added with just the faintest trace of resentment in her voice: "She can have
      him, as far as I'm concerned."
"He didn't wait long," said Trafford tactlessly.
"No," said Marjorie; "he didn't wait long.... Of course she got him on the rebound."...

Mrs. Pope was only a day or so ahead of a cloud of callers. The Carmel girls followed close
      upon her, tall figures of black fur, with costly-looking muffs and a rich glitter at neck and
      wrist. Marjorie displayed her house, talking fluently about other things, and watching for
      effects. The Carmel girls ran their swift dark eyes over her appointments, glanced quickly
      from side to side of her rooms, saw only too certainly that the house was narrow and small——.
      But did they see that it was clever? They saw at any rate that she meant it to be clever, and
      with true Oriental politeness said as much urgently and extravagantly. Then there were the
      Rambord girls
       and their mother, an unobservant lot who chattered about the ice at Prince's;
      then Constance Graham came with a thoroughbred but very dirty aunt, and then Ottiline
      Winchelsea with an American minor poet, who wanted a view of mountains from the windows at the
      back, and said the bathroom ought to be done in pink. Then Lady Solomonson came; an extremely
      expensive-looking fair lady with an affectation of cynicism, a keen intelligence, acutely apt
      conversation, and a queer effect of thinking of something else all the time she was talking.
      She missed nothing....
Hardly anybody failed to appreciate the charm and decision of Marjorie's use of those
      Bokhara embroideries.
They would have been cheap at double the price.

And then our two young people went out to their first dinner-parties together. They began
      with Trafford's rich friend Solomonson, who had played so large and so passive a part in their
      first meeting. He had behaved with a sort of magnanimous triumph over the marriage. He made it
      almost his personal affair, as though he had brought it about. "I knew there was a girl in
      it," he insisted, "and you told me there wasn't. O-a-ah! And you kept me in that smell of
      disinfectant and things—what a chap that doctor was for spilling stuff!—for six blessed
      days!..."
Marjorie achieved a dress at once simple and good with great facility by not asking the
      price until it was all over. (There is no half-success with dinner-dresses, either the thing
      is a success and inestimable, or not worth having at any price at all.) It was blue with a
      thread of gold, and she had a necklace
       of blueish moonstones, gold-set, and her hair ceased to be copper and became
      golden, and her eyes unfathomable blue. She was radiant with health and happiness, no one else
      there had her clear freshness, and her manner was as restrained and dignified and ready as a
      proud young wife's can be. Everyone seemed to like her and respect her and be interested in
      her, and Trafford kissed her flushed cheek in the hansom as they came home again and crowned
      her happiness. It had been quite a large party, and really much more splendid and brilliant
      than anything she had ever seen before. There had been one old gentleman with a coloured
      button and another with a ribbon; there had been a countess with historical pearls, and
      half-a-dozen other people one might fairly call distinguished. The house was tremendous in its
      way, spacious, rich, glowing with lights, abounding in vistas and fine remote backgrounds. In
      the midst of it all she had a sudden thrill at the memory that less than a year ago she had
      been ignominiously dismissed from the dinner-table by her father for a hiccup....
A few days after Aunt Plessington suddenly asked the Traffords to one of her less important
      but still interesting gatherings; not one of those that swayed the world perhaps, but one
      which Marjorie was given to understand achieved important subordinate wagging. Aunt
      Plessington had not called, she explained in her note, because of the urgent demands the
      Movement made upon her time; it was her wonderful hard-breathing way never to call on anyone,
      and it added tremendously to her reputation; none the less it appeared—though here the scrawl
      became illegible—she meant to shove and steer her dear niece upward at a tremendous pace. They
      were even asked to come a little early so that she might make Trafford's acquaintance.
      
The dress was duly admired, and then Aunt Plessington—assuming the hearthrug and forgetting
      the little matter of their career—explained quite Napoleonic and wonderful things she was
      going to do with her Movement, fresh principles, fresh applications, a big committee of all
      the "names"—they were easy to get if you didn't bother them to do things—a new and more
      attractive title, "Payment in Kind" was to give way to "Reality of Reward," and she herself
      was going to have her hair bleached bright white (which would set off her eyes and colour and
      the general geniality of appearance due to her projecting teeth), and so greatly increase her
      "platform efficiency." Hubert, she said, was toiling away hard at the detail of these new
      endeavours. He would be down in a few minutes' time. Marjorie, she said, ought to speak at
      their meetings. It would help both the Traffords to get on if Marjorie cut a dash at the
      outset, and there was no such dash to be cut as speaking at Aunt Plessington's meetings. It
      was catching on; all next season it was sure to be the thing. So many promising girls allowed
      themselves to be submerged altogether in marriage for a time, and when they emerged everyone
      had forgotten the promise of their début. She had an air of rescuing Marjorie from an
      impending fate by disabusing Trafford from injurious prepossessions....
Presently the guests began to drop in, a vegetarian health specialist, a rising young woman
      factory inspector, a phrenologist who was being induced to put great talents to better uses
      under Aunt Plessington's influence, his dumb, obscure, but inevitable wife, a colonial bishop,
      a baroness with a taste rather than a capacity for intellectual society, a wealthy jam and
      pickle manufacturer and his wife, who had subscribed
       largely to the funds of the Movement and wanted to meet the lady of title, and
      the editor of the Movement's organ, Upward and On, a young gentleman of abundant hair
      and cadaverous silences, whom Aunt Plessington patted on the shoulder and spoke of as "one of
      our discoveries." And then Uncle Hubert came down, looking ruffled and overworked, with his
      ready-made dress-tie—he was one of those men who can never master the art of tying a bow—very
      much askew. The conversation turned chiefly on the Movement; if it strayed Aunt Plessington
      reached out her voice after it and brought it back in a masterful manner.
Through soup and fish Marjorie occupied herself with the inflexible rigour of the young
      editor, who had brought her down. When she could give her attention to the general
      conversation she discovered her husband a little flushed and tackling her aunt with an
      expression of quiet determination. The phrenologist and the vegetarian health specialist were
      regarding him with amazement, the jam and pickle manufacturer's wife was evidently deeply
      shocked. He was refusing to believe in the value of the Movement, and Aunt Plessington was
      manifestly losing her temper.
"I don't see, Mrs. Plessington," he was saying, "that all this amounts to more than a kind
      of Glorious District Visiting. That is how I see it. You want to attack people in their
      homes—before they cry out to you. You want to compel them by this Payment in Kind of yours to
      do what you want them to do instead of trying to make them want to do it. Now, I think your
      business is to make them want to do it. You may perhaps increase the amount of milk in babies,
      and the amount of whitewash in cottages and slums by your methods—I don't dispute
       the promise of your statistics—but you're going to do it at a cost of human
      self-respect that's out of all proportion——"
Uncle Hubert's voice, with that thick utterance that always suggested a mouthful of plums,
      came booming down the table. "All these arguments," he said, "have been answered long
      ago."
"No doubt," said Trafford with a faint asperity. "But tell me the answers."
"It's ridiculous," said Aunt Plessington, "to talk of the self-respect of the kind of
      people—oh! the very dregs!"
"It's just because the plant is delicate that you've got to handle it carefully," said
      Trafford.
"Here's Miss Gant," said Aunt Plessington, "she knows the strata we are discussing.
      She'll tell you they have positively no self-respect—none at all."
"My people," said Miss Gant, as if in conclusive testimony, "actually conspire with
      their employers to defeat me."
"I don't see the absence of self-respect in that," said Trafford.
"But all their interests——"
"I'm thinking of their pride."...
The discussion lasted to the end of dinner and made no headway. As soon as the ladies were
      in the drawing-room, Aunt Plessington, a little flushed from the conflict, turned on Marjorie
      and said, "I like your husband. He's wrong-headed, but he's young, and he's certainly
      spirited. He ought to get on if he wants to. Does he do nothing but his
      researches?"
"He lectures in the spring term," said Marjorie.
"Ah!" said Aunt Plessington with a triumphant note, "you must alter all that. You must
      interest him in wider things. You must bring him out of his
       shell, and let him see what it is to deal with Affairs. Then he wouldn't talk
      such nonsense about our Work."
Marjory was at a momentary loss for a reply, and in the instant's respite Aunt Plessington
      turned to the jam and pickle lady and asked in a bright, encouraging note: "Well! And how's
      the Village Club getting on?"...
She had another lunge at Trafford as he took his leave. "You must come again soon," she
      said. "I love a good wrangle, and Hubert and I never want to talk about our Movement
      to any one but unbelievers. You don't know the beginnings of it yet. Only I warn you they have
      a way of getting converted. I warn you."...
On this occasion there was no kissing in the cab. Trafford was exasperated.
"Of all the intolerable women!" he said, and was silent for a time.
"The astounding part of it is," he burst out, "that this sort of thing, this Movement and
      all the rest of it, does really give the quality of English public affairs. It's like a
      sample—dredged. The—the cheapness of it! Raised voices, rash assertions, sham
      investigations, meetings and committees and meetings, that's the stuff of it, and politicians
      really have to attend to it, and silly, ineffective, irritating bills really get drafted and
      messed about with and passed on the strength of it. Public affairs are still in the Dark Ages.
      Nobody now would think of getting together a scratch committee of rich old women and
      miscellaneous conspicuous people to design an electric tram, and jabbering and jabbering and
      jabbering, and if any one objects"—a note of personal bitterness came into his
      voice—"jabbering faster; but nobody thinks it ridiculous to attempt the
       organization of poor people's affairs in that sort of way. This project of the
      supersession of Wages by Payment in Kind—oh! it's childish. If it wasn't it would be
      outrageous and indecent. Your uncle and aunt haven't thought for a moment of any single one of
      the necessary consequences of these things they say their confounded Movement aims at, effects
      upon the race, upon public spirit, upon people's habits and motives. They've just a queer
      craving to feel powerful and influential, which they think they can best satisfy by upsetting
      the lives of no end of harmless poor people—the only people they dare upset—and that's about
      as far as they go.... Your aunt's detestable, Marjorie."
Marjorie had never seen him so deeply affected by anything but herself. It seemed to her he
      was needlessly disturbed by a trivial matter. He sulked for a space, and then broke out
      again.
"That confounded woman talks of my physical science," he said, "as if research were an
      amiable weakness, like collecting postage stamps. And it's changed human conditions more in
      the last ten years than all the parliamentary wire-pullers and legislators and administrative
      experts have done in two centuries. And for all that, there's more clerks in Whitehall than
      professors of physics in the whole of England."...
"I suppose it's the way that sort of thing gets done," said Marjorie, after an interval.
"That sort of thing doesn't get done," snapped Trafford. "All these people burble about with
      their movements and jobs, and lectures and stuff—and things happen. Like some one
      getting squashed to death in a crowd. Nobody did it, but anybody in the muddle can claim to
      have done it—if only they've
       got the cheek of your Aunt Plessington."
He seemed to have finished.
"Done!" he suddenly broke out again. "Why! people like your Aunt Plessington don't
      even know where the handle is. If they ventured to look for it, they'd give the whole show
      away! Done, indeed!"
"Here we are!" said Marjorie, a little relieved to find the hansom turning out of King's
      Road into their own side street....
And then Marjorie wore the blue dress with great success at the Carmels'. The girls came and
      looked at it and admired it—it was no mere politeness. They admitted there was style about it,
      a quality—there was no explaining. "You're wonderful, Madge!" cried the younger
      Carmel girl.
The Carmel boy, seizing the opportunity of a momentary seclusion in a corner, ended a short
      but rather portentous silence with "I say, you do look ripping," in a voice that
      implied the keenest regret for the slacknesses of a summer that was now infinitely remote to
      Marjorie. It was ridiculous that the Carmel boy should have such emotions—he was six years
      younger than Trafford and only a year older than Marjorie, and yet she was pleased by his
      manifest wound....
There was only one little thing at the back of her mind that alloyed her sense of happy and
      complete living that night, and that was the ghost of an addition sum. At home, in her pretty
      bureau, a little gathering pile of bills, as yet unpaid, and an empty cheque-book with
      appealing counterfoils, awaited her attention.
Marjorie had still to master the fact that all the fine braveries and interests and delights
      of life that offer themselves so amply to the favoured children
       of civilization, trail and, since the fall of man at any rate, have trailed
      after them something—something, the justification of morality, the despair of all easy, happy
      souls, the unavoidable drop of bitterness in the cup of pleasure—the Reckoning.
</div></body></text></TEI>