
CHAPTER XX
“WHAT will ye give me, and I'll tell ye?” said Maxley to Alfred Hardie.
“Five pounds.”
“That is too much.”
“Five shillings, then.”
“That is too little. Lookee here; your garden owes me thirty shillings for work: suppose you
     pays me, and that will save me from going to your Dad for it.”
Alfred consented readily, and paid the money. Then Maxley told him it was Captain Dodd he had
     been talking with.
“I thought so! I thought so!” cried Alfred joyfully, “but I was afraid to believe it: it was
     too delightful. Maxley, you're a trump you don't know what anxiety you have relieved me of.
     Some fool has gone and reported the Agia wrecked; look here!” and he showed him his
     Lloyd's. “Luckily it has only just come, so I haven't been miserable long.”
“Well, to be sure, news flies fast now-a-days. He have been wrecked for that matter.” He then
     surprised Alfred by telling him all he had just learned from Dodd; and was going to let out
     about the 4,000,l. when he recollected this was the banker's son, and while he was talking to
     him, it suddenly struck Maxley that this young gentleman would come down in the world should
     the bank break, and then the Dodds, he concluded, judging others by himself, would be apt to
     turn their backs on him. Now he liked Alfred, and was disposed to do him a good turn, when he
     could without hurting James Maxley. “Mr. Alfred,” said he, “I know the world better than you
     do: you be ruled by me, or you'll rue it. You put on your Sunday coat this minute, and off like
     a shot to Albyn Villee; you'll get there before the Captain; he have got a little business to
     do first; that is neither here nor there: besides, you are young and lissom. You be the first
     to tell Missus Dodd the good news; and, when the Captain comes, there sits you aside Miss
     Julee: and don't you be shy and shamefaced, take him when his heart is warm, and tell him why
     you are there: 'I love her dear,' says you. He be only a sailor and they never has no sense nor
     prudence; he is a'most sure to take you by the hand, at such a time: and once you get his word,
     he'll stand good, to his own hurt. He's one of that sort, bless his silly old heart.”
A good deal of this was unintelligible to Alfred, but the advice seemed good—advice generally
     does when it squares with our own wishes. He thanked Maxley, left him, made a hasty toilet, and
     ran to Albion Villa.
Sarah opened the door to him in tears.
The news of the wreck had come to Albion Villa just half an hour ago, and in that half hour
     they had tasted more misery than hitherto their peaceful lot had brought them in years. Mrs.
     Dodd was praying and crying in her room; Julia had put on her bonnet, and was descending in
     deep distress and agitation, to go down to the quay and learn more if possible.
Alfred saw her on the stairs, and at sight of her pale, agitated face flew to her.
She held out both hands piteously to him: “O Alfred!”
“Good news!” he panted. “He is alive—Maxley has seen him—I have seen him—he will be here
     directly—my own love, dry your eyes—calm your fears—he is safe—he is well: hurrah! hurrah!”
The girl's pale face flushed red with hope, then pale again with emotion, then rosy red with
     transcendent joy. “Oh, bless you! bless you!” she murmured, in her sweet gurgle so full of
     heart: then took his head passionately with both her hands, as if she was going to kiss him:
     uttered a little inarticulate cry of love and gratitude over him, then turned and flew up the
     stairs, crying “Mamma! mamma!” and burst into her mother's room. When two such Impetuosities
     meet as Alfred and Julia, expect quick work.
What happened in Mrs. Dodd's room may be imagined: and soon both ladies came hastily out to
     Alfred, and he found himself in the drawing-room seated between them, and holding a hand of
     each, and playing the man delightfully, soothing and assuring them. Julia believed him at a
     word, and beamed with unmixed delight and anticipation of the joyful meeting. Mrs. Dodd cost
     him more trouble: her soft hand trembled still in his, and she put question upon question. But
     when he told her he with his own eyes had seen Captain Dodd talking to Maxley, and gathered
     from Maxley he had been shipwrecked on the coast of France, and lost his chronometer and his
     sextant, these details commanded credit. Bells were rung: the Captain's dressing-room ordered
     to be got ready; the cook put on her mettle, and Alfred invited to stay and dine with the
     long-expected one: and the house of mourning became the house of joy.
“And then it was he who brought the good news,” whispered Julia to her mother, “and that is
     so sweet.”
“Yes, dear,” said Mrs. Dodd, “he will make even me love him. The 14,000l.! I hope that was
     not lost in the wreck.”
“Oh, mamma! who cares when his own dear, sweet, precious life has been in danger, and is
     mercifully preserved? Why does he not come? I shall scold him for keeping us waiting. You know
     I am not a bit afraid of him, though he is papa. Indeed, I am ashamed to say I govern him with
     a rod of—no matter what. Do, do, do let us all three put on our bonnets, and run and meet him.
     I want him so to love somebody the very first day.”
Mrs. Dodd said, “Well, wait a few minutes, and then, if he is not here, you two shall go. I
     dare hardly trust myself to meet my darling husband in the open street.”
Julia ran to Alfred: “If he does not come in ten minutes, you and I may go and meet him.”
“You are an angel,” murmured Alfred.
“You are another,” said Julia haughtily. “Oh, dear, I can't sit down, and I don't want
     flattery: I want papa. A waltz! a waltz! then one can go mad with joy without startling
     propriety. I can't answer for the consequences if I don't let off a little, little
     happiness.”
“That I will,” said Mrs. Dodd; “for I am as happy as you, and happier.” She played a
     waltz.
Julia's eyes were a challenge: Alfred started up and took her ready hand, and soon the gay
     young things were whirling round, the happiest pair in England.
But in the middle of the joyous whirl, Julia's quick ear, on the watch all the time, heard
     the gate swing to: she glided like an eel from Alfred's arm and ran to the window. Arrived
     there, she made three swift vertical bounds like a girl with a skipping rope, only her hands
     were clapping in the air at the same time; then down the stairs, screaming, “His chest his
     chest! he is coming, coming, come!”
Alfred ran after her.
Mrs. Dodd, unable to race with such antelopes, slipped quietly out into the little
     balcony.
Julia had seen two men carrying a trestle with a tarpauling over it, and a third walking
     beside. Dodd's heavy sea-chest had been more than once carried home this way. She met the men
     at the door, and overpowered them with questions:—
“Is it his clothes? Then he wasn't so much wrecked after all. Is he with you? Is he coming
     directly? Why don't you tell me?”
The porters at first wore the stolid impassive faces of their tribe; but when this bright
     young creature questioned them, brimming over with ardour and joy, their countenances fell and
     they hung their heads.
The little sharp-faced man, who was walking beside the others stepped forward to reply to
     Julia.
He was interrupted by a terrible scream from the balcony.
Mrs. Dodd was leaning wildly over it, with dilating eyes and quivering hand, that pointed
     down to the other side of the trestle: “Julia!! Julia!!”
Julia ran round, and stood petrified, her pale lips apart, and all her innocent joy frozen in
     a moment.
The tarpauling was scanty there, and a man's hand and part of his arm dangled helpless
     out.
The hand was blanched, and wore a well-known ring.
