
CHAPTER III.
SOME time had elapsed since the marriage of Elizabeth and Richard
                    Clayton; already the spring was brightening into summer for the second time
                    since they had resided at “the Mount;” and the interval had, to all appearance,
                    been a season of unmixed prosperity for them all.
Mr. and Mrs. Clayton enjoyed the utmost esteem and consideration among the
                    inhabitants of B— and the vicinity, whilst their sister, Agnes Maynard, was a
                    universal favourite. Her peculiarly attractive appearance, sweet disposition,
                    and joyousness of spirit, had won the affection of all to whom she was known.
                        She was at least beyond a doubt most truly happy: happy in the
                    society of her sister, and in the warm friendship of her brother‐in‐law, whom
                    she had sought to propitiate by every means in her power, in order that the
                    harmony of their domestic life might be completed.
The birth of a daughter had been no small 
                    addition to the happiness of Elizabeth and Richard; more especially to the
                    latter, who felt for this little infant all that passionate tenderness which a
                    young father so often feels for his first‐born child. He was also at this time
                    highly gratified to find that his popularity was increasing considerably; he had
                    acquired greater weight and influence as a married man. His wife and her
                    beautiful sister were much sought after and respected by the leading families of
                    the county, and he soon found that he might take a high position in the
                    neighbourhood.
And yet, surrounded with all these outward blessings, Elizabeth Clayton was very
                    wretched. Her father‐in‐law had in vain endeavoured to draw the wandering gaze
                    of her dimmed eyes upward to that glorious Star, on which if a man look
                    steadily, he shall learn to take no heed of the mortal tempests roaring round
                    his head, or the fading of all mortal joys; he had found an insurmountable
                    barrier to all his efforts in the overwhelming and almost idolatrous love which
                    she bore to her husband. The love of Him, who first loved us, alone should reign
                    supreme in the immortal soul, and all other feelings be the rather called fourth
                    by it, as flowers give out fragrance when the sun shines on them; but if an
                    earthly affection, however lawful in itself, be permitted to supersede it,
                    thereby becoming  a sinful indulgence, then
                    does the holier love fade and perish away before that engrossing influence, like
                    the pure sunlight when the night sets in.
Day and night, waking and sleeping, Elizabeth had no thought but for her husband;
                    watching his every word and look, thinking she never could do enough to please
                    him, and harassing both herself and him by exacting an amount of attention and
                    tenderness which she was by no means justified in expecting. The one
                    overpowering idea which was always present in her mind, was the conviction that
                    his attachment for her fell far short of her own in depth and fervour.
She was, in fact, very right in her opinion, but this was no excuse for the
                    unreasonable manner in which she wearied him with her repining at his coldness.
                    She should have remembered that there is but one affection that can be of any
                    real value to those who inspire it, it is that love, noble and disinterested,
                    which is pure from the slightest taint of selfishness; which has for its sole
                    object and desire the happiness of those on whom it is bestowed. She should
                    never have allowed her own feelings and desires to interfere in the most minute
                    particular with his comfort. If she discovered that her presence wearied him,
                    she should have  left him with a smile, and
                    with a smile been ready to return to him if he wished it. If he seemed happier
                    while neglecting her, cheerfully she should have submitted to his neglect, and
                    striven only to prevent his home from being ever darkened by a look of sorrow on
                    her face, or its quiet disturbed by a word of discontent. But Elizabeth had
                    sought no other happiness for herself than that which she derived from this
                    affection, and therefore it was profoundly selfish. She was jealous of every
                    thing and every one on whom her husband bestowed a look; and jealous even of the
                    necessary business which took him from her side.
It was not unnatural that Richard, annoyed and often irritated at her unceasing
                    watchfulness, should gladly turn from her to seek the society of Agnes, whose
                    gaiety and light‐heartedness rendered her so pleasing a contrast to the anxious
                    care‐worn wife. He never acted under the guidance of principle, but he
                    habitually obeyed a law scarce less exacting, for he invariably followed the
                    bent of his own inclination, without pausing to scrutinize his motives, or to
                    examine into the possible result of his actions. It therefore never occurred to
                    him, that it must have cost poor Elizabeth many a bitter pang to see him so
                    openly preferring the society of her sister; while Agnes, with that careless
                    egotism  to which the young and the happy so
                    often yield themselves unconsciously, was ever ready to enjoy with him the long
                    walks and rides which Elizabeth’s enfeebled health prevented her from
                    attempting.
Thus, while to a casual observer all was bright and prosperous in the lives of
                    the Clayton family, there was ripening in the heart of her who should have been
                    the happiest, one of those dark tragedies which often run their course in the
                    narrow compass of an individual mind alone.
Soon, however, the anxieties and fears of Elizabeth took a new shape. Her health
                    began to fail her altogether. She had reduced herself to a very weak and nervous
                    state, solely by distress of mind and harassing annoyances; and now the
                    conviction had settled with a dull dead weight upon her heart, that she should
                    not survive the birth of her second child.
This idea was in reality but an imagination springing from her morbid state of
                    mind, for which there was not the slightest foundation; but the conviction,
                    deeply rooted, ate like a canker into her soul. It was not death which she
                    dreaded, not the coffin and the shroud; nor yet, chained to the dust as she was
                    by the ties of earth, the awful judgment to come; but it was the horror of the
                    dread which filled her  heart night and day,
                    that when she lay cold and helpless in her grave, Richard would find some
                    unknown stranger, fairer and dearer, to take her place in his love and in his
                    home. To a mind like Elizabeth’s this thought was torture; it haunted her like a
                    spectral phantom: she had loved him too exclusively when living, to give him up
                    even when she was dead; and she longed, had it been possible, to have held him
                    still within the stiff cold arms from which the warmth of life was fled. She had
                    ever before her eyes the terrible image of one more loved perhaps, who should
                    dwell in his house as she had dwelt, and walk by his side as she had walked,
                    honoured, cherished as his wife, the mother of his children. This vision of her
                    brain took a thousand agonizing forms. Sometimes she fancied that through the
                    mould, and the dust, and the coffin‐lid, his voice would reach her if he spoke
                    in accents of endearment to another; that, she should even hear the tramping of
                    their feet round her dark abode as they walked through the beautiful
                    church‐yard, too happy in their mutual affection to think of her who mouldered
                    there so lonely! And her child, too—her little fragile, gentle Mary, was she to
                    be delivered to the cold unloving care of a stepmother!
Over these ideas the jealous heart of Elizabeth 
                    brooded with all the strength of her diseased fancy; but suddenly, whilst she
                    speculated on the probable results of her death, a thought occurred to her which
                    brought with it at once the most complete consolation.
The sincere attachment of Richard to their sister Agnes became the source of her
                    utmost joy and thankfulness; he would never consent to part with her sister, now
                    become in affection, as well as in actual fact, his own also; he would never
                    send her away to a miserable and cheerless existence with the Hardmans: no,
                    Agnes would remain with him to take carevof her little niece, of whom she was
                    devotedly fond; and so long as she continued unmarried, she would prevent; the
                    possibility of another wife entering into the house of which she would be the
                    beloved inmate. This idea gave a totally new current to Elizabeth’s thoughts; it
                    was like balm to her wounded spirit; she could look forward with perfect calm to
                    her death, when she felt convinced that, so far from her place being filled by a
                    rival, Richard and Agnes would remain alone together to remember her, and talk
                    of her often with unchanging love, whilst her little Mary would find in the
                    young aunt the same tender and watchful friend which she had herself been to
                    Agnes.
Elizabeth had never concealed from either 
                    Richard or Agnes how near a close she believed her life to be, although her
                    natural delicacy of feeling had restrained her from telling them of the dread
                    which rendered this conviction one of such agony to her.
Now, however, she repeatedly implored of them both to promise her that Agnes
                    should always remain with her brother‐in‐law; urging as her reason for wishing
                    it, that to her alone would she commit the care of her little daughter, and the
                    new‐born babe if it survived.
Both were very willing to promise their poor Elizabeth all she desired, but
                    neither of them had the slightest apprehension for her life. Their medical
                    adviser was too skilful a physician not to know that her fears were perfectly
                    groundless, and he had completely reassured Agnes on the subject; they therefore
                    contented themselves with soothing her in the mean time, and looked forward
                    anxiously to the period when all anxiety should cease.
Such was the state of matters at “The Mount,” when Elizabeth took her seat one
                    fine evening in the early summer at the drawing‐room window, which was thrown
                    wide open that she might enjoy the soft mild air; directly below it was a smooth
                    piece of turf, on which Richard was slowly walking to and fro in conversation
                    with his father’s Curate.

Mr. Lambert was one of those characters which are, too unfortunately, rare in
                    this world, but of which alone shall doubtless be composed the population of
                    that Holy City, where nothing that defileth shall in any wise enter in: with a
                    powerful mind, and many a noble intellectual quality, he had sought and attained
                    to the innocency of life and humility of heart of a little child, who once was
                    set as an example to the gifted of this earth.
From the hour when he had received the awful commission for the work and office
                    of a priest in the Church of God, he had, with determinate resolution, set the
                    seal of “Holiness to the Lord” on every action of his future life. Severe and
                    unflinching towards himself in following out this difficult course, he was ever
                    most gentle and merciful to others; winning back to the old paths with sweet
                    persuasive accents those who had erred and strayed, and dealing with penitents
                    in the spirit of that unutterably blessed and touching declaration which has
                    been as the words of life to many a sinking soul—“ Neither do I condemn
                    thee.”
Notwithstanding his youth, there was a peculiar calm and dignity in his manner
                    which won the respect of all whom he approached; though few would have
                    suspected, from his habitual silence and reserve, that there was in his cha‐ racter an under current of profound and
                    intense feeling, which he seldom if ever displayed. Careless and indifferent as
                    Richard Clayton was, he could not but admire the pure and exalted views which
                    raised this man so far above himself; and he was always more ready to listen to
                    Mr. Lambert’s remonstrances than to the sterner warnings of his father, whose
                    faith and obedience shone forth rather in the severity of holiness than in its
                    beauty.
Their conversation was distinctly audible to Elizabeth as she sat at the window,
                    and she soon became so deeply and painfully interested in it that she forgot to
                    ascertain whether they were aware of her vicinity. Richard had asked Mr. Lambert
                    what was the cause of a tumult which he had witnessed that morning at the church
                    door, as he passed through the village.
Mr. Lambert answered that it had originated in one of those distressing cases
                    which were often a source of so much annoyance to the clergy. Two persons had
                    come before him to be married; they did not belong to this parish of B—, and the
                    banns had been published elsewhere; consequently, it was not until they were
                    actually within the church that he discovered the relationship in which they
                    already stood to one another. The woman was sister to the former wife of the
                    man.

“Of course I refused to marry them,” he added quietly.
“Then you share my father’s opinion,” said Richard. “I think him quite absurdly
                    rigid on this point. I cannot coincide in the strong objection which is raised
                    against it by so many. Such a marriage might often be a very convenient
                    arrangement.”
“And a most unhallowed alliance,” said Mr. Lambert, warmly.
“You will find few to look upon it in that light,” replied Richard; “think how
                    frequently the connexion is made without the slightest scruple.”
“There is nothing so common in this world as evil,” said Mr. Lambert, with quiet
                    emphasis; “you may give men authority to commit the greatest crimes with
                    impunity, if they are to find their license for it in the practice of others.”
                    He paused, for Richard’s peculiar position rendered this a subject scarce fit
                    for discussion.
Richard, however, would not let the matter drop till he had very clearly made
                    known his own opinion; he spoke much of the advantage which might result from
                    such an arrangement, in procuring for the children of the deceased wife so kind
                    and natural a protectress as their aunt.

Mr. Lambert replied, that, were the matter viewed as it ought to be, there could
                    be no more reason why the sister of the mother should not remain to take care of
                    the children than the sister of the father himself. Even on the score of
                    expediency alone, he could show the incalculable evil of such connexions,
                    bringing distrust and misery and confusion into the nearest and dearest
                    relations of life; but it was on a far higher ground that he would denounce
                    them, that of being altogether repugnant to the will of God; a fact which might
                    be proved from Scripture, and which had been set forth by the authority of the
                    Church in all ages. It was, in fact, a putting asunder of those whom God had
                    joined in the holy tie, whereby he declared that man and wife were to be one
                    flesh: if there were any meaning in those words at all, the relations of the one
                    must become the relations of the other also, and the sister‐in‐law be in the
                    sight of heaven counted as the sister in blood.
Richard could not answer this argument, though he still held to his own opinion;
                    and after a few more remarks from both, the conversation changed. But Elizabeth
                    Clayton had heard enough, and too much.
Richard little knew what deadly power there had been in his words so carelessly
                    spoken. He did not see, as his voice died away, how a figure  rushed from that darkened room with hurried steps and
                    suffocated breath; he did not hear how the bolt was drawn across the door of the
                    apartment above, by a hand that trembled till it was well nigh palsied; nor the
                    dull heavy fall upon the ground, of a form convulsed by its fierce mental
                    agony.
One thought alone was present in the mind of Elizabeth Clayton—a thought so
                    torturing and unsupportable that she strove to escape from it with that impotent
                    frenzy which in its full development drives men to the awful crime of
                    self‐destruction. She had a RIVAL in her SISTER! The wife whom she had dreaded would supplant
                    her after her death, would be her, who for two
                    years past had called her husband—brother! It was an idea too horrible even to
                    have entered into her mind, had it not been literally forced upon her by the
                    words of Richard himself.
Elizabeth had not the strong religious principles which induced Mr. Lambert to
                    view it with such warm indignation, but she had that which in this instance
                    supplied their place—the instinctive delicacy of feeling with which a pure mind
                    must revolt from a transaction so opposed to all that is just and holy.
                        What a horrible shade was now cast over the past intercourse of her
                        husband and sister, and the happy
                    familiarity she had herself loved to promote between them! It maddened her even
                    to think of the result which would probably follow on her own death. Instead of
                    living to watch over her children and remember her with unchanged affection,
                    they would remain together in a union condemned of God, and reprobated even by
                    the world itself.
Had she then, when she gave her orphan sister a home, been but preparing for
                    herself a rival, who would hereafter blot out her very memory from the heart of
                    the husband she loved so well? Oh! surely she had in truth been nourishing a
                    viper in her bosom: but at least it should be so no longer; she would not sit
                    idly by and see another preparing, under such false pretences, to rob her of the
                    love which she would have had her own even in the grave. She started
                    up—Elizabeth was ever violent in her resolutions as well as in her feelings—she
                    went to the door, scarce knowing what she did, strong in one determination
                    only—that Agnes should not stay another day in the house, to rise up between her
                    and the husband whose affection was her lawful right.
Suddenly, as she was about to draw the bolt, she started and staggered back; a
                    vision passed before her of a scene never forgotten. She saw the pale,
                    death‐stricken face; the uplifted  hands of the
                    expiring mother, clasped in passionate entreaty to her the daughter! She heard
                    again that voice, coming so faint and thrilling over the cold lips—
“Elizabeth, Elizabeth! I trust to you alone! promise—swear that you will never
                    desert my child; swear that no dearer tie shall ever induce you to forsake your
                    charge!” And she heard, as it were, the echo of her own voice when she answered,
                    child as she was, with such a solemn firmness—
“ Mother, fear not; I promise—I swear!”
And was it thus she was about to redeem that pledge given to the dead—to fulfil
                    that oath administered on a death‐bed?—by driving forth Agnes, that mother’s
                    youngest darling, from her house and home; casting her out into that dangerous
                    and chilling world, where she would be so friendless and alone!
There was a sudden revulsion of feeling in the breast of Elizabeth; a new horror
                    rose out of the idea of this unhallowed marriage. Was Agnes, the gentle Agnes,
                    so fair and joyous, thereby to become a being unworthy of the favour of heaven,
                    and an outcast even from society? Was the sister for whom she had indulged in so
                    many a bright ambitious dream, reserved for such a fate as this?—a wife disowned
                    both by the laws of God and man!

Elizabeth flung herself down once more with a sort of powerless despair. Which of
                    these two was she to hate the most, whom, until now, she had so dearly loved—the
                    husband, who, by his selfish act, might blight and blacken the whole existence
                    of her only sister; or the sister, who, under that sacred name, had stolen into
                    the husband’s heart, to dwell happy in his love when she was
                    mouldering forgotten in the dust? Her thoughts became confused—her senses seemed
                    abandoning her—the shock had been so sudden. She had never before contemplated
                    the possibility of such a marriage. She had believed it forbidden by all laws,
                    Divine or human; and now, not only was it brought suddenly before her as a
                    matter of frequent occurrence, but there had been an energy and an anxiety in
                    Richard’s manner of expressing himself, which proved that, however
                    unconsciously, it was yet for his own sake that he sought so earnestly to prove
                    the truth of his assertions.
There is a peculiar faculty in the human mind, which sometimes causes it, when a
                    new and absorbing idea is first presented to it, at once to grasp it in its full
                    extent, in all its bearings—past, present, and future. Elizabeth’s vivid
                    imagination would not allow her to find consolation in the great uncertainty of
                    the evil she dreaded; it carried her on at once to antici‐ pate the marriage of her husband and sister as the
                    infallible result of her own death,—now, as she believed, so near at hand. With
                    her face buried in her hands, she lay on the ground, wrestling with the great
                    agony of all the contending feelings which this terrible conviction had aroused
                    within her.
Meanwhile Richard and Agnes sat together in the drawing‐room below. “Where is
                    Elizabeth?” said Agnes, at last; “I have not seen her at all this evening.”
“I really do not know,” said Richard, indifferently; “perhaps she has gone to lie
                    down. She fancies herself fatigued now, whenever she has made the slightest
                    exertion. Do go and sing to me, Agnes,” he continued, flinging aside his book;
                    “this is just the hour when I can best enjoy music.”
Agnes complied, and in a few minutes Elizabeth could distinguish, through the
                    choking sobs that were bursting from her own lips, the sweet tones of her
                    sister’s voice, as she sang, one after another, the favourite songs which her
                    husband most preferred.
“It is strange that Elizabeth does not come,” said Agnes, after a time; “she
                    never goes to spend the evening in her room without telling us at least. I must
                    go and see where she is.”
“Some fancy!” said Richard, in a tone of 
                    irritation. “You had better leave her to herself. I wish she had your sweet
                    temper, Agnes.”
Agnes made no answer: it had often seemed strange to her that Elizabeth was not
                    in truth more uniformly happy, with so many blessings round her. She left the
                    room in search of her sister; but in an instant she returned, with an agitated
                    step, and a look of terror on her face, usually so bright and sunny.
“Dear Richard, come quickly!” she exclaimed; “I quite fear that Elizabeth is very
                    ill: her door is locked, and she made no answer when I called, but I can hear
                    her groaning in so strange a manner!”
Richard started from his seat, and bounded up stairs; Agnes followed. They
                    knocked at the door, and called in vain; but they could hear moan succeeding
                    moan. Alarmed to the last degree, Richard exerted all his strength, and burst
                    open the door. The violent shock, and the stunning noise it occasioned, put the
                    finishing stroke to the agitation of Elizabeth’s nerves and the confusion of her
                    mind. Her husband rushed in: all that he saw was her form stretched on the
                    ground, trembling and convulsed. He flung himself on his knees beside her, and
                    lifted up her head; whilst Agnes, kneeling close to him, drew back the long tangled hair that hung over her sister’s livid
                    face. Elizabeth opened her eyes: they were full of the most wild and ghastly
                    expression. A terrible fear shot through the mind of Richard that she had
                    suddenly become insane. There was, in truth, a sort of chaos in her thoughts;
                    but one idea remained too fearfully distinct.
Her gaze fell upon Agnes, and her heart revolted with unnatural horror against
                    her dear and only sister. Half frantic, she started up: with the strength almost
                    of a maniac, she seized Agnes by the arm, which she had rested on the shoulder
                    of Richard, and flung her back with such force, that she fell headlong against
                    the wall. Richard uttered a cry of terror; he really thought she had killed her.
                    He flew to Agnes, and raised her in his arms. She was only stunned, not hurt.
                    She looked up in his face, and smiled, to reassure him. Elizabeth gazed upon
                    them for a moment, as though her quivering frame were turning into stone. Then,
                    stretching out her hands towards her husband, she exclaimed, in words which he
                    then attributed to the ravings of delirium, but which years after haunted him
                    with a fearful meaning, “Oh, Richard, Richard! she is your sister—your
                    sister—your sister!”
There was something so horrible in the tone in which she reiterated these words,
                    that Agnes  flew towards her, and strove to
                    pass her arms round her, calling her by every endearing name. But Elizabeth
                    disengaged herself from her embrace, and, sinking on the sofa, she began to
                    utter shriek on shriek, evidently in great bodily agony.
In another hour she was alarmingly ill, and before morning a little feeble child
                    had been brought prematurely into the world, in which it seemed too fragile to
                    exist; and the life of the mother was despaired of.
