
 CHAPTER XXVIII. 
AN IMPORTANT INTERVIEW — DOUBTS AND FEARS.

				Michael's first recollections on opening his eyes were not of the
				clearest kind, and it required at least a minute's looking about him, after seating
				himself upright in the cart, before he could perfectly understand where he was, or
				why and how he got there. But no sooner did all the events of the day before rush
				back upon his mind,  than he felt conscious of being near the most
				important moment of his life. Again he closed his eyes, but not to sleep, and
				fervently prayed that whatever might be the tidings which awaited him, he might have
				strength to receive and bear them as he ought. Then, springing from his
				resting-place upon the ground, he inquired of a lad near him the way to Mr. Bell's,
				and set off to follow the directions he received with no greater delay than was
				necessary for a short halt beside a little streamlet on the way, which offered a
				welcome opportunity of washing his face and hands before he petitioned for admission
				to the presence of the good clergyman, to whose words he looked forward with an
				intensity of interest which almost amounted to agony. 
Though it was still early, Mr. Bell was already in his garden, and when the gate
				opened, it was himself who turned towards it to learn the errand of the young
				stranger. Michael felt at the first glance that the gentleman who stood before him
				was the person from whom he was to learn whether the brother he had so long mourned
				as dead was still alive, and he trembled so violently from head to foot that he
				could not articulate a word.
"What ails you, my lad?" said Mr. Bell, gently laying a hand upon his shoulder, and
				looking earnestly in his face. "You have not the look of one who has done mischief,
				or else I could fancy that you had some terrible tale to tell. Come into the house
				and sit down, my boy, for it is very clear you are not quite able to stand."
Michael, still silent, followed his considerate host into the house, and thankfully
				received from his hands a glass of water, which did him good service, for in a
				minute or two he was able to say, "I want you to tell me, sir — may God give me
				strength to hear your answer, let it be which way it may! — I want to know — if
				Edward — if my brother, Edward Armstrong, is alive or dead?" But notwithstanding
				Michael's torturing eagerness to hear the answer, he put his hand before his eyes,
				because he had not courage to bear the look that might forestal it.
"Your brother? Edward Armstrong your brother? Who then are you, boy, in the name of
				Heaven?" said Mr. Bell, eagerly.
"I am Michael, sir, Michael Armstrong. But oh! for pity's sake, tell me what I
				ask!"
"Yes, boy, yes. But compose yourself, my dear fellow! Edward is alive, and your
				friend Fanny Fletcher too."
Michael sunk from his chair upon his knees, and lifting his clasped hands towards
				Heaven, seemed breathing thanksgivings for this assured confirmation of tidings
				which, till now, he had not dared to believe true. But, startled as he was, the
				anxiety, the excitement, and the fatigue of the preceding night and day, had been
				more than enough for him, and at the moment when every thought would have been joy,
				and every sensation delight, he ceased to think or feel at all, — the colour forsook
				his lips, his eyes closed, and, greatly to the dismay of Mr. Bell, he sunk prostrate
				on the floor.
 No time was lost before the usual means of restoring suspended life were
				administered; and the uncared-for factory-boy, the mountain-braced 
				Westmorland shepherd, lay extended on a sofa, with essences at his nose, and the
				opening of his dark eyes watched for, as tenderly as if he had been a delicate young
				lady. 
A deep-drawn sigh announced to Mr. Bell, who stood by, anxiously watching him, that
				his remedies had been successful, that the boy so long mourned as dead, was really
				and truly alive, and a very handsome, well-grown fellow into the bargain.
"This is a strange history, Michael, as ever I chanced to hear," said he, taking the
				boy's hand, and ascertaining that his pulse again made 'healthful music.' "Why we
				have all been mourning for you as dead for this many a year, and now you drop down,
				as if from the clouds, and by what I can make out, have been fancying on your side
				that Edward was dead too. The first thing to do, must, I think, be to give you some
				breakfast, and then, if you are strong enough, you shall tell me how all this has
				come to pass."
Full as his heart was, and eagerly as he longed for the conversation in which he had
				so much to learn, as well as to tell, Michael gratefully submitted to this
				arrangement, till having received from the hands of the deeply-interested Mrs. Bell
				herself the refreshment he so greatly needed, he felt his young strength return, and
				if he trembled as he turned his eyes towards his kind host, with a look that seemed
				to say, "Now, sir, I can talk to you," it was from eagerness, not weakness.
Mr. Bell understood the appeal, and well inclined to answer it, said, "Having told
				you that Edward is alive and well, my dear boy, and only wants the sight that I see
				now to make him perfectly happy, I think you ought to be satisfied, and not expect
				me to tell you any more till my curiosity is gratified by hearing your own history.
				How in theworld did it happen, Michael, that when Miss Brotherton went to the Deep
				Valley Mills, on purpose to look for you, she should come back persuaded that you
				were dead, though the charming little girl she brought away with her had seen you
				there, and seemed to know you well?"
Michael Armstrong told his own story more succinctly than I have been able to do it,
				and probably much better too; for he beguiled Mrs. Bell of many tears as she
				listened to him; and bare as the sad narrative was of events, her husband also hung
				upon every word of it, as if, contrary to the theory which seemed to be pretty
				generally established in his neighbourhood, he thought the feelings and the
				sufferings of a factory-child might be capable of exciting interest.
When the history had reached its conclusion, and Michael had fairly brought himself
				into Mr. Bell's breakfast-parlour, he paused, and with a very eloquent look of
				entreaty said, "Now, sir, may I not listen to you?"
 "Yes, my dear boy," replied his new friend, in the happy tone with which a kind
				heart inspires words calculated to give pleasure. "Yes, you have much to hear, and a
				wonderful story it is, I promise you. But it shall be all true Michael, so don't
				fancy that I am telling you a fairy tale, and that Miss Brotherton is the fairy. But
				first tell me, before  I go any further, what sort of a boy was your
				brother Edward when you saw him last?" 
"Oh, sir! he was the dearest, kindest fellow that ever lived!" replied Michael, his
				fine eyes beaming with tenderness and well-remembered love.
"But what sort of a boy was he to look at?" demanded the clergyman.
Michael closed his eyes as if the better to contemplate the inward picture engraven
				on his memory.
"His face was a sweet face," said he, "but his dear limbs were crippled. He was a
				slighter boy than me, and could not stand the labour of the mill; and I fear — I
				fear," he added, shuddering, "that my poor Edward must live and die a cripple."
"What is your opinion about that, my dear?" said Mr. Bell, turning to his laughing
				wife.
"Why, I am inclined to think that Michael will have some difficulty in identifying
				his brother when he gets to him," she replied.
"Instead of being a cripple," resumed Mr. Bell, "I suspect that your brother is a
				handsomer fellow than you are, Michael. Every thing promised well for it when he
				took leave of us, and since then my wife has had letters from Miss Brotherton, which
				do not speak of any falling off in his improvement."
"Nay," said the lady, "I have had more than letters to speak for it. Shall I show him
				Miss Brotherton's drawing, George?"
"Most certainly, my dear; it will save me a vast deal of description, and you may
				trust to Miss Brotherton's pencil, Michael, as implicitly as to my words, for there
				never was a more faithful limner."
Mrs. Bell then opened a little portfolio, secured by a key, and drew thence a drawing
				in water-colours, the composition and finish of which would have done no discredit
				to a professional artist. How the stout nerves of the young and athletic Michael
				trembled as he received it! At first his eyes seemed to fail him, the outline, the
				colouring, the whole group was indistinct. "I am a fool, sir!" he said, letting the
				hand that held it drop beside him; "I positively cannot see."
"I don't much wonder at it," replied Mr. Bell; "but try again, Michael, it is worth
				looking at."
 And so thought Michael, as he once more placed it before him, and gazed upon it with
				an eye as eager as that of Surrey might have been, when contemplating the magic
				mirror that was to show him what he loved "in life and limb." The drawing
				represented a terrace-walk, along which ran a handsome stone balustrade partially
				covered by vine-leaves; while beneath it in the distance, stretched to a far horizon
				a glorious river, careering through a rich and varied landscape. All this was fair
				to look upon, but the boy's eyes saw it not — they were riveted upon two figures
				that occupied the foreground of the terrace. One of these was a slender girl, whose
				bright curls seemed just released from the restraint of a straw-hat which she held
				in her hand. But though the head was thus uncovered, the features were 
				not visible, for the other hand was placed upon the balustrade, over which she hung,
				as if in earnest contemplation of some object below. But the head of the other
				figure, a young man of some twenty years or so, was so turned as fully to meet the
				spectator's eye; and if the pencil that drew it flattered not, it was one of the
				handsomest that nature ever formed. The large expressive eyes, beaming with mingled
				softness and animation, were directed to some object out of the picture, but at no
				great distance; for the sweet smile that played about the mouth seemed to indicate
				that he was listening to pleasant words from some well-loved companion. The figure
				of the young man thus represented, was tall and graceful. His dress was the light
				summer garb of a southern climate — an open book was in his hand, his straw hat lay
				at his feet, beside which stood a basket of newly-gathered grapes, and a small
				Italian greyhound, its bright eye looking in the same direction as his own,
				completed the group, which spoke in every part of it a sort of graceful ease and
				enjoyment, that it was very pleasant to look upon. 
"Can this indeed by my Edward?" said Michael at length, after a long silent
				examination of the drawing. "How beautiful! — how noble! — how happy — how healthful
				— how intelligent he looks! Is it my own dear, pale, sickly brother? Can
				this be true?"
"As true as that you stand there to look at it," replied Mr. Bell. "Is there nothing
				in the face, Michael, that recalls your brother to you?"
"Yes, sir," he replied quickly; "the eyes and the sweet smile are so like my own
				Edward, that strange as it is to see him so healthy, tall, and graceful as he is
				represented here, and looking, too, so greatly like a gentleman, I do quite believe
				that this was never drawn for any one but him; for never, never since I saw him
				last, have I seen such eyes, or such a smile as that."
"You are quite right there, Michael. The face is one not easily forgotten, and I can
				trace it here, notwithstanding all the change of age and circumstance. But who do
				you think that slender girl may be? It seems a pity not to see her face; the form,
				the pretty attitude, the bright waving locks, all plainly tell that it must be worth
				looking at. Can you guess who it is?"
"I suppose it is Fanny Fletcher," replied Michael, colouring.
"And there, too, you are quite right. But does it not puzzle you to think how all
				this has been brought about? How does it happen, think you, that those whom you
				remember in a state so different, should now be living as you see them here, looking
				as if their existence were made up of sunshine and sweet air?"
 "And now again I shall answer, as they say the fortune-tellers do," replied Michael,
				smiling, "by telling you, sir, what you have before told me. It is Miss Brotherton,
				whose name I well remember at Dowling Lodge, it is she who has done all this, and
				may God bless her for it! But yet, truly, it still seems a mystery. How did it
				happen, sir, that this rich young lady should have left her grand house, and all  her fine acquaintance here, to go into foreign countries with two poor
				factory-children?" 
"You may well marvel at it, Michael, for it is no common act. But will you not think
				it something stranger still, if I declare, as I can do with all truth, that you are
				yourself the primal cause of it?" said Mr. Bell. "You look incredulous, yet so it
				is. Do you remember the play, Michael?"
"Sir Matthew's play?" cried Michael, burying his face in his hands. "Oh, sir! can I
				ever forget it?"
"It was a vastly gay thing, too," returned Mr. Bell, smiling, "and all the performers
				were exceedingly admired; but you do not seem to remember it with any great
				pleasure?"
"Pleasure, Mr. Bell?" returned Michael, with something like a groan; "I have suffered
				a good deal, considering how few years I had lived before my sufferings were over;
				but, excepting the coming home to mother's, and finding her and Teddy gone, and, as
				they told me, dead — both dead! excepting then, I never was so very, very
				wretched as while Sir Matthew was making me practise for that play!"
"Do you remember the very night it was acted, when you, and he, and Dr. Crockley were
				in a room by yourselves, somewhere behind the scenes; do you remember, Michael, his
				beating and abusing you because you had cried upon the stage?"
"As well as if it had happened yesterday," replied the young man. "I had to utter
				false and lying praise about him, and something I am sure there was about loving him
				as well as my dear mother. That I could not bear — and then it was that the tears
				burst out, though well I knew what I should pay for shedding them."
 "They were the luckiest tears that ever boy wept, so pray do not quarrel with them,"
				replied Mr. Bell. "While you were paying for them, as you call it, in the
				green-room, Miss Brotherton by accident heard and saw every thing that passed; and
				from that hour she has never forgotten you, Michael, though more than seven long
				years have passed, if I mistake not, during which you have never profited by it in
				your own person. I will not enter now into any description of what her feelings
				were. An accident prevented her seeing your mother immediately, and when she did, my
				poor boy, you were already beyond the reach of any help. But she never ceased to
				inquire, by every means in her power, whither you had been conveyed, and it was then
				she came to me, so that it is to you I owe the pleasure of knowing one of the purest
				and noblest-hearted human beings it has ever been my lot to meet with. It was in
				consequence of — not information, for I had none to give — but of a hint I gave her
				as to the nature of the place, that she set off on her exploring expedition to that
				horrid den of sin and suffering, the Deep Valley Mills, in Derbyshire. There she met
				the pretty creature whom she has since adopted. Little Fanny believed that you were
				dead, and this was the dismal news they brought to Hoxley-lane. — Your poor mother,
				Michael! But let it comfort you to know that  every want and every
				hardship were relieved from the first hour that Miss Brotherton saw her — and she
				died with the comfort of knowing that her poor Edward would never have to labour
				more. Soon after her death, Miss Brotherton took your brother to London for the
				purpose of consulting the most able surgeons about his lameness. Their science did
				not fail them; for they predicted that with proper treatment he would outgrow it —
				and so he has, completely; being at this time not only the graceful well-made
				personage you see him represented there, but healthy, active, and gifted, as I hear,
				with a most rare intelligence. For reasons which it is not very difficulty to guess,
				Miss Brotherton thought that she and her young protégées would find
				themselves better off on the continent than in Lancashire; and from the time she
				first left Milford Park to visit London, she has never returned to it. The place is
				now sold, and Miss Brotherton has no longer any possessions in this neighbourhood.
				And now my dear boy, I think I have told you all, excepting the exact spot where
				they now are; and this I cannot do, because our last letter from her informed us
				that they were just setting off upon a tour through Italy. She resided some time
				ago, for one year, at Paris, that the young people might acquire the language; but
				for the most part, Germany has been their home. It is there that your brother has
				received his education, and I think it very probable that it is there they will
				finally settle; for it is in the far-famed valley of the Rhingau that Miss
				Brotherton has purchased a spacious mansion, large enough, as she tells me, to
				accommodate half-a-dozen rich English families, with extensive and very beautiful
				grounds-around it, and all capabilities for being converted into a delicious
				residence." 
Here he ceased, and it was several minutes before poor Michael was capable of
				uttering a single word in return. The mention of his mother — the hint that she had
				not long survived the hearing he was dead, wrung his heart anew, with grief as fresh
				as if he had lost her yesterday; and spite of his manly stature, the tears flowed
				silently, but plenteously, down his cheeks. Yet, even when he had conquered this,
				there was something so surprising in the present situation of his brother,
				something, that notwithstanding all the fond yearnings of his own heart, seemed to
				place them so widely asunder, that the joy which Mr. Bell looked for, was less
				obvious, than an expression of almost timid embarrassment, as he said,
"Alas, sir! what shall I seem like amongst them? You speak of my dear Edward's
				education in Germany — of his learning a foreign language in France — while I! — my
				best, and truly my only education has been looking at nature from the mountain's
				side as I kept sheep, and all my learning, what I have gathered from a few
				strangely-mixed volumes that I have bought or borrowed during the last four years.
				How can I present myself before them? How they can welcome me?"
 "Be so kind, my dear," said Mr. Bell to his wife, without immediately replying to
				Michael's question, — "be so kind, my dear, as to find Miss Brotherton's last letter
				for me. I think you took possession  of it, and I doubt not have
				preserved it among other treasures of the same kind." 
Mrs. Bell immediately left the room, and presently returned with the letter in her
				hand.
"Take that letter, Michael," said Mr. Bell; "take it into the garden, my dear boy,
				and read it alone, and without interruption. You will find a shady seat where you
				may be very comfortable, and when you have finished the perusal come into my study,
				and tell me what you think of it."
Michael's hand trembled as he took the letter, and silently obeying the instructions
				he received, he walked out to an embowered spot where he could not be seen from the
				house, and seating himself on a garden-bench perused the following letter with a
				mixture of trepidation and eagerness which may easily be imagined:
"Have you thought it long since last you heard from me, dear friends? I hope you
				have, for it has seemed very long to me since last I wrote to you. But what a thief
				of time is occupation! I have been so very busy in drawing plans for the repairing
				and beautifying my old castle — you would certainly call it a castle in England —
				and so constantly called upon by Edward, to give my approval to his carte du
					voyage for our Italian tour, and by Fanny, to sanction her plans for our
				future flower-garden, and by Mrs. Tremlett to settle some point of enormous
				difficulty respecting the packing up of the things to be left, and the things to be
				taken, that though day by day I have told myself, for at least a month past, that I
				was behaving most abominably in not writing, I have never before found a leisure
				hour to set about it. But if I have not written, I have drawn for you — witness the
				view from my beautiful terrace which I shall send with this letter. I wish I could
				have put my own phiz in it to show you how healthy and well I look; but
				unfortunately, you know, there is no point of sight from which an artist can catch a
				peep at himself without the aid of a looking-glass, and though I pretty nearly live
				upon my terrace, I have not yet taken either to sleeping or dressing there, so no
				mirror was at hand. But instead of myself I have given you Edward; sometimes I do
				feel a little glorious as I look at him, and remember the delicate pale face and
				feeble limbs that greeted my first sight of him in Hoxley-lane. He is now — but you
				will laugh at me if I attempt to describe him in words — the sketch I send is no bad
				likeness, and may give you a tolerably correct idea of the alteration that has taken
				place. As to my sweet Fanny, though the attempt would have been a bold one, I meant
				to have given you a likeness of her too, but her attitude was so picturesquely
				pretty as she stood, unconscious of what I was about, that I contented myself with
				the back of her curly head — you shall have her face another time.
 "How can I be sufficiently thankful to Providence for having redeemed my isolated
				existence from the state of uselessness in which I vegetated before I met Edward
				Armstrong and Fanny Fletcher! Not an hour now passes by me, without leaving behind
				it some trace of  my having advanced in the precious labour of making
				these two beloved beings happier. Were they merely ordinary young people, with
				average hearts and average capacities, I should still bless Heaven with a grateful
				heart, for having permitted me to be the means of changing their condition, from one
				of great suffering to a life of innocent enjoyment. But as it is, I know not how to
				be thankful enough! 
"It seems to me, dear friends, however much I increase my acquaintance with other
				human beings, that Edward and Fanny are the noblest creatures in the world. Is it
				that suffering, being of necessity a part of our earthly nature, we cannot arrive at
				the perfect development of all our faculties without it? Where it arrives in later
				life, perhaps, the effect, though inwardly healthful, may not show fruits so
				beautiful. There is in the minds of both of them, a brightness of intelligence, and
				a delicious calm of temper that I have never met elsewhere. It is as if a heavy
				weight that had been painfully crushing them, was suddenly removed, causing all the
				ordinary sensations of human existence to be felt as a luxury. Young as they are,
				they are full of instruction, right thinking, pure feeling, and a firmness of
				integrity which it is the best joy of my life to contemplate — and all this built on
				so firm a foundation of religious principle, that I can have no fears for its
				endurance. After this, it would be very weak and womanish folly to dwell much on
				their personal advantages, or even on the peculiar charm of their manners and
				conversation — yet they are gifts which bring a charm, to which it is difficult to
				be quite insensible.
"Is it not strange, dear friends, that being such as I describe them, and having
				passed so large a portion of their lives together in the mutual contemplation of
				each other's excellence, is it not strange that they should not by this time be
				lovers, instead of friends? Yet such is not the case. That they love each other
				sincerely is most true, and I could give a thousand proofs that either would at all
				times gladly renounce amusement or pleasure of any kind, for the sake of the other;
				but they are not in love . If I did not believe it impossible, considering
				the age of the parties when they parted, I should think that Fanny's little heart
				had been buried in the grave of Michael, the poor little fellow, whose early
				sufferings under the tender patronage of Sir Matthew Dowling, first roused my sleepy
				existence into action. She cannot yet hear his name mentioned, without betraying a
				degree of emotion that it is painful to witness; and when, as sometimes happens,
				Edward is taken for her brother, it seems to delight her. 'Yes, yes, indeed he is my
				brother! I love him as such; and if you ask him, he will tell you that I am to him a
				dear and loving sister,' I have heard her say, and if Edward had been asked, I do
				believe he would have answered, and truly too, in the same strain.
 "Edward is now twenty-one, and my pretty Fanny nineteen; but, notwithstanding the
				variety of captivating young people with whom they are perpetually associating, I
				cannot believe that the heart of either has as yet received any tender impression —
				though in more cases than one, I have had reason to know that they have not been  looked at with indifference. Yet, sometimes I am puzzled about Edward!
				I think he is less gay and joyous than he used to be. At any time, indeed, the name
				of Michael has ever been sufficient to bring an expression of profound and hopeless
				sorrow upon his fine countenance, which it wrings my heart to see; for, alas! how
				vain must be all my affection, all sisterly love, to help him there! But,
				incontestably of late, his spirits have been less gay than formerly. This, to tell
				you the truth, is the only drawback to the happiness I enjoy. Could Fanny and Edward
				learn to forget poor Michael, I should hardly have a wish left; but I have little
				hope of this — his memory, I truly believe is too deeply engraven on their hearts,
				for any subsequent events to efface it. Sometimes, when I meditate on this
				sadly-enduring sorrow, I fancy that I should rejoice if they were both of them to
				fall in love, as a cure for it. But, alas! whenever that happens, what a breaking up
				of happiness it will be! for I can hardly hope to find a continental wife or husband
				for my adopted children, sufficiently English in habits and character, to permit my
				inviting them to make a part of my family. Yet marry abroad they must, I think, if
				they marry at all — for I will never by my own free will expose them to the
				mortification likely to ensue upon such an explanation respecting their origin, as
				must be the consequence of any matrimonial negotiation in England. On the continent,
				the ample fortunes they will possess, with their good education, and great natural
				advantages, will suffice to make them very desirable alliances to almost any one.
				But these are anxieties, which though they must come upon me sooner or later, I
				suppose, I shall endeavour to push from me, and forget as long as I can. 
"And now I must bid you farewell; for during the next month, or perhaps longer, our
				course will be directed by circumstances that we are not fully acquainted with as
				yet. But I will write as soon as I can tell you with certainty where your letters
				can reach us.
"Mrs. Tremlett, Edward, and Fanny, send affectionate greetings to you all. And should
				it fall in your way to see, or convey a message to poor Martha Dowling, I will beg
				you to tell her that I shall ever remember her with great affection and esteem.
				Adieu!

				"Ever dear Mr. and Mrs. Bell,
			
"Your grateful and affectionate, " Mary Brotherton
				."
 Did one reading of this epistle suffice for Michael? did two? did three? It is
				difficult to say, for he remained in his shady and obscure retreat so long, that Mr.
				Bell, notwithstanding his previous determination not to disturb him, began to think
				that it was time to see whether all the good news it contained had not killed him
				with joy. And when he reached the bench, Michael still sat with the precious letter
				in his hand, and his eyes fixed upon it, so that it appeared as if he had not yet
				finished the perusal of it. Michael looked up as Mr. Bell approached him, and
				immediately rising, stepped forward to receive him. It was not, however, any wild
				excess of joy that his features expressed,  but there were traces of
				very strong emotion on his countenance, and his hand trembled as he stretched it
				forth to receive that which was kindly extended towards him. 
"You have remained too long alone, my dear boy, in this cold nook," said Mr. Bell,
				taking the young man's arm within his own, and leading him towards the house. "What
				makes you look so pale, Michael? You are not ill, I hope?"
"No, sir, I think not," was the reply, "but I can hardly tell you how I feel. At one
				moment the idea that my dear brother still lives, and that it is possible I may
				again see him, hear him, hold him in my arms, seems to make me too happy to breathe
				— and then again, a sort of doubt and sadness takes hold upon me, and I do not feel
				as if it were possible I could ever make one in the happy party on the terrace."
"And why not, Michael?" demanded Mr. Bell somewhat reproachfully; "after reading that
				letter, can you find it in your heart to doubt that the party on the terrace would
				receive you joyfully?"
"Will not the happiness be too great?" cried Michael. "Oh! how can I deserve it?"
"Not by doubting the goodness or the affection of those who love you," replied Mr.
				Bell. "But come, I must not preach to you now, I believe, for I suspect that you are
				not in a condition to profit by it. Come into the house, sit down, and grow
				reasonable as fast as you can, and then we will talk of the time and the mode in
				which you must set off to join your family — for your family they are, and will be,
				Michael, you may depend upon it."
"Can I throw myself upon Miss Brotherton, sir, without her permission?" demanded
				Michael, while his paleness was changed for a moment into a glow of the deepest
				red.
"I am afraid you have a very proud heart, Michael," said Mr. Bell, looking at him;
				"and that is not right, it is not christianlike."
"Oh, Mr. Bell!" replied Michael, with strong feeling, "have I not already eaten the
				bitter bread of dependence, and can I, at my age, and with my power to labour,
				submit to it again?"
"You have a notion then, young man, that benefits conferred by a Sir Matthew Dowling,
				and a Miss Brotherton, are the same thing?" said Mr. Bell.
"Not so, sir," replied Michael, "I cannot doubt that she who wrote this letter, must
				be both great and good, and I well know that Sir Matthew Dowling was neither. But I
				only know Miss Brotherton as one of the fine folks visiting at his house, and I
				cannot feel that I should like to start out suddenly upon her, from the tomb, as it
				would seem, appearing to expect that she should adopt me too, as she has done my
				brother Edward."
 "Well, Michael, I must not blame you for this, because I believe it is very natural;
				yet, nevertheless, I feel quite sure that you will forget all such notions when you
				see Miss Brotherton," returned Mr. Bell, smiling. Michael shook his head, but he
				returned the smile, though rather languidly; and when they had reached the house,
					 and were again seated in the study, he said, "What does Miss
				Brotherton mean, sir, by calling Miss Martha Dowling 'poor Martha?' I trust that no
				misfortune has befallen her? she was very kind to me, and I shall always love her,
				although her name is Dowling." 
"I believe she deserves it, Michael," returned Mr. Bell, "and, by the by, you have it
				in your power to show your love, and do her a great kindness by the very simple
				process of letting her know that you are alive. Poor girl! She has suffered
				dreadfully from believing that she caused your death by the advice she gave to your
				mother about signing your indentures, and I fancy that letting her know that you did
				not perish in consequence, would be conferring a real blessing on her."
"Dear, good Miss Martha!" exclaimed Michael, "how well do I remember the walk we took
				together when she went to Hoxley-lane, to give my dearest mother that advice. She
				did it for my good, and for my good it would have been, if what she advised had been
				the thing she thought it! I owe her still, notwithstanding the misery she brought me
				to, the deepest gratitude; for her kind and careful teaching during the short time I
				was in her father's house first gave me the ambition and the hope to learn, and,
				spite of my degraded condition, I have never lost sight of it — and this it is,
				which, if any thing can, may reconcile me to presenting myself as a poor
				shepherd-boy before my well-taught brother."
"You are right there, Michael," replied Mr. Bell; "it is very clear to me that you
				have profited greatly by the feelings so inspired, notwithstanding the adverse
				circumstances in which you were placed during the four terrible years passed in the
				Deep Valley; and such feelings I can tell you, will make a vast difference in the
				degree of happiness you are likely to enjoy in a reunion with your brother."
"And to Fanny Fletcher too!" said Michael, with the eagerness of reviving hope
				heightening his colour, and darting its brightness from his eye, — "to Fanny
				Fletcher too, I owe the suggestion of thoughts which have saved me from being too
				utterly degraded to meet her again with pleasure. It is to Martha Dowling, surely,
				that I owe all the little book learning I have been able to acquire, as well as the
				power of writing down the thoughts and meditations to which it has given rise; but
				it was Fanny who made me fell that however lowly our condition and state on earth,
				we may yet retain as good a right as any of the kings of it, to open our hearts
				before God, and ask for His Spirit to help us. How many mornings have I watched the
				sun rise, how many evenings have I seen him set in glory behind the mountain-tops,
				and thoughts as I lay amidst the heather, and worshipped his Almighty Maker, that,
				but for her, I should never have known the comfort of loving and trusting, as well
				as of adoring him. It was that dear patient little girl who taught me this, and
				perhaps I may yet live to thank her for it."
 "I trust you will, my dear boy," replied Mr. Bell, touched with the earnest energy
				of the boy's manner; "I trust you will, Michael: and if I mistake her not, she will
				receive such thanks as a very welcome  reward for all the pains she
				took to comfort you. Such kindness as she showed you is, indeed, — 'twice blest, It
				blesseth him that gives, and him that takes:' and I doubt not that she, as well as
				yourself, has been the better for it, from that time to this." 
"May I look once more at that drawing, sir?" said Michael, with some little
				embarrassment.
"There it is, Michael," said the clergyman smiling, and once more laying it before
				him. "Were it not that I think you will so soon see the dear originals, and that we
				shall not, I would ask my wife to give it you."
"I think I shall learn every line, and every shade of it by rote," said Michael, "if
				I do but look at it a few minutes longer. There, sir," he added, after an earnest
				gaze, and resigning it into his hands; "I feel as if it were my own now." Then,
				after one deep sigh, he seemed to rouse himself; and, as if endeavouring to shake
				off some feeling that oppressed him, he said, "But you have not told me yet, sir,
				the reason why Miss Brotherton calls my first benefactress ' poor
				Martha!'"
"I am sorry to say," replied Mr. Bell, "that there are more reasons than one, for
				applying that pitying epithet to Miss Martha Dowling. In the first place, she is
				greatly out of health, poor girl; and in the next, her father's affairs are said to
				be in a very tottering condition, in consequence of his having overloaded himself
				with a greater quantity of spun cotton than he can get any sale for. He is said to
				have lent out money, too, on some speculation which has not answered: and, in short,
				that it is rather a nice question, whether he will be able to get through his
				difficulties or not. Another misfortune is, that Sir Matthew, as soon as he possibly
				could after the death of his first wife, thought proper to marry the Lady Clarissa
				Shrimpton, who, strange to say, thought proper also to marry him; and it is said
				also, that poor Miss Martha, who is the eldest of the daughters unmarried, is not
				permitted to enjoy much peace under the rule of her noble step-mother."
"Lady Clarissa Shrimpton?" said Michael, with the air of one to whom some long-lost
				image is brought back — "Lady Clarissa Shrimpton? Why, surely, that was the name of
				the tall, thin woman who had to practise the laying her bony hand upon my
				unfortunate little head, when the terrible play was about?"
"I dare say it was," said Mr. Bell. "But, at any rate, Lady Clarissa Shrimpton is now
				Lady Clarissa Dowling."
"Poor Miss Martha! — and she is out of health too? How can I manage to pay my duty to
				her, Mr. Bell, without running the risk of being recognised by Sir Matthew, as the
				unfortunate boy who escaped from the Deep Valley? He would be able, I suppose, to
				make me serve out my time?"
 "I do not think he would attempt it just now, Michael?" was the consolatory reply.
				"Thank God!" continued Mr. Bell, "there has been a good deal said of late concerning
				the abominations of the  Deep Valley Factory, and I don't much think
				Sir Matthew Dowling would run the risk of having it proved that he had kidnapped a
				boy away to it, in the style he managed you. I should have no fear whatever, of your
				presenting yourself at Dowling Lodge; only I think it is ten to one her ladyship
				will not let you get a sight of Miss Martha without her being present, — unless you
				were to write a line to the young lady first, and then perhaps she might contrive
				it." 
Michael now rose to take his leave, offering with a fervour that was very touching,
				his earnest thanks for the generous kindness with which he had been received; but he
				resisted all the hospitable efforts made to retain him as a guest. He had need, he
				said, to be alone, that he might bring his mind to such a state as should enable him
				to sustain the wonderful change in his prospects with something like fortitude and
				rational composure. There was more real kindness, and true sympathy, in the manner
				of accepting this excuse, than the most pressing offers of hospitality could have
				shown; and Michael, after involuntarily kissing the hand stretched out to bid him
				farewell took his departure from the clergyman's house, with a heart full of
				thankfulness to God and man.
