
 CHAPTER VII. 
A POPULAR CHARACTER — MORE BENEVOLENCE — INTERESTING INTELLIGENCE RECEIVED WITH
				BECOMING ANIMATION — A SELECT COMMITTEE — A FAREWELL FULL OF MEANING.

				The person who produced this very powerful effect was a lady not
				particularly distinguished either by wealth or station; but she seemed to possess
				the faculty of finding her way into every house within her reach, whether the owner
				of it desired her presence or not.
Mrs. Gabberly was the widow of a clergyman, who had formerly been vicar of the parish
				of St. Mary's, Ashleigh, and having made herself the very largest acquaintance that
				ever was enjoyed by any country lady without a carriage, she determined upon
				continuing amongst them after her husband died, as it might have taken her, she
				said, more years than she was likely to live, before she could expect to make so
				many friends all over again. She therefore, on leaving the vicarage, contented
				herself with a very small house, as near the town as possible, and went on very much
				as she had done before, only having one maid-servant instead of two, and contenting
				herself with a donkey-chair and a very little boy to drive it, instead of a
				one-horse chaise, and a steady man-servant of all work.
 Considering the wealth and splendour of the neighbourhood in which accident had
				first placed her, and to which choice now held her bound, it may be looked upon as a
				matter of wonder that she should have made any intimacies at all. But, though the
				vicarage  of St. Mary's, Ashleigh, was far enough from being richly
				endowed, and the private fortune of the late incumbent not such as to enable him to
				approach to any thing like an equality in his style of living to even the least
				wealthy among the manufacturers in the district, there is still a species of respect
				for the profession of a clergyman, which opens to him and his family the houses of
				many, greatly their superiors in point of wealth; and it therefore pretty generally
				depends on the clergy themselves, whether they are on intimate terms with their
				neighbours, or not. 
Now Mr. Gabberly, or more properly speaking, Mrs. Gabberly, who in strength of will
				had ever been his far better half, did greatly desire to be on intimate terms with
				her neighbours. Rich or poor, gentle or simple, old or young, she was determined to
				be intimate with them all. And she was intimate with them all, very intimate. One
				word more, and Mrs. Gabberly shall be left to speak for herself, which she was
				certainly able to do, with as little impediment of any kind, as most people. Mrs.
				Gabberly was the daughter of a physician; and from her earliest years had acquired
				so decided a taste for the theory and practice of medicine, that she could never
				wean herself entirely from it, but was thought by many to let it still occupy rather
				too large a share of her conversation and thoughts. Nevertheless, Mrs. Gabberly was
				exceedingly popular, for though her discourse ran much upon bruises and bowels,
				rickets and rheums, spasms and spines, it ran also upon matters more attractive. If
				she could not tell what every body for three miles round had for dinner on the very
				day on which she was speaking, it was a hundred to one but she could tell, within a
				cutlet or a hash, what they had been all eating for a week before. She knew, with an
				approach to correctness that was perfectly astonishing, the amount of every body's
				expenditure, and every body's debts; could tell to the fraction of a new ribbon, how
				many bonnets each lady consumed per annum; and was perfectly au fait of the
				quantity of corn and hay got through in every body's stables. No flirtation ever
				escaped either her eyes or her tongue, and the Morning Post was a less faithful
				record of fine parties, than the tablets of her comprehensive memory.
The Dowling family was aware of all this; and each in their way had a peculiar value
				for her society, for Mrs. Gabberly knew how to be all things to all men, women, and
				children; but, at the present moment, it was Sir Matthew who felt the most decided
				movement of satisfaction at beholding her sharp black eyes, brisk step, and eager
				manner of reconnoitring every individual present, as she entered the room.
"Here is my general advertiser," thought the knight, as he extended his huge hand to
				welcome her. "We will have a theatrical representation that shall immortalize my
				charity, and here's the one that shall act the part of Fame, and trumpet it round
				the country."
 "My goodness! what a charming party of you is got all together this morning,"
				exclaimed Mrs. Gabberly, smiling and bowing, and nodding, and courtesying, to every
				body in succession, all the time  that Sir Matthew continued his cordial
				hand-shaking. "Now you must just tell me what you are all about, for if you don't I
				shall die, and there's the truth." 
"No, no, Mrs. Gabberly, you shan't die, if we can save your life," replied Sir
				Matthew, in his most jovial tone. "We are a gay and happy party, at this moment, I
				do believe, one and all," and here the knight thought proper to send a glance after
				little Michael, who, notwithstanding his fine clothes, was looking pale and sad
				enough, in the most distant corner from the principal group to which he had been
				able to creep.
The experienced eye of Sir Matthew read past suffering and present terror in his
				speaking features, and he cursed the trembling child in his heart of hearts. But Sir
				Matthew Dowling might have removed as many coatings as the grave-digger in Hamlet,
				ere the looker-on could have penetrated so far; and it must have been a quick
				observer that could have detected the sort of lurid glare that for half an instant
				gleamed in the savage look he cast upon the boy. It was for no longer space that his
				joyous gaiety was obscured, and he then turned again his admiring glances upon the
				Lady Clarissa, and resumed his speech.
"This is the person, Mrs. Gabberly, who must let you into the mystery. You must
				entreat her ladyship to be pleased to inform you what it is she is going to make us
				all do."
"Well then, I hope her ladyship won't refuse. You won't be so cruel, will you, my
				lady?"
"No, certainly!" replied Lady Clarissa smiling complacently on the knight. "If Sir
				Matthew complies with my proposal, I shall have no objection to its being proclaimed
				to all the world."
And here glances were exchanged between the knight and the lady, perfectly
				intelligible to each other, and which said very distinctly, "Ah! Lady Clarissa!" on
				the one part; and, "Oh! Sir Matthew! on the other.
"Speak then, my lady!" said the gallant manufacturer with a low bow; "and whatever
				you shall say, shall be law."
"Now then, ladies and gentlemen! all of you give ear; for not Mrs. Gabberly alone,
				but every one present, should pay attention to what I am about to say." And here
				Lady Clarissa turned her eyes round about her in search of the hero of the scene.
				"Where is the little boy?" said she, in a tone of great theatrical feeling.
 "Come here, my dear little fellow!" said Sir Matthew, again turning his glances
				towards Michael, and now looking amiable and benignant with all his might. But the
				child seemed to wither beneath this sunshine, even more conspicuously than when he
				had been left in the shade; and it was not till the knight made some gigantic
				strides forwards to meet him, that poor Michael formed the desperate courage
				necessary to bring him from his corner to the spot where his noble benefactress
				stood. Nay, the last steps were not made without the helping hand of Sir Matthew,
				which heavily laid upon his shoulder performed a twofold office; ostensibly
				caressing,  while, in truth, it forcibly impelled the little trembler
				forward. 
"Now then, Mrs. Gabberly," said Lady Clarissa, "look at this interesting little
				fellow! It is he who is the hero of our fête ."
"Indeed! And pray what may the young gentleman's name be?" said Mrs. Gabberly.
"Is not that delicious?" cried Lady Clarissa. "Oh, Sir Matthew! how I envy you your
				feelings! Note that, dear Norval. The touch is exquisitely dramatic, and must on no
				account be omitted. This young gentleman , Mrs. Gabberly," continued Lady
				Clarissa, with increasing animation, "this young gentleman as you most naturally
				call him, was a few short hours ago, a wretched, ragged beggar-boy! Sir Matthew
				Dowling, from motives, that I dare not wound his generous heart by thus publicly
				dwelling upon, has rescued him from poverty and destruction. This deed, so beautiful
				in itself, and so beneficial in its influence as an example, is about to be
				immortalized as it ought to be, by the pen, the rapid, brilliant, touching pen of my
				young friend, Mr. Osmond Norval. He has undertaken to dramatize this charming trait
				of benevolence, and our excellent Sir Matthew, has consented to fit up a little
				theatre for the representation of it, at which all the neighbourhood are to be
				present as invited guests."
"Well now! If ever I heard any thing so delightful as that!" exclaimed Mrs. Gabberly,
				clapping her hands in ecstasy. "Are the cards sent out, Sir Matthew?"
"Not yet, Mrs. Gabberly," replied the knight, with his most friendly smile; "but
				depend upon it that when they are, you will not be forgotten."
"Well now, my dear Lady Dowling! I am sure you are always so kind to me!" cried the
				delighted Mrs. Gabberly, making her way towards the sofa, where sat the lady of the
				mansion in frowning state; "I should not wonder if you were to contrive a bed for me
				on this great occasion, it would be just like you. And oh! my! I have got such a
				quantity of things I want to tell you, but I can't stop one instant longer now, if
				you'd give me the whole world. So, good by to you all, my dears! I've heard
				something about you, Miss Arabella, but it must keep, my dear; and I've a secret for
				Miss Harriet's ear, too, when we have got leisure. But, good by, good by! Good
				morning, my Lady Clarissa," and away bustled Sir Matthew's public
					advertiser to spread the glorious news of private theatricals at Dowling
				Lodge, throughout the country. She paused for one moment, however, as she passed by
				Michael; and putting her hand upon his head, so as to make him turn his face up
				towards her, she said, after looking at him very earnestly,
"Well now, for a beggar-child, he is to be sure the genteelest-looking little fellow,
				I ever did see; but, perhaps that may be owing to his being so pale and thin, which
				is certainly a great deal more elegant than fatness and red cheeks, though it don't
				quite seem so healthy."

"Oh! he is in perfect health, I do assure you, Mrs. Gabberly, as you would have said,
				if you had seen the dear little fellow eating his luncheon with us just now," said
				the amiable Sir Matthew chucking him under the chin. "But, by the way," continued
				the merry knight, "I rather suspect that I called him away before he had quite
				finished, and that's what it is makes him look so doleful, isn't it, dear? Well!
				never be ashamed about it — go back again, there's a darling! and don't forget to
				take a nice bit home to mother and brother — d'ye hear, Michael? Pretty fellow! how
				he blushes!"
And here the benevolent Sir Matthew himself opened the door leading to the
				dining-room, and playfully pushed the "darling" through it.
"Well now!" again exclaimed the astonished Mrs. Gabberly "did ever any body see such
				a beautiful spectacle of charity as that?"
And without waiting for any reply, the brisk little lady made her exit without
				further pause or delay of any kind, and so completely charged "to the top of her
				bent" with wonderful intelligence, that she actually suffered from the repletion
				till half a dozen gossippings had relieved it.
Meanwhile, the party she left resolved themselves into a committee of management upon
				the business in hand. Mr. Osmond Norval was entreated to urge his eloquent pen with
				the greatest possible rapidity; while on his part, Sir Matthew promised that the
				necessary workmen should immediately be employed in preparing one of the largest
				rooms in the house as a theatre.
When the consultation reached this point, Lady Dowling suddenly rose and left the
				room; but this circumstance did not appear to produce much emotion in any of the
				party, and they remained together in a most delightful state of hubbub and
				excitement till the heiress grew tired, and ventured to hint that she thought it
				would be best for her to drive home first, and then send her carriage back for the
				accommodation of her noble friend.
This proposal brought the meeting to a conclusion; but not till Lady Clarissa had
				confessed in a whisper to Sir Matthew, that she never in her whole life remembered
				to have taken any thing that did her so much good, as the delicious grapes he had
				sent home with her the evening before.

