
 CHAPTER IX. 
SOME PARTICULARS RESPECTING MISS BROTHERTON — A DEMONSTRATION OF NEIGHBOURLY
				FRIENDSHIP AND ANXIETY — THE WILFULNESS OF AN HEIRESS — A GLEAM OF LIGHT CAUGHT IN
				THE DARKNESS.

				The mansion of Miss Brotherton, at the distance of three miles from
				the town of Ashleigh, though less splendid in external appearance than that of Sir
				Matthew Dowling, was quite as elaborately elegant in its interior, and moreover,
				incomparably superior to it in every point in which taste was concerned. To this
				superb home we must now follow the young heiress, as circumstances will hereafter
				frequently blend her name with that of Michael Armstrong.
The position of Mary Brotherton was a very singular one, and in many respects far
				from being fortunate. At the age of twenty-one years and eight months, she found
				herself, by the death of her mother, in the uncontrolled possession of two hundred
				thousand pounds. Her father, dead some six or seven years before, had been a
				manufacturer of the old apprentice-system school, and his fortune made long before
				the humane bill of Sir Robert Peel, the elder, had, in some degree, weakened the
				chains which bound thousands of friendless orphans to unmeasured and unmitigated
				drudgery. [2]

But of all these circumstances, his daughter was totally and altogether ignorant.
				Educated, from a very early age, at a fashionable London boarding-school, she knew
				nothing concerning the neighbourhood of her home, but that its hills and valleys
				were deformed by tall chimneys and dirty smoke; and that none of the young ladies
				who paid her visits during the holidays, were at all like her school-fellows in
				London.
Of course, the little lady soon learned to know that she was a person of great
				consequence; and at the age of fourteen, had most completely acquired all the airs
				and graces of a spoiled child. But the death of her father was a great advantage to
				her; as his only child, and the only heir of his immense wealth, he rather
				worshipped than loved her, and the attentions he paid her, seemed more like acts of
				homage than of affection. Had she not given herself airs, he would have been
				miserable; and had it been possible that any act of hers could bring upon her a
				reprimand, it would have been something indicating her belief, that she was formed
				of the same sort of materials as the wretches who toiled for him.
 Fortunately, however, she was fond of her mother, who, being  a great
				invalid, lived quietly in the midst of her splendour; and the holidays of her
				daughter were thus passed quietly too, which saved her from much early adulation.
				She had remained at school till nearly eighteen; and from that time, to the period
				of her mother's death, which happened about fifteen months before the opening of
				this narrative, she had led a life of great retirement, dividing her time between
				attendance in her sick mother's chamber, galloping about the country on horseback,
				and reading every book she could get hold of, good, bad, and indifferent. 
On first finding herself alone in her own great house, the poor girl wept bitterly.
				Her mother's increasing sufferings had long made her release from them an event to
				be ardently desired by the only being who loved her; but when at last it came, and
				she had herself to think of, and nobody else, there was something almost terrible in
				her utter loneliness. She was personally acquainted with very few in the
				neighbourhood, and felt no affection for any of them. Of relations, to the best of
				her knowledge and belief, she possessed not one in the world; and with all her
				advantages, for she had many, being young, pretty, talented, and rich, she would
				gladly have changed places during the first weeks of her dismal mourning, with any
				girl of her own age who had father, mother, brother, and sisters to love, and be
				loved by.
Mrs. Gabberly was the nearest neighbour she had on one side, and Lady Clarissa
				Shrimpton on the other, and both these ladies had occasionally been admitted to see
				her mother till within a few days of her death. When, therefore, this long-expected
				event at length took place, they both thought themselves privileged to assume the
				freedom of intimate friends, and penetrate to the lone boudoir of the mournful
				heiress. Fortunate for her it was, that they did so; for though neither of them
				possessed any single quality of sufficient value to win and wear the esteem, or even
				the liking, of an acute, clearsighted observer, such as the half-spoiled heiress
				certainly was; it was better to hear the sound of almost any human voice uttering
				words of kindness, than to sit lonely and apart, and hear none; so that neither the
				twaddling larum of Mrs. Gabberly, nor the absurd affectation of Lady Clarissa were
				without their use.
It might, however, have been somewhat dangerous to the moral development of the young
				lady's character, had she long continued to find her only relief from sorrow and
				solitude in the society of persons who could only amuse her by their absurdities.
				Almost the first time she exerted herself for the purpose of pursuing some of her
				ordinary occupations, she drew forth her drawing-box, and produced a caricature of
				Lady Clarissa reciting verses from the pen of Mr. Norval; and the first observations
				she committed to paper, were the result of a tolerably accurate counting of the
				number of times Mrs. Gabberly had uttered "Well now!" during her last visit.
 At length, the first dismal fortnight being over, Miss Brotherton appeared at
				church; and then the whole neighbourhood rushed in  to express their
				sympathy, till her very soul sickened under the cuckoo-note of sorrowless
				lamentation. Nevertheless, there was so much of real sadness in the spectacle of a
				young girl thus left utterly alone in the world, that despite the golden light her
				wealth threw around her, many among her herd of visiters might have felt more for
				her, perhaps, than she gave them credit for. But, unfortunately such persons are not
				those who make their "griefs and clamour roar" most audibly, so she knew nothing
				about it, if it were so, and thereby lost any advantage which her temper might have
				gained from emotions that soothe and soften. 
Instead of this, she had to undergo what she felt to be a very severe persecution,
				from the prodigiously active interest which Mrs. Gabberly took in her, and her
				concerns. As some of the singularities of Miss Brotherton's character, will
				eventually produce results of considerable importance to our hero, it may not be
				amiss to recount the particulars of a scene which took place in her boudoir exactly
				three weeks after the death of her mother.
On the morning in question, Mrs. Gabberly had as usual made her way unannounced to
				the young lady's presence, by dint of that assumption of extreme intimacy in her
				manner of inquiring for her, which in this case, as in a multitude of others,
				succeeded in putting to the rout the protecting discretion of her servants.
"Well now, dear child!" she exclaimed on entering; "how are you to-day? Upon my word,
				Mary, you are too pale. You know my dear, the palor , as we call it, is not
				natural to your complexion, and therefore the symptom must be attended to. Have you
				any camphor in the house, dear?"
"Thank you, Mrs. Gabberly; but I want nothing of the kind."
"Well now! then I must think of something else."
"Not for me, ma'am, I shall not take any medicine whatever."
"Dear child! How very odd that does seem to me! We people of science, Mary, are so
				used to turn to it upon all occasions, that it almost looks like losing one's wits
				altogether, to go on so, and take nothing."
"People of no science, ma'am, do not require it."
"Well now! so much the worse for them; but that was not the point I came to talk
				about. Do you know, my dear, I am perfectly miserable in my mind about you. I can't
				sleep at nights for thinking about the impossibility of your living on, all by your
				own self, in this great palace of a house."
Miss Brotherton turned away her head, and resting her elbow on the mass of cushions
				that were piled beside her on the sofa, concealed her eyes with her hand, while her
				neighbour proceeded to discuss her condition.
"Did you ever hear of such a thing in your whole life, my dear? No, never! that's
				quite certain. It is quite out of the question, and impossible; and to speak out the
				whole truth at once, it is not in any way decent."
Something a little approaching to a start, produced a slight movement in Miss
				Brotherton. Mrs. Gabberly proceeded.

"Well now, my dear! I have been thinking that what you must do, is to find out among
				your friends and acquaintance, some respectable person in the situation of a
				gentlewoman to live with you. Somebody already known in the neighbourhood, would be
				the most desirable, because then you would not have the trouble of introducing her;
				for of course it will be in no wise proper for so young a person as you are to visit
				about, even in the country, without a proper chaperone."
Again the cushions were slightly moved, but this time it was not a start, but a
				shudder which caused it.
"Well now, my dear Mary!" resumed the friendly Mrs. Gabberly; "what do you think
				about it?"
"It requires longer time than I have yet had, before I can answer your question, Mrs.
				Gabberly," replied the young lady.
"Well now! that's very true, and very discreet, and sensible; and God forbid, my
				dear, that I should make you do any thing in a hurry. Only you must not forget that
				every body will be on the look out to observe what you do. Depend upon it, that they
				won't wait to make their remarks — that's all."
The heiress retained her meditative position, but said nothing.
"Don't you think what I have said is true, my dear?"
Mary bowed her head, but without changing the position of the hand which concealed
				her face.
"I wish she would look up at me," thought Mrs. Gabberly; "I might guess then,
				perhaps, if there was any chance for me."
"It would be a comfort, as well as a protection, wouldn't it, my dear, to have a
				kind, affectionate friend, always near you!"
Mary bowed again.
"Well now! I wish you would open your dear heart, and speak out. Tell me, don't you
				feel very lonesome, when you sit down to dinner?"
"I have been long used to that, Mrs. Gabberly."
"Yes; but then you had not got to think all the time, as I am sure you must do now,
				that there was nobody near you; that there was nobody in the whole
				great house but your own self, besides the servants; that there was nobody
				to drink your health; nobody to say won't you take a little bit more, my
				dear? Nobody to say isn't this very nice? Nobody to give you a nod
				and a smile when you look up. Nobody to ask, 'Shall I peel an orange for
				you, my dear?' or, 'Shall I mix your strawberries and cream, my ove?' Now isn't this
				all dismal?"
"Very dismal, ma'am!" replied the young lady in a voice that showed plainly enough,
				that the picture was not an indifferent one.
"Well now! that's saying something; and I can't help thinking, dear Mary! I can't
				help saying, that it has come into my head, that if — "
 "Mrs. Gabberly!" cried Miss Brotherton, starting suddenly up. "I must now beg you to
				leave me. You have described my situation so forcibly, that I feel more than ever
				the necessity of making  some arrangement that may better it. But I will
				not do this without reflection. Leave me, now. I thank you for your kind concern,
				and when next you call upon me, you shall find that what you have said has not been
				disregarded." 
"Well now, that's all right, and I'll go directly. Shall it be to-morrow, dear, that
				I call again?"
"No, ma'am, if you please, not till next Saturday."
"Saturday? Why, my dear, this is only Monday — it is a great while for me to live in
				such suspense about you, dearest."
"No, ma'am, not very long. Saturday it must be if you please; and I shall be happy if
				you will stay and dine here on that day."
"Thank you, my dear. I shall like that very, very much indeed. And then we
				can talk every thing over, my dear Mary. God bless you, my love. Take care of
				yourself, dearest, till Saturday; and just let me say one word in your ear at
				parting. Remember, that there is nobody in the whole wide world that loves you as
				much as I do."
Miss Brotherton submitted herself passively to the embrace which followed; and when
				the door closed after her affectionate neighbour, she stood, as it seemed,
				patiently, while her sharp, short, retreating footsteps were heard along the
				spacious corridor, and when they were heard no more she applied her hand to the
				bell. But something made her pause ere she rang it, and stepping to a window, that
				opened upon a balcony filled with skilfully-shaded exotics, she peeped forth from
				among them, till the active-moving little figure of Mrs. Gabberly trudging along the
				drive below, became visible, and then the heiress turned again to the bell-rope, and
				pulled it vigorously.
"Tell nurse Tremlett — tell Mrs. Tremlett to be so kind as to come to me
				immediately," was the order given to the servant who answered it.
After the interval of a few minutes, during which Miss Brotherton stood with her arm
				resting on the mantelpiece, with a countenance and attitude of deep meditation, the
				door opened again, and a pale, thin, little old woman entered, who, had not her
				wrinkles and gray locks betrayed her, might have passed for five-and-twenty, so
				active and nicely moulded was her little person. But despite her still clear and
				bright black eye, her face showed that she could not honestly count less than twice
				that sum of years.
"Come in, dear nurse!" said Miss Brotherton kindly, "come in, and sit down by
				me."
The old woman obeyed this command without further ceremony; and, by her manner of
				doing it, showed plainly that it was not an uncommon one.
"What have you been about, my child?" said she, "you don't look well."
"I dare say not," replied Mary abruptly, "I have been bored and plagued, nurse
				Tremlett; and now I am going to bore and plague you, in order to comfort
				myself."

For all answer, the chartered nurse put her arm round the young lady's neck, and gave
				her a very loving kiss.
"Nay, it is very true, Mrs. Tremlett; and no joke in it. I do assure you. I am going
				to make a terrible change in your manner of life, my dear old woman. I am going to
				make a state-prisoner of you."
"You may plague and puzzle your old nurse as much as you like, my darling, so you
				will but smile and look a little less dismal than you have done of late. And what is
				it you are going to do to me, Miss Mary? I dare say it is nothing that I shall think
				very hard."
"I don't know that, Mrs. Tremlett," replied Mrs. Brotherton very gravely.
"Mrs. Tremlett, and Mrs. Tremlett," said the old woman, looking earnestly at her,
				"what does that mean, Miss Mary? — I don't like it."
"I know you won't like it. But you must bear that, and a great deal more, my dear old
				friend. You must make up your mind to lead a new life altogether; and I am very much
				afraid that you will not like the change."
"Oh! goodness, Miss Mary, what is it you mean? You are not going to send me away from
				you are you?"
"Is that the worst thing I could do to vex you?" said the young lady, very cordially
				returning the caress she had received; "you need not be afraid of that, at any rate.
				The misfortune I threaten is of quite a different kind."
"Well, then I shan't mind it; let it be what it will. But I don't think it is any
				thing very bad, my dear; for you look as if you were ready to laugh, though you try
				to look grave, and talk of a misfortune."
"It will be no misfortune to me, I assure you, but quite the contrary. I shall like
				it very much, and that is the reason you see me ready to smile; and if you will be a
				dear good woman, and make no difficulties about it, all will go well. Mrs. Gabberly
				has been here, nurse Tremlett; and she tells me that I must immediately take some
				elderly lady into the house, to sit with me and take care of me; because, as she
				says, I am too young to live alone, and that all the neighbourhood will be making
				remarks upon me."
"Well, my dear, and I dare say she says no more than the truth. Your great fortune,
				and your prettiness, and all that, will certainly bring many and many an eye upon
				you, my dear child; and, of course, it won't do for you to go on without having some
				steady lady of a companion like, to be living with you."
"But I hate all ladies that would come to live as a companion like ,"
				replied the young lady. "What should I do with a Miss Mogg, trotting about after me,
				to ask if I wanted my smelling-bottle, or my pug-dog? And that is not the worst that
				could happen to me either. As sure as you are there, nurse Tremlett, Mrs. Gabberly
				has made up her mind to come and live here as my companion herself!"

"And you would not like that, by your manner, my dear? I do think she is rather too
				bustling and busy for you. You are such a reader that you would not like any one
				that was over talkative and fidgety about you. But don't fret yourself for that,
				dear; you must make some civil sort of excuse to Mrs. Gabberly. You are clever
				enough to find one, I dare say."
"Yes, nurse Tremlett, I think I am — I have found one already."
"That's very right, Miss Mary; and what shall you say to her, my dear?"
"I shall tell her that you are going to live with me as my companion."
Nonsense, dear! That is the joke, is it, that you were looking so merry about?"
"Mrs. Tremlett, I am not jesting in any way," replied Miss Brotherton, very gravely;
				"and I entreat you to listen to my proposal as seriously as I make it. I am
				friendless, very friendless, dear nurse; and trust me, with all my money, I am
				greatly to be pitied. Why, in addition to the misfortune of not having a relation in
				the world, should I be doomed to the misery of hiring a stranger to pester me with
				her presence from morning to night? It is a penance that I cannot, and will not
				endure. Yet I know that all people will say, that I ought not to sit up here alone
				to receive company, and I do not wish to be spoken of as a person who either knows
				not or values not propriety. But if you will do what I desire, Mrs. Tremlett, you
				may save me from this, and from what I perhaps should unhappily consider as a
				greater misfortune still, namely, the being forced to pass my life with a person
				whose presence was a pain to me."
Tears flowed down the cheeks of the heiress as she spoke; and the devoted servant who
				sat beside her, though absolutely confounded by the strange proposal, could find no
				words to utter in opposition to it.
"Dear nurse! — you will not forsake me, then?" said Mary, smiling through her tears.
				"There's a dear soul — you will let me have my own way in everything — about your
				dress, you know, and all that? It will be worth any thing in the world to see Mrs.
				Gabberly, when she first beholds you sitting up in state in the drawing-room!"
From the moment the old woman had perceived that her beloved, but wilful darling, was
				not only serious, but sorrowful, and that, too, concerning no imaginary grief, but
				from the contemplation of the truly melancholy isolation of her condition, all
				disposition to resist her vanished; and yet nurse Tremlett was perfectly capable of
				perceiving all the inconveniences likely to arise on both sides from so strange a
				scheme. But even while such thoughts silently took possession of her, leaving
				perhaps some legible traces on her countenance, her young mistress looked so kindly
				and so coaxingly in her face, as if at once reading and deprecating all she had to
				say, that she felt nothing was left for her but obedience.
 "Do what you will with me, my dear," said she, with a fond  smile and a
				shake of the head, that seemed to say, "I know you must have your own way, Mary." 
And thus was conceived and established a mode of life for the pretty heiress, which
				left her as completely uncontrolled as to all she did, and all she said, as if nurse
				Tremlett still occupied her quarters in what was once called the nursery, but had
				since become the favoured nurse's sitting-room.
Mary's delight in dressing and drilling the old woman for her new duties, was
				childish and excessive; and most triumphant was the satisfaction with which she
				perceived that rich black silks, and delicate white crape, performed their office
				upon her nice little person so effectually, as to give her quite as much the air of
				a gentlewoman, as the majority of those who were likely to meet her.
So, on the following Saturday, Mrs. Gabberly found Miss Brotherton no longer the
				solitary occupant of her elegant boudoir, but with a remarkably well-dressed elderly
				lady, seated in the most luxurious of all the newly-invented chairs which decorated
				the apartment, with a small work-table before her; while on the footstool at her
				feet, sat the heiress, looking a vast deal more happy than she had ever before seen
				her.
The mystification did not last long. The eyes of Mrs. Gabberly were of that happy
				fabric, which enables the owner to retain for ever the memory of every face they
				have ever looked upon; and it was with heightened colour, and no very sweet
				expression of countenance, that she exclaimed, "Soh! you have taken your old nurse,
				Tremlett, to sit with you?"
"My nurse no longer, but my most kind friend, Mrs. Gabberly, who has affectionately
				consented to forsake many of her former comforts, in order to be useful to me. You
				will perceive, ma'am, that your advice has not been lost upon me."
"Well now! that is a strange whim, Miss Brotherton. But of course, you are not
				serious in trying to make me believe that it is your intention to let nurse Tremlett
				assist you in receiving your company. If it be so, I think it but fair to tell you
				at once, as my experience is rather greater than yours, that not one single soul
				among all our rich folks, will care to visit you at all. I don't wish to affront
				you, nurse Tremlett; but you won't contradict what I say, I am quite sure of
				that."
Mrs. Tremlett showed herself an apt scholar, for she bowed her head, went on with her
				knitting, and said nothing.
 If she was silent, however, Miss Brotherton was not. "Listen to me, ma'am, if you
				please, for a few minutes, while I explain to you my ideas on the subject; and
				having done so, I desire that it may never be alluded to again. I am left, Mrs.
				Gabberly, as I dare say you know — exceedingly well, in the possession of an ample
				fortune, with unlimited power to spend it as I please. Now I do not please to spend
				any part of it in putting myself under circumstances that I should feel annoying to
				me. For this reason I will not hire a gentlewoman — in all human probability of much
				higher birth than myself — to watch my caprices, and endure my whims. 
				If any one now in existence really loves me, it is Mrs. Tremlett; and I, too, most
				sincerely love her; therefore I flatter myself, that drawing tighter the tie that
				has long united us, will occasion pain to neither. If the obscure tradition I have
				heard respecting my grandfather be correct, he received much kindness when
				travelling the country as an itinerant tinker from Mrs. Tremlett's father, then a
				flourishing farmer in Yorkshire. So you perceive, Mrs. Gabberly, that I am really
				honoured by the association. But if any one should fancy the contrary — if any one
				should feel that the luxuries of my house and table — the only attractions I know
				of, by which I may hope to draw my neighbours round me — if any should feel that the
				value of these are lessened by the presence of Mrs. Tremlett, they must give them
				up. For the price I shall put upon my good dinners and fine balls, will be the most
				courteous and kind politeness to that dear and valued friend. And now that we have
				finally and for ever dismissed this subject, will you tell me if I may hope for the
				pleasure of your company at dinner to-day, Mrs. Gabberly?" 
From this period, Mrs. Tremlett never quitted Mary Brotherton, excepting when the
				heiress accommodated Lady Clarissa Shrimpton by the use of her carriage, when they
				were both going to visit at the same mansion: an arrangement which had often taken
				place during the late Mrs. Brotherton's lifetime, and which was of such very obvious
				mutual convenience, that one was rarely invited without the other.
Miss Brotherton by degrees recovered her natural high spirits, and though she not
				unfrequently felt the weight of great loneliness, she was rapidly learning to enjoy
				her independence. She read a great deal, though nobody knew any thing about it. She
				dearly loved flowers, and often assisted in their culture with her own hands,
				despite her half-dozen gardeners. She laid out whole miles of gravel walks in her
				own grounds with almost as much skill as went to form the Cretan labyrinth, in order
				that she might walk, and walk, and walk, without passing her own lodge-gates, and so
				running the risk of being called " imprudent " She still indulged herself,
				and with no sparing licence, in caricaturing her neighbours; and, if all the truth
				must be told, derived no small portion of amusement from the variety of modes she
				adopted to assure the almost innumerable pretenders to her hand, that it was not in
				her power to reward their valuable and flattering attachments.
Such was Mary Brotherton's condition when she complied with Lady Clarissa Shrimpton's
				request, to drive over to Dowling Lodge the day after they had dined there. Upon
				this occasion, as upon many previous ones, the young lady, for lack of other
				amusement, occupied herself in selecting subjects for her merry pencil. The best
				excuse to be offered for her offences in this line is, that nobody but Mrs. Tremlett
				ever saw her saucy productions; so that assuredly they gave pain to no one — and
				when the heart is empty, and the head full, much allowance must be made for such
				freaks and fancies.
 While laying up stores of sketches from Sir Matthew, Lady Clarissa,  and
				the poet, her eye suddenly became fixed upon the beautiful child who had been
				brought in for general examination. Like most other ready limners of the human face,
				Miss Brotherton had considerable skill in physiognomy, and ere she had long gazed on
				the pretty, nicely-dressed, little boy, she felt persuaded that in spite of his gay
					habit de fête , the child was ill at ease, and under great discomfort. 
It is difficult for persons residing at a distance, and not "to the manner
				born," to conceive the extraordinary degree of ignorance in which the ladies of the
				great manufacturing families are brought up, as to real condition of the people
				employed in the concern from whence their wealth is derived.
There is, however, a homely proverb that may help to explain this: "You should never
				speak of a rope in the house of a man that was hanged," and it is probably on the
				same principle, that no one speaks of the factory in the house of the manufacturer.
				Be this as it may, the fact is certain, and Mary Brotherton, like perhaps a hundred
				other rich young ladies, of the same class, grew up in total ignorance of the moans
				and the misery that lurked beneath the unsightly edifices, which she just knew were
				called the factories, but which were much too ugly in her picturesque eyes for her
				ever to look at them, when she could help it.
Little did the kind-tempered, warm-hearted girl guess, that for hours before she
				raised her healthy and elastic frame from the couch where it had luxuriously reposed
				through the night, thousands of sickly, suffering, children were torn from their
				straw pallets, to commence a long unvaried day of painful toil, to fill the
				ever-craving purses, of which her own was one. She knew that Sir Matthew Dowling was
				considered as the richest man in the district — richer even than her father had
				been, and this was all she knew about him, except that her own sharp observation had
				enabled her to perceive that he was ignorant, vulgar, and most ludicrously crammed
				with pretensions of all sorts.
After having looked into the face of little Michael, till she was perfectly convinced
				of his being exceedingly unhappy, she next directed her attention to his benefactor,
				as she heard him clamorously hailed on all sides; and his countenance, though
				smiling, spoke a language she liked not. It was evident to her that he was very
				keenly watching the boy, and more than once she detected a look from Sir Matthew,
				directed towards him, which was instantly followed by an attempt on the child's part
				to look less miserable.
Then followed all the nonsense about Mr. Osmond Norval, and his promised drama, which
				was to place upon the scene some prodigiously generous action of Sir Matthew
				Dowling's, towards this little boy. Mary Brotherton did not believe a word of it,
				and sick of the false and fulsome flattery that was bandied about between the
				knight, the lady, and the poet, she made, as we have seen, a somewhat hasty
				retreat.
 On her road home she was more than usually silent, being occupied in a meditation on
				the features of Michael Armstrong. For  some time she suffered her
				ridiculous ladyship to run on in a violent strain of panegyric upon Sir Matthew, his
				talents, and his generosity, without offering any interruption, but at length it
				struck her, that fool as she was, Lady Clarissa might be able to tell her what she
				wanted to know; and therefore, after answering "Indeed!" to some tirade about Sir
				Matthew's great qualities, Mary ventured to come across the torrent of her
				ladyship's eloquence by saying, 
"Pray, Lady Clarissa, who is that little boy?"
"Who, my dear? Good gracious, what an odd question! Is it possible you do not know he
				is a poor little factory-boy, that Sir Matthew has most benevolently taken out of
				that sad way of life, because he behaved so remarkably well about that cow, you
				know, my dear, last night?"
"But why should you call it a sad way of life, Lady Clarissa? It is the way that all
				our poor people get their bread, you know."
"Yes, I suppose so. But yet, my dear, you cannot but allow that it must be a very
				different way of life from what the little children lead whose parents, from father
				to son, for a dozen generations, have worked on the mains of one family. There can't
				be the same sort of family feeling and attachment, you know. However, I have not the
				least doubt in the world, that good Sir Matthew does his very best to make them
				comfortable."
"Is this boy to live in Sir Matthew's family?"
"I am not quite sure about that. I believe it depends in a great degree upon the
				manner in which the little fellow behaves; and so it ought, you know, my dear Miss
				Brotherton. I rather think Mr. Augustus was making himself too agreeable this
				morning for you to hear much of the story. However, the exquisite muse of our
				friend, Norval, will set the transaction before all the world in a proper point of
				view; and then you, like every body else, will be able to form your own judgment
				respecting the conduct of Sir Matthew."
Again, Mary sunk into a revery concerning the respective countenances of Sir Matthew
				and the little factory-boy; but feeling quite sure that she should obtain none of
				the information she was burning with impatience to acquire, from Lady Clarissa, the
				remaining part of the drive was passed entirely in silence on her part, excepting
				that when Lady Clarissa asked her if she did not intend to take a part in the
				theatrical performances about to be brought out at Dowling Lodge, she replied, "No,
				certainly Lady Clarissa Shrimpton, I do not."

