
 CHAPTER XXII. 
MISS BROTHERTON SETS OFF ON HER TRAVELS, AND FEELS FRIGHTENED AT HER OWN TEMERITY —
				BUT SPEEDILY RECOVERS HER COURAGE, AND PLAYS THE HEROINE — SHE VISITS SOME
				FACTORIES, AND IS INTRODUCED TO A SUNDAY-SCHOOL — SHE APPROACHES THE PRECINCTS OF
				THE DEEP VALLEY.

				It was about nine o'clock on a bright autumn morning that Miss
				Brotherton and her faithful nurse mounted into a lumbering six-inside vehicle, bound
				for — . Their two small trunks, with " Mrs. Tremlett, passenger ," modestly
				written on both, were safely lodged on the top; Mr. Bell gave them a silent blessing
				and a silent nod; the horseboy vociferated "all right," and the richest young lady
				in Lancashirc rolled off, very literally in search of adventures.
The novelty of her situation, and of her sensations of every kind, the unceremonious
				examination bestowed upon her by a smart young clerk who sat opposite, the anxious
				look of Mrs. Tremlett's usually tranquil face, and the consciousness that the
				enterprise she was upon must even by herself be characterized as wildly extravagant,
				if not carried through with much steady courage and discretion, altogether produced
				a feeling of oppression on her heart that very nearly overcame her. "Am I acting
				rightly in thus exposing myself?" was the question that her startled nerves
				suggested: and had her conscience been unable to answer it boldly and promptly, her
				condition would have been really pitiable. Happily, however, this was not the case.
				There was some feminine timidity about Mary Brotherton, but not an atom of false
				shame or affectation of any kind. "Yes! — I am right!" was the answer recorded on
				her heart of hearts, "and shame to me if I shrink at the first step, for no better
				reason than because the dust flies, and a vulgar young man stares me in the
				face."
From that moment Mary recoiled no more; and a little resolute meditation on her
				object, and of the strength demanded to obtain it, so effectually restored her usual
				self-possession, that she looked round upon her fellow-travellers with as little
				embarrassment as if she had been used to travel in public all her life, nodded to
				Mrs. Tremlett with an encouraging smile, and thought how very silly people were who
				fancied that every thing unusual must of necessity be terrible.
"Are you going all the way to — , miss?" said a goodnatured-looking woman who sat
					bodkin between the smart clerk and Mrs. Tremlett.
"Yes, ma'am, I am," replied Mary, civilly.
The good-natured woman twisted herself round to reconnoitre Mrs. Tremlett.
"Your mamma, I suppose, my dear?"
"No, ma'am — the lady is a friend!"

"Oh! I ask your pardon; you are so very much alike made me say it."
Mary bowed — Mrs. Tremlett smiled.
The goodnatured-looking woman persevered in the same train of pertinent observation,
				sometimes addressed to one passenger, and sometimes to another, so as to prevent the
				party from sinking into total silence, which might otherwise, perhaps, have
				happened. But Mary bore her share in this trifling annoyance with perfect
				good-humour; and when at length they arrived at — , and Mrs. Tremlett asked her in
				rather piteous accents, the moment they were alone together, whether she did not
				feel dreadfully worn out, she cheerfully replied,
"Not the least in the world, my dear friend."
"Thank God!" replied the old woman, fervently, "I know you do so hate to be bothered,
				Mary, that I was afraid that old fool would put you out of all patience."
"Times are altered with me now, nurse Tremlett," replied Mary; "I have left off
				living for myself, and I feel my temper improving already by it. Now, then, ring the
				bell, and give your orders; remember, nurse, you are the great lady, and must order
				every thing."
Encouraged by this cheerful submission to circumstances, which was in truth somewhat
				more than she expected, Mrs. Tremlett began to think that Mary might indeed prove
				capable of carrying through the scheme, the first sketch of which had appeared so
				wild, that nothing short of a devotion to her will, which knew no bounds, could have
				surmounted her averseness to it.
"My darling child!" cried the old woman, looking at her with equal admiration and
				delight, "your mind is as strong as your heart is tender, and never will I again
				oppose my silly ignorance to any thing you wish to do."
 It was not difficult in this first stage of their expedition to follow exactly the
				plan that had been laid down. The two ladies professed themselves to be travellers,
				anxious to see all objects of curiosity, and particularly the factories, which were,
				as they observed, so famous throughout all the world. The master of the hotel where
				they lodged exerted himself with utmost civility to gratify so natural a desire, and
				Mrs. Tremlett and Mary were accordingly promenaded, on the following morning,
				through one of the largest establishments of the town. It is probable, from the
				drowsiness of the public mind on the subject, that many travelling strangers who are
				in like manner led by a skilful official through the various floors of a factory,
				retire from the spectacle they present without having any feeling of sympathy
				excited by the cursory glance they have thrown over the silent unobtrusive little
				beings, one moment of whose unchanging existence they have been permitted to
				witness. It is the vast, the beautiful, the elaborate machinery by which they were
				surrounded that called forth all their attention, and all their wonder. The uniform
				ceaseless movement, sublime in its sturdy strength and unrelenting activity, drew
				every eye, and rapt the observer's mind in boundless admiration of the marvellous
				power of science! No wonder that along every line a score of  noiseless
				children toiled, unthought of, after the admirable machine. Strangers do not visit
				factories to look at them; it is the triumphant perfection of British mechanism
				which they come to see, it is of that they speak, of that they think, of that they
				boast when they leave the life-consuming process behind them. The more delicate, and
				(alas!) living springs by which the Great Artificer has given
				movement to the beings made in his own image, are not worth a thought the while. The
				scientific speculator sees nothing to excite his intellectual acumen in them; he
				hardly knows that they are there, but gazes with enthusiasm and almost reverence on
				the myriads of whirling spindles amidst which they breathe their groans, unheeded,
				and unheard. 
But it was not thus that Mary won her way through the whirling hissing world of
				machinery into which she now entered for the first time in her life. The hot and
				tainted atmosphere seemed to weigh upon her spirits, as well as upon her lungs, and
				the weary aspect of the Drakes, and the failing joints of Edward Armstrong became
				fearfully intelligible as she watched the children (and she watched nothing else)
				who dragged their attenuated limbs along. Then it was that Mr. Bell's tremendous
				statement of the number of suffering beings thus employed came with full force upon
				her mind. She would have given years of existence at that moment, could she have
				believed it false. Two hundred thousand little creatures, created by the abounding
				mercy of God, with faculties for enjoyment so perfect, that no poverty short of
				actual starvation can check their joy so long as innocence and liberty be left them!
				Two hundred thousand little creatures, for whose freedom from toil during their
				tender years the awful voice of nature has gone forth, to be snatched away, living
				and feeling, from the pure air of heaven, while the beautiful process is going on by
				which their delicate fabric gradually strengthens into maturity, — taken for ever
				from all with which their Maker has surrounded them for the purpose of completing
				his own noblest work — taken and lodged amidst stench and stunning, terrifying
				tumult, — driven to and fro, till their little limbs bend under them — hour after
				hour, day after day — the repose of a moment to be purchased only by yielding their
				tender bodies to the fist, the heel, or the strap of the overlooker! All this rushed
				together upon poor Mary's heart and soul, and, turning deadly pale, she seized the
				arm of her friend to save herself from falling.
"Terrible hot day!" roared their conductor, in the hideous scream by which some human
				voices can battle successfully with the din of machinery.
 Fortunately, they were near the door of the room, and Mrs. Tremlett, urging her
				steps forward, now brought her to an open window outside it. The fresh air, so
				carefully excluded within, [4] soon revived her: the colour returned to her lips, and having
				remained silently inhaling  the breeze for another minute or two, she
				signified her wish to proceed. 
"Not now, Mary! Pray, not now!" said the frightened Mrs. Tremlett. "Indeed, indeed,
				you have not strength for it!"
Mary gave her one steady look, and the opposition ceased; for it said as plainly as
				look could speak — "Is it thus that I shall find Michael Armstrong?"
"For a moment I felt the heat oppressive," said Miss Brotherton, in a voice of very
				steady composure. "But I am quite sure the sensation will not return. I came to — on
				purpose to see the factories, my dear friend, and, indeed, you must not disappoint
				me."
"The young lady's right," replied their conductor. "She'll never see the like of our
				mills, you may depend upon that. Why all the machinery in the known world put all
				together won't equal one of our spinning-mills. There is nothing in creation to
				compare to it; and I don't question but the young lady heard as much before she
				come. So it would be altogether wrong to disappoint her of the sight of 'em."
"Thank you," said Mary. "Are we to go up stairs now?"
"Yes, if you please, miss. We have got seven stories, here, and, thank God, all is
				busy just now, one as the other, from the bottom to the top."
On entering the second room Mary felt, as she expected, that her bodily strength was
				quite sufficient to sustain her. She had not habituated herself to "seek the sun
				upon the upland lawn," for nothing. Few girls so lapped in luxury could boast of
				equal vigour and activity. The first aspect of the system (the horrors of which had
				been so clearly explained to her) in action, was for a moment overwhelming — but it
				was past — the terrible " premier pas " could not come again, and far from
				shrinking from the task she had imposed upon herself, she left the enormous fabric,
				after having perseveringly mounted to its summit, with the satisfactory conviction
				that she should not fail in her enterprise either from want of strength, or from
				want of will.
Good Mrs. Tremlett, however, still felt less confident upon the subject, and no
				sooner found herself tête-à-tête with her young mistress within the shelter of their
				drawing-room, than she said, "You will never stand it, Miss Mary! — feeling about it
				all as you do — the sight of those poor ragged, sickly little souls will be the
				death of you."
 "Then so let me die, dear nurse!" replied Mary. "If I have not vigour enough both of
				mind and body to be in some degree useful, I should hardly think it worth while to
				live; but I know myself better, nurse Tremlett. I turned sick and giddy, I confess,
				on entering that first room, but it is my friend, Mr. Bell, who has to answer for
				it. The impressions received at that moment by my senses served as a specimen of all
				the horrors he had described to me. The account I had heard enabled me at a glance
				to comprehend the scene before me, while that scene itself acted back again, as it
				were, upon my memory, making me understand, a thousand times more clearly than
				before, all the frightful details he had given me. The effect of this was
				overpowering, but it  cannot return upon me again in the same manner; I
				am already hardened. Think therefore no more of me, dear friend, but let us cogitate
				together upon the likeliest way of turning all such visits to account." 
This cogitation led them both to the conclusion that it might, for the sake of
				appearances, be as well to take the landlord's recommendation to another of the
				establishments, usually pointed out to the attention of strangers, and then to
				consult the ivory tablets, and venture upon a visit to the only one near — named
				therein, as notorious for the reception of apprentices.
In pursuance of this plan, the waiter was again interrogated when he attended the
				ladies at their luncheon, and again he brought a written address from his master,
				accompanied by a message intimating that the following morning being Sunday, the
				ladies might have the advantage of visiting the Sunday-school attached to the
				factory, for which he had given the address, to a sight of which they would be
				admitted without difficulty, if they would make known their wishes for such
				admission to the person who would show them the factory.
"There is a Sunday-school attached to the establishment?" said Mary in an accent of
				great satisfaction. "Yes, miss," replied the man, "Messrs. Robert and Joseph
				Tomlins, the serious gentlemen as owns the factory, has built a school-room
				altogether at their own expense, and attends their ownselves in person every Sunday
				morning to see that both master and children puts the time to profit. Their factory
				is about a mile or so out of the town, but master says as he can let you have a
				carriage very reasonable."
"I should wish to go there by all means," replied Mary, "desire the carriage may be
				got ready for us directly."
The man left the room to obey her.
"Thank Heaven!" exclaimed Mary, as the door closed behind him, "there is, then, some
				Christian feeling still left among them here, as well as at Bradford. We shall not
				here, at least, be shocked by witnessing such degrading ignorance as that of the
				poor Drakes. — They are treated like Christian children, at any rate."
"Most surely it is a pleasure to hear of it, my dear," replied Mrs. Tremlett, "and it
				is quite as well, Mary, that we have got to ride to it — at least if you feel like
				me, my dear."
Less than half an hour's drive brought the travellers to a large factory, which,
				whatever it might be within, was on the outside, though in itself as grim as
				coal-smoke could make it, surrounded by a fine expanse of rural scenery. In answer
				to their application at the gates they were civilly desired to walk in, and
				presently found that the routine of exhibition was precisely similar to that of the
				morning. It struck them both, however, that if possible, the children looked more
				worn and weary, more miserably lean, and more frightfully pallid, than those they
				had seen before; nevertheless Mary failed not, when taking leave of their conductor,
				to request permission to attend the Sunday-school on the morrow.
 "Certainly!" was the reply, pronounced in a tone as clearly announcing 
				the speaker's connexion with the party self-styled evangelical, as the broadest
				Irish brogue does the birthright of the speaker to call himself a son of the Emerald
				Isle. "Certainly! the Lord forbid that Christian women should ask to be present at
				the doings of the godly and be refused!" 
On inquiring the hour at which they should be there, the man replied, "As the clock
				in the tower of the Lord's house strikes seven, Mr. Joseph Tomlins, by the blessing
				of God, will begin to speak the exhortation. The prayer will follow from the lips of
				Mr. Robert, and then the schooling will begin."
"We must be here, then, exactly at seven?" said Mary. "Ten minutes earlier, would be
				more decent time," replied the man, with a gravity of aspect that approached a
				frown, "our gentlemen are very strict as to their hours in all things."
They civilly promised to be very punctual, and departed. The factory was built on the
				side of a hill, so steep, that the back part of it, to which the shed used as a
				school-room was attached, could not be safely approached by a carriage; Miss
				Brotherton, therefore, and her old friend, on arriving at the bottom of the hill on
				the following morning, got out, and, desiring the vehicle to await their return,
				proceeded on foot by the path pointed out to them as "the way to Master Tomlin's
				school." The ladies were more than punctual, for it still wanted a quarter to seven,
				they therefore seated themselves on a fallen tree by the road-side, and watched the
				arrival of one or two miserable-looking children who were laggingly approaching the
				spot.
"You look half asleep my poor child!" said Mary, laying her hand on the shoulder of a
				little girl, who ragged, pale, half-washed, and with eyes half-closed, was being
				dragged onward by an older child, a boy, apparently about ten years old.
"She be so hard asleep by times," said the boy, "that I can't get her on."
"But why is that, my dear? surely seven o'clock is not so very early!" said Mary.
"We were all to the mill till five minutes afore twelve," said the boy, making
				another effort to pull his sister onward.
"How! — do you mean to tell me that you were working at midnight?" demanded Mary.
"Five minutes afore twelve we stopped — 'cause it was Sunday," replied the boy. "Come
				along Peggy!" he added with another stout tug, "I shall catch it to-morrow from the
				looker if I'se too late for the 'sortation."
The little girl who had fallen fairly asleep, during this short delay, being thus
				roused again, stumbled onwards, leaving Mrs. Tremlett and Mary alike undeceived as
				to the humanity of instituting a school to be carried on under such regulations.
				They determined, however, to witness with their own eyes the operation of teaching
				children to read, who were fast asleep, and walking on came within sight of the
				school-room door just as Mr. Joseph Tomlins showed himself on the step before it,
				with his watch in one hand and a bible in the other.
 "Wicked and ungrateful children!" he began, "Is this the way  you obey
				your earthly master, who leaves his comfortable bed, and his breakfast untouched, to
				lead you to the feet of your heavenly one! Wicked, idle, and ungrateful — " But at
				this moment Miss Brotherton and Mrs. Tremlett appeared in sight, and in a voice
				suddenly changed from reprobation into drawling softness, he went on, "Come unto Him
				little children — I forbid you not, but urge you with tender Christian love, early
				and late, late and early, to hear His word, and sing His praise." 
Here he stopped, and bowing to the ladies offered to lead them to a place where they
				might be well accommodated for the exhortation and and prayer, and for hearing the
				children also, if they wished it.
As soon as they had entered the sort of pew to which Mr. Tomlins led them, the twenty
				or thirty miserable-looking children who were assembled in the room were called upon
				by a loud word of command to " Kneel !" and down they tumbled, the
				elder ones in several instances taking the little creatures already asleep beside
				them, and placing them on the floor as nearly as they could in the attitude
				commanded. The sonorous voice of Mr. Joseph Tomlins was then heard pronouncing an
				exhortation, intended to show that obedience to their earthly masters was the only
				way of saving children from the eternal burning, prepared for those who were
				disobedient, in the world to come.
Mary, as she looked earnestly round upon every child present, greatly doubted if
				there was one sufficiently awake to listen to this; and in her heart she blessed the
				heaviness which saved them from hearing the mercy of their Maker blasphemed. A
				prayer followed this exhortation, as little like what a prayer ought to be, as was
				the preparation of the little congregation who listened to it for bearing part in a
				religious ceremony. Still Mary Brotherton waited to the end, nor left her station
				till the nominal business of instruction had proceeded sufficiently to convince her
				that poor Sophy Drake's account was strictly true when she said "keeping our eyes
				open Sundays wasn't possible, 'cause they didn't strap us." The children were
					not strapped, and consequently they were, with very few exceptions,
				literally fast asleep during the hour and half that this ostentatious form of
				instruction was going on.
Unwilling to attract more notice than was necessary, Miss Brotherton and her
				companion remained till the drowsy tribe were roused, awakened, and dismissed by the
				loud voice of Mr. Joseph Tomlins, and then they also slipped away, regained the
				carriage that waited for them, and returned to — .
"Now then," said Mary, as their one horse dragged them deliberately along, "now then,
				dear Tremlett, our search must really begin. As soon as we have breakfasted we will
				set off in this same equipage for — Mill, that being the first on my list where
				apprentices are taken, and, moreover, within a morning's drive of — ."
"And how shall you endeavour to gain admittance my dear?" demanded her friend.
"As we did yesterday — merely stating that we are strangers, travelling, who are
				desirous of seeing the factories," replied Mary.

"But you don't expect to get in, my dear, do you? — after all Mr. Bell told you about
				apprentices!" exclaimed Mrs. Tremlett.
"Probably not," was the answer, "and in that case, my dear woman, you know what is to
				happen."
"You are really in earnest then, Miss Mary?" rejoined her friend in an accent which
				betrayed some nervousness. "You really mean to do all you said when we were shut up
				together?"
"Most certainly I do," replied Miss Brotherton, gravely. "Did you suppose I was
				jesting, nurse Tremlett, in what I then said to you?"
"Not jesting, Miss Mary. — No, certainly, not jesting. Only I thought that may be
				after a little more thinking about it you might change your mind."
"You do not yet understand me, nurse!" said Mary, with vexation. "You do not yet
				comprehend how determined I am to persevere in the business I have undertaken."
"Do not say so, dearest Miss Mary!" replied the old woman with emotion, "I do
				understand you, — I do know that you will leave no stone unturned to obtain your
				object, — and indeed, indeed, I love you a thousand times better than ever I did,
				and that is just because I do understand you; only I did not feel quite sure that
				you would have courage."
"We shall see, nurse Tremlett. Courage, I believe, often depends more upon the
				earnestness of the will than the strength of the nerves," said Mary.
Their attempt to get admittance to the apprentice factory was, as they both expected,
				abortive; they were told that no persons were admitted there except on business, and
				having nothing such to plead, they retreated as they had advanced, somewhat fearful
				lest their having taken so much trouble for nothing, might excite the alarming
				observation. "It is very odd," on the part of their driver or some of his
				gossips.
The distance was considerably greater than they had expected, and they had little
				more time on their return to — , than sufficed for securing places in a
				cross-country coach for the morrow, which would convey them to a small town named by
				Mr. Bell, within a morning's drive of which were two establishments known to receive
				apprentices, howsoever and wheresoever they could get them.
Having again booked their places in the name of Tremlett, prepared their travelling
				luggage for a further progress, and taken a meal that served for dinner and tea in
				one, they went to rest. But it was long ere the excited mind of Mary permitted her
				to sleep; nor did she, in fact, close her eyes till, after repeated consideration,
				she had decided totally to change the plan of operations she had fixed upon for the
				morrow.
Mrs. Tremlett had not yet left her bed, when her young mistress appeared at the foot
				of it, on the following morning, with her ivory tablets in her hand. "Nurse
				Tremlett," she said, "do you remember which, among all the places mentioned here,
				was the one Mr. Bell declared that he considered as the most likely for Sir
				Matthew to have selected, if his purpose was to keep the abode of Michael Armstrong
				unknown?"

"Dear me! My dear Miss Mary! Only think of your being up already and me lying abed
				so!" was the reply she received.
"Never mind that, dear nurse. It is not getting-up time yet — only I am restless. Do
				you remember the name of the mills Mr. Bell particularly dwelt upon?"
"I dare say I might, Miss Mary, if I was to hear it spoken again," said the old
				woman, sitting up in bed, and endeavouring to feel awake.
"Now then listen, dear soul, and stop me when you think I name the right." Mary then
				turned to her tablets, and read the names, with the descriptions of the localities
				inscribed there. It was not till she had reached the last in the list that Mrs.
				Tremlett again spoke, and then she exclaimed promptly, "That is it, Mary! I am quite
				sure that is the place! 'I will bet ten to one,' he said, 'that if Sir Matthew has
				been for putting the boy out of sight, Deep Valley Mill is where he will have lodged
				him.' Those were his words, Miss Mary — I could quite swear it."
"I was pretty sure of it before, nurse Tremlett, but now no doubt can possibly
				remain. Hear me, then, my dear kind friend, and tell me truly if I am right or
				wrong. I settled last night, nurse, to set off and visit all these factories exactly
				in the order in which they are here set down. But, after I went to bed, it struck me
				that it would be surely better to begin with the place pointed out by our good
				friend as the most likely to afford success. I like the business quite as little as
				you do, nurse, and would gladly shorten it, if possible."
"But, my dear, won't the stage we are going in take us the wrong way?"
"A little round about — but I see no objection in that; we have no particular wish,
				you know, to have our course traced, and this setting off in one direction, when our
				purpose is to take another, must go far towards preventing it. So that you see we
				have no immediate change to make, and you have only to get up, and eat your
				breakfast in time to be ready for the coach, that is to stop for us here."
"God bless your dear heart!" said the old woman. "You think ten times more of me than
				you do of yourself, darling! Little sleep last night, Mary, and getting up before
				any body else in the morning, is not the way to be quite strong and composed
				by-and-by."
"Fear nothing — I feel perfectly well, and greatly pleased by our change of plans. I
				have great faith in this visit to Deep Valley, and long to have the experiment made
				and over."
Mary Brotherton was quite correct in her geography; the place to which the coach
				conveyed them was at about the same distance from Deep Valley as from — ; and,
				without making any further inquiries concerning that mysterious spot, which indeed
				the memoranda received from Mr. Bell rendered quite unnecessary, she ordered a
				chaise, on quitting the stage-coach, to convey them to the nearest town at which he
				had stated that it would be likely they should find decent accommodation for the
				night.
 Both the young and the old lady were rather surprised, on reaching 
				this place, to find every house in it that offered public accommodation so poor and
				miserable looking, as to make them almost afraid to enter. Their driver, however,
				soon drew up to one which, upon Mrs. Tremlett's inquiring if it were the best, he
				assured them, was not only the best, but the only one that ladies could find
				comfortable. "Here then we will get out," said Mary, courageously, and giving her
				friend an encouraging smile, she preceded her into a room that smelt strongly of
				tobacco-smoke, ale, and gin. 
"Can we have an up-stairs room that might be more open and airy like?" said Mrs.
				Tremlett, looking anxiously at her young mistress.
"To sleep in?" demanded the woman who had received them.
"A sitting-room, good woman, I mean," responded the meek-spirited Mrs. Tremlett, half
				frightened by the woman's look and accent.
"What, this is not good enough, I suppose? Then you may trudge — it is good enough
				for your betters," replied the woman, looking most alarmingly sulky. Had the last
				been addressed to herself, Mary Brotherton would have thought it one of the duties
				imposed by her pilgrimage to endure it; but, as it was, she slipped out of the
				dungeon-parlour with great celerity, and reached the house-door before the postboy
				had succeeded in his attempts to untie the cord which fastened their trunks behind
				the chaise. Apparently hands were scarce at this unpromising hostelry, for he was
				performing the business alone, at which Mary greatly rejoiced, as it enabled her to
				address him unobserved. "This does not seem a comfortable house, my lad, that you
				have brought us to. Don't you think we might do better if we tried another?"
"It be the best in the town," was the reply.
"Then could you not drive as a mile or two out of it?" said Mary, in a very coaxing
				voice. "We should like to sleep at any little country inn by the roadside a great
				deal better than this."
"And how would my master's horses like it I wonder?" said the postboy. By this time
				Mary's purse was visible in her hand. The youth's countenance softened as he gazed
				upon it, and he presently gave an unequivocal symptom of relenting, by scratching
				his head. Miss Brotherton held half-a-sovereign between her finger and thumb — "I
				will give you this, she said, beyond the sum you are to receive for the horses if
				you will drive us on to some clean country inn at which we could sleep."
"Where is the old lady?" demanded the boy in something like a whisper.
"I will bring her out this moment," said she; and, without waiting further parley,
				Mary flitted back again through the vapour of tobacco and spirits to rescue her old
				friend, — a deed of daring that found its reward in the look of gentle satisfaction
				with which her signal to quit the parlour was obeyed; for Mrs. Tremlett was one who
				could not bandy words, and she had therefore endured, without intermission or
				resistance, as much insolence as could be compressed into the period of her abode in
				the apartment.
"Why did you not follow me at once, dear nurse?" said Mary, as soon as the postboy
				had closed the carriage-door upon them.

"Bless you, my dear, I never thought of getting away again till to-morrow morning,
				and I staid with her to prevent her following you. How very glad I am we are got
				away safe and sound from that terrible woman! How could you have the courage and
				cleverness to think of it, Mary? Sure enough, dear, it is you that take care of me —
				and that's a shame, isn't it?"
"It is but fair, nurse, that we should divide the labours of the road between us. It
				is you who always take care that we are not starved, and it is not too much in
				return that I should be watchful for your preservation from all the wild cats and
				tigresses we may chance to encounter."
The postboy earned his golden gratuity, greatly to the contentment of its donor, by
				drawing up at a small but perfectly neat little mansion, where milk-pans set on end
				to dry before the door offered a delightful contrast to all that had been visible at
				the sign of the Three Crowns. The clean-coifed landlady looked a little surprised at
				being asked for sleeping-rooms by ladies entitled to so splendid a mode of
				travelling, but the demand being satisfactorily answered, they were quickly
				installed in a parlour smelling of geraniums instead of gin, and giving orders for
				their evening meal to the bustling good woman of the house with an air of old
				acquaintanceship, that looked as if they had been her guests for a month.
"Nothing was ever so fortunate as this, nurse Tremlett," said Mary, as soon as they
				were left alone; "our stage-playing, as you are pleased to call it, must begin here.
				There is no danger that this kind simple-hearted creature should misdoubt a word we
				say, and if you will only perform your allotted part with your usual quiet good
				sense, I have no doubt but we shall reach her heart sufficiently to make her very
				useful. I do not ask you to say any thing — only look sufficiently interested to
				support the character I assign you."
"Oh! dear Miss Mary!" exclaimed Mrs. Tremlett, colouring, — "is it to begin
				already?"
The countenance of Miss Brotherton fell from an expression of great animation into
				that of deep despondency and disappointment, she found that all her difficulties
				with the old woman were about to be renewed. "Oh! why, Mrs. Tremlett, if you are
				unequal to this, did you not honestly tell me so when I explained my purpose to you
				before we set out?" said she, with more of severity than she had ever used in
				addressing her during her whole life before, "I could then have taken measures to
				carry on this business without you. You know how deeply my heart is in it — I did
				not expect this weakness — I thought it was over!"
"You are wrong, Miss Mary — you are mistaken altogether," replied Mrs. Tremlett,
				eagerly. "I am neither weak nor silly, and so you shall see, if you won't be so very
				rash and hasty with me."
By no means displeased at the energy with which the good woman defended herself, Mary
				replied, "Let me see this, Tremlett, and my love and value for you will increase a
				hundred fold."
"Begin, then, as soon as you like, my dear, I am quite ready."

And, in saying this, the good old woman assumed an aspect as full of confidence and
				courage as her own.
In a few minutes their repast, which a good dairy made luxurious, was before them,
				the landlady remaining in attendance to replenish the tea-pot, and so forth.
Miss Brotherton's manners, though by no means remarkable to those in her own station
				for that perfect polish which guards every thing without, and every thing within,
				from disagreeable impressions, were always conciliatory and kind to all below her,
				and seldom was she waited upon by any one who would not have gladly retained that
				office near her. So it was with Mrs. Prescot of the King's Head; the good woman
				lingered in the room, evidently because she liked being there, and taking advantage
				of this, Mary addressed her, venturing to give her the name she had read upon the
				sign.
"We are in Derbyshire, are we not, Mrs. Prescot?"
"Yes, miss; this is Derbyshire, sure enough."
"What distance is it from hence to Deep Valley?"
"What, the factory, miss, that is called Deep Valley Mill?"
"Yes; how far is it to that factory?"
"Why it is not over easy to say rightly, seeing that there is no direct road to it.
				It is a lonesome out-of-the-way place as ever human beings thought of taking to, and
				I can't say as much is knowed about it by any of the neighbours round. There is a
				cart-road, I believe, as goes right down to the mill, but the nearest way would be
				over them hills there, of course, because the factory is built down amongst the very
				middlemost of 'em," replied Mrs. Prescot.
"Would the walk over the hills be too far for my aunt and me?" inquired Mary.
"Oh dear yes, miss! I should think so! Besides, 'tis no place whatever for ladies to
				go to. The poor little creturs as bides there bean't no sight for them to look at;
				and, besides, nobody of any sort is ever let to look at 'em."
"We must get there, somehow or other, Mrs. Prescot," said Mary; "and I trust in God
				that we shall not be refused admittance, for our business is no common one."
"You have got business at Deep Valley Mill?" demanded Mrs. Prescot, abruptly.
"Indeed we have," replied Mary, "and, by some means or other, we must get in, and,
				what is more, we must see every apprentice they have."
The woman shook her head.
 "I have had more than one lodging here for a night," said she, "who for some reason
				or other was curious to get inside of Deep Valley Mill. But I never knowed one of
				'em that ever did more than get a look down upon it from the top of one of them
				mountainous hills out yonder; and it's no easy matter, they say, to get to the right
				place even for that; for, by what folks say, them as built the mills seem to think
				that they could puzzle the  wicked one himself to find 'em out. But
				there's one eye as sees 'em, if no other do." 
These last words were added in a mutter that might, or might not, be noticed,
				according to the pleasure of the parties within hearing. Mary did not notice
				them.
"Could you have the kindness to tell us to whom we should apply for permission to go
				through the factory?" said she.
"Indeed, miss, I am happy to say I knows nothing about 'em, and if all's true as I've
				heard said over the ale-pot by the kitchen fire, the more people ask for leave, the
				less they are likely to get it. But may I make so bold, miss, as to ask the reason
				why such ladies as you wants to get in there? It would only break your hearts; and
				what's more, they've been having a horrid fever there, and that I know for certain,
				though they sent the poor little creturs off by night to be buried, some to one
				churchyard, and some to another, to stop people's tongues. It bean't no place,
				ladies, for you to go."
"When I tell you why we wish to enter there you will not say so," replied
				Mary. "The mill is worked by apprentice children, is it not?"
"Yes, miss, the more's the pity — for that's what makes the poor wretches slaves for
				life — for not many of 'em, by all accounts, lives till their time is up."
"Hear me then, Mrs. Prescot — among those miserable apprentices we hope and expect to
				find a dear child who belongs to us."
"Lack-a-day! what a story-book that would make!" exclaimed Mrs. Prescot. "How long is
				it since you lost him?"
"It is a long time," replied Mary, evading the question, "and it is a long story to
				tell how it happened. He is my own brother — and this lady who is come with me is
				our aunt."
"Are you quite sure, miss, that you shall find him there?"
"How can I say that, Mrs. Prescot, when you tell me so many of the children are
				dead?" replied Mary. "But so much do I think I shall, that I will give five
				sovereigns to any one who will only put me in the way to get admittance to the
				mill."
Mrs. Prescot again shook her head. "There be a many and a many poor souls round about
				that would do amost any thing honest for such a reward; but if any body told you
				they could do as much, they would only deceive you. I don't believe there is any
				body in the parish, not even the parson, could make 'em open their doors to let
				strangers in."
"Do you think that the person who has the power to open them would do it for a
				hundred pounds?" demanded Miss Brotherton.
"I can't take upon me to say, miss; it sounds like a fortune to me — but they are all
				rich at Deep Valley, as folks say, managers, overlookers, and all — so, may be they
				mayn't think so much of it."
"Mrs. Prescot, I would give five hundred pounds, rather than not look over the
				children at Deep Valley Mill."
 The woman stared at her with a very natural mixture of curiosity and astonishment;
				but there was a friendly interest in her eye, also. "It's late to-night, ma'am, to
				do anything," said she, "and if you'll be pleased to say nothing to nobody till my
				husband comes home, I don't know  but what he may be as likely to think
				upon what would be the best way to set about it as any body; not that he ever
				meddles or makes with the people of the mill in any way, but he's a good schollard,
				and a quick-witted man too, as ever I knowed, though I say it as shouldn't." 
This proposal was readily agreed to, and the interval till their host's return
				employed in a ramble of a mile or two along the road, where a recent shower had laid
				the dust, while every woodbine in the hedges which skirted it, sent forth a
				delicious perfume. The outline of the hills around them, though hardly deserving
				Mrs. Prescot's epithet of mountainous, was bold and picturesque, and the foreground,
				with its hanging levels and rich copses, altogether formed a scene of considerable
				beauty.
"All this is very pretty, my good Tremlett," said Mary, offering her arm to her old
				friend to assist her ascent of a steep hill, "and I should enjoy it greatly did I
				not fancy that could we look over yonder hill-tops we should see a hateful roof,
				excluding the sweet breath of evening from the helpless creatures it encloses."
"God grant that you may snatch one of them from it, my dear child," replied the old
				woman; "let that thought comfort you."
"Should I succeed!" cried Mary, "should I indeed carry home that little fellow to his
				poor mother and my pretty Edward, I should certainly feel something approaching to
				perfect happiness! But if I fail! how shall I bear to meet them?"
"Think not of it, dear! see how that last bit of sunshine comes full upon your face
				as you talk about it; that is a sign my dear that you will have your wish."
It was the last bit of sunshine, for the next moment the golden disk was hid
				behind a ridge of hills; yet they walked on for nearly a mile further, and, when
				they returned to the King's Head, they found the good man of the house already
				returned, and his supper, as his wife assured them, very nearly finished. "He shall
				come to you in half a minute, ladies, if you'll please to be seated, while I bring
				in the candles; — I have told him all you said to me, and he don't seem so much put
				out about it, by much, as me, — but he's uncommon 'cute, as you'll find when you
				comes to talk to him."
In about a quarter of an hour Mr. Prescot knocked at the parlour-door, and being
				properly introduced to the ladies by his wife, was left standing before them, while
				she retreated to pursue her various avocations.
"Your wife has told you, Mr. Prescot, our reason for coming here?" said Miss
				Brotherton, glad to escape the repetition of her fictitious tale.
"She has, ma'am," was the succinct reply.
"And do you think it possible for us to obtain admission to Deep Valley Mill, and to
				go over it in such a manner as to give us an opportunity of seeing all the
				children?"
 "If I had heard that much, as to your purpose, ladies, and nothing more, I should
				have said NO you could no more get into Deep Valley factory than into the moon. But
				my missis added something to the  back of it, as makes a difference."
				This was said with a look and accent which fully justified Mrs. Prescot's assurances
				of her good man's "'cuteness." 
"I think, Mr. Prescot, that she said no more than I am willing to make good," replied
				Mary, "I do not wish to expend money wantonly, but, if less will not serve, I am
				ready to give five hundred pounds to any person who could enable me to see all the
				children in Deep Valley Mill."
"It is a long sum, miss," replied the man thoughtfully, "and I can't but fancy that
				less might serve. The people as is in authority there is bad people, I don't scruple
				to say it, and sooner than open their doors for pity towards any Christian soul,
				man, woman, or child, they would see 'em all in the bottomless pit. But 'tis just
				because they do all the wickedness we hears of, that I sees hope they may be bought
				to break their own laws; for if they does one thing for the love of gold, they may
				do another. 'Tis plain enough to see, to be sure, that they knows it is for their
				interest to keep all eyes off their cruel goings-on — and what's for their interest
				they won't easily give up. — So it may be that squire Elgood Sharpton himself would
				turn away from five hundred pounds, rather than show off his poor miserable
				apprentices. — But that mayn't hold good for his agent, and I believe in my heart
				that, if we could quietly get to offer Woodcomb the manager a hundred pounds, you
				would not have long to wait for a sight of the children."
"And how is this to be done, Mr. Prescot?" said Miss Brotherton, "if you can
				undertake to manage it, you may put what price you like on your services, I feel
				certain that you would not name a higher sum than I should be willing to pay."
"Why, as for me, miss, I must not be known to meddle or make in the matter. Squire
				Sharpton would have my licence away before I could say Jack Robinson. Any advice I
				can give is at your service, and I may be able to put you up, perhaps, to doing the
				thing in the likeliest way; but as to my going to the mill, it won't do. One reason
				is, that I never was there before, and it's like enough that, seeing a stranger,
				they'd set the dogs at me before I had time to say my errand. No! — that won't
				answer. The only man I can think of as would give us a chance is one Smith, the
				miller as serves 'em with oatmeal, and pretty stuff 'tis, as I've been told, which
				don't speak over-well for his honesty, you'll say, though 'tis likely the price is
				in proportion. Howsomever, whether he be good or bad, I don't know another as comes
				and goes to Deep Valley as he does, and that's what makes me fix upon him as a
				messenger."
"And when could I see this man?" demanded Mary.
"Why, betimes to-morrow, miss, there's no doubt, if I goes and gives him notice."
"Then, do so Mr. Prescot, and be assured your trouble shall not be forgotten."
 "There is no fear of it, miss," replied the acute landlord with very honest
				sincerity, "and I'll go to the mill outright. But I think — you'll be pleased to
				excuse me for speaking my mind — that you two  ladies must settle
				between yourselves what you'd be willing to give Timothy Smith himself for the job —
				seeing that he's not one to work for nothing; — and another thing I'd make so free
				as to mention is, that you'd do well to make him understand that you don't want to
				get inside their wicked den, but only to see the children, one and all of 'em — and
				then you know, miss, they may trim 'em and scour 'em up a little for shame's sake,
				afore they brings 'em out." 
Miss Brotherton, after this conversation, felt as fully convinced as the good wife
				herself could desire of the value of the landlord's head, and determined to be
				guided by his advice. After a little further conversation between them, it was
				settled that she should write a note to Mr. Woodcomb, the manager, in readiness to
				give into the hands of Mr. Timothy Smith on the following morning, if she could
				prevail upon him to deliver it.
Mr. Prescot performed his part of the business ably, for the portly miller was
				waiting for the ladies in the parlour when they returned from their early walk.
Miss Brotherton possessed a sort of instinctive skill in reading the human
				countenance, which rarely deceived her, and it took her not long to discover that
				the man she had now to deal with was one upon whom it would be folly to waste any
				arguments which did not affect his own interest. She, therefore, briefly stated the
				fact that it was of great importance to her to obtain sight of all the apprentices
				at Deep Valley Mill, having great reason to hope that she should find a young
				relative there, for whose release from all engagements she was willing to pay
				handsomely.
"It is not the custom, ma'am, to admit visiters at that factory. It have been found
				to hinder the work," replied the miller solemnly.
"So I understand, sir. But, hearing that you are in the habit of visiting the mill on
				business, I have taken the liberty to send for you in order to say, that if you
				would undertake to deliver this note to Mr. Woodcomb, the manager, I would willingly
				give you five pounds for your trouble."
"That is hardly enough, ma'am, for the risk of offending so good a customer," replied
				the miller.
"Will double that sum induce you to do it for me?" said Mary.
"On what day do you wish it to reach Mr. Woodcomb's hands?" demanded Mr. Timothy
				Smith, endeavouring to retain a doubtful expression of countenance.
"To-day, sir; as early as possible."
"Then, ma'am, I'll be fair and open with you, and not go about to mince the matter,
				or deceive you in any way. If you will pay me down twenty pounds in gold, or Bank of
				England notes, I will consent to give up all the important business I had fixed to
				do this morning, and undertake, not only to give your letter to Mr. Woodcomb, but to
				use my influence with him — which is greater than you may guess for — to make him do
				what you wish, provided that you treat him with the liberality which a gentleman
				like him has a right to expect."
Miss Brotherton drew forth her pocket-book.

"I will give you the twenty pounds you demand, Mr. Smith," she said in a tone as
				business-like and decided as his own, "if you perform my errand successfully. I will
				give you this ten-pound note now, as payment for conveying the letter, and another
				of the same value when you return to me with the manager's permission to see the
				children who are apprenticed at the mill."
Mr. Timothy Smith looked at Miss Brotherton's pocket-book and he looked at her. His
				glance at the first inspired a strong inclination to increase his demands; but the
				miller had studied the human countenance as well as the lady, and when he looked at
				her he felt certain that though young, rich, and very eager in pursuit of her
				object, she was not a fool, and that if he pushed her to a more preposterous payment
				than he had already proposed, she would be likely enough to turn about and look for
				another agent. He therefore demurely replied, "It is all fair, ma'am; I agree to the
				terms."
And without wasting any further time, the man of the mill received the note, put on
				his hat, and departed.
Not all Mary's self-command, and, considering all things, she had a great deal, could
				enable her to await the return of her costly messenger with composure. All that she
				heard of this mysterious mill tended to prove that it was precisely such a place as
				Sir Matthew Dowling would be likely to fix upon as the abode of Michael. The more
				she meditated the more she became convinced that the boy was there, and she was hot
				and cold, pale and red, a dozen times in an hour.
She had kept a copy of her letter to the manager, that she might show it to Mr. Bell,
				from whom she hoped to receive absolution for the innocent fraud she had practised.
				To read and re-read this letter, and to speculate with Mrs. Tremlett upon its
				probable and possible effects, occupied some portion of the tedious time; slowly
				dragging her steps up and down Mrs. Prescot's little garden, and occasionally
				sitting for a fidgety five minutes in a bower of scarlet-runners, employed the rest.
				But the morning seemed endless, and more than once she suspected that her watch
				stood still.
The important letter to Mr. Woodcomb was as follows:
"Sir, — A wealthy and respectable family have recently had reason to believe that a
				dear child, long considered as lost, has been sent as an apprentice to Mr. Elgood
				Sharpton's factory at Deep Valley. Fully aware that the examination necessary to
				prove whether this hope be well founded, must be attended with considerable trouble
				to you — inasmuch as the children must be brought out from their work for me to see,
				I beg to say that, if, without giving me further trouble, you will permit this, I
				will pay the sum of one hundred pounds for the accommodation. Should it be refused,
				I must have recourse to other means for the purpose of ascertaining what it is so
				important for me to know.

				"I am, Sir,
			
"Your obedient servant, " Dorcas Tremlett. "
 It was not till five o'clock in the afternoon, by which time Mary was fully
				persuaded that her commission had failed, that Mr. Timothy  Smith, in
				his white hat and well-powdered blue coat, was again seen approaching the King's
				Head. The heiress, who was sitting near the window, started up, and would certainly
				have stepped forward to meet him, had not Mrs. Tremlett whispered. "Sit down, Miss
				Mary, sit down, there's a darling, and look like a great lady as you did this
				morning; and that's what you are, and always should be." 
Mary reseated herself, and, after a short interval, the miller knocked at the
				parlour-door, and was desired to enter. Miss Brotherton pointed to a chair, and he
				rested himself. "The weather is warm, ladies," said he, drawing forth a cotton
				handkerchief, and wiping his head and face, "and I have not loitered in my errand,
				as you may see by the state I'm in; but my horse is getting in years, like his
				master, and it's no easy work to drive him by such a road as that I have comed
				by."
"Have you succeeded, sir?" said Miss Brotherton, looking as grand as Mrs. Tremlett
				could desire.
"I am happy to say, ma'am," he replied, with dignity, "that the second ten pounds is
				fairly won."
"I rejoice to hear it," cried Mary, brightly colouring; "and I shall have great
				pleasure in paying it. When, sir, may I see these children?" she added, pulling out
				her pocket-book as she spoke.
"Here, ma'am, is Mr. Woodcomb's reply to your note, and on the reading of that, I
				look to hear you say that the ten pounds is mine."
Miss Brotherton took the dirty epistle offered her, and read: — 
"Madam, — My employer is strict in his orders not to let the hands be interrupted, as
				they too often are in some mills, to gratify the idle curiosity of strangers. But in
				consideration of your handsome proposal, and hoping that you won't scruple to follow
				it with a like sum in case of your finding and carrying away the child, which will
				be no more than just, seeing that if I part with a hand I must get another in the
				place of it, on this condition I am willing that all the children on the premises
				shall be placed in the feeding-room for your inspection at twelve o'clock
				to-morrow.

				"I am, Madam,
			
"Your humble servant, " James Woodcomb. "
The miller kept his eye fixed upon her as she read, and the result he looked for
				followed the perusal of the despatch he had brought. Miss Brotherton handed the
				letter to her friend, and then drew the promised bank-note from her pocket-book. The
				jolly miller rose, and received it from her hands. "I thank you, madam," said he,
				folding it carefully, "and I beg to say, in return, that you would have been
				troubled to find another man who could have done your errand as well."
"I am quite satisfied, sir," she replied, "and will only ask in addition to what you
				have already done for me, that you would be obliging enough to tell me by what
				conveyance it will be best for us to get to the factory to-morrow? Mr. Woodcomb, as
				you probably know, has named twelve o'clock. I suppose the distance is too great for
				us to walk?"

"Quite impossible, ma'am — altogether out of the question. But I shall have no
				objection to hire out my chay-cart for the day, if so be you would think that
				suitable," said the obliging miller.
"I have no doubt it would do perfectly well, provided you have a horse that can draw
				it — I should be sorry to lose time in going, and should not choose to be later than
				the hour appointed," replied Mary.
"I'll look to having a fitting horse, ma'am, and one as is used to the road, and that
				is what but few are. The road is no very good one in parts, that's the truth, and
				I'm not over sure that there's another man besides myself that would like to
				undertake the job; but I've no objection to driving you myself, ladies, provided you
				think it worth while to pay a tradesman for the loss of his time — of course I can't
				charge my labour like a postboy."
"If you take means, sir, to get us to Deep Valley Mill, by the hour appointed, and
				drive us back again safely to this house, we shall not dispute about the price. But
				remember, if you please, that the carriage, or cart, or whatever it is, must have
				accommodation for the child I hope to bring away with me."
"I will take care of that, ma'am. I will put a little stool in on purpose — and I
				think if I say two guineas, ma'am, for the job, which is no easy one, that you can't
				complain of the price."
"I certainly shall not complain of it," said Miss Brotherton.
Nine o'clock was then fixed as the hour of setting out, and Mr. Timothy Smith
				departed.
Mrs. Prescot's roast chicken and French beans were treated very differently from her
				previous breakfast and luncheon. Mary Brotherton was in higher spirits than she had
				enjoyed for many weeks — she felt confident of success, and for the first time in
				her life, perhaps, fully enjoyed the possession of the wealth which gave her such
				power of surmounting difficulties. The kind-hearted Mrs. Tremlett was at length as
				sanguine, and almost as happy as herself; and very freely confessed, again and
				again, that her dear young lady knew ten times better how to manage things than she
				did, old as she was.
The evening was again spent in a long late ramble, and though they did not forget
				that over a certain towering height, pointed out by Mrs. Prescot, lay the dismal
				spot called the Deep Valley, the exceeding happiness which was anticipated for one
				who dwelt there, made them almost forget the misery of the rest.

