
 CHAPTER IV. 
A LITTLE COTTAGE GOSSIP — A VISIT OF CHARITY — PRACTICAL BENEVOLENCE.

				The promptitude of the measures taken by Mr. Joseph Parsons, to
				bring to effect the wishes of his master, showed him to be deserving the post of
				confidence he held, as principal superintendent of Sir Matthew Dowling's factory. He
				lost not a moment in obtaining a short interview with one of the parish-officers,
				who was his particular friend, and then made his way to Hoxley-lane, with the
				intention of questioning the widowed mother of the two Armstrongs, as to the
				situation of her affairs, and the particular species of misery from which she might,
				at that precise moment, be suffering the most.
The statement pronounced in Sir Matthew's kitchen respecting the general eligibility
				of Hoxley-lane as a place of residence, was perfectly correct. It was the most
				deplorable hole in the parish — a narrow, deep-rutted parish-road (too hopelessly
				bad to be indicted), led from the turnpike down a steep hill to the town of
				Ashleigh. Exactly at the bottom of the hill, just at the point where every summer
				storm and winter torrent deposited their gatherings, there to remain and be absorbed
				as they might, began a long, closely-packed double row of miserable dwellings,
				crowded to excess by the population drawn together by the neighbouring factories.
				There was a squalid, untrimmed look about them all, that spoke fully as much of want
				of care, as of want of cash in the unthrifty tribe who dwelt there. It was like the
				moral delinquencies of a corporate body, of which no man is ashamed, because no man
				can be pointed at as the guilty ONE. It was not the business of No. 1 to look after
				the filth accumulated in front of No. 2; and the inhabitants of No. 3, saw no use in
				mending the gate that swung on one hinge, because No. 4 had no gate at all; and the
				dogs and the pigs who made good their entry there, of course found their way easy
				enough through the make-believe hedge, which throughout the row divided one tenement
				from another. The very vilest rags were hanging before most of the doors, as
				demonstration that washing of garments was occasionally resorted to within. Crawling
				infants, half-starved cats, mangy curs, and fowls that looked as if each particular
				feather had been used as a scavenger's broom, shared the dust and the sunshine
				between them, while an odour, which seemed compounded of a multitude of villanous
				smells, all reeking together into one, floated over them, driving the pure untainted
				air of heaven aloft, far beyond the reach of any human lungs abiding in
				Hoxley-lane.
"Where does widow Armstrong live?" demanded Mr. Parsons of a woman who was whipping a
				child for tumbling in the dunghill before No. 5.

"In the back kitchen of No. 12, please your honour," replied the woman, making a low
				reverence to the well-known superintendent.
"No. 12! — why that's Sykes's tenement — and they're on the ground-floor
				themselves."
"Yes, please your honour; but since the rents have been raised by Sir Matthew, the
				Sykes's have been obliged to let off the back-kitchen, and live in the front
				one."
"Why there's a matter of a dozen of 'em, isn't there?"
"Yes, your honour, they lies terrible close."
"Obstinate dolt-heads! — That's just because they pretend to fancy that it is not
				good for the small children to work — I know, for certain, that they have got two
				above five years, that they won't send to the factory; and then they have the
				outdaciousness to complain that the rents are raised — as if because they are above
				choosing to earn money in an honest way, Sir Matthew was not to make what he could
				of his own. 'Tis disgusting to see such airs, where people ought to be thankful and
				happy to get work."
"That's quite true, no doubt, sir," answered the woman, continuing to shake, and
				occasionally to slap the grub of a child she had taken off the dunghill. "But Robert
				Sykes's children are very weakly; and them as your honour talks of, is almost too
				small — though 'tisn't to be doubted that it is the bounden duty of us all to send
				'em, sooner than see 'em starve."
"I fancy so, indeed," replied Mr. Parsons; adding, with a finger pointed at the
				squalling child, who still continued under the cleansing process above described,
				"And isn't it a comfort now, Mrs. Miller, to get rid of the plague of 'em?"
The woman ceased to shake her little boy, and looking for a moment at the clear blue
				eyes that, notwithstanding her rough discipline, were very lovingly turned up to her
				face — something like a shudder passed over her.
"Get along in with you, Bill," said she, as if afraid that the blighting glance of
				the superintendent should rest upon him; and then added, "as long as they be so very
				small, your honour, they can't do no good if they be sent."
"Stuff and nonsense! there's ways to teach 'em. But don't fancy that I want you to
				send your brats — confound 'em! They're the greatest plagues in natur; and nothing
				on God's earth but good-heartedness and love of his country would ever make Sir
				Matthew, for one, trouble himself or his men with any of the creturs. — No. 12, is
				it, where I shall find the widow Armstrong?"
"Yes, please your honour — you'll be sure to find her. She's a cripple pour soul, and
				can't stir."
"She's made up her mind to go into the workhouse, hasn't she?" demanded the
				manager.
"Have she indeed, poor thing?" responded the woman, in an accent of compassion.
 "I heard so, as I come along, and that's the reason I'm going to her. Our good Sir
				Matthew, who to be sure is the kindest-hearted  man in the whole world,
				has taken a fancy to her boy, and he'll be a father to him, I'll be bound to say he
				will; and that's why I think he'd like me to give her a call, just to tell her not
				to fret herself about the workhouse. If she don't like going there, she needn't, I
				dare say, with such a good friend as she's got." 
The woman stared at him with an air of such genuine astonishment, that the
				superintendent felt disconcerted, and turning abruptly away, continued his progress
				down the lane.
By the time he had reached No. 12, however, he had begun to doubt whether his sudden
				appearance at the bedside of the widow Armstrong might not produce an effect
				unfavourable to the object he had in view.
"As sure as steam's steam," thought he, "she'll be more inclined to fancy that I am
				come scolding about the boys for something, than to take her part, or do her
				pleasure; so I'll just say a civil word to the Sykeses, and then stroll away on,
				till such time as the parish officers have been after her. I'll engage for it, that
				Sam Butchel won't let no grass grow under his feet after what I said to him; and if
				I turn in when he's there, as if to see what was going on, it would certainly be
				more natural-like, and believable."
In accordance with this improved projet de charité , Mr. Joseph Parsons
				walked on; but he had not proceeded far ere, on turning his head round to
				reconnoitre, he perceived, not the tall and burly Sam Butchel, the overseer of the
				parish, but the lean and lathy person of little Michael, advancing with an eager and
				rapid step towards his mother's dwelling.
"Soh!" ejaculated the sagacious Parsons, "here comes the charity job! It would be
				worth a week's wages to hear him tell his own story."
Mr. Joseph Parsons had a Napoleon-like promptitude of action, which the unlearned
				operatives described by calling him "a word-and-a-blow man," but which in reality
				often deserved the higher epithet above bestowed.
Scarcely had the thought of overhearing little Michael's tale suggested itself, ere a
				sidelong movement ensconced him for a moment behind a favouring pig-sty, from
				whence, unseen, he watched the boy enter the door of No. 12.
Again Napoleon-like, he remembered all he had heard from her neighbour, concerning
				the position of the widow's dwelling-place; and rightly judging that Sykes's
				back-kitchen must, in some way or other, be in a condition to favour the emission of
				sound, he troubled not the household by making his approaches through the principal
				entrance, but striding over the inefficient fence of the tiny cabbage-plot behind,
				obtained a station as favourable to his purpose, as he could possibly desire. This
				was a nook between a protuberance intended for an oven, and the window close beside
				the widow Armstrong's bed, from whence prophetic fate, favouring the yet latent
				purpose of the manager, had caused three panes to be extracted by a volley of
				pebbles, intended for mother Sykes's cat, at least two months before.

To this safe and commodious crouching-place, he made his way just in time to hear the
				widow say, "Understand one word of Edward's story, Mike; so sit down dear boy, and
				tell me all."
"Why mother, 'tis like a story-book — and it's very fine to be sure — but yet — " And
				the boy stopped short.
"But yet you don't like it, Mike?" rejoined his mother. "That's what you was going to
				say. Tell the truth, my child, and don't go to keep nothing from me."
"That was it," said Mike.
"Ungrateful viper!" muttered the confidential superintendent between his closed
				teeth.
"Poor fellow! poor dear Michael!" exclaimed the woman, soothingly. "It was hard to go
				to sleep without kissing mother, wasn't it?"
"Yes, I didn't like that — nor I didn't like being without Teddy neither — and I
				didn't like the grumpy old lady as comed into the kitchen, and abused me; nor the
				gentlemen servants either, except the gardener, and he took hold of my hand, and led
				me along kind enough — and I like Molly too, that's she as give me my supper and my
				bed, and my breakfast this morning, mother. Oh, mother! how I did long to bring away
				some of the milk and bread and butter home with me!"
"Never think of such a thing, for your life, boy!" exclaimed the mother eagerly. "It
				would be thieving, nothing else, Michael — nothing more nor less than thieving —
				never mention that again to me, dear, that's a darling."
"I won't, mother; but I know I shall think of it every time I see them big pounds of
				butter, and jugs of milk, and minds how careful you be over your little scrimped bit
				in the broken saucer, and how you drinks your drop of tea without ever having any
				milk at all."
"Never you mind that, darling. But what are they going to do with you, Mike? And what
				for do they want to have you up at the great house? 'Tis a mystery to me, and
				thankful as we ought to be for any help, I can't say but I should be easier in my
				mind, if I understood something about it."
"Impertinent hag!" growled the surly Parsons from his lair. "Does she think they are
				going to trap him like a rabbit, for the sake of his skin?"
"But, mother, I don't understand any thing about it myself," said Michael, rather
				dolefully.
To this avowal, no reply was made for some minutes; upon which the superintendent
				grew impatient, and stretching forward his neck a little, contrived athwart the
				sheltering branches of an elder-bush, to peep through the broken window.
 To the agent of Sir Matthew Dowling's benevolence the sight that presented itself
				was really revolting; though there may be others who would have been affected
				differently by it. Michael had flung himself across the bed; his arms were thrown
				round his mother, who was sitting upright with some piece of needlework in her
				hands,  and his dark curls set off in strong contrast the extreme
				paleness of the face that looked down upon him. The widow Armstrong was still rather
				a young woman, and would still have been a very lovely one, had not sickness and
				poor living sharpened the delicate features, and destroyed the oval outline that
				nature had made perfect. Yet she had quite enough of beauty left to detain the eye;
				and such a history of patient suffering might be read in every line of her speaking
				countenance, that few ever looked upon her harshly. Spite of her extreme poverty
				too, she was clean — her cap was clean, the bedclothes were clean, and the pale
				hands too, looked so very white, that if Mr. Parsons from his hiding-place had
				ventured to speak any opinion concerning her, he would certainly have given
				utterance to a strong expression of indignation, at the abominable air of delicacy
				which her appearance displayed. 
She looked as if she were struggling with some painful feeling, but did not weep,
				though her boy did, heartily.
For a little while she suffered his tears to flow without interruption or reproof,
				and then she kissed him once, twice, thrice.
"There now, Michael," she said, looking at him fondly; "have you not played baby long
				enough? Stand up, darling, and listen to me. You don't seem over-glad, Mike, of this
				great change, and if you did, perhaps I might have been over-sorry; but sorrow would
				be sin for either of us, when God has sent us help. 'Tis you that be the heartiest
				Mike, and 'tis you that want food the most, growing at the rate you do, and
				heart-sore have I been at meal-times to see you so stinted. So never let us trouble
				ourselves any more about the reasons for your getting so into favour, but just thank
				God, and be contented."
"But mother! How will you get on without me?" replied Michael, shaking his head; "I
				am sure that Teddy can't make your bed as I do — he hasn't the strength in his arms.
				And who's to fetch water? 'Deed and 'deed mother, you'd better thank Sir Matthew,
				and say no, unless he'll just please to let Teddy go instead."
"That won't do my dear child, in any way. 'Tis I must watch poor Edward. Little as I
				can do for him, I don't think he'd like to part from me, as long as God is pleased
				to let me stay."
"That's true mother — that's very true! Teddy would break his heart. No, no, 'tisn't
				he shall be parted from you; I'll show him how to make the bed, if I can't come over
				myself; but perhaps they'll let me, mother?"
"What's the business that you'll have to do, Michael?" inquired the widow.
"I haven't been told of any business yet," replied the boy.
"But you don't expect that you're going to be kept for nothing, dear?" said the
				mother, smiling.
"'Tisn't for my work, mother; 'tis for the cow," replied Michael, gravely.
 "The cow, child? What is it you and Teddy have got into your heads about a cow? A
				poor starved beast, he says it was, that  wouldn't have frightened a
				mouse, and you made it turn round, Mike — that's all I can make out. But he must be
				mistaken surely. What was it you did about the cow, darling?" 
At this question, the boy burst into a hearty fit of laughter, which to say truth,
				offended the listening ears of Mr. Joseph Parsons, still more than his weeping had
				done.
"I'll do his business for him, he may depend upon it," thought he. "If master must
				have a charity job, he must; but it don't follow that the cretur shan't be made to
				know himself just as well as if he was in the factory. I'll be your overlooker yet,
				master Mike."
Just as this prophetic sketching of the future had made itself distinctly visible to
				his mind's eye, the bodily senses of the agent announced to him that the tranquil
				tête-à-tête within the widow's chamber was disturbed by the entrance of persons,
				whose voice and step announced that they were men. Mr. Parsons was at no loss to
				guess their errand. "Here they come!" muttered he. "Now we'll see how Master Butchel
				manages his job.
"We be commed to see," said a gruff voice within the widow's chamber, "whether or no
				you be commed to your senses, Mrs. Armstrong."
"Sir?" said the trembling woman in return.
"You knows well enough what I means, without my going into it again; you knows well
				enough as I comes to talk to ye about the house again. We've had Larkins the baker,
				coming to inquire if there's parish pay to look to, for your bill, Mrs. Armstrong —
				and I have told him, NO, not a farthing, not the quarter of a farthing, unless
				you'll come into the house. The parish have gone on allowing you two shilling a
				week, week after week, God knows how long — 'tis a perfect shame and imposition, and
				the board says they won't do it no longer. You and the boys too may come in if you
				will, that's one thing; but living here, cramming 'em with as much wheaten bread as
				they'll eat without paying for it, is another, and it's what no honest parish don't
				tolerate. I'll be bound to say now, as you have brought up the scamps without their
				ever knowing the taste of gruel? Tell the truth, did you ever take the trouble to
				make a drop of gruel for 'em?"
"As long as I had my legs to stand upon, sir, I never minded trouble; and, when my
				husband was living, we did a deal better, and I have done cooking for 'em then, such
				as a few potatoes and a cabbage, may be, with a scrap of bacon on a Sunday; but,
				from the hour he died, we have never had a pot upon the fire."
"That's what 'tis to be so obstinate. If you'd come into the house you'd see the pot
				upon the fire all day long, a'most."
"But the children would be in one room, after they came from the factory, and I
				should be in another," pleaded the widow, "and I've got a few of the decent things
				as I married with, when I came from service, and it would be a grief to me to see
				'em all sold."
 "If the parish don't sell 'em, Larkins the baker will, you may take my word for
				that, Mrs. Armstrong," replied the overseer. "However, 'tis your business, not mine.
				Here's a decent, respectable  man, as is ready to take all you've got at
				a valiation, fair and honourable, but that's just as you please. I only called, as
				in duty bound, to tell ye that the parish don't mean to continy no such extravagance
				as paying you two shilling a week, no longer." 
"God help me!" answered the widow gently. "If 'tis his will that so it should be, it
				would be a sin for me to complain."
"That's vastly fine, beant it?" said the brutal Butchel, "and now let's hear what
				you'll be after saying to Master Larkins, for here he comes, as sure as eggs be
				eggs."
An abrupt, and most peremptory demand, for three pounds two shillings and seven
				pence, was here made, by a sour-looking little man, who entered the small room
				without ceremony, making a group of intruders round the widows bed, equally unwonted
				and unwelcome. Her over-taxed courage seemed to fail, for it was with something like
				a sob that she replied to his demand by saying, "I shall have twelve shillings to
				take for needlework, when this is done, and you shall have it every farthing sir, if
				you'll be so merciful."
"And who's to pay your rent, Missis Armstrong? if I may be so bold," said Mr.
				Butchel.
The widow had not a word to say for herself, and, covering her face with her hands,
				wept bitterly.
"Now's my time!" said Parsons to himself, as he stealthily crept from his
				hiding-place. "Now for Sir Matthew's benevolence." And, in a minute afterwards, his
				tall, gaunt figure, and hard countenance, were added to the company. The noise he
				made in entering, caused the widow to uncover her eyes, and it was with an emotion
				little short of terror that she recognised the tyrant, at whose name her children's
				cheeks grew pale. Instinctively she stretched out her hand, and took hold of that of
				Michael, who was still seated on the side of the bed. But the boy shook it off, as
				if his mother's love was a secret treasure that the overlooker must not see, and,
				suddenly standing up, he remained, with his eyes fixed on the ground, and his hands
				hanging by his sides, as if petrified.
"Hollo! — why what's the matter now? Is all the parish come to wish joy to this good
				woman here?" said the overlooker, with as jocund an air as he could persuade his
				iron features to assume.
"Wish her joy?" responded the well-tutored parish-officer, "and for what, Mr.
				Parsons, if you please? For having an honest tradesman come upon her with the gripe
				of the law, in hopes to get what's his own? She's got into trouble, I promise you,
				and I don't very well see how she's to get out of it."
"You don't say so?" said the confidential agent. "What! is that you, Mr. Larkins,
				coming to take the law of a poor body this way? I didn't think you was so
				hard-hearted."
 "I don't deserve that character, sir," replied the baker sharply; for though desired
				to call and enforce his claim by the parish overseer, Mr. Larkins knew not a word
				about Sir Matthew's scheme of benevolence; "and the proof that my heart isn't harder
				than other people's" he continued, "is, that I gave the widow here 
				credit for what has been, excepting a few ounces of tea, her whole and sole living
				for months past." 
"And very kind of ye too," observed the conciliating superintendent.
"I should like to know, then, what became of all the money the two boys got, besides
				her own needlework, and, of late, two shilling a week from the parish, beside?"
				observed Mr. Butchel.
"Why, that is rather puzzling, I must say," replied Mr. Parsons, "but no matter for
				that, no matter for that, just now. This family have got a kind friend, I promise
				you."
"Yes, but it does matter," returned Larkins. "It can't be right, no how, for me to be
				out of three pounds two shillings and seven pence, and she with such lots of
				money."
"Indeed, indeed, sir!" said the widow, once more looking up at him, "I have done my
				very best, paying a little and a little at a time, as you know I never stopped
				doing, only for two weeks that my biggest — that is my oldest boy, was making up
				time that was lost, when he was home sick, and so got no wages. But the seven
				shillings a week that they get between 'em, and my uncertain bit of needle-work,
				gentlemen, can't stand for food, and clothes, and rent' — and a little soap to keep
				us decent, and a bit of firing to boil a drop of water — it can't do all that,
				gentlemen, without getting behindhand, when any making up time comes in the
				factory."
"Well then, that's just the reason why you must come into the house," replied
				Butchel; "and, at any rate, you may depend upon getting no more money out of
				it."
Upon hearing these words, "the decent, respectable man," who was willing to take the
				widow's goods, at a "valiation fair and honourable," began examining the condition
				of a chair that stood near him; an operation which the widow eyed with the most
				piteous look imaginable.
"Come into the house, I tell you, without more ado," resumed Butchel. "And what, in
				God's name, d'ye think we want you in for but your own good? D'ye think the parish
				have a fancy for maintaining crippled women and children, by way of a pleasure? 'Tis
				ruination any way; but when you're in, we know the worst of it at once, and that's
				something. The boys' wages will go a bit to help, and at any rate there'll be no two
				shillings to pay, which is what the overseers hates above all things; and what they
				won't continy to do. So now I have said my say."
And here Mr. Butchel began to move his heavy person towards the door.
"Stop a minute, Mr. Butchel, if you please sir," ejaculated Sir Matthew's
				superintendent. "I should be sorry to let you go back to your employers under any
				delusion or mistake whatever, and the fact is, that this good woman, the widow
				Armstrong, is no more likely to go into the workhouse than you are yourself, Mr.
				Butchel; begging your pardon for naming such a thing."

"Then I suppose as it's yourself as means to keep her out of it, Mr. Parsons?"
				replied the parish officer jocosely.
"Not exactly me, myself," replied the other in the same tone, "but it's one as much
				more able as he is willing. It is Sir Matthew Dowling as intends to befriend her,
				and that not only on account of the general charitableness of his temper, which all
				who know him really well are quite aware is very great, but because that little boy
				as stands there, and who is one of our factory children, saved a friend of Lady
				Dowling's, last night, from something she looked upon to be a considerable
				danger."
"And does Sir Matthew mean to see me paid?" demanded the baker.
"Upon my word, Mr. Larkin, that's more than what I've got authority to say," replied
				Parsons; "but, howsomever, I don't think that you had best go on, just at this
				particular minute, to persecute about it, seeing that in course Sir Matthew won't
				take it civil, when he's being such a friend himself to the widow."
"I don't want to do nothing uncivil to nobody," replied the baker, "but I don't quite
				understand this business. It is something new, isn't it, Sir Matthew setting up for
				a soft-hearted gentleman, among the factory folks?"
"New to you, may be, Mr. Larkin, but not to me," replied the trustworthy agent.
				"There isn't another to be found, look which way you will, that can be compared with
				Sir Matthew Dowling, for real, true, benevolent, charitableness, when he finds
				proper objects for it."
The baker stared; the man of old chairs and tables scratched his puzzled head; the
				intelligent Mr. Butchel looked at the speaker with a knowing wink; the widow fixed
				her eyes upon her patchwork quilt; and little Michael in astonishment, which
				conquered terror, raised his eyes to the superintendent's face, while that worthy
				advocate of a master's virtues stood firmly, striking his stout cane upon the
				ground, with the air of a man ready to do battle with all the world in support of
				what he has asserted.
"Well then, at any rate my business is done and ended," said Mr. Butchel moving off,
				"and I wish you joy Mussiss Armstrong of your unaccountable good fortune."
"Come along, Jim!" said the baker to the respectable dealer in seized goods, "there's
				nothing to be done to-day, that's clear. But I hope you'll remember the twelve
				shillings as you've promised me, Mrs. Armstrong."
"I will indeed, sir!" answered the widow earnestly; and, on receiving this assurance,
				Mr. Larkin took his departure with his professional friend, leaving Mr. Joseph
				Parsons, the widow Armstrong, and her son Michael to carry on whatever conversation
				they might wish for, without interruption.
 "Well now, if I ain't glad they're gone, them fellows," said the superintendent
				shutting the door after them. "You are a favoured woman, Mrs. Armstrong, to get rid
				of 'em as you have  done, and I don't and won't, question that you are
				thankful to those to whom thanks are due." 
"I always wish to be so, sir," said the widow.
"Well, there's no hardship in that I suppose. But about this son of yours, this young
				Master Michael, you must see to his doing his duty to his benefactor. If he was to
				prove ungrateful, Mrs. Armstrong, it is but fair to tell you that I wouldn't
				undertake to answer for the consequences."
"God forbid he ever should be ungrateful to any as was kind to him!" replied the poor
				woman; "but indeed, sir, I don't think it is in his heart to be so. Since the day he
				was born, God bless him, I have had little besides love to give him, and indeed,
				sir, I think the child would die for me."
Michael slily stole his little hand sideways under the bedclothes, where it was soon
				clasped in that of his mother, but his eyes were again firmly rivetted upon the
				ground.
"Ay, ay, that's all very well; but it has nothing to do in any way with his duty and
				obligations to Sir Matthew. What I want to know is, whether he is ready and willing
				to do that which Sir Matthew will require of him — that's the main question, you
				see, Mrs. Armstrong."
"And what will that be, sir?" said the widow, while Michael's eyes were again raised
				for a moment to the face of his taskmaster.
"He is to be made a gentleman of — that's to be the first work put upon him." The
				poor woman smiled; but little Michael shook his head. The superintendent appeared to
				pay no attention to either; but again striking his cane magisterially upon the
				ground, he added, "Let him make up his mind to do all that he's bid, and come back
				to Dowling Lodge with as little delay as possible."
With these words, and without deigning to bestow any species of parting salutation
				upon those to whom they were addressed, Mr. Parsons left the room.
