
 CHAPTER XXVII. 
MICHAEL ARMSTRONG SETS OUT UPON A DANGEROUS EXPEDITION — ITS TERMINATION PROVES
				RATHER MORE THEN HE CAN BEAR — HE MEETS A GOOD MAN, AND TAKES SERVICE UNDER HIM — HE
				ASKS AND OBTAINS A HOLIDAY, AND MEETS SEVERAL ADVENTURES IN THE COURSE OF IT.

				While this gay and happy party, who would any of them have gladly
				exchanged pleasure for pain, could they thereby have purchased only the knowledge of
				his existence, were thus placing kingdoms between them, the unhappy Michael was
				still enduring all the miseries of an apprentice at the Deep Valley Mill.
It would be difficult to imagine a stronger contrast in the situation of two brothers
				than that which many subsequent years presented between him and Edward. Edward! —
				who had ever been to him as a dearer second self — who had never enjoyed a pleasure
				unshared by him, and never known a sorrow that had not also been his — Edward was
				enjoying all that nature and fortune could give; while Michael still hopelessly
				dragged on a wretched existence amidst unceasing and unvarying suffering! At length
				the desperate resolution was formed which put the officials of the Deep Valley
				factory in the state of activity already described. And where was Michael the
				while?
Safely ensconced in a sort of rude drain, which he had himself assisted to construct,
				when he held the regretted office of scavenger of the court, and over the aperture
				of which he easily arranged sticks and rubbish sufficient to conceal him, Michael
				lay for many hours listening to the hubbub which his absence occasioned. He
				distinctly heard the expression of Mrs. Poulet's anger and scorn, as messenger after
				messenger returned, without bringing tidings of him; and had, moreover, the
				advantage of knowing the track that he had purposely made on the grass which grew
				tall and rank immediately behind the factory, had led them, and would continue to
				lead them, all one way, while he would of course take especial care to go
				another.
Having left his foot-marks on the grass in the manner described, Michael had
				scrambled through the bushes which covered the steep hill-side, for the distance of
				a few hundred yards, and then, taking advantage of a layer of stones, by which a
				patch of marshy ground had been rendered firm, he again crossed from the hill
				towards the factory, without leaving any trace behind. By this simple device his
				pursuers were completely thrown out, for when night came and he crawled out from his
				shelter, no eye was open to look for him close to his prison-walls, though very keen
				ones were busy elsewhere in search of him.
 The same strength of frame which had enabled him to escape deformity in the mill,
				helped him well now, as without food, without  sleep, and with every
				pulse throbbing between hope and fear, he strode rapidly onward on the road he had
				come with Parsons four years before, carefully avoiding its grassy margin, however,
				lest more footsteps might be traced. Then, revolving with great clearness of local
				recollection, the direction in which this road led, after mounting the hill, he
				firmly resolved, as long as his strength lasted, to pursue it, till it brought him
				to the door of his mother's home — provided always, that he was not stopped short by
				the grasp of an overlooker in the way. 
The necessity of procuring food had not appeared to him any obstacle to the
				undertaking; for not only had he great faith in his own power of enduring
				abstinence, but he had faith too, in the impossibility of begging at a firm-house
				door for a morsel of bread, in vain — nor did either hope deceive him: he walked
				till nightfall with no other refreshment than water, caught in the hollow of his
				hand from a trickling road-side spring, and a few blackberries, snatched in terror,
				as he hurried on.
As the darkness thickened round him, he called a counsel with himself, as to whether
				it would be wisest to lay down under the shelter of a hay-rick, and let sleep serve
				him for supper, or to venture a petition for a morsel of food at a decent-looking
				mansion which he saw at some distance, and walk on through the night, if he
				succeeded, by help of the strength so recruited.
After many anxious reasonings, pro and con, he at last decided upon the latter, and
				so well did his handsome face and simple assurance that he was very hungry, plead
				for him, that he not only obtained scraps sufficient for a hearty supper, but a
				crust or two for the following morning; and with this treasure he trudged on,
				footsore indeed, and with a pretty strong inclination to lie down and sleep, but
				mental energy sufficed for many hours to conquer bodily fatigue, and it was not till
				past three o'clock the next morning, that he yielded, and at last laid himself down
				in a dry, and, as he thought it, most delightfully comfortable ditch, and slept the
				sleep of youth and weariness for three four hours. The bright beams of an autumn sun
				shooting directly upon his eyes awakened him, and he started up, ready and able to
				walk forward, sufficiently thankful for the hoarded crusts in his pocket.
 He was now not more than seven miles from Ashleigh; a fact which he joyfully
				ascertained by a milestone on a road which he had reached, he hardly knew how, but
				it must have been by missing, not hitting the way he had endeavoured to find; for
				Parsons had not followed the high-road from the town for more than a mile, and that
				was before Sir Matthew's carriage overtook him. Michael looked backwards and
				forwards along this wide unsheltered road, and trembled to think how easy it would
				be, to see and recognise a fugitive from any spot within sight of it; but there was
				a burning impatience at his heart when he thought of home, and remembered that he
				was within two hours walk of it, which left all caution far behind, and  commending himself to God, he set off at the fleetest pace he could achieve,
				towards Ashleigh. 
No symptom of pursuit, however, alarmed him. From the moment he quitted the mills, to
				that when he reached what had once been his mother's door, no terror of the kind had
				come near him; he had heard no whispering voices, nor seen shadowy figures stealing
				towards him from a distance. All he had most feared was got through with ease; but
				all he had most fondly hoped, turned out a fearful blank.
As Michael drew near the door, he remembered so well every object which met his eye,
				that he began to fear lest he himself might be remembered by others, and making a
				circuit to avoid Sir Matthew's mills, he reached Hoxley-lane without having met a
				single face he knew.
It was a tremendous moment for him, that in which he first caught sight of the lowly
				door through which he had passed a thousand times in eager anticipation of his
				mother's kiss! Some minutes followed before he could reach it, and the boy trembled
				so violently that he tottered as he hurried onward, like a drunken man.
At length his hand was on the latch; it yielded as in days of yore, and in an instant
				the door was wide open before him. Poor Michael! what death can have a pang so
				bitter as that he felt, when the almost impossible project of reaching his mother's
				home being performed, he found that home empty and desolate, and telling him as
				plainly as angels trumpet-tongued could do, that she was dead!
A dismal groan burst from him, and he sunk on the floor, just where he had last stood
				gaily talking to her of his bright fancies for the future, a few hours before he was
				snatched away from her for ever.
The noise he made reached the ears of a woman in the front room, and she opened the
				door of communication to ascertain who it could be, rummaging in the empty room that
				was "to let."
"My gracious! I should like to know who you are? What do you want here, you
				ragamuffin? Is this the way you come to take lodgings, pray?"
This was said by a young and pretty woman who held a baby in her arms, and who being
				the wife of a confidential overlooker, had not only succeeded to the occupation of
				No. 12, upon the death of Mrs. Sykes and the dispersion of her family; but
				considered herself privileged to assume, on most occasions, an air of great
				importance.
"Mother lived here!" said Michael, with a look wretched enough to soften the heart of
				the saucy girl who had addressed him.
"Your mother, my poor boy? Are you the little orphan Armstrong, then?" was the
				reply.
"Is mother dead?" said the unhappy boy.
"Dead? to be sure she is. And where can you have been not to know that? Wasn't you
				with her, when she died?"
"No, no, no!" sobbed Michael; "I came here to find her."
"Poor fellow! that's dismal enough to be sure. I bean't Ashleigh born, but I have
				heard a deal since I comed here, about the widow Armstrong and the boy as died!"

"Died!" echoed Michael, looking wildly at her. "Is he dead too? Is my poor Teddy
				dead?"
"Sure-ly he is," replied the unthinking young woman, who, in truth, knew nothing
				about either the widow Armstrong or her son, but remembered hearing that a little
				more than a year before she took possession of the premises, a widow Armstrong had
				died in the back room, for grief at having lost a boy. She was far from intending to
				be cruel to the poor lad, who looked himself so very nearly like a corpse, but was
				too indifferent upon all subjects which did not immediately concern herself, to take
				the trouble of thinking before she spoke.
A few more questions might probably have obtained, if not the truth, at least some
				proof of his informer's ignorance of it, but Michael had heard enough; he rose to
				his feet, and without uttering another word, rushed out of the room.
The state in which he then found himself was certainly nearly approaching to
				delirium. His strength of body and mind completely exhausted by fatigue, fasting,
				and intense anxiety, the blow which had fallen upon him was heavier than his reason
				could bear, and he wandered forth into the fields without knowing where he was, or
				having any distinct idea of what had befallen him. His devious and unheeded path led
				him to a spot, at the distance of nearly a mile from his former home, at which
				several miniature rocks of sandstone give something of wildness and dignity to the
				little stream, which for the most part runs tamely enough, and looks little more
				than a wide and dirty ditch, as it passes through the town of Ashleigh. A multitude
				of cotton-factories, with their tall chimneys mocking the heavens, were visible in
				the distance, on the other side, and the boy stopped in his wild, hurried walk, to
				gaze upon them, with a feverish consciousness that there at least stood something he
				had seen before. A frightful flash of memory then shot across his brain — his mother
				dead — his darling Edward dead — himself a houseless, friendless, starving wretch,
				who soon would be caught and carried back to the prison-house he had ran from only
				to learn that he had no friend on earth! Such were the thoughts which racked him, as
				he stood upon the edge of the rocky little precipice, and fixed his eyes upon the
				quite water that flowed some twenty feet beneath him. It seemed to present an image
				of coolness and repose; his burning lips longed to kiss the gentle ripple on its
				surface — he drew nearer to the extremest verge.
"I should be safe there!" he murmured, looking downwards till his sick head reeled.
				"God forgive me!" he added, raising his eyes to heaven. "But if I drown, mother! I
				shall go to thee!" and as he spoke the words, he sprang forward, and plunged into
				the stream!
 The shock restored his wandering senses in a moment; he felt that he was perishing,
				though unconscious that it was by his own act; and forgetting how little reason he
				had to wish for life, struggled hard to grasp a bush that protruded from the bank
				into the stream. But he could not swim, and the efforts he made, though they served
				for a minute or two to keep him afloat, only increased the distance between  himself and the object he endeavoured to reach. His heavy shoes filled
				with water, and dragged him downwards — his strength failed, his arms ceased to
				move, and in another moment the water rippled over his head. 
But poor Michael's history was not finished yet. A heavy-looking elderly man, who had
				as little as possible the air of one desirous of seeking an adventure, was in the
				act of examining some sheep in a field, the fence of which was not fifty yards from
				the rocky ledge from whence the boy had sprung. Having completed his survey, and
				directed two men who were with him to select a score or two from the lot, the old
				man reposed himself upon a style in the fence above mentioned, and having chanced to
				turn his head from the sheep, towards the spot where Michael stood, had watched for
				a minute or two the boy's agitated movements and demeanour, but without the
				slightest suspicion of the frightful catastrophe that was to ensue.
No sooner, however, did he hear the splash occasioned by the plunge, than he sprang
				over the style with the activity of a younger man, and calling to the others to
				follow him, made his way with little loss of time, to a bit of pebbly ground on a
				level with the stream, and at no great distance from the point at which Michael had
				sunk. But, short as the time had been, the ripple had already disappeared from the
				surface of the water, and no trace remained of the object of his search. The two
				young men whom he had summoned to follow him, though they had not seen the accident,
				had gathered from his words that something terrible had occurred, and clambering
				down the rocky cliff, were by his side in a moment.
"It is too late, lads!" exclaimed the old man, wringing his hands together. "I saw
				the poor distracted creature take the leap, but he was sunk before I got to the
				bank, and I take it he will never rise again. I shall never forgive myself for not
				going to him when I saw him throwing his arms about in that wild way. I might have
				guessed what was going to happen — and may Heaven forgive me for not preventing
				it!"
"'Tis a man who has thrown himself in?" inquired one of the men.
"Not a man, but a fine young lad as ever you see. Poor fellow! 'Twas early days for
				him to have found sorrow enough to throw himself out of life that way! If I had ran
				to him, as I ought to have done, and stopped the deed, who knows but we might have
				brought him round to a better manner of thinking?"
"'Tis ten to one but he'll come to the top again yet, if he hasn't done it already,"
				said the man.
"But if he comes, he'll come dead, William!" replied the old man.
"I don't know that," rejoined the young shepherd." "The stream runs briskish round
				yon corner, and would carry him right away with it; but it's worth while having a
				look lower down. If he rises at all, 'twill be there."
 And so saying, the young man set off at a swifter pace than his master could follow
				him; while the old man and the other shepherd-lad  continued for a
				minute or two to watch the place where he had fallen. 
"Halloo! Halloo! Halloo!" cried a voice at no great distance.
"That's William, by all that's good!" exclaimed the young shepherd, and without
				waiting for his companion's reply, he ran off at full speed, the old man following
				with no lagging step, and at the distance of a few yards, after turning the corner
				formed by another huge mass of sandstone rock, they perceived William, breast deep
				in the water, and grasping, at the utmost extent of his arm, a limb of the drowning
				boy. Before the old Westmorland statesman (for such he was) could overtake his young
				companions, the hero of our tale was lying high and dry upon the bank, but whether
				life was quite extinct, or still lingered in the cold, corse-like form before them,
				was a question which, when the old man joined the group, the young ones were not
				able to answer. Luckily for Michael, the old statesman had seen a man saved from
				drowning some thirty years before, and he remembered enough of the process he had
				then witnessed, to enable him to give some very useful instructions on the present
				occasion. They managed to make their patient discharge from his mouth some portion
				of the superfluous draught he had swallowed, and after bestowing patient and
				assiduous friction on his breast and limbs, they had the great satisfaction of
				seeing the chest heave with returning respiration, and all other symptoms of
				revivification follow in their proper order, till the eyes of Michael were once more
				widely opened, and fixed with preplexity, and something like terror, on the faces
				which were bending over him.
"Thank Heaven!" ejaculated the old man earnestly, "he's safe now, at least from
				drowning, and I have not got that to answer for. But he isn't in a trim to be left,
				my lads. He would have been as well in the river, perhaps, as out of it, if we do no
				more for him."
Then causing Michael to sit, and examining his features, with a glance of very
				friendly curiosity, he said,
"You don't look like a bad boy, my poor fellow. What could have set you upon doing
				such a desperate action?"
The effort which the poor boy made to answer was ineffectual, and he only shook his
				head.
"I suppose it's oversoon as yet, to expect any information from him," resumed the old
				man, "so there's nothing to be done, as I see, but just to carry him up between us,
				if he cannot walk, to the Nag's Head, and have him laid upon my bed there, till he
				is a condition to tell us something about himself. Can you feel your legs yet, my
				boy?" he continued, endeavouring, by the help of his man William, to make him stand
				up.
 But Michael had no power to second their efforts; the two lads, threfore, raised him
				head and heels, and preceded by the grayhaired farmer, bore him between them above a
				mile, to the humble hostelry of the Nag's Head. The procession was too remarkable a
				one to escape notice, and before it reached the shelter of the little inn a
				miscellaneous crowd of men, women, and children had joined it. Many of these had
				been familiar with the features of poor Michael in  days of yore, but
				not one of them recognised the widow Armstrong's boy, in the long-limbed, pallid
				figure, that they now gazed upon. 
Muster Thornton, the Westmorland yeoman and farmer, was too substantial a customer to
				be refused any reasonable favour, and the ragged, dripping Michael was not only
				permitted to lie down on Muster Thornton's best of beds, but accommodated promptly
				with dry linen, and duly comforted with more hot brandy, water, sugar, and biscuits
				than he had any inclination to swallow. He took enough, however, to remove the
				faintness of inanition; and this, together with dry linen, and a bed, sufficed, in
				spite of the heavy sorrows upon which his mind had not yet dared to fix itself, to
				sooth him into a long and healing sleep.
When he awoke from it, he was capable of answering all the questions Mr. Thornton put
				to him, and this he did with a simplicity of pathos that went straight to the good
				man's heart. That he had been working in a distant cotton-factory, where he had been
				very hardly treated, and having got away to see his mother and his brother, had
				found them both dead, was a tale, that if it could not excuse the desperate act
				which he had attempted, at least accounted for it, in a manner that left as much to
				pity as to blame.
"Poor boy! poor boy!" exclaimed the old man, with tears in his eyes. "It was wrong
				and wicked, very wrong and wicked! but you must pray God to forgive you, my boy, and
				never think of any such desperate doings more."
"I did not know what I was about, if I remember rightly," said Michael. "My head
				seemed gone. I don't know how I got to the river, but I am sure I did not go there
				on purpose."
"So much the better — I am glad to hear it — and it's no great wonder, sure enough,
				if you did lose your head, coming to such a home as that. But what are you to do
				next, my poor fellow? I suppose there is no other home for you, is there?"
"I have no home, nor a single friend in the whole world," replied Michael.
"And the only work you have ever been used to, I suppose, is following the wheels in
				the factories?" said the farmer.
"Except once for three months and a bit that I was kept to cleaning the outhouses and
				yard, and wheeling away garden-rubbish and such like," replied Michael.
"Well, but that's better than nothing, boy. At any rate, you know how to hold a
				spade, which is a long deal better than having never used your fingers, except for
				tying bits of thread. D'ye think you should be willing to work for me, my boy, and
				tend my farm-yard stock, and do a turn of work in the fields when it was
				wanted?"
"I should be willing, sir," replied Michael, while a flush passed over his
				pale face, "I should be willing and most thankful to work for you."
 "That's well," said the old man cheerily, "and as to terms, I don't expect we shall
				find much difficulty; you will come to me my poor fellow, much in the same condition
				as you first come into the world,  therefore all that you want, I must
				find, which will be about as much as I can afford to give, I take it, just at first,
				till you, and I too, find out what you're good for. Will you agree to it, my lad,
				and give me your time and best endeavours for clothes, food, lodging, and good
				will?" 
"It will be a blessed bargain for me, sir," said Michael, "if you will add to all
				your goodness the excusing my ignorance. But if will was all that was
				wanting to make a good servant, you should not lose by me."
"And will is all that is wanting, boy. You are no fool, I take it, by your
				looks; and if you will mind what is said, and do your best, I shall ask no more.
				What is your name, my good fellow?"
"Michael — Michael Armstrong, sir."
"Well, then, Michael Armstrong, I am your master, and you are my man. And now you
				must eat, and then you must go to sleep again, I think, till I have got some decent
				clothes for you. Those you wore yesterday have had a good washing to be sure.
				Nevertheless, I don't justly like the looks of them."

 Within six months from this time, Michael Armstrong, promoted to a place of trust,
				might have been seen sitting upon the hill-side in one of the most romantic spots in
				Westmorland, a shepherd's maud wrapped round his person, a sheep-dog at his feet,
				and his master's flocks nibbling the short grass around him on all sides. Many were
				the solitary hours he thus passed, and very rich was the harvest they brought him.
				Had the boy remained a year or two longer in the state that "Blocks out the forms of
				nature, preconsumes The reason, famishes the heart, shuts up The infant being in
				itself, and makes Its very spring a season of decay;" [5] had Michael remained a
				year or two longer at the Deep Valley factory, in the state thus admirably and
				accurately described, it would have been too late for any contemplation of God's
				works to have roused his withered spirit to worship and to hope. But as it was, his
				mind seemed to awaken day by day from the long and heavy sleep in which it had been
				plunged. With an intellect naturally vigorous, and covetous of acquirement, and
				having had his first infant stretch of thought happily and indelibly directed,
				though with primeval simplicity, to one God and father of all, his transition from a
				condition in which "Scarcely could you fancy that a gleam Could break from out those
				languid eyes," [6] to one "Sublime from
				present purity and joy," [7] was rapid and delightful.
				His heavy losses were not forgotten; but while he meditated beneath the bright arch
				of heaven on the mother and the brother he had so fondly loved, there were so many
				sublime  and hope-inspiring thoughts mixed with his sorrow, that it
				could hardly have been called painful. 
The worthy "statesman" to whose service he had vowed himself, though he did not,
				perhaps, follow Michael through all the improving processes which his mountain
				occupation led to, nor very clearly comprehend the elevating effect of the "skyey
				influences" under which he lived, was no way slow in perceiving that the Samaritan
				feeling he had so opportunely displayed in the township of Ashleigh, had bound to
				his service one of the most trustworthy, active, and intelligent lads he had ever
				met with. There is always, moreover, in the human heart a propensity to cherish
				whatever we have preserved; and this feeling, joined to his more worldly-minded
				approbation of Michael's good gifts, rendered Muster Thornton exceedingly fond of
				the boy, and well-inclined at all times to grant him every reasonable indulgence.
				But Michael rarely taxed his kindness as far as it was ready to go. Once he had
				asked, and obtained leave to mount to the top of Helvellyn, and once to make a
				sabbath-day's journey over the mountain-tops to Ulswater; these were the only
				occasions on which he had expressed any wish to wander beyond the immediate
				neighbourhood of the farmer's sheep-walks, and, in truth, this immediate
				neighbourhood included so many mountain torrents, glassy lakes, stupendous crags,
				and sylvan solitudes, that there was little need to go beyond it, in order to
				gratify a passion for the picturesque. But when Michael had attained the age of
				eighteen years, a longing, and somewhat restless desire seized him to revisit the
				place of his birth, to seek for the graves of his mother and Edward, to learn
				tidings of the kind-hearted Martha, to discover, if possible, whether his own escape
				from the Deep Valley had been communicated to Sir Matthew, and to ascertain whether
				he still stood in any danger of being reclaimed as an apprentice, in case of its
				being discovered that he was at liberty. As to any danger of being personally
				recognised at Ashleigh, he feared it not; conscious that from his remarkably tall
				stature and florid health, he was too unlike the factory-child of former days, to
				run any risk of being known.
It was, however, some months after this wish first suggested itself, before he took
				courage to name it to his indulgent master. When at length, however, he did so, the
				good man not only gave his free consent, but declared himself well pleased that such
				a project had entered his favourite's head.
"It will do thee a power of good, Mike," said he. "The only fault I have to find with
				thee is, that thee beest too steady for a lad of thy years, and that looks as if,
				with all our care and coaxing, we had not yet been able to make thee forget thy
				sorrowful childhood. Set off, in God's name, my boy; stay as long as thou wilt, but
				only promise to come back at last, for I think it would be heart-aching work to part
				with thee."
 Michael gratefully promised a speedy return, and dressed in his best attire, he set
				forth upon his much wished-for pilgrimage to his early home. "It was the pride, the
				spring tide of the year," every leaf was  opened, yet every leaf
				retained the new-born freshness of its lovely green. The birds saluted him from
				every bush; the herds lowed from amidst their dewy banquet, in a note that spoke
				their measureless content; and every object on which his bright young eye fixed
				itself, seemed to echo the abounding gladness of his own heart. How elastic was the
				step with which he passed along! How proudly and thankfully did he feel conscious of
				his own high place amidst this wondrous creation! and how perfectly was he
				convinced, despite all he had read during his lone hours on the mountain-side, of
				the splendour of the cities of the earth, that nothing on its whole surface could
				exceed in grace and glory the majesty of the gorgeous sun, as he rose triumphantly
				from out his bed of gold! Had every thought of the boy's heart been chronicled, a
				very poetical sort of hymn would have been the result; but as it was, all the
				glowing thankfulness, the heavenward rapture, and the joy supreme, was but for
				himself alone — yet was it not thrown away, for Michael enjoyed his own existence
				during these early hours with an intensity that made him feel all his former
				sufferings most benignantly overpaid by his present happiness. Yet in the midst of
				this, tears more than once started to his eyes, as he thought of his mother, and the
				brother he had so entirely loved. His very soul longed to have Edward by his side,
				as various fancies chased each other through his fertile brain; and the image of
				little Fanny, too, with her soft reasoning eyes, as she used to look at him when
				preaching patience at the Deep Valley Mill, as he fondly laboured to recall it, made
				him sigh in the midst of his pleasure and his freedom, to think how sad it was that
				all he had ever loved should have passed away from his eyes for ever. 
But amidst the million proofs of tender commiseration for the sufferings, incident of
				necessity, to our place in creation (which those who run may read, if they are not
				very great dunces indeed), there is, perhaps, none more remarkable than the gradual
				softening of the agony which all who survive what they love, are doomed to feel. The
				state which follows, though as sad as the darkness of the lonely night, made visible
				by the pale backward glances of the parting moon, has the same soothing stillness
				too. Passion is over, anxiety at rest, and we feel more than consoled, we feel
				joyful, as we remember that we too shall pass away, and follow them.
The journey to Ashleigh cost Michael three days' smart walking, but his pockets were
				no longer in the condition they had been at the time of his never-to-be-forgotten
				escape from The Deep Valley. He had proved himself a good and faithful servant, and
				the worthy yeoman paid him accordingly, so that he had wherewithal to recruit his
				spirits and his strength as he jogged along, and reached the hospitable Nag's Head
				in his native town on the third evening, rather the better than the worse for his
				pleasant toil.
 His first walk on the following morning was to Ashleigh churchyard; but here he was
				obliged to content himself by knowing that the dear relics of those he wished to
				honour were near him; for, of course, the only indication by which he could guess
				whereabouts these  precious relics lay, was to be found in the want of
				all memorial. On the sunny side of Ashleigh churchyard, a number of handsome
				tombstones may be seen; many a massive monument is there, protected by its strong
				and stately rail; and thereon may be read, by those who list, the important fact
				that some one who bore a Christian appellation, lies below. To the north, where the
				grass grows strongest, though the sun never comes to cheer it, are a multitude of
				little nameless, unclaimed hillocks, closely wedged together, and rarely showing
				even a withy-band across the swelling sod, to testify that some one has cared for
				what lay hidden under it. To this green republic Michael turned himself, and knew
				full surely that it was there his mother lay. Another, though even as humble as
				himself, might, under similar feelings, have addressed inquiries to the
				parish-sexton, and endeavoured to set his memory to work as to the exact spot where
				he had buried her — but this Michael dared not do; for it would be at once losing
				the advantage of his incognito, and laying himself very needlessly open to the
				danger of being reclaimed by his old enemy, Sir Matthew, as a bound apprentice, who
				had run away. So he contented himself with walking carefully, and with reverential
				tread, through and amongst the many grassy mounds, permitting his tears to flow
				freely as he thought of Teddy, and the dear gentle mother who had so equally loved
				them both; and then turned slowly away, following a path that brought him at the
				distance of a mile or so to Brookford factory. 
The sensation which he felt when the great many-eyed monster first met his sight, was
				one of unmixed pleasure. He literally hugged himself, and blessed the freedom of his
				limbs, the firm and healthy action of his pulse, and the delicious consciousness
				that he was no man's slave.
For many minutes he stood still to enjoy this; and as his eyes perused line after
				line of the dusky smoke-stained windows, and recalled the early sufferings he had
				endured within them, his very heart swelled with gratitude for the change, and he
				blessed God aloud. But as he approached nearer, and perceived the dim shadowy
				figures slowly moving here and there, and thought upon the condition of each of
				them, he almost repented of his selfish joy, and blamed the ecstasy that for a while
				had made him so utterly forget that thousands were imprisoned still, though he was
				free.
On, and on, he walked with his eyes immovably fixed upon the hideous fabric till,
				sooner than he expected it, he stood before the gates. He had connived no previous
				plan by which to enter it, and knew that without some specific business, real or
				feigned, it would be impossible; but while he stood weighing the danger of possible
				discovery against his very strong inclination to see what alteration time had made
				in the troop within — whether he should recognise any among them — and whether his
				old tyrant, Parsons, was still their chief, — the gates opened, and one of the
				engine-men, a grizzly fellow, whom he well remembered when his sable hair was
				somewhat less silvered, came forth.
 He gave Michael a look, that very plainly said, "What do you want?"  and in truth, his neat appearance, unstained skin, and free
				unshrinking eye, very naturally suggested the idea that he could have no business
				there. 
"Is Mr. Parsons within?" said Michael boldly, and daring the inquiry as much because
				he knew not what to say, as from any deliberate resolution to do so.
"Yes," replied the man; "he is about the place somewhere, I seed him not more than
				ten minutes ago."
Michael nodded his head, and walked through the gate into the court, across which he
				had passed in trembling a thousand times. Nor was he now quite free from a slight
				feeling of alarm at the idea of meeting the sharp eyes of his former terrible
				taskmaster, and felt much inclined to blame himself for the curious temerity which
				had brought him so nearly within his gripe. But it was too late to retreat, for at
				the distance of a dozen yards he saw Parsons before him, coming forth from the
				building into the court. On seeing the stranger he immediately approached him;
				Michael touched his hat.
"What may your business here be, young man?" said Parsons eyeing him from top to
				toe.
"I called in, sir, to inquire whether you happened to want a spinner, and what the
				wages may be," said Michael.
"Is it for yourself?" demanded Parsons, knitting his brows, and looking at him with a
				sort of incredulous sneer.
"Why, no sir, it is for a kinsman who happens to be out of employ," replied Michael,
				colouring from the unusual consciousness of deceit, and from the same cause casting
				his eyes upon the ground, thereby displaying the remarkable length of his black
				eyelashes, and giving to his whole countenance a look much more resembling that of
				former days, than he had worn when he first entered.
Parsons looked at him with a sort of vague idea that he had seen him before.
"Where do you come from?" said he.
"From Westmorland, sir. I have been living in service there for these four years
				past."
"And pray what may your name be?"
"Robert Thornton, sir," replied Michael, blushing again, as he thus unceremoniously
				borrowed the appellation of his worthy master.
"Have you ever worked in a factory yourself?"
"Yes, sir, I have, when I was a boy," said Michael, from mere want of skill and
				hardihood in the art of lying.
"And you think you have bettered yourself, I suppose, with your fine buff waistcoat,
				and the rest of it. No we don't want no spinners here."
Michael by no means unwillingly obeyed this dismissal, and walked away, more than
				half ashamed of his achievement.
 "If I didn't know that Michael Armstrong was dead, I should swear that there chap
				was him," said a girl somewhat older than our imprudent masquerader, and who had
				been watching him very earnestly during the foregoing conversation. The observation
				was not  addressed to the overlooker, but to another girl, who had
				brought the speaker her dinner to prevent her leaving some particular work on which
				she was employed. 
"What's that you say, Sykes?" said Parsons, turning quickly towards her.
"I was saying, sir, as that boy was unaccountable like Michael Armstrong, as used to
				live in mother's back-kitchen. He wasn't above a year or two younger than me, and I
				knowed him as well as I did my own brothers."
"Stuff and nonsense, girl! All the world knows that young rascal died years ago; and
				fuss enough there was made about it by that mad miss at Milford, who I suppose,
				found out that she was their cousin, or something of the sort, for she took it so to
				heart, that she sold her house and lands, and ran away with another of 'em to some
				foreign country, for fear he should die too. Sure you must mind all that queer
				story?"
"Yes, sir," replied the girl; "I remember it right well, and that's the reason why I
				says that I know it can't be him."
"Yet upon my soul, now you mention it, he was the very image of him. I fancied as I
				looked at him that sure-ly I had seen him somewhere before. But it can't be — a dead
				dog is dead, all the world over."
"Yes sure, sir," responded Kitty Sykes, who being what is called a very sightly girl,
				was not unfrequently indulged with a little condescending notice from Mr. Parsons.
				"But 'twas his queer curly black hair, and his particular-looking eyes as put it
				into my head."
"And if you go on talking of it, Sykes, in that way, you will be putting it into my
				head too. And after all, there is nothing so very impossible in it. Nobody in these
				parts could really know much about it, you see, and there's no reason, as I can
				tell, why the scamp might not have run away from the Deep — that is, the
				stocking-weaver's manufactory as he was sent 'printice to, and they as ought to have
				stopped him, might have given out that he was dead," replied the overlooker.
"Then if it was possible," resumed Kitty Sykes, "I wouldn't mind taking my
				bodily oath that that there young fellow was Michael Armstrong, and nobody
				else."
"Egad, I wish I hadn't let him go!" cried Parsons, running to the gates. "He was
				'printiced till twenty-one, and if he has run away, he's liable to be taken up and
				put in prison, by the first as catches him."
Kitty Sykes took the liberty of running to the gates also; but to say the truth, she
				had no wish at all that Mr. Parsons should catch him up, and put him into prison.
				The girl, though she had prudence enough not to communicate the opinion to her
				friend Mr. Parsons, thought the stranger by far the handsomest young fellow she had
				ever seen, and secretly determined. if she could catch sight of him again, that she
				would give him a hint to keep clear of his old acquaintance.

"There he goes," cried Parsons, watching Michael, as with upright gait, and rapid
				strides, he was pursuing his way by the well-remembered path, which led from the
				factory to Dowling Lodge. "There he goes! He don't look like one of the mill-people
				any way — and yet the fellow said that he had worked in a factory. Didn't you hear
				him, Kitty?"
"Yes, sir," replied the girl, "and it was just then as I felt so unaccountable sure
				that, unless it was out and out impossible, it must be Michael Armstrong as was
				speaking. I never did see such eyes a Michael's, nor such hair neither."
"And there he goes, I'll bet a sovereign," rejoined the overlooker, "to take a look
				at his old quarters at the Lodge. Kitty, I'll give you a glass of gin and a
				shilling, if you'll run after him — you can run like a hare, I know — run and bring
				him back, Kitty, there's a darling, and say as I have got some good news to tell
				him."
Off started the girl with right good-will, having her own reasons for wishing to do
				the errand, as well as a very sufficient inclination to gain the promised
				reward.
Mr. Parsons by no means over-rated her running powers; and had she been less fleet,
				she would have failed in her object, for Michael walked briskly, and without any
				inclination to remain longer in the vicinity of the mill, though by no means
				conscious that he had been recognised.
He had just turned the corner of a hedge when the girl overtook him, so that their
				colloquy did not take place within sight of the overlooker.
Michael heard the fair Kitty's approach, and turned to see who it was that thus came
				galloping and panting after him.
"Do you want me, young woman?" said he, civilly stopping for her.
"Well then, you are no changeling!" replied the girl, laying her hand on his arm;
				"you were always out-and-out, the civilest boy in the mill."
A very bright suffusion dyed the clear brown of Michael's cheek as he heard this.
"I do not know what you mean!" he replied.
"Come, come, Michael Armstrong," rejoined Kitty, "you needn't be afraid of me. Don't
				you remember Kitty Sykes, as have gone to and from the mill with you and Teddy, a
				hundred and a hundred times?"
"Is it indeed Kitty Sykes, grown into such a handsome young woman?" said Michael,
				holding out his hand to her, and feeling quite incapable of preserving his
				incognito, in the presence of so old an acquaintance. "And to think of your knowing
				me, Kitty! But you must not betray me, my dear girl. If I was found out for Michael
				Armstrong, I might get into a scrape."
 "And that's true, and no lie," answered the faithless ambassadress, "for I am sent
				after you by that old beast Parsons, to tell you to come back, because he had good
				news for you. But his news would just  be to give you notice to march
				into prison for having run away; and I agreed to carry his message for him. He
				thinks that I delight in him, the old monster! but I'd rather walk a mile to do a
				kindness to you Michael, than stir an inch, to please him." 
"God bless you, my dear girl! I hope you have done me a great service now; for I
				think I could show him leg bail, that he would find it difficult to refuse, Kitty.
				So now good by, old friend; I am sorry to part so soon, but it won't do to stay here
				to be caught, will it?"
"No, truly, Mike! I'd be loath to see any friend of mine at his mercy, or at that of
				his master either. But you won't go clear away out of the country without seeing me
				again, will you? You needn't be feared of him, 'twill be easy enough to put him off
				the scent. I'll back, and tell that we was both of us altogether deceived, and that
				you bean't no more Michael Armstrong than he be."
"I don't think I ought to stay in Ashleigh now, Kitty; there's others may know me as
				well as you and he, and 'twould be a terrible change, I can tell you, my dear girl,
				to come down from the hills where I am tending a good master's sheep, and often feel
				so high and so happy, that I think I am halfway to heaven — it would be a terrible
				change, Kitty, to come from that, into the Deep Valley Mill again, which is as much
				worse than our old factory here, as hanging is worse than whipping!"
"Lord have mercy upon 'em, then!" ejaculated the poor girl. "But I say, Michael, you
				needn't run no risk at all, if I go back and say as it isn't you, and then you might
				meet me after nightfall, in the town."
"It will not be very long, Kitty, before I am one-and-twenty, and a free man, and
				it's then, please Heaven, that I'll come back again, and pay the old place a visit.
				You have been kind enough to remember me so long, that I don't think you'll have
				forgotten me by that time, and it shall go hard with me but I'll bring you a token
				from some of our north-country fairs." So saying, he gave the damsel a kiss, and she
				wrung his hand without making any further effort to detain him.
"God bless you!" said the retreating Michael, over his shoulder.
"And God bless you, too, you nice boy! muttered poor Kitty. "I wouldn't ask no better
				luck, than just to follow you, and keep sheep too."
Either from wishing to look after him as ong as he was in sight, or for the purpose
				of giving him law, in case Mr. Parsons should determine on pursuit, Kitty Sykes
				remained stationary on the spot where Michael left her, till, abandoning his hardy
				project of a visit to Dowling Lodge, he had stretched far away over the fields
				towards the road he was to pursue northwards to his peaceful home; and then she
				walked leisurely back to the factory, where, after a sharp reproof for staying so
				long, and a pert reply to it, she informed the overlooker that they had both been
				wrong, but that the young lad said he might be found if he was wanted, at the sign
				of the Magpie, that was about a mile on the road towards London.
 Warned by this unexpected recognition, Michael determined to run  no
				more risks among his townfolks; but not being disposed to lose the little bundle he
				had deposited at the Nag's Head, he ensconced himself within the shelter of a small
				public-house, on the road-side, resolved to wait there till the evening set in, and
				then to venture back to his last night's lodging, pay his bill, reclaim his bundle,
				and set forth upon a night-march, which he hoped would take him beyond all danger of
				Mr. Parsons, before the following morning. 
Having secured his welcome by the usual ceremony of ordering a meal, Michael looked
				about him for some means of occupation during the hours which he had doomed himself
				to pass there, and in despair of finding any better literary amusement, seized upon
				a heap of handbills, of a vast variety of external forms, but having, as he found
				upon examination, one and all the same object, namely, the calling together a
				general meeting of the whole county of York (then undivided), for the purpose of
				signing a petition to parliament for a law, limiting the hours of labour in
				factories to ten hours a day. Michael Armstrong was no longer a factory operative;
				free as the air he breathed upon his beloved mountain-tops, he no longer trembled at
				the omnipotent frown of an overlooker, nor sickened as he watched the rising sun
				that was to set again long hours before his stifling labour ceased. All this was
				over and ended with him for ever. Yet did his heart throb, and his eye kindle as he
				perused page after page of the arousing call which summoned tens of thousands, nay
				hundreds of thousands to use the right their country vested in them, of imploring
				mercy and justice from the august tripartite power that ruled the land.
Very powerful was the male and simple eloquence with which many of these unpretending
				compositions appealed to the paternal feelings of those they addressed; and such
				terribly true representations were found among them of the well-remembered agonies
				of his boyhood, that Michael was fain to put his spread hand before his face to
				conceal the emotions they produced.
He had sat in this situation for some minutes, revolving both his former sufferings,
				and the blessedness of his present release from them, when a man, who had been
				quietly sitting writing at a distant window, but had nevertheless found leisure to
				watch Michael's countenance as he proceeded with his examination of the handbills,
				rose from his place, and gently approaching him said, in deep, yet very gentle
				voice, "You seem moved by the perusal of these papers, my good friend. Is it the
				first time you have met with them?"
"Yes, indeed, sir, it is," replied Michael, starting from his revery.
"Then I presume you are a stranger in this part of the country?"
"Why, yes, sir; the master I serve is a Westmorland statesman, and I am only come
				this way upon a holiday trip."
"Then maybe you don't care enough for the poor factory operatives to join their
				meeting, and put your name to their petition?"
"If caring for them could do them any good, master," replied Michael, warmly, "they
				would be in no want of help, as long as I was near them. But I don't think the name
				of a poor servant-boy like me, could do them either honour or service."

"Then what sort of names, my good lad, do you suppose will support this petition. Do
				you think the great mill-owners will sign it? — Do you think such men as Sir Matthew
				Dowling for instance, whom you may have heard spoken of, down at Ashleigh, maybe, do
				you think it will be such as he, whose first object in life is to get as many hours
				of labour out of the little creatures that work for him, as stripes can make them
				give, do you think it will be such as he, that will sign the ten hours bill?"
"Not if that bill is either to hurt himself, or better the children, I should think,"
				said Michael.
"True enough," replied his new acquaintance, "and not only is that true, but he and
				the like of him will do all that mortal men can, to prevent all others from signing
				it. But Heaven forbid they should succeed, young man — for if they do, the best hope
				of many thousand suffering, and most helpless human beings, will fall to the
				ground!"
"Then, indeed, may Heaven forbid that they should have their will!" returned Michael,
				fervently. "When is this meeting to take place?" he added, turning his eyes again to
				the papers he still held in his hand. "But three days hence! — truly I should like
				to witness it!"
"Is there any reason against your doing it?" demanded the stranger. "Will your
				services be wanted by your master before that time?"
"He won't expect me, till two or three days after it," replied Michael; "I have done
				all I wanted — at least I have stayed as long as I wished at Ashleigh, and I don't
				see any great harm there would be in witnessing the meeting."
"Do see it, my good lad!" said the stranger; "I predict that it will offer a
				spectacle such as never was witnessed before, and most likely never will, or can be
				seen, again. A multitude, probably amounting to above a hundred thousand overworked
				operatives, will meet in peace and good order, to petition for legal relief from the
				oppression of a system which has brought them to a lower state of degradation and
				misery than any to which human beings have ever been brought before. Were those in
				whom these poor people have confidence, less deeply anxious to preserve the public
				peace than they are, a different mode of redress might be sought for. But as it is,
				an honest man may venture to advise such a respectable young fellow as you seem to
				be, to stretch your good master's leave a little, in order to be present at this
				great spectacle."
A good deal more conversation followed on the same theme, and ere Michael had ceased
				to listen to his companion, he felt convinced that duty as well as inclination would
				lead him to do all that a loyal subject and peaceable citizen could, in aid of the
				suffering class from whose ranks he had so miraculously escaped. In a word, Michael
				Armstrong determined to attend the great Yorkshire meeting, and hold up his hand for
				the ten hours bill.
 The extraordinary circumstances attending that enormous meeting; the
					unaccountable disappointments which at every halting-place attended all
				the precautionary efforts of the committee to procure bread  for the
				multitude, while beer was every where found ready, and in the greatest abundance;
				the terror felt by those most interested, lest heat, fatigue, exhaustion, and beer,
				together, might lead to some disturbance of the peace; and the triumphant influence
				of reason and kindness joined, in inducing the hungry multitude to separate
				peaceably, are already matters of history, and the narrative must therefore adhere
				to the fortunes of its hero, without dwelling upon nobler themes. 
In returning to Ashleigh for his bundle, Michael took good care to be as little seen
				as possible; he was in fact more than ever anxious to avoid detection, as the more
				he meditated on his recollections of Sir Matthew Dowling and Parsons, the more did
				he feel convinced that should he fall into their power before the age of twenty-one,
				matters would go very hard with him.
At the great assembling of the people at York, he feared not that he should encounter
				any enemy; the only human beings whom he could so designate being likely to show
				themselves at the most distant part of the kingdom, rather than before the face of
				the multitude to be expected there. No feelings of distrust or alarm, therefore,
				arose to check the pleasurable excitement which this expedition was calculated to
				inspire; and Michael, with his stout staff over his shoulder, and the cotton
				handkerchief, containing a change of linen, suspended from it, set out with a light
				heart and active step upon a walk in which he soon found himself joined by many
				thousand companions.
The assurance given him by his unknown acquaintance, that he should see a wonderful
				and spirit-stirring spectacle, was fully verified. The very sight of the road along
				which he travelled, which looked like a dark and mighty current moving irresistibly
				along, while tributary streams flowed into it on all sides, so thick and serried was
				the mass that moved along it, was of itself well worth the toil it cost him, to
				behold its peaceful tumult. From time to time Michael indulged in a little
				questioning of the various individuals beside whom he found himself; but for the
				most part the men were too intent upon the object of their expedition, to converse
				idly respecting it — and by degrees our hero grew as silent as the rest, and trudged
				on without any other communion than that of his own thoughts.
It was at about twenty miles distance from York, when the multitude were on their
				return, that a circumstance occurred, which, being of considerable importance to
				Michael, must be detailed somewhat at length. He had entered an inn by the
				road-side, which, being one of the largest post-houses on the north road, had an air
				of pretension and costliness about it, that caused the great majority of the host to
				walk on, without venturing to approach precincts so dangerous.
But Michael was much exhausted, and having already discovered, when passing before
				the humbler houses of public entertainment, that no rest could be hoped from
				entering them, every inch of space being occupied, he deemed it wisest to disburse a
				splendid shilling, rather than fag on till he had no strength to go further.
 In pursuance of this reasoning, he entered the kitchen of the Royal Oak, and called
				for bread, cheese, and a pint of beer. Though there  were not many of
				his fellow-travellers either rich or extravagant enough to share these splendid
				quarters with him, there were, nevertheless, three or four men taking refreshment in
				the apartment. One of these, an elderly respectable-looking personage, who had, as
				it seemed, exclusive possession of a snug little round-table in a corner, made a
				sign to Michael to share it with him. This was gratefully accepted, the loaf and
				cheese were already there, and the foaming tankard quickly followed. 
"I marked you at the meeting," said his sociable companion. "It did my heart good to
				see a sprinkling here and there of them that come out of pure love and kindness to
				their poor fellow-creatures, having nothing themselves to gain. 'Tis a pity and a
				sin too, that so many Englishmen stand idly by, when such a business as this is
				afoot, just as if they had nothing to do with it. But they are one and all mistaken,
				and that they may chance to find out, too, one of these days."
"You give me credit for more than I deserve, perhaps," replied Michael; "that is, if
				you think my heart was enough with the poor factory-folks to make me take a long
				roundabout to sign with them, without having had some knowledge of their sufferings
				myself. You are right in thinking that I am not one of them now; but I have been,
				and Heaven forbid I should ever forget it! for the keeping that time mind, is quite
				enough to make every thing that comes to me now seem light and easy."
"You have worked in a factory?" said the other in an accent of surprise; "I should
				never have guessed as much — but you are very right to be thankful for the present,
				instead of ashamed for the past. But I don't think," he added, eyeing the fine
				person of Michael from head to foot, "I don't think I ever saw a lad who showed so
				little signs of having suffered in health and limb from it. Some lucky accident must
				have taken you away early?"
"I have seen many a boy and girl crippled for life," replied Michael, "before they
				were as old as I was when I ran away."
"My good fellow," whispered his companion, "don't you use them words again. You are
				safe with me, I promise you; but if you ran from indentures, you won't do wisely to
				tell of it."
"You must blame your own kind and friendly looks," said Michael, smiling; "I know
				well enough that what you say is true, and it isn't a thing I should have told to
				many. But excepting just now that I took a fancy to come back, and take a look about
				the old place where I was born, I have got so clear and clean away from mills and
				mill-owners, that I have grown rather bolder, maybe, than I ought to be. My business
				now, thank Heaven! is sheep-tending upon the beautiful free hills of
				Westmorland."
"You may well be thankful for such a change," replied his friendly companion. "It
				must have been some unaccountable good luck; for in general, a runaway factory
				'prentice is hunted down and caught long before he has got among the good
				hill-folks."
 "It was, indeed, a blessed chance for me!" said Michael, with deep 
				feeling. "I fell into the hands of the best man and the best master that ever a
				wretched runaway hit upon." 
"I almost wonder at you then venturing to come within sight of your own place again.
				You can't be one-and-twenty yet by your looks, and you would not over-well like to
				work out your time in a factory, I should think," said the other.
"I don't think I should," replied Michael, laughing; "and I have run some risk, I
				promise you, already, of the very thing you talk of, since I left my master's house.
				Nothing would content my foolish fancy for calling back old times, but going to look
				at the very factory where I first worked, and talking to the identical tyrant who
				tortured me there."
"But he did not know you, I hope?" said the old man.
"I can hardly say that he did not," replied Michael; "for some notion or other came
				into his head, and after I left him he sent for me to come back again. It was,
				however, by a friendly messenger who knew well enough who I was, and gave me pretty
				plainly to understand which way I had better walk — and that was good luck again.
				But I was sorry, too, to have to turn away from the old place without learning any
				news of my former acquaintance. I found the same overlooker at Sir Matthew Dowling's
				mill, and that was all I could find out."
"Sir Matthew Dowling's mill at Ashleigh? that's my country, too. My wife keeps a
				school at Milford," replied the man, "and we have heard enough of Sir Matthew."
"Can you tell me any thing about his daughter Martha?" demanded Michael, with the
				appearance of being greatly interested in the inquiry. "She was very kind to me, and
				I loved her next best, I think, to my own dear mother and brother. Do you happen to
				know any thing about her?"
"Not just at present," replied the man; "though they do say, that all the family are
				likely to have a downfal, owing to Sir Matthew's getting into a scrape about bad
				bills, or something or other, t'other side of the water. But I do well remember
				something particular about Miss Martha that you talk of, a matter of seven years
				ago; and if she was good to you, it was more than she was to every body, for it was
				all along of a cruel piece of treachery of hers, that I lost the best mistress that
				ever man had. I dare say, if you come from Ashleigh, you must know the name of Miss
				Brotherton, though it's long since she left Milford. I was her coachman, and if it
				had not been for Miss Martha Dowling, I believe I might have been so still."
"I was but just turned ten years old, at the time I knew Miss Martha," returned
				Michael; "but I shouldn't have thought she could be treacherous to any body."
"She was though, for all our people knew the whole story from first to last, and a
				queer story it was too, when one thinks of the end of it; which was neither more nor
				less than sending our dear young lady away out of the country."
 "I never happened to know any thing about the lady who owned the 
				park," replied Michael; "except that she was one of the fine folks as I have seen at
				Dowling Lodge, but I should like to hear the story, because of Miss Martha." 
"Why the short and the long of it was, that there was a poor widow called Armstrong —
				"
Michael started so violently, that his companion stopped.
"Did you happen to know her, my lad?" he added, after a pause.
"Yes, sir, I remember her very well — but please to go on."
"Well then, this widow Armstrong had two sons, and one of them was had up to the
				great house, Dowling Lodge, I mean, for some nonsensical reason or other; and Sir
				Matthew pretended to make the greatest fuss in the world about him, and the whole
				country was talking about it. But for some offence of the poor boy's, I never
				rightly heard what, the old sinner determined upon sending him 'prentice to the most
				infernal place, by all account, that the earth has got to be ashamed of. And how do
				you think the poor widow was coaxed over to sign the indentures? Why by your friend,
				Miss Martha, and no one else, and that I know upon the best authority. Well, 'tis a
				long story, the ins and outs of it, and I can't say that I ever rightly understood
				the whole, but this I know to be fact: that our young mistress took the whole thing
				so much to heart, that she actually set out to look after the boy; but when she got
				to the murderous place the poor little fellow was dead! And what did she do then,
				dear, tender-hearted lady! but bring back a pretty little girl instead of him,
				because, as we all guessed, she was determined to save somebody."
The emotion of Michael Armstrong on hearing this, was so entirely beyond his power to
				conquer, that he lost all capability of utterance, and instead of asking the name of
				the little girl — an inquiry which he in vain strove to make — he sat pale and
				gasping, with his eyes fixed on the speaker, and every limb trembling.
"The Lord have mercy on us! what is the matter with you, my good fellow?" said Miss
				Brotherton's ci-devant coachman. "You look cruel bad! Is it my tale as
				turns you so? or is it that you have walked too much and too fast?"
"No, no, no! Pray go on!" murmured Michael, making a strong effort to
				articulate.
"'Tis the story, then? and you knowed the poor Armstrongs, beyond all doubt!" said
				the kind-hearted coachman. "Well then, you shall hear the end of it. When my
				mistress brought back the news of the little fellow's death, his poor mother, who
				was but a sickly, cripply sort of body, just broke her heart and died; whereupon
				Miss Brotherton took home the other boy, put him to school to my wife, and then took
				to teaching him herself, and treated him for all the world as if he had been her own
				brother; and then she began to fancy that he wanted a doctor — "
"And then," groaned Michael, suddenly interrupting him, — "and then he died!"
 "You don't say so?" said the coachman, in an accent of regret. "Did he indeed, poor
				boy? Well now, I'm sorry for that; for it was a pleasure to see him growing taller
				and stouter every day, almost, as  one may say. And when was it he
				died? It's curious that we should never have heard of it." 
"Heard of it?" said Michael, while a sort of wild uncertainty took possession of his
				mind, that gave him the feeling of one whose reason threatened to leave him. "Heard
				it? Why did you want to hear it? Could you not see it, and know it, if he was living
				in the same house with you?"
"For certain I could, if he had died while Miss Brotherton remained at the park; but
				that he did not, for I drove him off the first stage myself, alive and well, and
				looking as beautiful as he always did, poor lad, for he was to be sure the
				handsomest-faced boy, that ever I looked upon. But what might have happened to him
				afterwards, is of course more than I can say; for when the place was sold, and all
				of us paid off, all we heard was, that our dear young lady was set off to travel in
				foreign countries, and had left pensions to every one of her servants according to
				their length of service. So we know nothing since."
"Is there no one can tell me where she is gone, and in what land my brother died?"
				said Michael, violently agitated.
"Your brother?" said his companion. "Who do you mean by your brother, my lad?"
"Teddy! — my brother Edward! — I am Michael Armstrong!" was the convulsive reply.
"God bless my heart and soul! And you be the boy as Miss Brotherton went to look
				after? And she got into the wrong box, then, about your being dead? Was there ever
				any thing like that? But who was it, my boy, that told you as your brother was
				dead?"
"A woman in Ashleigh — one living in the house where my mother died. She told me that
				my mother was dead, and my brother too."
"Did she know who she was speaking to? Did she know you was Michael Armstrong?" said
				the old coachman with quickness.
"No, she knew me not," replied Michael; "but she knew that the widow Armstrong and
				her boy were dead."
"Then I'll be hanged if I believe as your brother is dead," replied the
				other eagerly. "When she said the widow's boy, she meant you, I'll lay my life on
				it; and there is nobody in Ashleigh, if they had told of her death, but would have
				named that of her boy too; but it would have always been meaning you, because every
				body knew that one followed close upon the news of the other. And I don't believe
				that your brother's dead, and that's a fact."
Michael clasped his hands rigidly together, and closing his eyes, remained so long
				motionless, that his good-natured companion became alarmed, and laying his hand upon
				the poor lad's arm, shook him gently, as he said, "Any how, my good fellow, there is
				no cause for you to break your heart with thinking about it all. Talking about your
				poor mother, and her love of you, has made you turn as pale as a sheet; and natural
				enough, too, perhaps. But my notion that your brother is alive and well, ought to
				comfort you — oughtn't it?"
 Michael opened his eyes, and fixing them on his companion, said, "The joy of it is
				more than I can bear!" and then the tears bursting  forth, he wept
				copiously; a timely relief, for which he had great reason to be thankful. 
"Well, well, I don't mind seeing you cry a little — that won't do you no harm; and
				thank goodness your colour is coming back again! I declare I thought I had been the
				death of you," said his new friend. "But I'll tell you something more, and that is
				the name of him as knows more about Miss Brotherton and your brother too, I'll be
				bold to say, than any body in the whole country, and that's Parson Bell, of
				Fairly."
"And where is Fairly?" said Michael, starting up. "How long shall I be in getting
				there? The hope is only hope yet, you know — there is no certainty. Edward! dear,
				dear, Edward! Is it God's pleasure that I should see him again in this world? Is it
				possible that such a heavenly dream can ever come true? Oh! how often have I sat
				upon the hill and watched the clouds, and thought that he was above them all!"
"Poor boy! But 'twill be better still, for a few years to come, that he should be
				upon the earth along with you, won't it?"
"Where is Fairly?" reiterated Michael. "How long shall I be in getting there?"
"Longer than you'll like, my dear boy," replied the coachman. "It's a good sixteen
				miles from this very house; I should not wonder if they was to charge seventeen, and
				you must not think of trying to compass that to-night, for you are not in any wise
				in a fit condition for it, changing colour, as you do, every minute. Your best
				course will be to rest here for the night, and set off again by times to-morrow
				morning, and that will bring you in easy by about the middle of the day, you
				know."
"Impossible!" said Michael. "I owe you more than I am able to thank you for, and I
				would be willing to show my gratitude by following your advice — only, sir, I am
				quite sure I could not sleep a wink. And I don't think it would do me any good to
				lie tossing from side to side, unknowing, for certain, whether my own dear Teddy was
				alive or dead! So if you please, I must set off directly, that I may know the best
				and the worst at once."
"I suppose at your age I should have done the same; therefore I won't pretend to
				quarrel with you for it," replied the good man; "but I suppose it would be just
				prudent to call for an ink-horn, and to set down upon a bit of paper the name of the
				good clergyman that you are to call upon, as well as his place of residence."
"There is no need of that, sir," said Michael; " Parson Bell, of Fairly ,
				are the words you said, and they, as well as all the rest you have spoken, seem as
				if they were stamped upon my very heart. But yet, before I start, I should like to
				use the ink-horn too, that I might write a line or so to my good master. I know he
				will be troubled in his mind about me if I don't get back, and I don't know rightly
				how long it may be. God bless him, good man!" continued Michael; "it was he that had
				me taught to write, and he shan't be left with any doubts or fears upon his mind for
				want of a letter from me."

This was a measure that the coachman greatly approved, and observing that he was well
				known in the house, and sure to be minded, he undertook to order the
				writing-materials, as well as something substantial by way of a supper; declaring
				that though he had come into his young friends wild scheme of walking off straight
				away for Fairly, instead of putting up for the night, either where they were, or at
				Leeds, he should not part with him without a quarrel, if he refused to accept, and
				do justice to the good cheer he should provide. This kindness on the part of the man
				who had so strongly influenced his destiny, was both kindly intentioned and wisely
				devised; for greatly did the agitated young man stand in need of recruited strength
				and tranquillity, before he set off upon a new expedition, which was to lead to
				information so vitally important to his happiness. Though it was somewhat against
				his inclination, he accepted the friendly invitation gratefully, and the materials
				for writing being set before him, he addressed the following epistle to Mr.
				Thornton:
"Honoured Master!
"Your goodness to me, in all ways, would make any abuse of it on my part a heavy
				crime indeed — too heavy, I think, for me to commit, or you to suspect me of. But I
				cannot be at the suppertable at Neckerby, on next Saturday night, according to my
				promise. A very strange thing has happened to me, dear master, which may, perhaps,
				come to nothing, and in that case I know you will hear my story, and pity me too
				much to think of anger. But if all I hope comes to pass, your generous heart will
				rejoice with me, and you will bless your own goodness, for bringing me to the
				knowledge of the very greatest joy that ever fell to the lot of a human being, by
				giving me this holiday.

				"I am, honoured Master,
			
"Your faithful and grateful servant, " Michael
					Armstrong. "
Having finished his letter, and committed it to the post, Michael felt somewhat more
				tranquil, and endeavoured to assume with his new acquaintance an air of greater
				composure, and self-possession. But his heart beat, his temples throbbed, his
				thoughts wandered, and when he and his friendly companion sat down to supper, the
				poor boy felt that he could almost as easily have swallowed the board itself as any
				portion of the substantial fare which was spread upon it. But he quaffed a long and
				refreshing draught from a pitcher of cold water, and putting, at the suggestion of
				the worthy coachman, a crust in his pocket, he sallied forth with the agitating
				consciousness that on the information of which he was in pursuit, hung all his
				earthly hopes.
His new friend shook his head as he felt his feverish hand, and marked his heightened
				colour, and his eager eye.
 "God bless you, boy!" said the good man. "Remember, if you fall sick by the way,
				that my name is Richard Smithson, that I live at Milford, near Ashleigh, and that
				I'll hold myself ready to come to  you at a pinch, if you should happen
				to have need of me. And here, Michael Armstrong, are three sovereigns, that I give
				you to keep for two reasons. One is, that you may use them in case you have need.
				The other, that if you don't want them, I shall be sure to see you, when you bring
				them back, and that you will do, or I'll never trust a lad's face more; and now good
				bye. It is but a wildish sort of boy's trick though, setting off this way at night,
				when you ought to be in bed." 
"The air and the walk will do me more good than all the beds in the world!" replied
				Michael. "God bless you, sir! See me you shall, if I continue to live;" and so
				saying, he strode forth into the night, with a longing for greater space to breathe
				in, than could be found in the kitchen of the Royal-oak.
The boy was right as to the effect which this bodily exertion would produce upon him.
				The very darkness calmed him; he took his hat off that the cool air might bathe his
				temples with its dewy breath; and though his pace was rapid, and scarcely relaxed
				for a moment during many miles, the action of his pulse became more healthy, and the
				aching of his throbbing temples passed away.
All he now seemed to fear was that his imagination should cheat him into the
				persuasion that all he wished was true. Edward! Fanny! (for of her identity with
				Miss Brotherton's protégée he could hardly doubt, when he remembered the
				history of her departure from the Deep Valley) — these names seemed to ring in his
				ears, and to be inscribed in starlight on the heavens as he raised his eyes towards
				them. And thus the sixteen miles were traversed before he had half chewed the cud of
				all the sweet thoughts that thronged upon his fancy. When he reached Fairly, it was
				still much too early to find any one stirring, so Michael unceremoniously walked
				into a cart-shed, and clambering up into a vehicle that had the sweet savour of
				newly-carried hay to recommend it, he placed his bundle under his head, and despite
				both hopes and fears, fell into a sound sleep, nor waked till cocks, hens, cows,
				pigs, and ploughboys, all joined in chorus to arouse him.
