<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Twins, by Martin Farquhar
     Tupper, A.M., F.R.S..</title><author>Tupper, Martin Farquhar (1810-1889).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary
     History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I.
PLACE: TIME: CIRCUMSTANCE.
Burleigh-Singleton is a pleasant little watering-place on the southern coast of England,
     entirely suitable for those who have small incomes and good consciences. The latter, to
     residents especially, are at least as indispensable as the former: seeing that, however just
     the reputation of their growing little town for superior cheapness in matters of meat and
     drink, its character in things regarding men and manners is quite as undeniable for pre-eminent
     dulness.
Not but that it has its varieties of scene, and more or less of circumstances too: there are,
     on one flank, the breezy Heights, with flag-staff and panorama; on the other, broad and level
     water-meadows, skirted by the dark-flowing Mullet, running to the sea between its tortuous
     banks: for neighbourhood, Pacton Park is one great attraction—the pretty market-town of
     Eyemouth another—the everlasting, never-tiring sea a third; and, at high-summer, when the
     Devonshire lanes are not knee-deep in mire, the nevertheless immeasurably filthy, though
     picturesque, mud-built village of Oxton.
Then again (and really as I enumerate these multitudinous advantages, I begin to relent for
     having called it dull), you may pick up curious agate pebbles on the beach, as well as
     corallines and scarce sea-weeds, good for gumming on front-parlour windows; you may fish
     for whitings in the bay, and occasionally catch them; you may wade in huge caoutchouc
     boots among the muddy shallows of the Mullet, and shoot at cormorants and curlews; you
     may walk to satiety between high-banked and rather dirty cross-roads; and, if you will scramble
     up the hedge-row, may get now and then peeps of undulated country landscape.
Moreover, you have free liberty to drop in any where to "tiffin"—Burleigh being very
     Indianized, and a guest always welcome; indeed,
     so Indianized is it, so populous in jaundiced cheek and ailing livers, that you may
     openly assert, without fear of being misunderstood (if you wish to vary your common phrase of
     loyalty), that Victoria sits upon the "musnud" of Great Britain; you may order curry in the
     smallest pot-house, and still be sure to get the rice well-cooked; you may call your house-maid
     "ayah," without risk of warning for impertinence; you may vent your wrath against indolent
     waiters in eloquence of "jaa, soostee;" and, finally, you may go to the library, and besides
     the advantage of the day-before-yesterday's Times, you may behold in bilious presence an
     affable, but authoritative, old gentleman, who introduces himself, "Sir, you see in me the hero
     of Puttymuddyfudgepoor."
You may even now see such an one, I say, and hear him too, if you will but go to Burleigh;
     seeing he has by this time over-lived the year or so whereof our tale discourses. He has, by
     dint of service, attained to the dignity of General H.E.I.C.S., and—which he was still longer
     coming to—the wisdom of being a communicative creature; though possibly, by a natural rëaction,
     at present he carries anti-secresy a little too far, and verges on the gossiping extreme. But,
     at the time to which we must look back to commence this right-instructive story, General Tracy
     was still drinking "Hodgson's Pale" in India, was so taciturn as to be considered almost dumb,
     and had not yet lifted up his yellow visage upon Albion's white cliffs, nor taken up
     head-quarters in his final rest of Burleigh-Singleton.
Nevertheless, with reference to quartering at Burleigh, a certain long-neglected wife of his,
     Mrs. Tracy, had; and that for the period of at least the twenty-one years preceding: how and
     wherefore I proceed to tell.
A common case and common fate was that of Mrs. Tracy. She had married, both early and
     hastily, a gallant lieutenant, John George Julian Tracy, to wit, the military germ of our
     future general; their courtship and acquaintance previous to matrimony extended over the not
     inconsiderable space of three whole weeks—commencing with a country ball; and after marriage,
     honey-moon inclusive, they lived the life of cooing doves for three whole months.
And now came the furlough's end: Mr. Tracy, in his then habitual reserve (a quiet man was
     he), had concealed its existence altogether: and, for aught Jane knew, the hearty invalid was
     to remain at home for ever: but months soon slip away; and so it came to pass, that on a
     certain next Wednesday he must be on his way back to the Presidency of Madras, and—if she will
     not follow him—he must leave her.

However, there was a certain old relative, one Mrs. Green, a childless widow—rich,
     capricious, and infirm—whom Jane Tracy did not wish to lose sight of: her money was well worth
     both watching and waiting for; and the captain, whom a lucky chance had now lifted out of the
     lieutenancy, was easily persuaded to forego the pleasure of his wife's company till the
     somewhat indefinite period of her old aunt's death.
How far sundry discoveries made in the unknown regions of each other's temper reconciled him
     to this retrograding bachelorship, and her to her widowhood-bewitched, I will not undertake to
     say: but I will hazard the remark, anti-poor-law though it seemeth, that the separation of man
     and wife, however convenient, lucrative, or even mutually pleasant, is a dereliction of duty,
     which always deserves, and generally meets, its proper and discriminative punishment. Had the
     young wife faithfully performed her Maker's bidding, and left all other ties unstrung to cleave
     unto her lord; had she considered a husband's true affections before all other wealth, and
     resolved to share his dangers, to solace his cares, to be his blessing through life, and his
     partner even unto death, rather than selfishly to seek her own comfort, and consult her own
     interest—the tale of crime and sadness, which it is my lot to tell, would never have had truth
     for its foundation.
Ill-matched for happiness though they were, however well-matched as to mutual merit, the
     common man of pleasure and the frivolous woman of fashion, still the wisest way to fuse their
     minds to union, the likeliest receipt for moral good and social comfort, would have been this
     course of foreign scenes, of new faces, sprinkled with a seasoning of adventure, hardship,
     danger, in a distant land. Gradually would they have learned to bear and forbear; the petty
     quarrel would have been forgotten in the frequent kindness; the rougher edges of temper and
     opinion would insensibly have smoothed away; new circumstances would have brought out better
     feelings under happier skies; old acquaintances, false friends forgotten, would have
     neutralized old feuds: and, by long-living together, though it were perhaps amid various
     worries and many cares, they might still have come to a good old age with more than average
     happiness, and more than the common run of love. Patience in dutiful enduring brings a sure
     reward: and marriage, however irksome a constraint to the foolish and the gay, is still so wise
     an ordinance, that the most ill-assorted couple imaginable will unconsciously grow happy, if
     they only remain true to one another, and will learn the wisdom always to hope and often to
     forgive.

The Tracys, however, overlooked all this, and mutual friends (those invariable foes
     to all that is generous and unworldly) smiled upon the prudence of their temporary separation.
     The captain was to come home again on furlough in five years at furthest, even if the aunt held
     out so long; and this availed to keep his wife in the rear-guard; therefore, Mrs. Tracy wiped
     her eyes, bade adieu to her retreating lord in Plymouth Sound, and determined to abide, with
     other expectant dames and Asiatic invalided heroes, at Burleigh-Singleton, until she might go
     to him, or he return to her: for pleasant little Burleigh, besides its contiguity to arriving
     Indiamen, was advantageous as being the dwelling-place of aforesaid Mrs. Green;—that wealthy,
     widowed aunt, devoutly wished in heaven: and the considerate old soul had offered her designing
     niece a home with her till Tracy could come back.
During the first year of absence, ship-letters and India-letters arrived duteously in
     consecutive succession: but somehow or other, the regular post, in no long time afterwards,
     became unfaithful to its trust; and if Mrs. Jane heard quarterly, which at any rate she did
     through the agent, when he remitted her allowance, she consoled herself as to the captain's
     well-being: in due course of things, even this became irregular; he was far up the country,
     hunting, fighting, surveying, and what not; and no wonder that letters, if written at all,
     which I rather doubt, got lost. Then there came a long period of positive and protracted
     silence—months of it—years of it; barring that her checks for cash were honoured still at
     Hancock's, though they could tell her nothing of her lord; so that Mrs. Tracy was at length
     seriously recommended by her friends to become a widow; she tried on the cap, and looked into
     many mirrors; but, after long inspection, decided upon still remaining a wife, because the
     weeds were so clearly unbecoming. Habit, meanwhile, and that still-existing old aunt, who
     seemed resolved to live to a hundred, kept her as before at Burleigh: and, seeing that a few
     months after the captain's departure she had presented the world, not to say her truant lord,
     with twins, she had always found something to do in the way of, what she considered, education,
     and other juvenile amusement: that is to say, when the gayeties of a circle of fifteen miles in
     radius left her any time to spare in such a process. The twins—a brace of boys—were born and
     bred at Burleigh, and had attained severally to twenty years of age, just before their father
     came home again as brevet-major-general. But both they, and that arrival, deserve special
     detail, each in its own chapter.
</div></body></text></TEI>