<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAP. XX. FAREWELL.
On the morning after Mr. Harding's return home, he
                                        received a note from the bishop full of affection,
                                        condolence, and praise. "Pray come to me at once," wrote the
                                        bishop, "that we may see what had better be done; as to the
                                        hospital, I will not say a word to dissuade you; but I don't
                                        like your going to Crabtree: at any rate, come to me at
                                        once."
Mr. Harding did go to him at once; and long and confidential was
                                        the consultation between the two old friends. There they sat
                                        together the whole long day plotting to get the better of
                                        the archdeacon, and to carry out little schemes of their
                                        own, which they knew would be opposed by the whole weight of
                                        his authority.
The bishop's first idea was, that Mr. Harding, if left to
                                        himself, would certainly starve—not in the figurative sense
                                        in which so many of our ladies and gentlemen do starve on
                                        incomes form one to five hundred a year not that he would be
                                        starved as regarded  dress coats, port wine,
                                        and pocket-money; but that he would positively perish of
                                        inanition for want of bread.
"How is a man to live, when he gives up all his income?" said the
                                        bishop to himself. And then the good-natured little man
                                        began to consider how his friend might be best rescued from
                                        a death so horrid and painful.
His first proposition to Mr. Harding was, that they should live
                                        together at the palace. He, the bishop, positively assured
                                        Mr. Harding that he wanted another resident chaplain: not a
                                        young, working chaplain, but a steady, middle-aged chaplain;
                                        one who would dine and drink a glass of wine with him, talk
                                        about the archdeacon, and poke the fire. The bishop did not
                                        positively name all these duties, but he gave Mr. Harding to
                                        understand that such would be the nature of the service
                                        required.
It was not without much difficulty that Mr. Harding made his
                                        friend see that this would not suit him; that he could not
                                        throw up the bishop's preferment, and then come and hang on
                                        at the bishop's table; that he could not allow people to say
                                        of him that it was an easy matter to abandon his own income,
                                        as he was able to sponge on that of another person. He
                                        succeeded, however, in explaining that  the
                                        plan would not do, and then the bishop brought forward
                                        another which he had in his sleeve. He, the bishop, had in
                                        his will left certain moneys to Mr. Harding's two daughters,
                                        imagining that Mr. Harding would himself want no such
                                        assistance during his own lifetime. This legacy amounted to
                                        three thousand pounds each, duty free; and he now pressed it
                                        as a gift on his friend.
"The girls, you know," said he, "will have it just the same when
                                        you're gone—and they won't want it sooner—and as for the
                                        interest during my lifetime, it is n't worth talking about.
                                        I have more than enough."
With much difficulty and heartfelt sorrow, Mr. Harding refused
                                        also this offer. No; his wish was to support himself,
                                        however poorly,—not to be supported on the charity of any
                                        one. It was hard to make the bishop understand this; it was
                                        hard to make him comprehend that the only real favour he
                                        could confer was the continuation of his independent
                                        friendship; but at last even this was done. At any rate,
                                        thought the bishop, he will come and dine with me from time
                                        to time, and if he be absolutely starving I shall see
                                        it.
Touching the precentorship, the bishop was clearly of opinion
                                        that it could be held without the  other
                                        situation—an opinion from which no one differed; and it was
                                        therefore soon settled among all the parties concerned, that
                                        Mr. Harding should still be the precentor of the
                                        cathedral.
On the day following Mr. Harding's return, the archdeacon reached
                                        Plumstead full of Mr. Cumming's scheme regarding Puddingdale
                                        and Mr. Quiverful. On the very next morning he drove over to
                                        Puddingdale, and obtained the full consent of the wretched
                                        clerical Priam who was endeavouring to feed his poor Hecuba
                                        and a dozen of Hectors on the small proceeds of his
                                        ecclesiastical kingdom. Mr. Quiverful had no doubts as to
                                        the legal rights of the warden; his conscience would be
                                        quite clear as to accepting the income; and as to the
                                        Jupiter, he begged to assure the archdeacon that he was
                                        quite indifferent to any emanations from the profane portion
                                        of the periodical press.
Having so far succeeded, he next sounded the bishop; but here he
                                        was astonished by most unexpected resistance. The bishop did
                                        not think it would do. "Not do, why not?" and seeing that
                                        his father was not shaken, he repeated the question in a
                                        severer form: "Why not do, my lord?"
His lordship looked very unhappy, and shuffled about in his
                                        chair, but still didn't give way; he  thought
                                        Puddingdale wouldn't do for Mr. Harding; it was too far from
                                        Barchester.
"Oh! of course he'll have a curate."
The bishop also thought that Mr. Quiverful wouldn't do for the
                                        hospital; such an exchange wouldn't look well at such a
                                        time; and, when pressed harder, he declared he didn't think
                                        Mr. Harding would accept of Puddingdale under any
                                        circumstances.
"How is he to live?" demanded the archdeacon.
The bishop, with tears in his eyes, declared that he had not the
                                        slightest conception how life was to be sustained within him
                                        at all.
The archdeacon then left his father, and went down to the
                                        hospital; but Mr. Harding wouldn't listen at all to the
                                        Puddingdale scheme. To his eyes it had no attraction; it
                                        savoured of simony, and was likely to bring down upon him
                                        harder and more deserved strictures than any he had yet
                                        received: he positively declined to become vicar of
                                        Puddingdale under any circumstances.
The archdeacon waxed wroth, talked big, and looked bigger; he
                                        said something about dependence and beggary, spoke of the
                                        duty every man was under to earn his bread, made passing
                                        allusions to the follies of youth and waywardness of age, as
                                        though Mr.  Harding were afflicted by both, and
                                        ended by declaring that he had done. He felt that he had
                                        left no stone unturned to arrange matters on the best and
                                        easiest footing; that he had, in fact, so arranged them,
                                        that he had so managed that there was no further need of any
                                        anxiety in the matter. And how had he been paid? His advice
                                        had been systematically rejected; he had been not only
                                        slighted, but distrusted and avoided; he and his measures
                                        had been utterly thrown over, as had been Sir Abraham, who,
                                        he had reason to know, was much pained at what had occurred.
                                        He now found it was useless to interfere any further, and he
                                        should retire. If any further assistance were required from
                                        him, he would probably be called on, and should be again
                                        happy to come forward. And so he left the hospital, and has
                                        not since entered it from that day to this.
And here we must take leave of Archdeacon Grantly. We fear that
                                        he is represented in these pages as being worse than he is;
                                        but we have had to do with his foibles, and not with his
                                        virtues. We have seen only the weak side of the man, and
                                        have lacked the opportunity of bringing him forward on his
                                        strong ground. That he is a man somewhat too fond of his own
                                        way, and not sufficiently scrupulous in his manner of
                                        achieving it, his best friends cannot  deny.
                                        That he is bigoted in favour, not so much of his doctrines
                                        as of his cloth, is also true: and it is true that the
                                        possession of a large income is a desire that sits near his
                                        heart. Nevertheless, the archdeacon is a gentleman and a man
                                        of conscience; he spends his money liberally, and does the
                                        work he has to do with the best of his ability; he improves
                                        the tone of society of those among whom he lives. His
                                        aspirations are of a healthy, if not of the highest, kind.
                                        Though never an austere man, he upholds propriety of conduct
                                        both by example and precept. He is generous to the poor, and
                                        hospitable to the rich; in matters of religion he is
                                        sincere, and yet no Pharisee; he is in earnest, and yet no
                                        fanatic. On the whole, the Archdeacon of Barchester is a man
                                        doing more good than harm,—a man to be furthered and
                                        supported, though perhaps also to be controlled; and it is
                                        matter of regret to us that the course of our narrative has
                                        required that we should see more of his weakness than his
                                        strength.
Mr. Harding allowed himself no rest till everything was prepared
                                        for his departure from the hospital. It may be as well to
                                        mention that he was not driven to the stern necessity of
                                        selling all his furniture: he had been quite in earnest in
                                        his intention to do so, but it was soon made known to him
                                                 that the claims of Messrs. Cox and
                                        Cumming made no such step obligatory. The archdeacon had
                                        thought it wise to make use of the threat of the lawyer's
                                        bill, to frighten his father-in-law into compliance; but he
                                        had no intention to saddle Mr. Harding with costs, which had
                                        been incurred by no means exclusively for his benefit. The
                                        amount of the bill was added to the diocesan account, and
                                        was, in fact, paid out of the bishop's pocket, without any
                                        consciousness on the part of his lordship. A great part of
                                        his furniture he did resolve to sell, having no other means
                                        to dispose of it; and the ponies and carriage were
                                        transferred, by private contract, to the use of an old
                                        maiden lady in the city.
For his present use Mr. Harding took a lodging in Barchester, and
                                        thither were conveyed such articles as he wanted for daily
                                        use—his music, books, and instruments, his own arm-chair,
                                        and Eleanor's pet sofa; her teapoy and his cellaret, and
                                        also the slender but still sufficient contents of his
                                        wine-cellar. Mrs. Grantly had much wished that her sister
                                        would reside at Plumstead, till her father's house at
                                        Crabtree should be ready for her; but Eleanor herself
                                        strongly resisted this proposal. It was in vain urged upon
                                        her, that a lady in lodgings cost more than a gentleman; and
                                        that, under her father's present circumstances,  such an expense should be avoided. Eleanor had not
                                        pressed her father to give up the hospital, in order that
                                        she might live at Plumstead Rectory, and he alone in his
                                        Barchester lodgings; nor did Eleanor think that she would be
                                        treating a certain gentleman very fairly, if she betook
                                        herself to the house which he would be the least desirous of
                                        entering of any in the county. So she got a little bedroom
                                        for herself behind the sitting-room, and just over the
                                        little back parlour of the chemist, with whom they were to
                                        lodge. There was somewhat of a savour of senna softened by
                                        peppermint about the place; but, on the whole, the lodgings
                                        were clean and comfortable.
The day had been fixed for the migration of the ex-warden, and
                                        all Barchester were in a state of excitement on the subject.
                                        Opinion was much divided as to the propriety of Mr.
                                        Harding's conduct. The mercantile part of the community, the
                                        mayor and corporation, and council, also most of the ladies,
                                        were loud in his praise. Nothing could be more noble,
                                        nothing more generous, nothing more upright. But the gentry
                                        were of a different way of thinking, —especially the lawyers
                                        and the clergymen. They said such conduct was very weak and
                                        undignified; that Mr. Harding evinced a lamentable want of
                                                
esprit de corps , as well as courage; and that such
                                        an abdication must do much harm, and could do but little
                                        good.
On the evening before he left, he summoned all the bedesmen into
                                        his parlour to wish them good-bye. With Bunce he had been in
                                        frequent communication since his return from London, and had
                                        been at much pains to explain to the old man the cause of
                                        his resignation, without in any way prejudicing the position
                                        of his successor. The others, also, he had seen more or less
                                        frequently; and had heard from most of them separately some
                                        expression of regret at his departure; but he had postponed
                                        his farewell till the last evening.
He now bade the maid put wine and glasses on the table; and had
                                        the chairs arranged around the room; and sent Bunce to each
                                        of the men to request they would come and say farewell to
                                        their late warden. Soon the noise of aged scuffling feet was
                                        heard upon the gravel and in the little hall, and the eleven
                                        men who were enabled to leave their rooms were
                                        assembled.
"Come in, my friends, come in," said the warden —he was still
                                        warden then. "Come in, and sit down;" and he took the hand
                                        of Abel Handy, who was the nearest to him, and led the
                                        limping grumbler  to a chair. The others
                                        followed slowly and bashfully: the infirm, the lame, and the
                                        blind; poor wretches! who had been so happy, had they but
                                        known it! Now their aged faces were covered with shame, and
                                        every kind word from their master was a coal of fire burning
                                        on their heads.
When first the news had reached them that Mr. Harding was going
                                        to leave the hospital, it had been received with a kind of
                                        triumph;—his departure was, as it were, a prelude to
                                        success. He had admitted his want of right to the money
                                        about which they were disputing; and as it did not belong to
                                        him, of course it did to them. The one hundred a-year to
                                        each of them was actually becoming a reality; and Abel Handy
                                        was a hero, and Bunce a faint-hearted sycophant, worthy
                                        neither honour nor fellowship. But other tidings soon made
                                        their way into the old men's rooms. It was first notified to
                                        them that the income abandoned by Mr. Harding would not come
                                        to them; and these accounts were confirmed by attorney
                                        Finney. They were then informed that Mr. Harding's place
                                        would be at once filled by another. That the new warden
                                        could not be a kinder man they all knew; that he would be a
                                        less friendly one most suspected; and then came the bitter
                                        information that, from the moment of Mr. Harding's  departure, the twopence a day, his own
                                        peculiar gift, must of necessity be withdrawn.
And this was to be the end of all their mighty struggle—of their
                                        fight for their rights—of their petition, and their debates
                                        and their hopes! They were to change the best of masters for
                                        a possible bad one, and to lose twopence a day each man! No;
                                        unfortunate as this was, it was not the worst, or nearly the
                                        worst, as will just now be seen.
"Sit down, sit down, my friends," said the warden. "I want to say
                                        a word to you, and to drink your healths, before I leave
                                        you. Come up here, Moody, here is a chair for you; come,
                                        Jonathan Crumple—" and by degrees he got the men to be
                                        seated. It was not surprising that they should hang back
                                        with faint hearts, having returned so much kindness with
                                        such deep ingratitude. Last of all of them came Bunce, and
                                        with sorrowful mien and slow step got into his accustomed
                                        seat near the fire-place.
When they were all in their places, Mr. Harding rose to address
                                        them; and then finding himself not quite at home on his
                                        legs, he sat down again. "My dear old friends," said he,
                                        "you all know that I am going to leave you."
There was a sort of murmur ran round the room, intended, perhaps,
                                        to express regret at his departure;  but it was
                                        but a murmur, and might have meant that or anything
                                        else.
"There has been lately some misunderstanding between us. You have
                                        thought, I believe, that you did not get all that you were
                                        entitled to, and that the funds of the hospital have not
                                        been properly disposed of. As for me, I cannot say what
                                        should be the disposition of these moneys, or how they
                                        should be managed, and I have therefore thought it best to
                                        go."
"We never wanted to drive your reverence out of it," said
                                        Handy.
"No, indeed, your reverence," said Skulpit. "We never thought it
                                        would come to this. When I signed the petition—that is, I
                                        didn't sign it, because—"
"Let his reverence speak, can't you?" said Moody.
"No," continued Mr. Harding; "I am sure you did not wish to turn
                                        me out; but I thought it best to leave you. I am not a very
                                        good hand at a lawsuit, as you may all guess; and when it
                                        seemed necessary that our ordinary quiet mode of living
                                        should be disturbed, I thought it better to go. I am neither
                                        angry nor offended with any man in the hospital."
Here Bunce uttered a kind of groan, very clearly expressive of
                                        disagreement.
"I am neither angry nor displeased with any man in the hospital,"
                                        repeated Mr. Harding, emphatically.  "If any
                                        man has been wrong—and I don't say any man has—he has erred
                                        through wrong advice. In this country all are entitled to
                                        look for their own rights, and you have done no more. As
                                        long as your interests and my interests were at variance, I
                                        could give you no counsel on this subject; but the
                                        connection between us has ceased; my income can no longer
                                        depend on your doings, and therefore, as I leave you, I
                                        venture to offer to you my advice."
The men all declared that they would from henceforth be entirely
                                        guided by Mr. Harding's opinion in their affairs.
"Some gentleman will probably take my place here very soon, and I
                                        strongly advise you to be prepared to receive him in a
                                        kindly spirit, and to raise no further question among
                                        yourselves as to the amount of his income. Were you to
                                        succeed in lessening what he has to receive, you would not
                                        increase your own allowance. The surplus would not go to
                                        you; your wants are adequately provided for, and your
                                        position could hardly be improved."
"God bless your reverence, we knows it," said Spriggs.
"It's all true, your reverence," said Skulpit; "we sees it all
                                        now."
"Yes, Mr. Harding," said Bunce, opening his  mouth
                                        for the first time; "I believe they do understand it now,
                                        now that they've driven from under the same roof with them
                                        such a master as not one of them will ever know again—now
                                        that they're like to be in sore want of a friend."
"Come, come, Bunce," said Mr. Harding, blowing his nose, and
                                        manoeuvring to wipe his eyes at the same time.
"Oh, as to that," said Handy, "we none of us never wanted to do
                                        Mr. Harding no harm; if he's going now, it's not along of
                                        us; and I don't see for what Mr. Bunce speaks up agen us
                                        that way."
"You've ruined yourselves, and you've ruined me too, and that's
                                        why," said Bunce.
"Nonsense, Bunce," said Mr. Harding; "there's nobody ruined at
                                        all. I hope you'll let me leave you all friends, I hope
                                        you'll all drink a glass of wine in friendly feeling with me
                                        and with one another. You'll have a good friend, I don't
                                        doubt, in your new warden; and if ever you want any other,
                                        why after all I'm not going so far off but that I shall
                                        sometimes see you;" and then, having finished his speech,
                                        Mr. Harding filled all the glasses, and himself handed each
                                        a glass to the men round him, and raising his own,
                                        said,—
"God bless you all! you have my heartfelt wishes 
                                        for your welfare. I hope you may live contented, and die
                                        trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thankful to Almighty
                                        God for the good things he has given you. God bless you, my
                                        friends!" and Mr. Harding drank his wine.
Another murmur, somewhat more articulate than the first, passed
                                        round the circle, and this time it was intended to imply a
                                        blessing on Mr. Harding. It had, however, but little
                                        cordiality in it. Poor old men! how could they be cordial
                                        with their sore consciences and shamed faces? how could they
                                        bid God bless him with hearty voices and a true benison,
                                        knowing, as they did, that their vile cabal had driven him
                                        from his happy home, and sent him in his old age to seek
                                        shelter under a strange roof-tree? They did their best,
                                        however; they drank their wine, and withdrew.
As they left the hall-door, Mr. Harding shook hands with each of
                                        the men, and spoke a kind word to them about their
                                        individual cases and ailments; and so they departed,
                                        answering his questions in the fewest words, and retreated
                                        to their dens, a sorrowful repentant crew.
All but Bunce, who still remained to make his own farewell.
                                        "There's poor old Bell," said Mr. Harding, "I mustn't go
                                        without saying a word to  him; come through
                                        with me, Bunce, and bring the wine with you;" and so they
                                        went through to the men's cottages, and found the old man
                                        propped up as usual in his bed.
"I've come to say good-bye to you, Bell," said Mr. Harding,
                                        speaking loud, for the old man was deaf.
"And are you going away, then, really?" asked Bell.
"Indeed I am, and I've brought you a glass of wine; so that we
                                        may part friends, as we lived, you know."
The old man took the proffered glass in his shaking hands, and
                                        drank it eagerly. "God bless you, Bell!" said Mr. Harding;
                                        "good-bye, my old friend."
"And so you're really going?" the man again asked.
"Indeed I am, Bell."
The poor old bed-ridden creature still kept Mr. Harding's hand in
                                        his own, and the warden thought that he had met with
                                        something like warmth of feeling in the one of all his
                                        subjects from whom it was the least likely to be expected,
                                        for poor old Bell had nearly outlived all human feelings.
                                        "And your reverence," said he, and then he paused, while his
                                        old palsied head shook horribly, and his shrivelled  cheeks sank lower within his jaws, and his
                                        glazy eye gleamed with a momentary light; "and, your
                                        reverence, shall we get the hundred a-year then?"
How gently did Mr. Harding try to extinguish the false hope of
                                        money which had been so wretchedly raised to disturb the
                                        quiet of the dying man! One other week and his mortal coil
                                        would be shuffled off; in one short week would God resume
                                        his soul, and set it apart for its irrevocable doom; seven
                                        more tedious days and nights of senseless inactivity, and
                                        all would be over for poor Bell in this world; and yet, with
                                        his last audible words, he was demanding his moneyed rights,
                                        and asserting himself to be the proper heir of John Hiram's
                                        bounty! Not on him, poor sinner as he was, be the load of
                                        such sin!
Mr. Harding returned to his parlour, meditating with a sick heart
                                        on what he had seen, and Bunce with him. We will not
                                        describe the parting of these two good men, for good men
                                        they were. It was in vain that the late warden endeavoured
                                        to comfort the heart of the old bedesman; poor old Bunce
                                        felt that his days of comfort were gone. The hospital had to
                                        him been a happy home, but it could be so no longer. He had
                                        had honour there, and friendship; he had recognised his
                                        master, and been recognised; all his wants, both of soul and
                                        body, had been supplied,  and he had been a
                                        happy man. He wept grievously as he parted from his friend,
                                        and the tears of an old man are bitter. "It is all over for
                                        me in this world," said he, as he gave the last squeeze to
                                        Mr. Harding's hand; "I have now to forgive those who have
                                        injured me—and to die."
And so the old man went out, and then Mr. Harding gave way to his
                                        grief, and he too wept aloud.

</div></body></text></TEI>