<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The
                                                Warden</title><author>Trollope, Anthony (1815-1882)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1855</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAP. XI. IPHIGENIA.
When Eleanor laid her head on her pillow that night, her
                                        mind was anxiously intent on some plan by which she might
                                        extricate her father from his misery; and, in her
                                        warm-hearted enthusiasm, self-sacrifice was decided on as
                                        the means to be adopted. Was not so good an Agamemnon worthy
                                        of an Iphigenia? She would herself personally implore John
                                        Bold to desist from his undertaking; she would explain to
                                        him her father's sorrows, the cruel misery of his position;
                                        she would tell him how her father would die if he were thus
                                        dragged before the public and exposed to such unmerited
                                        ignominy; she would appeal to his old friendship, to his
                                        generosity, to his manliness, to his mercy; if need were she
                                        would kneel to him for the favour she would ask; but before
                                        she did this, the idea of love must be banished. There must
                                        be no bargain in the matter. To his mercy, to his
                                        generosity, she could appeal; but as a pure maiden, hitherto
                                        even unsolicited, she could not  appeal to his
                                        love, nor under such circumstances could she allow him to do
                                        so. Of course when so provoked, he would declare his
                                        passion; that was to be expected; there had been enough
                                        between them to make such a fact sure; but it was equally
                                        certain that he must be rejected. She could not be
                                        understood as saying, Make my father free and I am the
                                        reward. There would be no sacrifice in that—not so had
                                        Jephthah's daughter saved her father—not so could she show
                                        to that kindest, dearest of parents how much she was able to
                                        bear for his good. No; to one resolve must her whole soul be
                                        bound; and so resolving, she felt that she could make her
                                        great request to Bold with as much self-assured confidence
                                        as she could have done to his grandfather.
And now I own I have fears for my heroine: not as to the upshot
                                        of her mission—not in the least as to that; as to the full
                                        success of her generous scheme, and the ultimate result of
                                        such a project, no one conversant with human nature and
                                        novels can have a doubt; but as to the amount of sympathy
                                        she may receive from those of her own sex. Girls below
                                        twenty and old ladies above sixty will do her justice; for
                                        in the female heart the soft springs of sweet romance reopen
                                        after many years, and again gush out with waters pure as in
                                        earlier days, and greatly  refresh the path
                                        that leads downwards to the grave. But I fear that the
                                        majority of those between these two eras will not approve of
                                        Eleanor's plan. I fear that unmarried ladies of thirty-five
                                        will declare that there can be no probability of so absurd a
                                        project being carried through; that young women on their
                                        knees before their lovers are sure to get kissed, and that
                                        they would not put themselves in such a position did they
                                        not expect it; that Eleanor is going to Bold, only because
                                        circumstances prevent Bold from coming to her; that she is
                                        certainly a little fool, or a little schemer, but that in
                                        all probability she is thinking a good deal more about
                                        herself than her father.
Dear ladies, you are right as to your appreciation of the
                                        circumstances, but very wrong as to Miss Harding's
                                        character. Miss Harding was much younger than you are, and
                                        could not, therefore, know, as you may do, to what dangers
                                        such an encounter might expose her. She may get kissed; I
                                        think it very probable that she will; but I give my solemn
                                        word and positive assurance, that the remotest idea of such
                                        a catastrophe never occurred to her, as she made the great
                                        resolve now alluded to.
And then she slept; and then she rose refreshed, and met her
                                        father with her kindest embrace and  most
                                        loving smiles; and on the whole their breakfast was by no
                                        means so triste as had been their dinner the day before; and
                                        then, making some excuse to her father for so soon leaving
                                        him, she started on the commencement of her operations.
She knew that John Bold was in London, and that, therefore, the
                                        scene itself could not be enacted to-day; but she also knew
                                        that he was soon to be home, probably on the next day, and
                                        it was necessary that some little plan for meeting him
                                        should be concerted with his sister Mary. When she got up to
                                        the house, she went as usual into the morning sitting-room,
                                        and was startled by perceiving, by a stick, a great coat,
                                        and sundry parcels which were lying about, that Bold must
                                        already have returned.
"John has come back so suddenly," said Mary, coming into the
                                        room; "he has been travelling all night."
"Then I'll come up again some other time," said Eleanor, about to
                                        beat a retreat in her sudden dismay.
"He's out now, and will be for the next two hours," said the
                                        other; "he's with that horrid Finney; he only came to see
                                        him, and he returns by the mail train to-night."
Returns by the mail train to-night, thought Eleanor 
                                        to herself, as she strove to screw up her courage— away
                                        again to-night—then it must be now or never; and she again
                                        sat down, having risen to go.
She wished the ordeal could have been postponed: she had fully
                                        made up her mind to do the deed, but she had not made up her
                                        mind to do it this very day; and now she felt ill at ease,
                                        astray, and in difficulty.
"Mary," she began, "I must see your brother before he goes
                                        back."
"Oh yes, of course," said the other; "I know he'll be delighted
                                        to see you;" and she tried to treat it as a matter of
                                        course, but she was not the less surprised; for Mary and
                                        Eleanor had daily talked over John Bold and his conduct, and
                                        his love, and Mary would insist on calling Eleanor her
                                        sister, and would scold her for not calling Bold by his
                                        christian name; and Eleanor would half confess her love, but
                                        like a modest maiden would protest against such
                                        familiarities even with the name of her lover: and so they
                                        talked hour after hour, and Mary Bold, who was much the
                                        elder, looked forward with happy confidence to the day when
                                        Eleanor would not be ashamed to call her, her sister. She
                                        was, however, fully sure that just at present Eleanor would
                                        be much more likely to avoid her brother than to seek
                                        him.

"Mary, I must see your brother, now, to-day, and beg from him a
                                        great favour," and she spoke with a solemn air, not at all
                                        usual to her; and then she went on, and opened to her friend
                                        all her plan, her well-weighed scheme for saving her father
                                        from a sorrow which would, she said, if it lasted, bring him
                                        to his grave. "But Mary," she continued, "you must now, you
                                        know, cease any joking about me and Mr. Bold; you must now
                                        say no more about that; I am not ashamed to beg this favour
                                        from your brother, but when I have done so, there can never
                                        be anything further between us;" and this she said with a
                                        staid and solemn air, quite worthy of Jephthah's daughter or
                                        of Iphigenia either.
It was quite clear that Mary Bold did not follow the argument:
                                        that Eleanor Harding should appeal, on behalf of her father,
                                        to Bold's better feelings, seemed to Mary quite natural; it
                                        seemed quite natural that he should relent, overcome by such
                                        filial tears, and by so much beauty; but, to her thinking,
                                        it was at any rate equally natural, that having relented,
                                        John should put his arm round his mistress's waist, and say,
                                        'Now having settled that, let us be man and wife, and all
                                        will end happily!' Why him good nature should not be
                                        rewarded, when such reward would operate to the disadvantage
                                        of none,  Mary, who had more sense than
                                        romance, could not understand; and she said as much.
Eleanor, however, was firm, and made quite an eloquent speech to
                                        support her own view of the question: she could not
                                        condescend, she said, to ask such a favour on any other
                                        terms than those proposed. Mary might, perhaps, think her
                                        high-flown, but she had her own ideas, and she could not
                                        submit to sacrifice her self-respect.
"But I am sure you love him,—don't you?" pleaded Mary; "and I am
                                        sure he loves you better than anything in the world."
Eleanor was going to make another speech, but a tear came to each
                                        eye, and she could not; so she pretended to blow her nose,
                                        and walked to the window, and made a little inward call on
                                        her own courage, and finding herself somewhat sustained,
                                        said sententiously, —"Mary, this is nonsense."
"But you do love him," said Mary, who had followed her friend to
                                        the window, and now spoke with her arms close wound round
                                        the other's waist. "You do love him with all your heart,—you
                                        know you do; I defy you to deny it."
"I" commenced Eleanor, turning sharply round to refute the
                                        charge; but the intended falsehood stuck in her throat, and
                                        never came to utterance.  She could not deny
                                        her love, so she took plentifully to tears, and leant upon
                                        her friend's bosom and sobbed there, and protested that,
                                        love or no love, it would make no difference in her resolve,
                                        and called Mary, a thousand times, the most cruel of girls,
                                        and swore her to secrecy by a hundred oaths, and ended by
                                        declaring that the girl who could betray her friend's love,
                                        even to a brother, would be as black a traitor as a soldier
                                        in a garrison who should open the city gates to the enemy.
                                        While they were yet discussing the matter, Bold returned,
                                        and Eleanor was forced into sudden action: she had either to
                                        accomplish or abandon her plan; and having slipped into her
                                        friend's bedroom, as the gentleman closed the hall door, she
                                        washed the marks of tears from her eyes, and resolved within
                                        herself to go through with it. "Tell him I am here," said
                                        she, "and coming in; and mind, whatever you do, don't leave
                                        us." So Mary informed her brother, with a somewhat sombre
                                        air, that Miss Harding was in the next room, and was coming
                                        to speak to him.
Eleanor was certainly thinking more of her father than herself,
                                        as she arranged her hair before the glass, and removed the
                                        traces of sorrow from her face, and yet I should be untrue
                                        if I said that she was not anxious to appear well before her
                                        lover: why else  was she so sedulous with that
                                        stubborn curl that would rebel against her hand, and why did
                                        she smooth so eagerly her ruffled ribands? why else did she
                                        damp her eyes to dispel the redness, and bite her pretty
                                        lips to bring back the colour? Of course she was anxious to
                                        look her best, for she was but a mortal angel after all. But
                                        had she been immortal, had she flitted back to the sitting
                                        room on a cherub's wings, she could not have had a more
                                        faithful heart, or a truer wish to save her father at any
                                        cost to herself.
John Bold had not met her since the day when she left him in
                                        dudgeon in the cathedral close. Since that his whole time
                                        had been occupied in promoting the cause against her father,
                                        and not unsuccessfully. He had often thought of her, and
                                        turned over in his mind a hundred schemes for showing her
                                        how disinterested was his love. He would write to her and
                                        beseech her not to allow the performance of a public duty to
                                        injure him in her estimation; he would write to Mr. Harding,
                                        explain all his views, and boldly claim the warden's
                                        daughter, urging that the untoward circumstances between
                                        them need be no bar to their ancient friendship, or to a
                                        closer tie; he would throw himself on his knees before his
                                        mistress; he would wait and marry the daughter when the
                                        father had lost his home and his income; he would  give up the lawsuit and go to Australia,
                                        with her of course, leaving the Jupiter and Mr. Finney to
                                        complete the case between them. Sometimes as he woke in the
                                        morning fevered and impatient, he would blow out his brains
                                        and have done with all his cares—but this idea was generally
                                        consequent on an imprudent supper enjoyed in company with
                                        Tom Towers.
How beautiful Eleanor appeared to him as she slowly walked into
                                        the room! Not for nothing had all those little cares been
                                        taken. Though her sister, the archdeacon's wife, had spoken
                                        slightingly of her charms, Eleanor was very beautiful when
                                        seen aright. Hers was not of those impassive faces, which
                                        have the beauty of a marble bust; finely chiselled features,
                                        perfect in every line, true to the rules of symmetry, as
                                        lovely to a stranger as to a friend, unvarying unless in
                                        sickness, or as age affects them. She had no startling
                                        brilliancy of beauty, no pearly whiteness, no radiant
                                        carnation: she had not the majestic contour that rivets
                                        attention, demands instant wonder, and then disappoints by
                                        the coldness of its charms. You might pass Eleanor Harding
                                        in the street without notice, but you could hardly pass an
                                        evening with her and not lose your heart.
She had never appeared more lovely to her lover 
                                        than she now did. Her face was animated though it was
                                        serious, and her full dark lustrous eyes shone with anxious
                                        energy; her hand trembled as she took his, and she could
                                        hardly pronounce his name, when she addressed him. Bold
                                        wished with all his heart that the Australian scheme was in
                                        the act of realisation, and that he and Eleanor were away
                                        together, never to hear further of the lawsuit.
He began to talk, asked after her health—said something about
                                        London being very stupid, and more about Barchester being
                                        very pleasant: declared the weather to be very hot, and then
                                        inquired after Mr. Harding.
"My father is not very well," said Eleanor.
John Bold was very sorry, so sorry: he hoped it was nothing
                                        serious, and put on the unmeaningly solemn face, which
                                        people usually use on such occasions.
"I especially want to speak to you about my father, Mr. Bold;
                                        indeed, I am now here on purpose to do so. Papa is very
                                        unhappy, very unhappy indeed, about this affair of the
                                        hospital: you would pity him, Mr. Bold, if you could see how
                                        wretched it has made him."
"Oh Miss Harding!"
"Indeed you would,—any one would pity him:  but a
                                        friend, an old friend as you are—indeed you would. He is an
                                        altered man; his cheerfulness has all gone, and his sweet
                                        temper, and his kind happy tone of voice; you would hardly
                                        know him if you saw him, Mr. Bold, he is so much altered;
                                        and— and—if this goes on, he will die." Here Eleanor had
                                        recourse to her handkerchief, and so also had her auditors;
                                        but she plucked up her courage and went on with her tale.
                                        "He will break his heart, and die. I am sure, Mr. Bold, it
                                        was not you who wrote those cruel things in the
                                        newspaper—"
John Bold eagerly protested that it was not, but his heart smote
                                        him as to his intimate alliance with Tom Towers.
"No, I am sure it was not; and papa has not for a moment thought
                                        so; you would not be so cruel— but it has nearly killed him.
                                        Papa cannot bear to think that people should so speak of
                                        him, and that every body should hear him so spoken of:—they
                                        have called him avaricious, and dishonest, and they say he
                                        is robbing the old men, and taking the money of the hospital
                                        for nothing."
"I have never said so, Miss Harding. I—"
"No," continued Eleanor, interrupting him, for she was now in the
                                        full flood tide of her eloquence; "no, I am sure you have
                                        not, but others have said  so; and if this goes
                                        on, if such things are written again, it will kill papa. Oh!
                                        Mr. Bold, if you only knew the state he is in! Now papa does
                                        not care much about money."
Both her auditors, brother and sister, assented to this, and
                                        declared on their own knowledge that no man lived less
                                        addicted to filthy lucre than the warden.
"Oh! it's so kind of you to say so, Mary, and of you too, Mr.
                                        Bold. I couldn't bear that people should think unjustly of
                                        papa. Do you know he would give up the hospital altogether,
                                        only he cannot. The archdeacon says it would be cowardly,
                                        and that he would be deserting his order, and injuring the
                                        church. Whatever may happen, papa will not do that: he would
                                        leave the place tomorrow willingly, and give up his house,
                                        and the income and all, if the archdeacon—" Eleanor was
                                        going to say "would let him," but she stopped herself before
                                        she had compromised her father's dignity; and giving a long
                                        sigh, she added—"Oh, I do so wish he would."
"No one who knows Mr. Harding personally, accuses him for a
                                        moment," said Bold.
"It is he that has to bear the punishment; it is he that
                                        suffers," said Eleanor; "and what for? what has  he done wrong? how has he deserved this persecution? he
                                        that never had an unkind thought in his life, he that never
                                        said an unkind word!" and here she broke down, and the
                                        violence of her sobs stopped her utterance.
Bold, for the fifth or sixth time, declared that neither he nor
                                        any of his friends imputed any blame personally to Mr.
                                        Harding.
"Then why should he be persecuted?" ejaculated Eleanor through
                                        her tears, forgetting in her eagerness that her intention
                                        had been to humble herself as a suppliant before John
                                        Bold—"why should he be singled out for scorn and disgrace?
                                        why should he be made so wretched? Oh! Mr. Bold,"—and she
                                        turned towards him as though the kneeling scene were about
                                        to be commenced—"oh! Mr. Bold, why did you begin all this?
                                        you whom we all so—so—valued!"
To speak the truth, the reformer's punishment was certainly come
                                        upon him, for his present plight was not enviable; he had
                                        nothing for it but to excuse himself by platitudes about
                                        public duty, which it is by no means worth while to repeat,
                                        and to reiterate his eulogy on Mr. Harding's character. His
                                        position was certainly a cruel one: had any gentlemen called
                                        upon him on behalf of Mr. Harding he could of 
                                        course have declined to enter upon the subject; but how
                                        could he do so with a beautiful girl, with the daughter of
                                        the man whom he had injured, with his own love?
In the meantime Eleanor recollected herself, and again summoned
                                        up her energies.
"Mr. Bold," said she, "I have come here to implore you to abandon
                                        this proceeding."
He stood up from his seat, and looked beyond measure
                                        distressed.
"To implore you to abandon it, to implore you to spare my father,
                                        to spare either his life or his reason, for one or the other
                                        will pay the forfeit if this goes on. I know how much I am
                                        asking, and how little right I have to ask anything; but I
                                        think you will listen to me as it is for my father. Oh, Mr.
                                        Bold, pray, pray do this for us—pray do not drive to
                                        distraction a man who has loved you so well."
She did not absolutely kneel to him, but she followed him as he
                                        moved from his chair, and laid her soft hands imploringly
                                        upon his arm. Ah! at any other time how exquisitely valuable
                                        would have been that touch! but now he was distraught,
                                        dumbfounded, and unmanned. What could he say to that sweet
                                        suppliant; how explain to her that the matter now was
                                        probably beyond his control; how  tell her that
                                        he could not quell the storm which he had raised?
"Surely, surely, John, you cannot refuse her," said his
                                        sister.
"I would give her my soul," said he, "if it would serve her."
"Oh, Mr. Bold," said Eleanor, "do not speak so; I ask nothing for
                                        myself; and what I ask for my father, it cannot harm you to
                                        grant."
"I would give her my soul, if it would serve her," said Bold,
                                        still addressing his sister; "everything I have is hers, if
                                        she will accept it; my house, my heart, my all; every hope
                                        of my breast is centred in her: her smiles are sweeter to me
                                        than the sun, and when I see her in sorrow as she now is,
                                        every nerve in my body suffers. No man can love better than
                                        I love her."
"No, no, no," ejaculated Eleanor, "there can be no talk of love
                                        between us; will you protect my father from the evil you
                                        have brought upon him?"
"Oh, Eleanor, I will do anything; let me tell you how I love
                                        you!"
"No, no, no," she almost screamed; "this is unmanly of you, Mr.
                                        Bold. Will you, will you, will you leave my father to die in
                                        peace in his quiet home?" and seizing him by his arm and
                                        hand, she  followed him across the room towards
                                        the door. "I will not leave you till you promise me; I'll
                                        cling to you in the street; I'll kneel to you before all the
                                        people. You shall promise me this, you shall promise me
                                        this, you shall—" And she clung to him with fixed tenacity,
                                        and reiterated her resolve with hysterical passion.
"Speak to her, John; answer her," said Mary, bewildered by the
                                        unexpected vehemence of Eleanor's manner; "you cannot have
                                        the cruelty to refuse her."
"Promise me, promise me," said Eleanor;"say that my father is
                                        safe—one word will do. I know how true you are; say one
                                        word, and I will let you go."
She still held him, and looked eagerly into his face, with her
                                        hair dishevelled, and her eyes all bloodshot. She had no
                                        thought now of herself, no care now for her appearance, and
                                        yet he thought he had never seen her half so lovely; he was
                                        amazed at the intensity of her beauty, and could hardly
                                        believe that it was she whom he had dared to love. "Promise
                                        me," said she; "I will not leave you till you have promised
                                        me."
"I will," said he at length, "I do—all I can do, I will do."
"Then may God Almighty bless you for ever  and
                                        ever!" said Eleanor; and falling on her knees with her face
                                        on Mary's lap, she wept and sobbed like a child: her
                                        strength had carried her through her allotted task, but now
                                        it was well nigh exhausted.
In a while she was partly recovered, and got up to go, and would
                                        have gone, had not Bold made her understand that it was
                                        necessary for him to explain to her how far it was in his
                                        power to put an end to the proceedings which had been taken
                                        against Mr. Harding. Had he spoken on any other subject, she
                                        would have vanished, but on that she was bound to hear him;
                                        and now the danger of her position commenced. While she had
                                        an active part to play, while she clung to him as a
                                        suppliant, it was easy enough for her to reject his
                                        proffered love, and cast from her his caressing words; but
                                        now—now that he had yielded, and was talking to her calmly
                                        and kindly as to her father's welfare, it was hard enough
                                        for her to do so. Then Mary Bold assisted her, but now she
                                        was quite on her brother's side. Mary said but little, but
                                        every word she did say gave some direct and deadly blow. The
                                        first thing she did was to make room for her brother between
                                        herself and Eleanor on the sofa: as the sofa was full large
                                        for three, Eleanor could not resent this, nor could she show
                                        suspicion by taking another seat; but she felt 
                                        it to be a most unkind proceeding. And then Mary would talk
                                        as though they three were joined in some close peculiar bond
                                        together; as though they were in future always to wish
                                        together, contrive together, and act together; and Eleanor
                                        could not gainsay this; she could not make another speech,
                                        and say, "Mr. Bold and I are mere strangers, Mary, and are
                                        always to remain so!"
He explained to her that, though undoubtedly the proceeding
                                        against the hospital had commenced solely with himself, many
                                        others were now interested in the matter, some of whom were
                                        much more influential than himself: that it was to him
                                        alone, however, that the lawyers looked for instruction as
                                        to their doings, and, more important still, for the payment
                                        of their bills; and he promised that he would at once give
                                        them notice that it was his intention to abandon the cause.
                                        He thought, he said, that it was not probable that any
                                        active steps would be taken after he had seceded from the
                                        matter, though it was possible that some passing allusion
                                        might still be made to the hospital in the daily Jupiter. He
                                        promised, however, that he would use his best influence to
                                        prevent any further personal allusion being made to Mr.
                                        Harding. He then suggested that he would on that afternoon
                                        ride over himself to Dr. Grantly, and  inform
                                        him of his altered intentions on the subject, and with this
                                        view, he postponed his immediate return to London.
This was all very pleasant, and Eleanor did enjoy a sort of
                                        triumph in the feeling that she had attained the object for
                                        which she had sought this interview; but still the part of
                                        Iphigenia was to be played out. The gods had heard her
                                        prayer, granted her request, and were they not to have their
                                        promised sacrifice? Eleanor was not a girl to defraud them
                                        wilfully; so, as soon as she decently could, she got up for
                                        her bonnet.
"Are you going so soon?" said Bold, who half-an-hour since would
                                        have given a hundred pounds that he was in London, and she
                                        still at Barchester.
"Oh yes!" said she. "I am so much obliged to you; papa will feel
                                        this to be so kind" (she did not, quite appreciate all her
                                        father's feelings); "of course I must tell him, and I will
                                        say that you will see the archdeacon."
"But may I not say one word for myself?" said Bold.
"I'll fetch you your bonnet, Eleanor," said Mary, in the act of
                                        leaving the room.
"Mary, Mary," said she, getting up and catching her by her dress,
                                        "don't go, I'll get my bonnet myself;"  but
                                        Mary, the traitress, stood fast by the door, and permitted
                                        no such retreat. Poor Iphigenia!
And with a volley of impassioned love, John Bold poured forth the
                                        feelings of his heart, swearing, as men do, some truths and
                                        many falsehoods; and Eleanor repeated with every shade of
                                        vehemence the "No, no, no," which had had a short time since
                                        so much effect; but now, alas! its strength was gone. Let
                                        her be never so vehement, her vehemence was not respected;
                                        all her "No, no, no's" were met with counter asseverations,
                                        and at last were overpowered. The ground was cut from under
                                        her on every side: she was pressed to say whether her father
                                        would object; whether she herself had any aversion
                                        (aversion! God help her, poor girl! the word nearly made her
                                        jump into his arms); any other preference (this she loudly
                                        disclaimed); whether it was impossible that she should love
                                        him (Eleanor could not say that it was impossible): and so
                                        at last, all her defences demolished, all her maiden
                                        barriers swept away, she capitulated, or rather marched out
                                        with the honours of war, vanquished evidently, palpably
                                        vanquished, but still not reduced to the necessity of
                                        confessing it.
And so the altar on the shore of the modern Aulis reeked with no
                                        sacrifice.

</div></body></text></TEI>