<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="163">
CHAPTER CLXII.   THE BEQUEST.
Two days after the suicide of Lady Cecilia Harborough,—an event which created a profound
      sensation in the fashionable world, and plunged the Tremordyn family into mourning,—Richard
      Markham was a passenger in a coach that passed through Hounslow.
At this town he alighted, and inquired the way to the residence of Mr. Bennet, a small
      farmer in the neighbourhood.
A guide was speedily procured at the inn; and after a pleasant walk of about three miles,
      across a
      country which already bore signs of the genial influence of an early spring,
      Richard found himself at the gate of a comfortable-looking farm-house.
He dismissed his guide with a gratuity, and was shortly admitted by a buxom servant-girl
      into a neat little parlour, where he was presently joined by Katherine.
The young maiden was rejoiced to see her benefactor; and tears started into her eyes, though
      her lips were wreathed in smiles;—but they were tears of pleasure and gratitude.
"This is kind of you, Mr. Markham," she said, as he shook her hand with friendly warmth.
"I am come to see you upon important business, Katherine," observed Richard. "But first let
      me inquire after the good people with whom you reside?"
"I am sorry to say," answered Katherine, "that Mrs. Bennet experienced a relapse after her
      return from London; and she is not able to leave her chamber. She is, however, much better.
      Her husband is a kind-hearted, good man, and he behaves like a father to me. He is now
      occupied with the business of his farm, but will be in presently."
"And now, Katherine, listen to the tidings which I have to communicate," said Markham. "Have
      you received any news from London within the last day or two?"
"No—not a word," returned Katherine, already alarmed lest some new misfortune was about to
      be announced to her.
"Compose yourself," said Richard; "the news that I have for you are good. But first I must
      inform you that your late master, Mr. Reginald Tracy, is no more."
"Dead!" exclaimed Katherine.
"He put a period to his own existence," continued Markham; "but not before he made you all
      the amends in his power for the deep injury which his own guilt entailed upon you."
"Then he confessed his crime, and thus established my innocence beyond all doubt?" said
      Katherine.
"And he has bequeathed to you his whole fortune, with the exception of a small legacy to
      Mrs. Bennet, whom his guilt deprived of a sister," added our hero.
"Oh! then he died penitent!" exclaimed Katherine, weeping—for her goodness of heart prompted
      her to shed tears even for one who had involved her in such a labyrinth of misery as that from
      which she had only so recently been extricated.
"He died by his own hands," said Richard; "and the world will not generally admit that such
      an act can be consonant with sincere penitence. That he attempted to make his peace with
      heaven ere he rushed into the presence of the Almighty, let us hope:—that he did all he could
      to recompense those whom his crime had injured, is apparent. But this letter will probably
      tell you more on that head."
Richard handed to Katherine a letter, as he uttered these words.
It was addressed, "Miss Katherine Wilmot."
With a trembling hand the young girl opened it; and with tearful eyes she read the following
      words:—
"To you, Katherine Wilmot, a man about to appear before his Maker appeals for pardon. That
      man is deeply imbued with a sense of the injury—the almost irreparable injury which his
      enormous guilt caused you to sustain. But in confessing that this guilt was all and solely his
      own,—in proclaiming your complete innocence,—and in offering you the means of henceforth
      enjoying independence, and fulfilling the dictates of your charitable disposition,—that great
      criminal entertains a hope that you will accord him your forgiveness, and that you will
      appreciate his anxiety to do you justice in his last moments. My solicitor is already
      acquainted with my intentions; and he will faithfully execute my wishes. This letter will be
      forwarded to him, to be delivered to you, through your benefactor—that noble-hearted young
      man, Mr. Richard Markham. The bulk of my fortune, amounting to eighteen thousand pounds, I
      have made over to my solicitor in trust for yourself, and under certain conditions which I
      have devised exclusively for your benefit. The sum of five hundred pounds I have, in addition,
      bequeathed to Rachel Bennet, with the hope that she will extend her pardon also to
      the man who deprived her of an affectionate sister. This letter is written in a hurried
      manner, and under circumstances whose appalling nature you may well conceive. May heaven bless
      you! Refuse not to pray for the soul of
"REGINALD TRACY."
Katherine perused this letter, and then handed it to Richard Markham.
While he read it, the young maiden prayed inwardly but sincerely for the eternal welfare of
      him whose course had been dazzling like a meteor, but had terminated in a cloud of appalling
      blackness.
"Those conditions, to which the unhappy man alluded, I can explain to you," said Richard,
      after a long interval of silence, during which he allowed Katherine to compose her thoughts.
      "This letter was placed in the hands of Mr. Tracy's solicitor, by the governor of Newgate, the
      day before yesterday. The lawyer immediately wrote to me, being unacquainted with your
      address. I saw him yesterday afternoon; and he gave me the letter to convey to you, entrusting
      me at the same time with the duty of communicating to you this last act of Reginald Tracy. Mr.
      Wharton acquainted me with the conditions which Mr. Tracy had named. These are that you shall
      enjoy the interest of the money until you attain the age of twenty-one, when the capital shall
      be placed at your whole and sole disposal; but should you marry previous to that period, then
      the capital may also be transferred to your name. And now I must touch upon a more delicate
      point—inasmuch as it alludes to myself. Mr. Tracy was pleased to place such confidence in me,
      as to have stipulated that should you contract any marriage previous to the attainment of the
      age of twenty-one, without my approval of the individual on whom you may settle your
      affections, you will then forfeit all right and title to the fortune, which is in that case to
      be devoted to purposes of charity specified in the instructions given by Mr. Tracy to his
      solicitor."
"Oh! I should never think of taking any step—however trivial, or however important—without
      consulting you, as my benefactor—my saviour!" exclaimed Katherine.
"You are a good and a grateful girl, Katherine," said Richard; "and never for a moment did I
      mistake your excellent heart—never did I lose my confidence in your discretion and
      virtue."
"No—for when all the world deserted me," said the maiden, "you befriended me!"
"I have yet other matters of business to consult you upon," continued Markham. "Yesterday
      evening your uncle called upon me. Never—never have I seen such an alteration so speedily
      wrought in any living being! He said that certain representations which I had made to him at
      the tavern in the
      Old Bailey, after you had departed with Mrs. Bennet, had induced him to reflect
      more seriously upon the course of life which he had been for years pursuing."
"Oh! these news are welcome—welcome indeed!" ejaculated Katherine, clasping her hands
      together in token of gratitude.
"I communicated to him your good fortune, Katherine," proceeded Markham; "and he wept like a
      child."
"Poor uncle! His heart was not altogether closed against me!" murmured Katherine.
"I desired him to call upon me to-morrow, and I assured him that in the meantime I would
      devise some project by which he should be enabled to earn a livelihood whereof he need not be
      ashamed."
"You are not content with being my benefactor, Mr. Markham: you intend to make my relatives
      adore your name!" cried Katherine, her heart glowing with gratitude towards our hero.
"I now intend that you shall be the means of doing good, Katherine," said Richard,
      with a smile.
"Oh! tell me how!" exclaimed the amiable girl, joyfully.
"You shall draw upon the first year's interest of your fortune, for a sufficient sum to
      enable your uncle to retire to some distant town, where, under another name, he may commence a
      business at whose nature he will not be forced to blush."
"Oh! that proposal is indeed a source of indescribable happiness to me," said Katherine.
"Then I will carry the plan into effect to-morrow," continued Richard. "Your uncle and
      cousin shall both visit you here, when they leave London."
"Poor John!" said Katherine. "Do you think that his father——"
"Will treat him better in future?" added Markham, seeing that the maiden hesitated. "Yes: I
      will answer for it! A complete change has taken place in your uncle: he is another man."
"He contemplated your benevolence, and he could not do otherwise than be struck by the
      example," said Kate.
"I asked him if he desired you to live with him in future; and he replied, 'Not for
       worlds!' He then continued to say that dwell where he might, conceal his name how he
      would, there would be danger of his ancient calling transpiring; and he would not incur the
      chance of involving you in the disgrace that might ensue. This consideration on his part
      speaks volumes in favour of that change which has been effected within him."
"The tidings you have brought me concerning my uncle, Mr. Markham," said Katherine, "far
      outweigh in my estimation the news of my good fortune."
"Your uncle and your cousin will yet be happy—no doubt," observed Richard. "In reference to
      yourself, what course would you like to adopt? Would you wish me to seek some respectable and
      worthy family in London, with whom you can take up your abode in entire independence?
      or——"
"Oh! no—not London!" exclaimed Katherine, recoiling from the name in horror.
"My counsel is that you remain here—in this seclusion,—at least for the present," said
      Richard. "The tranquillity of this rural dwelling—the charms of the country—the
      unsophisticated manners of these good people, will restore your mind to its former composure,
      after all you have passed through."
"This advice I have every inclination to follow," said Katherine; "and even were I otherwise
      disposed—which I could not be—your counsel would at once decide me."
"Remember, Katherine," resumed Markham, "I do not wish you to pass the best portion of your
      youth in this retirement. With your fortune and brilliant prospect, such a proceeding were
      unnatural—absurd. I only feel desirous that for a short time you should remain afar from
      society—until recent events shall be forgotten, and until your own mind shall become calm and
      relieved from the excitement which past misfortunes have been so painfully calculated to
      produce."
"I will remain here until you tell me that it is good for me to go elsewhere," said
      Katherine.
At this moment an old man, dressed in a rustic garb, but with a good-natured countenance and
      venerable white hair, entered the room.
This was the farmer himself.
Katherine introduced Richard to him as her benefactor; and the old man shook hands with our
      hero in a cordial manner, saying at the same time, "By all I have heard Miss Kate tell of you,
      sir, you must be an honour to any house, whether rich or poor, that you condescend to
      visit."
Richard thanked the good-natured rustic for the well-meant compliment, and then communicated
      to him the fact that his wife was entitled to a legacy of five hundred pounds, which would be
      paid to her order in the course of a few days.
The old man was overjoyed at these tidings, although his countenance partially fell when he
      heard the source whence the bequest emanated; but Richard convinced him that it would be
      unwise and absurd to refuse it.
Mr. Bennet hastened up-stairs to communicate the news to his wife.
While he was absent, the farmer's servant-girl entered to spread the table for the
      afternoon's repast.
On the return of the old man to the room, the dinner was served up; and our hero sat down to
      table with the farmer and Katherine.
A happy meal was that; and in the pure felicity which Katherine now enjoyed, Richard beheld
      to a considerable extent the results of his own goodness. How amply did the spectacle of that
      young creature's happiness reward him for all that he had done in her behalf!
It was four o'clock in the afternoon when our hero took his leave of the old farmer and Miss
      Wilmot, in order to retrace his steps to Hounslow.
</div></body></text></TEI>