<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="255">
CHAPTER CCLIV.   FURTHER MISFORTUNES.
Greenwood had been insulted by those wealthy citizens who once considered themselves
      honoured by his notice; and this he might have borne, because he was man of the world
      enough to know that poverty is a crime in the eyes of plodding, money-making persons.
But to be made the jest of a couple of despicable adventurers—to be jeered at by two knaves
      for whom he entertained the most sovereign contempt, because their rascalities had been
      conducted on a scale of mean swindling rather than in the colourable guise of financial
      enterprise,—to be laughed at and mocked by such men as those, because they happened to have
      good clothes upon their backs,—Oh! this was a crushing—an intolerable insult!
The unhappy Greenwood felt it most keenly: he writhed beneath the sharp lash of that bitter
      sarcasm which had been hurled against his shabby appearance;—he groaned under the scourge of
      those contemptuous scoffs!
Sanguine as his disposition naturally was,—confident as he ever felt in his own talents for
      intrigue and scheming,—he was now suddenly cast down; and hope fled from his soul.
Not for worlds would he have risked the chance of receiving farther insult that day, by
      calling at the counting-house of another capitalist!
And now he fled from the City with a species of loathing,—as much depressed by
      disappointment as he had been elated by hope when he entered it a few hours previously.
He crossed Blackfriars' Bridge, turned into Holland Street, and thence entered John Street,
      where he knocked timidly at the door of a house of very mean appearance.
A stout, vulgar-looking woman, with carrotty hair, tangled as a mat, overshadowing a red and
      bloated face, thrust her head out of the window on the first floor.
"Well?" she cried, in an impertinent tone.
"Will you have the kindness to let me in, Mrs. Brown?" said Greenwood, calling to his aid
      all that blandness of manner which had once served him us a powerful auxiliary in his days of
      extensive intrigue.
"That depends," was the abrupt reply. "Have you brought any money with you?"
"Mrs. Brown, I cannot explain myself in the street," said the unhappy man, who saw that a
      storm was impending. "Please to let me in—and——"
"Come—none of that gammon!" shouted the landlady of the house, for the behoof of all her
      neighbours who were lounging at their doors. "Have you brought me one pound seventeen and
      sixpence—yes or no? 'Cos, if you haven't, I shall just put up a bill to let my lodgings—and
      you may go about your business."
"But, Mrs. Brown——"
"Don't Mrs. Brown me!" interrupted the woman, hanging half way out of the window,
      and
      gesticulating violently. "It's my opinion as you wants to do me brown—and that's
      all about it."
"What is it, dear Mrs. Brown?" inquired a woman, with a child in her arms, stepping from the
      door of the adjoining dwelling to the kerb-stone, and looking up at the window.
"What is it?" vociferated Greenwood's landlady, who only required such a question as the one
      just put to her in order to work herself into a towering passion: "what is it? Why, would you
      believe it, Mrs. Sugden, that this here swindling feller as tries to look so much like the
      gentleman, but isn't nothink more than a Swell-Mob's-man—and that was my rale opinion
      of him all along—comes here, as you know, Mrs. Sugden, and hires my one-pair back for seven
      and sixpence a-week——"
"Shameful!" cried Mrs. Sugden, darting a look of fierce indignation upon the miserable
      Greenwood.
"So it were, ma'am," continued Mrs. Brown, now literally foaming at the mouth: "and though
      he had his clean pair of calico sheets every fortnight and a linen piller-case which my
      husband took out o' pawn on purpose to make him comfortable——".
"Dis-graceful!" ejaculated Mrs. Sugden, casting up her eyes to heaven, as if she
      could not have thought the world capable of such an atrocity.
"And then arter all, that feller there runs up one pound seventeen and six in no time—going
      tick even for the blacking of his boots and his lucifers——"
Greenwood stayed to hear no more: he perceived that all hope of obtaining admission to his
      lodging was useless; and he accordingly stole off, followed by the abuse of Mrs. Brown, the
      opprobrious epithets of Mrs. Sugden, and the scoffs of half-a-dozen of the neighbours.
It was now four o'clock in the afternoon; and Greenwood found himself retracing his way over
      Blackfriars' Bridge, without knowing whither he was going—or without even having any place to
      go to.
He was literally houseless—homeless!
His few shirts and other necessaries were left behind at the lodging which had just been
      closed against him; and a few halfpence in his pocket, besides the garments upon his back,
      were all his worldly possessions.
"And has it come to this?" he thought within himself, as he hurried over the bridge, not
      noticing the curiosity excited on the part of the crowd by his strange looks and wildness of
      manner: "has it come to this at length? Homeless—and a beggar!—a wretched wanderer in this
      great city where I once rode in my carriage! Oh! my God—I deserve it all!"
And he hurried franticly along—hell raging in his bosom.
At length it suddenly struck him that he was gesticulating violently in the open street and
      in the broad day-light; and he was overwhelmed with a sense of deep shame and profound
      humiliation.
He rushed across Bridge Street, with the intention of plunging into one of those lanes
      leading towards Whitefriars; when a cry of alarm resounded in his ears—and in another moment
      he was knocked down by a cabriolet that was driving furiously along.
The wheel passed over his right leg; and a groan of agony escaped him.
The vehicle instantly stopped: the livery servant behind sprang to the ground; and, with the
      aid of a policeman who came up to the spot the instant the accident occurred, the domestic
      raised Greenwood from the pavement.
But an agonising cry, wrung from him by the excruciating pain which he felt in his right
      leg, showed that he was seriously injured; and the policeman said, "We must take him to the
      hospital."
There were two gentlemen in the cabriolet; and one of them, leaning out, said, "What's the
      matter with the fellow—smite him!"
"Yeth—what ith it all about, poleethman?" demanded the other gentleman, also thrusting
      forward his head.
Greenwood recognised their voices, and turned his face towards them in an imploring manner:
      but he suffered too acutely to speak.
"My gwathiouth! Thmilackth," cried Sir Cherry Bounce, who was one of the inmates of the cab:
      "may I die if it ithn't Gweenwood!"
"So it is, Cherry—strike me!" ejaculated the Honourable Major Dapper. "Here, policeman! see
      that he's taken proper care of—in the hospital——"
"Yeth—in the hothpital," echoed Sir Cherry.
"Hold your tongue, Cherry—you're a fool," cried the Major. "And, policeman, if you want to
      communicate with me upon the subject—I mean, if any thing should happen to the poor devil, you
      know—you can call or write. Here's my card—and here's a guinea for yourself."
"Thanke'e, sir," returned the officer: "but won't you be so kind as to give him a lift in
      your cab as far as Saint Bartholomew's?"
"Quite out of the quethtion!" exclaimed Sir Cherry.
"Oh! quite," said the Honourable Major Smilax Dapper. "We are engaged to dine at the house
      of some friends with whom Lady Bounce—that's this gentleman's wife—is staying; and we are late
      as it is. You must get a stretcher, policeman—strike me! Now then, John!"
"All right, sir!" cried the servant, springing up behind the vehicle.
And away went the cabriolet with the rapidity of lightning.
In the meantime a crowd had collected; and amongst the spectators thus assembled were two
      individuals who seemed to take a more than common interest in the painful scene.
One was Filippo, who happened to be passing at the moment: but he kept behind the crowd, so
      that Greenwood might not perceive him.
The other was the hump-back Gibbet, whom accident likewise made a witness of the event, and
      who, observing the cruel indifference with which the gentlemen in the cab had treated a
      misfortune caused by themselves, felt suddenly interested in behalf of the victim of their
      carelessness.
The policeman procured a stretcher; and, with the aid of two or three of the idlers whom the
      accident had collected to the spot, he conveyed Greenwood to Saint Bartholomew's Hospital.
Filippo hurried rapidly away the moment he saw his late master removed in the manner
      described; but Gibbet, who, we should observe, was clad in deep mourning, walked by the side
      of the procession.
Greenwood fainted, through excessive pain, while he was being conveyed to the hospital; and
      when he came to himself again, he was lying in a narrow
      bed, upon a hard mattress stretched on an iron framework, while the house-surgeon
      was setting his leg, which had been broken.

The room was long and crowded with beds, in each of which there was a patient; for this was
      the Casualty Ward of Saint Bartholomew's Hospital.
"And how did this occur, then?" said the house-surgeon to the police-officer, who was
      standing by.
"Two gentlemen in a cab, coming along Bridge Street, capsized the poor feller," was the
      answer. "They told me who they was—one a Sir, so I suppose a Barrow-Knight—and
      t'other, whose card I've got, is a Honourable and a Major. If they hadn't had handles to their
      names I shouldn't have let 'em go off so quiet as I did, after knocking down a feller-creatur'
      through sheer carelessness."
"Well, well," said the surgeon, impatiently: "I suppose you know your duty. The leg is
      set—it's a simple fracture—and there's no danger. Mrs. Jubkins."
"Yes, sir," said a nurse, stepping forward.
"The new patient must be kept very quiet, Mrs. Jubkins," continued the house-surgeon, behind
      whom stood two assistants, termed dressers, and smelling awfully of rum and tobacco: "and if
      any casualty that's likely to be noisy should come in to-night, don't put it into this ward,
      Mrs. Jubkins. I shall visit this Leg the first thing in the morning, before I see the
      Collar-Bone that came in just now. By the by, Mrs. Jubkins, how's the Eye this evening?"
"The Eye, sir, has been calling out for somethink to eat this last three hours, sir,"
      replied the head nurse of the Casualty Ward.
"And the Ribs, Mrs. Jubkins, that came in this morning—how do you get on there?"
"The Ribs, sir," answered the nurse, somewhat indignantly, "has done nothing but curse and
      swear ever since you left at noon. It's quite horrible, sir."
"A bad habit, Mrs. Jubkins—a very bad habit," said the surgeon: "swearing neither mends nor
      helps matters. But damn the fellow—he can't be so very bad, either."
"In course not, sir," observed the nurse. "But what am I to do with the Nose, sir?"

"Let the Nose put his feet into hot water as usual."
The surgeon then felt Greenwood's pulse, gave Mrs. Jubkins a few necessary directions, and
      was about to proceed to the next ward to visit a Brain, which also had a compound fracture of
      the arm, when he suddenly espied Gibbet near the head of the new patient's bed.
"Well, my good fellow," said the surgeon; "and what do you want?"
"Please, sir," answered Gibbet, "I merely came in—I scarce know why—but I saw the
      accident—and I thought that if this poor gentleman would like to send a message to any
      friend——"
"Oh! yes, I should indeed!" murmured Greenwood, in a faint and yet earnest tone.
"Well—you can settle that matter between you," said the surgeon: "only, my good fellow," he
      added, speaking to Gibbet, "you must not hold the patient too long in conversation."
"No, sir—I will not," was the answer.
The surgeon, the nurse, and the dressers moved away: the policeman had already taken his
      departure; and Greenwood was therefore enabled to speak without reserve to the kind-hearted
      hump-back who had manifested so generous an interest in his behalf.
And now behold Gibbet—the late hangman's son—leaning over the pallet of the once
      fashionable, courted, and influential George Montague Greenwood.
"I am so weak—so ill in mind and body," said the latter, in a very faint and low tone, "that
      I cannot devote words to tell you how much I feel your kindness."
"Don't mention that, sir," interrupted Gibbet. "Inform me as briefly as possible
      how I can serve you."
"I will," continued Greenwood. "If you would proceed to a mansion near Lower Holloway,
      called Markham Place——"
"Markham Place!" said Gibbet, with a start.
"Yes—do you know it?"
"It was my intention to call there this very evening. The Prince of Montoni has been my
      greatest benefactor——"
"Oh! how fortunate!" murmured Greenwood. "Then you know that there is a young lady named
      Miss Monroe——"
"Yes, sir: she lives at the Place, with her father."
"And it is to her that I wish a message conveyed," said Greenwood. "Seek an opportunity to
      deliver that message to her alone;—and on no account, I implore you, let the Prince—nor any
      inmate of that house save Miss Monroe—learn what has occurred to me."
"Your wishes shall be faithfully complied with. But the message——"
"Oh! it is brief," interrupted Greenwood, with a sad smile, which was not, however,
      altogether devoid of bitterness: "tell her—whisper in her ear—that an accident has brought me
      hither, and that I am desirous to see her to-morrow. And—assure her, my good friend," he
      added, after a short pause, "that I am in no danger—for she might be uneasy."
"Your instructions shall be fulfilled to the letter," replied Gibbet.
Greenwood expressed his thanks; and the hump-back took his departure.
</div></body></text></TEI>