<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XXXV. WHITECROSS-STREET PRISON.
A COLD drizzling rain was falling, as Chichester proceeded along the streets leading to the
      debtors' prison. The noise of pattens upon the pavement; the numbers of umbrellas that were
      up; the splashing of horses' feet and carriage-wheels in the kennels; the rush of cabs and the
      shouting of omnibus-cads, were all characteristic of a wet night in a crowded metropolis.
Chichester shivered—more through nervousness than actual cold; and he felt an oppressive
      sensation at the bottom of his stomach, as well as at the chest.
The officer endeavoured to console him, by observing that "it was lucky he had been taken so
      close to the prison on such a rainy night."
The ruined young man envied many a poor wretch whom he passed on his way; for he knew that
      it was far easier to get into a debtors' gaol than to get out of it.
At length they arrived at the prison.
It was now nine o'clock; and the place, viewed by the flickering light of the lamp at the
      gate of the governor's house, wore a melancholy and sombre appearance. The prisoner was
      introduced into a small lobby, where an elderly turnkey with knee-breeches and gaiters, thrust
      a small loaf of bread into his hand, and immediately consigned him to the care of another
      turnkey, who led him through
       several alleys to the staircase communicating with the Receiving Ward.
The turnkey pulled a wire, which rang a bell on the first floor.
"Who rings?" cried a voice at the top of the stairs.
"Sheriffs debtor—Arthur Chichester—L. S.," replied the turnkey, in a loud sing-song
      voice.
Chichester afterwards learnt that he was mentioned as a sheriff's prisoner, in
      contra-distinction to one arrested by a warrant from the Court of Requests; and that L. S.
      meant London side—an intimation that he had been arrested in the City of London, and
      not in the County of Middlesex.
Having ascended a flight of stone steps, Chichester was met at the door of the Receiving
      Ward by the steward thereof. This steward was himself a prisoner, but was considered a
      trustworthy person, and had therefore been selected by the governor to preside over that
      department of the prison.
The Receiving Ward was a long low room, with windows secured by bars, at each end. There
      were two grates, but only one contained any fire. The place was remarkably clean—the floor,
      the deal tables, and the forms being as white as snow.
The following conversation forthwith took place between the new prisoner and the
      steward:—
"What is your name?"
"Arthur Chichester."
"Have you got your bread?"
"Yes."
"Well—put it in that pigeon-hole. Do you choose to have sheets to-night on your bed?"
"Certainly."
"Then that will be a shilling the first night, and sixpence every night after, as long as
      you remain here. You can, moreover, sleep in the inner room, and sit up till twelve o'clock.
      Those who can't afford to pay for sheets sleep in a room by themselves, and go to bed at a
      quarter to ten. You see we know how to separate the gentlemen from the riff-raff."
"And how long shall I be allowed to stay up in the Receiving Ward?"
"That depends. Do you mean to live at my table? I charge sixpence for tea, the same for
      breakfast, a shilling for dinner, and four-pence for supper."
"Well—I shall be most happy to live at your table."
"In that case, write a note to the governor, to say you are certain to be able to settle
      your affairs in the course of a week; and I will take care he shall have it the very first
      thing to-morrow morning."
"But I am sure of not being able to settle in a week."
"Do as you like. You won't be allowed to stay up here unless you do."
"Oh! in that case I will do so at once. Can you oblige me with a sheet of
      writing-paper?"
"Certainly. Here is one. A penny, if you please."
Chichester paid for the paper, wrote the letter, and handed it to the Steward.
He then cast a glance round the room; and saw three or four tolerably decent-looking persons
      warming themselves at the fire, while fifteen or sixteen wretched-looking men, dressed for the
      most part as labourers, were sitting on the forms round the walls, at a considerable distance
      from the blazing grate.
The Steward, perceiving that the new prisoner threw a look of inquiry towards him,
      said,—"Those gentlemen at the fire are Sheriff's Debtors, and live at my table: those
       chaps over there are Court of Requests' Men, and haven't a shilling to bless
      themselves with. So, of course, I can't allow them to associate with the others."
"How many prisoners, upon an average, pass through the Receiving Ward in the course of one
      year?"
"About three thousand three hundred as near as I can guess. All the Debtors receive each so
      much bread and meat a-week. The prison costs the City close upon nine thousand pounds a
      year."
"Nine thousand a-year, spent to lock men up, away from their families!" exclaimed
      Chichester. "That sum would pay the debts of the greater portion of those who are unfortunate
      enough to be brought here."
"You may well say that," returned the Steward. "Why, half the prisoners who come
      here are poor working-men, snatched away from their labour, and obliged to know that their
      wives and children will starve during their absence. That man over there, with the little
      bundle tied up in a blue cotton handkerchief, is only arrested for 8d. The costs are three and
      sixpence."
"He is actually a prisoner, then, for four and two-pence."
"Exactly. The man next to him is arrested for 3d., the balance of a chandler's shop debt;
      his costs are five shillings. But the case of that poor devil who is crying so up in the
      corner, is the worst. It appears that he had an account at a tally-shop, and paid one shilling
      a-week towards its liquidation. He was in full work, and earned eighteen shillings a week; and
      so he regularly gave his wife the money every Saturday night to put away for the tally-man.
      But the woman is fund of tippling, and she spent the money in gin. Well, the tally-man takes
      out a summons from the Court of Requests: the wife receives it, and is afraid to tell
      her husband. Next week comes the Rule: this the woman also hides, hoping, somehow or
      another, to get together the debt and costs, and settle it unknown to her husband. But no such
      thing: so this morning, as the poor fellow was going home to dinner, he was arrested for four
      shillings debt, and six shillings costs."
"This was cruel indeed," observed Chichester, to whom all these details were perfectly
      new.
"Yes," continued the Steward; "but that is nothing to the things that I have heard men tell
      up in this room. Loan-Societies, Tally-Shops, and the low pettifogging lawyers, keep this
      place well-filled."
It was now a quarter to ten; and the poor wretches who could not afford to pay for sheets,
      were huddled off to bed. Chichester, and the "gentlemen who boarded at the Steward's
       table," remained up, smoking cigars and drinking ale, until twelve.
Chichester was then introduced into a large room, containing ten or a dozen beds, whose
      frame-work was made of iron. One miserably thin blanket, a horse-cloth, and a straw mattress
      and pillow, were all provided for each couch, by the Corporation of the City of London!
Oh! how generous—how philanthropic—how noble; to tear men away from their homes and give
      them straw, wrapped up in coarse ticking, to sleep upon!
On the following morning Chichester awoke early, and rose with every bone aching from the
      hardness of his bed. He performed his toilette in a species of scullery attached to the
      Receiving
       Ward; and the enjoyment of this luxury was attended with the following
      disbursements:—Towel. 2d.; Use of Soap, 1d.; Loan of Razor and Lather-box, 1d.

Breakfast, consisting of coffee and dry toast, was then served up.
Those who boarded with the steward sate down and commenced a desperate assault upon the
      provisions: and those who fancied an egg or a rasher of bacon with their meal, paid twopence
      extra. The conversation was entirely associated with the prison affairs; it appeared as if
      those men when once they set foot in the prison, discarded all thoughts of the great world
      without, from which they have been snatched away. Even when the morning newspaper came in,
      attention was first directed, by a strange kind of sympathy, to the list of Bankrupts and to
      the Law Notices, the latter of which afforded them the pleasing and interesting intelligence
      of who were that day to appear before the Commissioners of the Insolvent Court.
At five minutes past nine, a violent ring at the bell called the Steward in haste to the
      door. This was the summons of a turnkey who came to remove the new prisoners to the respective
      departments of the establishment to which they belonged. Thus
       they were classified into Middlesex Sheriffs' Debtors, London Sheriffs' Debtors,
      and City Freemen who were also Sheriffs' Debtors; and London Court of Requests' Debtors, and
      Middlesex Court of Requests' Debtors.
Chichester was ordered to remove to the Poultry Ward, on the London side, the governor
      declining to comply with the request contained in his letter.
It will be seen from what we have already said, that Whitecross-street prison is essentially
      different from the Bench, descriptions of which have been given in so many different works,
      and the leading features of which are so familiar to a large portion of the community, either
      from hearsay or experience. If a man cannot muster four or five pounds to transfer himself
      from the custody of the Sheriffs to that of the Judges, by a habeas corpus writ, he
      must remain in Whitecross-street prison, while the more wealthy debtor enjoys every luxury and
      privilege in the Bench. And yet, we are constantly assured that there is the same law for the
      poor as there is for the rich!
The system of imprisonment for debt is in itself impolitic, unwise, and cruel in the
      extreme:—it ruins the honest man, and destroys the little remnant of good feeling existing in
      the heart of the callous one. It establishes the absurd doctrine, that if a man
       cannot pay his debts while he is allowed the exercise of his talents, his labour,
      and his acquirements, he can when shut up in the narrow compass of a prison, where
      his talents, his labours, and his acquirements are useless. How eminently narrow-sighted are
      English legislators! They fear totally to abolish this absurd custom, because they dread that
      credit will suffer. Why—credit is altogether begotten in confidence, and never arises from the
      preconceived intention on the part of him who gives it, to avail himself of this law against
      him who receives it. Larceny and theft are punished by a limited imprisonment, with an
      allowance of food; but debtors, who commit no crime, may linger and languish—and starve in
       gaol.
The Poultry Ward was a long, dark, low room, with seven or eight barred windows on each
      side, sawdust upon the stone floor, and about a dozen or fourteen small tables arranged, like
      those of a coffee-house, around the walls. The room was full of debtors of all
      appearances—from the shabby-genteel down to the absolutely ragged. Here a prisoner was
      occupied in drawing up his schedule for the Insolvent Debtors' Court;—there an emaciated old
      man was writing a letter, over which he shed bitter and scalding tears;—at another table a
      young farmer's labourer-looking man was breakfasting off bread and cheese and onions, which he
      washed down with porter;—close by was a stout seedy-looking person with grey hair, who did not
      seem to have any breakfast at all;—in this nook a poor pale wretch was reading a newspaper;—in
      that corner another individual was examining a pile of letters;—several were gathered round
      the fire in the scullery or kitchen attached to the Ward, preparing their breakfasts;—and
      others were lounging up and down the room, laughing and talking over the amusements of the
      preceding night up in the sleeping rooms.
The steward of the Poultry Ward had just finished his breakfast when the turnkey introduced
      Mr. Chichester.
"Well, Mr. Thaynes," said the Steward, quite delighted to see the new prisoner, "I began to
      think we should have had none down this morning. Pray take a seat, sir."
This invitation was addressed to Chichester, who sat down accordingly.
The Steward, after exchanging a few observations with the turnkey, produced a book from a
      drawer in the table, and, addressing himself in a semi-mysterious tone to Mr. Chichester,
      said—"These are our rules and regulations. Every new member is required to pay an entrance fee
      of one pound and sixpence; and this goes towards the fund for paying the officers and servants
      of the ward, providing coals, and administering generally to the comforts of the place."
"I am quite satisfied with the justice of the charge," said Chichester; and he paid it
      accordingly.
"I suppose you will live at my table?" enquired the Steward. "Same charges as upstairs in
      the Receiving Ward."
"Oh! certainly," answered Chichester. "Have you any body here of any consequence at
      all?"
"Not particularly at this moment. Lord William Priggins stayed a couple of days with us, and
      went over to the Bench yesterday morning."
"Who is that gentleman walking up and down the narrow court outside?" enquired Chichester,
      glancing towards the window, through which might be seen a tall slim young man, with black
      moustachios, a long faded cotton dressing gown, a dingy velvet skull cap, and pantaloons
      hanging low and loose, because the owner had forgotten his braces.
"Oh! that is Count Pichantoss—a celebrated Russian nobleman, who was cleaned out some weeks
      since at a West-end Hell, and got put into prison for his hotel bill."
"And who is that respectable old gentleman with the bald head, and dressed in black?"
"That is a clergyman, the Rev. Henry Sharpere: he is an excellent preacher, they say—and the
      best securer of a die that I ever saw in my life."
"And that very sickly pale-faced youth, who seems to be scarcely twenty?"
"He is only twenty-one and a month. He was arrested the day after he came of age for blank
      acceptances which he had given, during his minority, to the tune of three thousand pounds, and
      for which he never received more than three hundred."
"And that quiet-looking old gentleman, at the table opposite?"
"He is a Chancery prisoner—committed for contempt. It appears that he was one morning
      walking by the Auction Mart, and saw large posting-bills announcing the immediate sale of an
      estate, consisting of thirteen houses, somewhere in Finsbury, under a decree of the Court of
      Chancery. My gentleman hadn't a guinea in his pocket, nor the means of raising one at the
      time. Nevertheless he walked into the Mart as bold as brass, strode up stairs to the
      auctioneer's rooms, and bid for the estate. There were plenty of competitors; but he didn't
      care—he bid away; and at last the estate was knocked down to him for four thousand three
      hundred pounds. When sales are effected under an order of the Chancellor, no deposit-money is
      required. This may seem strange to you; but it is not the less a fact. So off walks my
      gentleman, quite rejoiced at his bargain. The first thing he does is to go and collect all the
      arrears of rent he can from the tenants of the houses, and to distrain upon those who couldn't
      or wouldn't pay. Lord! what a game he did play, to be sure! He called into request the
      services of half the brokers in Finsbury, and made the tenants cash up to the very last
      farthing that was due. Well, the lawyers employed for the sale of the estate, drew up the
      deeds
       of conveyance and the abstract of the title; but my gentleman never meant
      paying—so at last, the Chancery Court, getting tired of his excuses, and finding that he would
      not disgorge the amount he had already received for rents, nor yet come down with a shilling
      towards the purchase-money, clapt him into limbo under some form or another;—and so here he
      is."
In this manner did the steward of the Poultry Ward render the new prisoner familiar with the
      leading characters of that department of the prison. In addition to the few instances of
      flagrant dishonesty, or culpable extravagance which were pointed out to Chichester,
      information was given him of many—very many cases of pure and unadulterated misfortune. The
      churchyard has known no sorrow—the death-chamber has known no anguish equal to that acute and
      poignant suffering which many an inmate endures within the walls of that prison. If he be an
      affectionate father, he thinks of his absent little ones, and he feels shocked at the cold
      cruelty of the rules which only permit children to visit their incarcerated sire twice
      a-week—on Wednesday and Sunday—and then only for three hours each time. If he be a kind
      husband, and possess a tender and a loving wife, he dreads the fatal hour of five of the
      evening, which is the signal for all strangers and visitors to leave these walls. Misery—lank,
      lean, palpable misery—is the characteristic of Whitecross Street prison.
The legislature says—"We only allow men to be locked up in order to prevent them from
      running away without paying the debts they owe."—Then why treat them as felons? Why impose
      upon them rules and regulations, the severity of which is as galling to their souls as the
      iron chains of Newgate are to the felons' flesh? Why break their spirits and crush their good
      and generous feelings, by compelling them all to herd together—the high and the low—the polite
      and the vulgar—the temperate and the drunkard—the cleanly and the filthy—the religious and the
      profane—the sedate and the ribald?
O excellent legislators! do you believe that a man ever went out of the debtor's gaol more
      moral and better disposed than he was when he went in? The answer to this question will, in
      one word, teach you the efficacy of Imprisonment for Debt.
Chichester walked out into a large stone-paved court attached to his ward, and bearing the
      attractive but somewhat illusive name of the "Park." At twelve o'clock the beer men from the
      public-houses in Whitecross Street were allowed admittance; and then commenced the debauchery
      of the day. The seats round the "Park" were soon crowded with prisoners and visitors,
      drinking, smoking, laughing, and swearing.
Many poor wretches, who could not boast of much strength of mind, but who were in reality
      well disposed, took to this occupation to kill care.
And who will blame them? Not you, proud peer, who bury your vexations in crystal goblets
      sparkling with the choicest juice of Epernay's grape—nor you, fine gentleman, who seek in
      gaming at your club a relief from the anxieties and petty troubles which now and then
      interrupt the otherwise even tenure of your way!
In the course of the day Mr. Chichester wrote a very penitent letter to his father, the
      pawnbroker, lamenting past follies, and promising future good conduct. The postscript
      contained an intimation that prison was bad enough when one possessed plenty of money; but
      that it was ten thousand times worse when associated with empty pockets.
This precious epistle succeeded in inducing the "old gentleman," as Chichester denominated
      his father, to loosen his purse strings, and remit a few pounds to supply immediate wants.
Chichester was thus enabled to live at the Steward's table, and smoke his cigars and drink
      his ale to his heart's content. In a small community like that of a ward in Whitecross Street,
      as well as in the great world without, he who has the most money is the most "looked up
      to"—which is a phrase perfectly understood, and almost synonymous with "respected;" and thus
      Mr. Chichester very speedily became the "star" of that department of the prison to which he
      had been assigned.
</div></body></text></TEI>