<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="99">
CHAPTER XCIX. THE BUFFER'S HISTORY.
"You are well aware that my name is really John Wicks, although very few of my pals know me
      by any other title than the Buffer.
"My father and mother kept a coal and potatoe shed in Great Suffolk Street, Borough. I was
      their only child; and as they were very fond of me, they would not let me be bothered and
      annoyed with learning. For decency's sake, however, they made me go to the Sunday-school, and
      there I just learnt to read, and that's all.
"When I was twelve years old, I began to carry out small quantities of coals and potatoes to
      the customers. We used to supply a great many of the prisoners in the Bench; and whenever I
      went into that place, I generally managed to have a game of marbles, and sometimes rackets,
      with the young blackguards that lurked about the prison to pick up the racket balls, run on
      messages, and so on. At length I got to play for money; and as I generally lost, I had to take
      the money which I received from the customers to pay my little gambling debts. I was obliged
      to tell my father and mother all kinds of falsehoods to account for the disappearance of the
      money. Sometimes I said that I had lost a few halfpence; then I declared that a beggar in the
      street had snatched a sixpence out of my hand, and ran away; or else I swore that the
      customers had not paid me. This last excuse led to serious misunderstandings; for sometimes my
      father went himself to collect the debts owing to him; and then, when the prisoners declared
      they had paid me, I stuck out that it was false; and my father called them rogues and
      swindlers. At length, he began seriously to suspect that his son was robbing him; and one day
      he found it out in a manner which I could not deny. I was then fourteen, and was pretty well
      hardened, I can tell you. So I turned round, and told my father that he had brought it all on
      himself, because he had instructed me how to cheat the customers in weight and measure, and
      had therefore brought me up in wrong principles.
"You must understand that the usual mode of doing business in coal-sheds is this: all the
      weights only weigh one half of what they are represented to weigh. For instance, the one which
      is used as the fifty pound weight is hollow, and is, therefore, made as large in outward
      appearance as the real fifty pound weight; whereas, in consequence of being hollow, it
      actually only weighs twenty-five pounds. This is the case with all the weights; the pound
      weight really weighs only half a pound, and so on. You may ask why the weights are thus
      exactly one half less than they are represented to be,—neither more nor less than one half. I
      will tell you: when the leet jury comes round and points, for instance, to the weight used for
      fifty pounds, the answer is, 'Oh, that is the twenty-five pound weight;' and, upon being
      tested, the assertion is found to be correct. So there is never any danger of being hauled
      over the coals by the leet jury; but if the weights were each an odd number of ounces or
      pounds short, they could not be passed off to the jury as weights of a particular standard,
      and then the warehouseman would get into a scrape. It is just the same with the measures. The
      bushel contains a false bottom, and is really half a bushel; and when the leet jury calls, it
      is stated to be the half bushel measure, whereas to customers it is passed off as the bushel.
      This will also account to you for the way in which costermongers in the streets are able to
      sell fruit (cherries particularly) and peas, in the season, for just one half of the price at
      which they can be bought at respectable dealers. The poor dupe who gives twopence for a
       pound of cherries of a costermonger in the street, only obtains half a pound; and the
      housewife who thinks that she can save a hundred per cent. by buying her peas in the same way,
      only gets half a peck instead of a peck.
"My father had thirty barrows, which he let out to the costermongers at the rate of eighteen
      pence a day each; and some of those men could clear eight or ten shillings a day by their
      traffic. But they are so addicted to drinking that they spend all they get; and in the winter
      season they starve. Now and then a costermonger would disappear with the barrow, for the loan
      of which my father never required any security, as the poor souls had none to give; and then
      my father offered a reward for the apprehension of the absentee. He was generally caught, and
      my father always had him taken before the magistrate and punished—as a warning, he said, to
      the rest. I used to think he behaved very harshly in this respect, as the poor wretch whom he
      thus got sent to the treadmill had most probably paid for the barrow over and over again.
"But to return to my story. When my father discovered that I had robbed him, I threw in his
      teeth the use he made of false weights and measures. He was alarmed at this, because I
      threatened to inform the neighbours; and so he did not give me the thrashing which he had at
      first promised. He, however, resolved to send me away from home, and in the course of a few
      days got me a place at a friend's of his, who kept a sweet-stuff shop, in Friar Street,
      Blackfriars. There I was initiated into all the mysteries of that trade. I found that the
      white-sugar articles were all largely adulterated with plaster of Paris; and that immediately
      accounted to me for the pernicious—often fatal—effects produced by this kind of trash upon
      children. If parents, who really care for their children, were only commonly prudent, they
      would never allow them to eat any white-sugar sweet-stuff at all. Then I discovered that the
      articles passed off as burnt almonds, really contained the kernels of fruits; for the
      kitchen-maids in wealthy families and hotels collect and sell the stones of the peaches,
      apricots, and nectarines, eaten at the dinner-tables of their masters, as regularly as cooks
      dispose of their bones and grease. In fact, the most deleterious ingredients enter into the
      composition of sweet-stuff. The sugar-refiners sell all their scum to the sweet-stuff makers;
      and this scum is composed of the lime, alum, bullock's blood, charcoal, acetate of soda, and
      other things used for fining sugar. Oxide of lead is also mixed with the small proportions of
      sugar used in making sweet-stuff; and thus you may perceive what filthy and poisonous
      substances are given to children in the shape of sugar-plums. I hope that I do not weary you
      with this description; and if you should be surprised that I can now recollect the chemical
      names of the ingredients used, I must tell you that I went so often to the sugar-refiners, and
      to the chemists, for my master, that I soon became familiar with every thing at all relating
      to the business.
"I now come to more interesting matters. I had been with my master about six years, and was
      then going on for twenty-one, when my father died. My mother sent for me home to help her in
      the business; and I now had the command of money. The taste for gambling which I had imbibed
      in my boyhood, returned with additional force; and I sought
       every opportunity of gratifying my inclination in this respect. I frequented a
      notorious public-house in Suffolk Street, where gaming was carried on to a great extent; and
      my ill-luck seemed unvaried. My mother did all she could to check the progress of this
      infatuation; but it was invincible; and in the course of three years I had completely ruined
      both my mother and myself. An execution was put into the house for rent, and my mother died of
      a broken heart. I shed a few tears, and then looked round me for some occupation.

"One of the persons who frequented the public-house in Suffolk Street offered to recommend
      me to a friend of his, who kept an auction-room in the City. I gladly accepted the proposal,
      and was engaged as 'a bidder,' at that establishment. I will tell you what I had to do: the
      auction was carried on in an open warehouse in a great thoroughfare. The articles put up for
      sale were all of the most worthless description—razors, made (like Peter Pindar's) to sell,
      and not to cut; pen-knives, that would inflict no damage upon a piece of wood; decanters, that
      would scarcely resist the pressure of the most delicate lady's hand; candlesticks, made of a
      metal that would melt if held too close to the fire; urns, that sprang a leak the moment hot
      water was poured into them; watches, that were never known to go beyond the first
      four-and-twenty hours; scissors, that would not sever a thread; snuffers, that merely crushed
      without diminishing the wick; teapots, made of polished pewter, and warranted as silver; in a
      word, every species of domestic rubbish of this kind, occupied the counters and tables in the
      auction-room. Myself and three others were hired as bidders. Our duty was to offer a price for
      every article put up, and buy it in if it appeared likely to go to a stranger at too low a
      price—although, indeed, few prices were too low for the articles on which they were put. Then,
      when a greenhorn entered the mart, we were to puff off the articles amongst ourselves in his
      hearing—never talking to him, but talking at him. The master was perched up
      behind a high desk, using his hammer with exemplary alacrity, and knocking down article after
      article to the flats that came in and bid. Sometimes the dupes would come back the following
      day, and demand the return of their money, as they had ascertained that the goods for which
      they had parted with it were worthless: it was then our duty to hustle such obstreperous
      claimants, bonnet them, or,
       in extreme cases, knock them down, and then give them into custody for creating
      a disturbance.
"In this situation I remained for three years. The master was very good to us, and gave us a
      present every time he effected large sales by our means. One afternoon an elderly gentleman
      entered the mart, and stood bidding for some cut decanters. They had been invoiced to the
      proprietor of the establishment for six shillings, and the lowest price at which they were to
      be knocked down was two pounds ten. The bidding was rather slow; and I retreated a pace or two
      behind the old gentleman, to avoid having the appearance of being anxious to make myself
      conspicuous. In that position I observed the corner of a red pocket-book peeping out of his
      coat tail. I glanced around: no one noticed me; and in a moment I abstracted the inviting
      object. This was the first theft I ever committed; and bad as I already was, the moment I had
      that pocket-book safe in my possession, I would have given the world for it to have been back
      again in its former place. The deed was however done; and I evaporated from the auction mart
      with the rapidity of thought.
"I was not such an idiot as to return to my lodgings; but I hastened into the vicinity of
      Smithfield, and entered a public-house in Chick Lane. The parlour—a little slip, with a single
      window looking upon the street—was fortunately empty; and I immediately examined my treasure.
      And true enough it was a treasure! It contained eight hundred pounds in Bank of England notes,
      together with bills of exchange to the amount of three thousand. There were also letters and
      cards of address, which showed me who the old gentleman was. He was a rich landholder in the
      county of Hants. I enclosed the bills of exchange and the letters in a sheet of paper, and
      returned them through the post to their owner. The Bank notes I kept. But I was now at a loss
      how to act; for I fancied that if the notes had been stopped, there would be danger in
      attempting to pass them. After I had put the letter in the post, I returned to the
      public-house in Chick Lane, and meditated upon the best course to pursue. While I was sitting
      in the parlour, over a glass of brandy-and-water, pondering upon this very difficult matter, a
      man entered, sate down, called for some liquor, and got into conversation with me. By degrees
      we grew confidential; and he let me know that he was a member of the swell-mob. I opened my
      heart to him; and he immediately offered to take me to a place where I could change my
      notes.
"I thankfully accepted his proposal; and he led me into Field Lane. There he entered a shop
      where they sold salt fish, herrings, haddocks, and oysters. He asked a dirty-looking girl if
      Israel Moses was at home; and, receiving an affirmative answer, led the way up a narrow, dark,
      and dirty staircase, to a room where an old Jew, with a face almost completely concealed by
      grisly white hair, was sitting at a table covered with papers. My guide immediately
      communicated to him the object of my visit; and the old Jew questioned me closely relative to
      the way in which I had obtained the Bank notes. My companion advised me to tell him the exact
      truth, which I did; and the Jew then offered me six hundred pounds in gold for my eight
      hundred pounds' worth of notes. He explained to me that he should be compelled to send them to
      his agents in Paris, Hamburgh, and Amsterdam, to get rid of them; and that he could therefore
      afford to give me no more. I accepted his proposal, received the gold, and departed,
      accompanied by my new friend, who was no other than Dick Flairer.
"I made him a handsome present for his counsel and assistance, and was about to part from
      him, when he told me that I had better take care of myself for a few days until the hue and
      cry concerning the pocket-book should be over. He asked me to accompany him to his lodgings in
      Castle Street, Saffron Hill. I agreed; and there I first met his sister Mary. In the evening
      Dick went out, to ascertain, as he said, 'how the wind blew.' He came back at a late hour, and
      brought me a copy of a hand-bill that had been printed and circulated, and which gave not only
      a full description of the robbery, but also a most painfully accurate account of my person.
      Dick assured me that I was not safe in his lodgings, as he himself was a suspicious character
      in the neighbourhood; and he advised me to hide myself in a certain house which he knew in
      Chick Lane. I followed his advice, and proceeded to the Old House, where I lay concealed in
      that horrid dungeon under ground for a mortal fortnight. Mary brought me my food every other
      day, and gave me information of what was going on outside. She told me that the newspapers had
      published an account of the return of the bills of exchange and letters by post; and that the
      same organs stated that the old gentleman who had been robbed was unwilling to proceed any
      farther on that very account. At length Dick came himself, and assured me that I might leave
      the dungeon; but that it would be better for me to remain quiet in some snug place for a few
      weeks. I proposed to him a trip into the country; he agreed; and Mary accompanied us.
"We went down to Canterbury, and took lodgings on the Herne Bay road, close by the barracks.
      Dick and I used to visit all the neighbouring towns, and see what we could pick up; but we led
      a jovial life, spending much more than we got, and thus making desperate inroads into my
      funds. My old habits of gambling returned; and the gold which I had received from the Jew was
      disappearing very rapidly. We had left London for upwards of eight months, when we thought of
      returning to our old haunts. Mary seemed quite averse to the proposal, and was most anxious to
      remain a short time longer where she was. To this Dick agreed; and he and I came up to town.
      We went to the Boozing-ken on Saffron Hill, and there took up our quarters. Dick introduced me
      to Bill Bolter; and as it happened that our funds were all low, we resolved upon adopting some
      means to replenish our purses. Happening to take up the Times, I saw an
      advertisement, according to which a wealthy jeweller and goldsmith in the Strand required a
      porter. I made a remark which led Dick Flairer to observe, that if I chose to take the
      situation, he could get me a reference, as he knew one of the largest linen-drapers in Norton
      Folgate, who was in the habit of buying stolen goods of the cracksmen of Dick's gang, and
      would not dare refuse to perform the part required. The plan was settled: I applied for the
      situation, gave the reference, and in two days entered the service of the rich goldsmith. In
      less than a fortnight I had obtained all the information I required; and stepping out one
      evening, I hastened to the boozing-ken, where I met the pals, and appointed the following
      night for the enterprise. I then returned to my master's residence.
"On the ensuing night, precisely as the clock struck twelve, I stole softly down from my
      bed-room, and entered the shop by means of a skeleton key. I then cautiously opened the front
      door, and admitted Dick Flairer and Bill Bolter. We immediately set to work to pack up all the
      most valuable and most
       portable articles; in which occupation we were engaged when a cry of 'Fire,
       fire!' was heard in the street outside; and almost at the same moment a tremendous
      knocking at the front door began. For an instant we were paralysed; but the noise of steps
      descending the stairs hurried us into action; and, opening the doors, we darted from the house
      with the speed of wild animals, leaving all the booty behind us. The cry of 'Fire!'
      was instantly succeeded by that of 'Thieves!' and several persons began to pursue us
      hotly. We gained Wellington Street, and hastened towards Waterloo Bridge, intending to get
      into the Borough with the least possible delay. On we went—through the great gate, without
      waiting to pay the toll at the entrance of the footway—the pursuers gaining upon us. Suddenly
      I recollected that the cornice along the outside of the parapet was very wide; and without
      hesitating a moment I sprang over the parapet, alighted on the cornice, and only saved myself
      from falling into the river by catching hold of the gas-pipe which runs along the outer side
      of the bridge. Scarcely had I thus accomplished a most dangerous feat, when I distinctly saw a
      man, a few yards a-head, mount the parapet, and precipitate himself into the river. Then arose
      the sounds of voices on the bridge, crying, 'He is over!' 'He has leaped
      in!' 'He will be drowned.' 'They have all three escaped.' 'But
       where the devil could the other two have got to?' and such-like exclamations, which
      convinced me that my companions were safe. There I remained, a prey to a thousand painful
      reflections and horrid ideas, for upwards of an hour; till at length I grew so dizzy that I
      was every moment on the point of falling into the river. The bridge was now completely silent;
      and I ventured to leave my hiding-place. I passed over the bridge to the Surrey side, without
      molestation, and proceeded by a circuitous route to the Old House in Chick Lane, where, to my
      astonishment, I found Bill Bolter. I then learnt that it was Dick Flairer who had leapt into
      the river, and was no doubt drowned; and that Bolter had only escaped by concealing himself in
      the deep shade of one of the recesses of the bridge, when totally overcome by fatigue, until
      his pursuers had passed, when he retraced his steps, and quietly gained the Strand.
"We were greatly grieved to think that our enterprise in the jeweller's house should have
      failed, and that we had lost so excellent a fellow as Flairer; but in the midst of our
      lamentations, the door opened and Dick himself entered the room. Pale, dripping, and
      exhausted, he fell upon a seat, and would most probably have fainted—if not died—had we not
      forced some brandy down his throat. He then revived; and, having changed his clothes, was soon
      completely recovered from the effects of his bath, and the desperate exertions he had made to
      swim to a wharf communicating with the Commercial Road.
"We staid for the remainder of the night at the Old House; and on the following morning Dick
      Flairer went up to the boozing-ken, where he procured a newspaper. He then returned to us; and
      we perceived by the journal that the curtains of the bed-room which I had occupied at the
      jeweller's house had caught fire, and created the alarms which had interrupted us in the midst
      of our employment in the shop. I moreover ascertained that I was of course suspected of having
      admitted thieves into the premises, and that a reward was offered for my apprehension. I was
      accordingly compelled to remain concealed for some weeks in the Old House, while Bolter and
      Flairer, being unsuspected, were enabled to go abroad. I did not upon this occasion conceal
      myself in the dungeon of the Old House, for I could not bear the solitude of that living tomb;
      and as Bolter and Flairer were constantly visiting me, the time did not hang so very heavily
      on my hands. At length I left the Old House, and I and Dick returned to Canterbury.
"When we arrived there, after an absence of two months, we made a most unpleasant
      discovery—unpleasant to Dick as the brother, and to me who was enamoured of Mary. She was in a
      way to become a mother; her situation was too palpable to be concealed. Dick flew into a most
      ungovernable rage; and Mary tried to deny it. But the fact was glaring, and she was obliged to
      confess that she had been seduced by a serjeant of the regiment stationed at Canterbury. Her
      attachment to that man, and the hope that he would do her justice, were the reasons that had
      induced her to remain at Canterbury, when we went to London. The serjeant had recently treated
      her with neglect and indifference, and she longed for revenge. Dick and I swore that she
      should have it. She told us that the serjeant was very fond of angling, and that every morning
      early he indulged in his favourite sport in the river Stour, which flowed close by the
      barracks.
"Next morning Dick and I went down to the river, and there we saw the serjeant preparing his
      tackle. From the description we had received of him, we knew him to be the man we wanted; but
      there was a large water-mill close by, and we dared not attack him in a spot that was so
      overlooked. We accordingly returned home, and consulted together how we should proceed. At
      length we resolved that Mary should endeavour to get him to grant her an interview on the
      banks of the river. She sent him a note, saying that she was to leave Canterbury in a few
      days, and that she wished to see him once more. She concluded by begging him to meet her that
      evening or the next between nine and ten o'clock, close by the bridge of Kingsford's
      water-mill. He consented, and appointed the evening of the next day for the interview.
"The hour drew nigh, and Mary went to the place agreed upon. Dick and I followed her at a
      little distance. The night was dark; it was in the month of April; and the air was very cold.
      As we drew near the bridge as noiselessly as we could, we distinguished the forms of two
      persons standing upon the bridge, and leaning in earnest conversation upon the low railing
      that overhung the huge wheel which was revolving beneath, the torrent pouring over it through
      the sluices of the dam upon the top of which the bridge stood. We advanced closer; and could
      then perceive that the two forms were those of Mary and her seducer. We proceeded to the
      bridge. When we reached the middle, Dick went up to the serjeant, and said, 'This is my
       sister; do you mean to do her justice?'—'No,' cried Mary; 'he has just told
       me that I need have no hope in that respect.' 'Then there is nothing more to be
       said,' exclaimed Dick Flairer; and at the same moment we precipitated ourselves upon the
      serjeant. Dick Flairer pressed his hand upon his mouth; the poor wretch struggled violently;
      but in an instant we hurled him over the bridge-railing. He fell upon the wheel; the roar of
      the torrent, and the din of the ponderous machine drowned his last cry of agony, and the
      crushing of his bones. 'Now, Mary,' said I, 'you are revenged.' She pressed
      my hand convulsively, without uttering a word; and we returned to our lodgings.
      
"Next day, the body of the serjeant was found, fearfully crushed and mutilated, a mile below
      the mill, entangled in a bed of osiers. It was carried to the barracks: an inquest was called;
      and a verdict of 'Found Drowned' was recorded. Not a suspicion was entertained that
      the man had been murdered, it being evident from the surgical examination that he had been
      crushed by the wheel of the mill, upon which it was supposed he had accidentally fallen, over
      the bridge-railing, which was only about three feet high.
"The moment the verdict was returned, and we saw that no suspicion attached to any body in
      reference to the murder, we left Canterbury, and repaired to London. In the course of a few
      weeks, Mary became the mother of a still-born child; and in due time I assured her that I
      would overlook her fault, and marry her if she would have me. She was pleased with the
      proposal; and Dick readily agreed to it. But before we could be spliced, I one day met the
      goldsmith of the Strand in the street; and he gave me into custody. I was taken before the
      magistrates, and fully committed for an attempt to rob my employer. While I was in Newgate,
      waiting for my trial, I was greatly alarmed lest the old gentleman, whom I had robbed at the
      auction mart, should prefer an indictment against me; but my fears in this respect were
      unfounded. At length the sessions commenced, and I was put upon my trial. The Sheriffs had
      supplied me with counsel, for I was completely without funds when I was arrested. The
      barrister thus retained in my behalf, advised me to plead guilty, as I should then stand a
      good chance of escaping transportation. I followed his recommendation, and expressed my
      contrition for the offence. The Recorder read me a long lecture, and condemned me to seven
      years' transportation, which sentence was commuted to two years' imprisonment in Newgate.
"During that time I seriously thought of mending my ways, when I should be once more at
      liberty. But I could not conceive what on earth I should do for a livelihood if I did not
      steal. I knew that I should be turned adrift without a penny in my pocket; and I had no
      friends but those with whom I could only pursue my old career. When the chaplain spoke to me
      upon the errors of my past life, and the necessity of reformation, I used to say to him,
       'Show me, reverend sir, how I am to obtain an honest living when I leave these walls, and
       I never shall sin again.' But he always gave an evasive reply. In fact, what could he
      say? If he had required a man-servant—a groom—an errand-boy—a menial scrub to black his boots
      and brush his clothes, would he have taken me? No. If he had known any friend who wanted a man
      to take care of his hounds—never enter his house—but sleep in the kennels along with the dogs,
      would the chaplain have recommended me? No. If the governor of Newgate had needed a man to
      sweep the dirt away from the front of the prison, would the reverend gentleman have spoken a
      kind word in favour of me? No. Of what use, then, is it for these gaol chaplains to preach
      penitence and reformation, when by their very actions they say, 'We do not believe that
       you can possibly change for the better?' Of what benefit is it for these salaried
      moralists to declaim upon the advantages of a virtuous course, when they know perfectly well
      that the old maxim is invariably correct,—'Give a dog a bad name and hang him!'
      Virtue must be fed; but Virtue, upon leaving the walls of a criminal prison, can obtain no
      food. Must Virtue, then die of starvation? Human nature revolts against this
      self-destruction—this systematic suicide; and, sooner than submit to it, Virtue will allow
      itself to be changed by circumstances into Vice. Virtue in this case has no option but to
      become Vice.
"I often thought, when I was in prison, that if there was a workshop, established by the
      government to receive persons whom the criminal gaols daily vomit back upon society, many a
      miserable creature would in reality reform, and be saved from a re-plunge into the sea of
      crime. But all that the government does is to punish. I mentioned these thoughts to the
      chaplain. And what did he say? He endeavoured to get rid of the necessity of giving a decisive
      opinion, by throwing himself headlong into a mass of argument and reasoning, half religious
      and half political, which I could not understand. Thus do those men invariably extricate
      themselves from perplexing topics. In my opinion there is no mockery more abominable—no
      hypocrisy more contemptible—no morality more baseless than the attributes of a
      gaol-chaplain!
"If good and pious men attended criminal prisons of their own free will, and talked in a
      plain homely manner to the inmates,—a manner which those inmates could understand,—how much
      benefit might result! But when you think that the chaplain only troubles himself about you
      because he is paid,—that he doles out his doctrine in proportion to the income which he
      receives,—and that he says the same to you to-day which he said to another yesterday, and will
      say to a third to-morrow,—his office is mean, contemptible, and degrading.
"It does not do for me to hold forth in this manner; I know that: but I cannot help
      expressing the thoughts that occupied me when I was in Newgate. They are often present in my
      memory; and, sometimes, when I am dull and in low spirits, I console myself by the conviction
      that if I am bad now, it is because there is no door open for me to be good. So a truce to
      these ideas. They do not often come from my lips; and even now I scarcely wish to recall
      them.
"Well—I passed my two years in Newgate; and when I was released, I stood still by the
      lamp-post at the top of the Old Bailey, thinking which way I should go. I had not a penny in
      my pocket; and I knew that in the course of a few hours I should be hungry. As true as I am
      sitting here, tears rolled down my cheeks as I contemplated the necessity of returning to my
      old pursuits,—yes—burning tears—tears of agony—such tears as I never shed before, and shall
      never shed again!
"Suddenly a thought struck me. I would go to the workhouse. The idea consoled me; and,
      fearful lest my good intentions should grow cool, I turned back past the door of Newgate
      again, and directed my steps down the Old Bailey towards Blackfriars' Bridge. In the course of
      an hour, I knocked at the door of the —— Workhouse, with an order for admission from the
      overseer.
"It was about twelve o'clock in the day when I entered the Workhouse. The porter conducted
      me into the office, where the master took down my name, age, etc. He then sent me to the
      bath-room, where I was cleansed. When I came from the bath I put on the coarse linen, grey
      suit, and thick shoes which constitute the workhouse garb—the livery of poverty. The dress
      differed but little from the one I had worn in Newgate—so small is the distinction in this
      blessed country between a felon and a pauper! My old clothes were put up together in a bundle,
      labelled with my name, and conveyed to the store-room, to be returned to me when I chose to
      leave
       the place. As soon as I was dressed, I was allotted to the able-bodied men's
       department of the Workhouse. The scale of food for this class of persons was just
      this:—
"So you see that we had only five ounces of cooked meat and five ounces of bacon, in the
      shape of animal food, in the course of each week! And yet we had to work—to keep the grounds
      in order, to do various jobs in the establishment, and to pick four pounds of oakum each,
      every day, the Sabbath excepted. Felons are better off;[79]
      for in the prison one has more meat, more bread, and more gruel (which is certainly
      nourishing) than in the workhouse!
"We had nothing to drink with our dinners and suppers but water—and of that they could not
      very well stint us, because it cost nothing. The able-bodied women had much less than
      the able-bodied men. The infirm paupers had each one ounce of tea and seven ounces of sugar
      weekly, instead of gruel, for breakfast! Fancy one ounce of tea for seven meals!
"We were divided into messes, or tables of ten each; and each mess elected a carver. The
      duty of the carver was to go to the kitchen and fetch the provision allotted to the
      individuals at his particular table, and then to distribute it in equal proportions. What
      fighting and wrangling always took place at meal times! On meat days, one had too much fat,
      and another's morsel was too under-done:—on bacon days, one had too much lean, and another had
      the rind given to him. Then one declared that he had been cheated out of a potatoe; and so on.
      It was a scene of perpetual selfishness—of human beings quarrelling for a crumb! But who can
      wonder? A potatoe or a cubic inch of bread was a considerable portion of a meal; and where all
      were ravenous, who could afford to lose even a potatoe or a crumb?[80]
"Neither of you have ever been in a workhouse, I know; and therefore you cannot imagine the
      change it produces in its inmates. They grow discontented with the world, and look upon their
      superiors with abhorrence. An army of able-bodied men, recruited from all the Unions in the
      kingdom, would make the finest republican soldiers imaginable. They would proceed with a good
      heart to level throne, aristocracy, and every institution which they believed oppressive to
      the industrious classes.
"But that is no business of mine—and I care nothing for politics of any kind. Of an evening,
      we used to gather round the fire till bed-time, and talk of our past lives. Many—many of my
      companions, had, like myself, seen better days; and it actually made one's heart ache to hear
      them compare their former positions with their present ones. And after all, what can be more
      inhuman—what more cruel, than the very principles of the workhouse system? Old couples, who
      have lived together for years and years, are separated when they go to the workhouse. Mothers
      are debarred from the society of their little ones:—no ties of kindred are respected
       there!
"I remember one man—he was about sixty, and much better behaved than the rest—who had been a
      writer, or something of that kind, in his time. The men used to get him now and then, when he
      was in the humour to recite poems—some of which he had composed in better days, and others
      since he had been in the Union. Those of his palmy years were all about love, and friendship,
      and sweet spring, and moonlight scenes, and so on;—but from the moment that he set foot in the
      workhouse, he bade farewell to love and friendship; and he never more was destined to know the
      enjoyments of charming seasons and tranquil hours! One of his late poems made such an
      impression on me, that I learnt it by heart. It was a workhouse scene. I remember it now; and
      will repeat it:—
"THE SONG OF THE WORKHOUSE.

"Stooping over the ample grate,
Where burnt an ounce of fuel,
That cheered not the gloom
Of the workhouse room,
An aged and shivering female sate,
Sipping a pint of gruel:
And as she sopped a morsel of bread
In that liquid thin and poor,
With anguish she shook her aching head,
And thought of the days that were o'er.
"Through the deep mists of years gone by
Her mental glances wandered;
And the warm blood ran
To her features wan;
And fire for a moment lighted her eye,
As o'er the past she pondered.
       
For she had once tripped the meadow green
With a heart as blithe as May;
And she had been crowned the village-queen
In times that were far away!
"She'd been the pride of parents dear,
And plenty banished sorrow;
And her love she gave
To a yeoman brave;
And a smiling offspring rose to cheer
Hearts that feared not for the morrow.
Oh! why should they fear? In the sweat of their brow
They ate their daily bread;
And they thought, 'The earth will e'er yield as now
The fruits whereon we're fed!'
"But when their hair grew silvery white,
Sorrow their cot invaded,
And ravaged it then
As armies of men
Sack the defenceless town by night:—
Thus all Hope's blossoms faded!
From their little farm the stock was swept
By the owner of their land;
And the very bed on which they slept,
Was snatched by the bailiff's hand.
"One hope—one fond hope now was all
Each tender heart dared cherish—
That they might remain
Still linked by one chain,
And 'midst the sorrows that might befal,
Together live or perish.
But Want drove them on to the workhouse gate;
And when the door was pass'd
They found themselves doomed to separate—
To separate at last!
"And he fell sick:—she prayed in vain
To be where he was lying;
She poured forth her moan
Unto hearts of stone;
Never admittance she could gain
To the room where he was dying!
Then into her brain the sad thoughts stole
That brain with anguish reeling—
That the great ones, judging by their own soul,
Think that paupers have no feeling.
"So, thus before the cheerless grate,
Watching the flick'ring ember
She rocked to and fro,
Her heart full of woe;
For into that heart the arrow of fate
Pierced like the cold of December.
And though she sopped a morsel of bread,
She could not eat for crying:
'T was hard that she might not support the head
Of her much-lov'd husband dying!

"I stayed in the workhouse six weeks; and could stand it no longer. I had to labour, and was
      half-starved. So one morning I went to the Master, demanded my clothes, and was speedily
      retracing my steps towards my old haunts. That evening I supped with Dick Flairer at the
      boozing-ken on Saffron Hill; and the same night we broke into a watchmaker's shop in the City.
      We got seventeen pounds in money, and a dozen watches and other trinkets, which we sold to the
      'fence' in Field Lane for thirty guineas. That was a good bargain for him! I then went and
      took up my quarters with Dick Flairer at his lodgings; and in a few weeks I married his sister
      Mary. Six or eight months afterwards poor Dick was killed; and—"
</div></body></text></TEI>