<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="192">
CHAPTER CXCI.   CRANKEY JEM'S HISTORY.
My father's name was Robert Cuffin. At the death of his father he succeeded to a
      good business as grocer and tea-dealer; but he was very extravagant, and soon became bankrupt.
      He obtained his certificate, and then embarked as a wine merchant. At the expiration of three
      years he failed again, and once more appeared in the Gazette. This time he was
      refused his certificate. He, however, set up in business a third time, and became a coal
      merchant. His extravagances continued: so did his misfortunes. He failed, was thrown into
      prison, and took the benefit of the Insolvents' Act—but not without a long remand. On his
      release from gaol, he turned dry-salter. This new trade lasted a short time, and ended as all
      the others had done. Another residence in prison—another application to the Insolvents'
      Court—and another remand, ensued.
"My father was now about forty years of age, and completely ruined. He had no credit—no
      resources—no means of commencing business again. He was, however, provided with a wife and
      seven children—all requiring maintenance, and he having nothing to maintain them on. I was not
      as yet born. It appears that my father sate down one evening in a very doleful humour, and in
      a very miserable garret, to meditate upon his circumstances. He revolved a thousand schemes in
      his head; but all required some little credit or capital wherewith to make a commencement; and
      he had neither. At length he started up, slapped his hand briskly upon the table, and
      exclaimed, 'By heavens, I've got it!'—'Got what?' demanded his wife.—'A call!' replied my
      father.—'A call!' ejaculated his better half, in astonishment.—'Yes; a call,' repeated my
      father; 'a call from above to preach the blessed Gospel and cleanse the unsavoury vessels of
      earth from their sinfulness.'—His wife began to cry, for she thought that distress had turned
      his brain; but he soon convinced her that he was never more in earnest in his life. He desired
      her to make the room look as neat as possible, and get a neighbour to take care of the
      children for an hour or two in the evening, when he should return with a few friends. He then
      went out, and his wife obeyed his instructions. Sure enough, in the evening, back came my
      father with a huge Bible under one arm and a Prayer-Book under the other, and followed by
      half-a-dozen demure-looking ladies and gentlemen, who had a curious knack of keeping their
      eyes incessantly fixed upwards—or heaven-ward, as my father used to express it.
"Well, the visitors sate down; and my father, whose countenance had assumed a most wonderful
      gravity of expression since the morning, opened the prayer-meeting with a psalm. He then read
      passages from the two sacred books he had brought with him; and he wound up the service by an
      extemporaneous discourse, which drew tears from the eyes of his audience.
"The prayer-meeting being over, an elderly lady felt herself so overcome with my father's
      convincing
      eloquence, that a considerate old gentleman sent for a bottle of gin; and thus my
      father's 'call' was duly celebrated.

"To be brief—so well did my father play his cards, that he soon gathered about him a
      numerous congregation; a chapel was hired somewhere in Goodman's Fields; and he was now a
      popular minister. His flock placed unbounded confidence in him—nay almost worshipped him; so
      that, thanks to their liberality, he was soon provided with a nicely-furnished house in the
      immediate vicinity of the chapel. Next door to him there dwelt a poor widow, named Ashford,
      and who had a very pretty daughter called Ruth. These females were amongst the most devoted of
      my father's flock; and in their eyes the reverend preacher was the pattern of virtue and
      holiness. The widow was compelled to take a little gin at times 'for the stomach's sake;' but
      one day she imbibed too much, fell down in a fit, and died. My father preached a funeral
      sermon, in which he eulogised her as a saint; and he afforded an asylum to the orphan girl.
      Ruth accordingly became an inmate of my father's house.
"And now commences the most extraordinary portion of the history of my father's life. You
      will admit that the suddenness of his 'call' was remarkable enough; but this was nothing to
      the marvellous nature of a vision which one night appeared to him. Its import was duly
      communicated to Miss Ashford next day; and the young lady piously resigned herself to that
      fate which my father assured her was the will of heaven. In a few months the consequences of
      the vision developed themselves; for Miss Ashford was discovered to be in the family way. My
      father's lawful wife raised a storm which for some time seemed beyond the possibility of
      mitigation; the deacons of the chapel called, and the elders of the congregation came to
      investigate the matter. My father received them with a countenance expressive of more than
      ordinary demureness and solemnity. A conclave was held—explanations were demanded of my
      father. Then was it that the author of my being rose, and, in a most impressive manner,
      acquainted the assembly with the nature of his vision. 'The angel of the Lord,' he said,
      'appeared to me one night, and ordered me to raise
      up seed of righteousness, so that when the Lord calls me unto himself, fitting
      heirs to carry on the good work which I have commenced, may not fail. I appealed to the angel
      in behalf of my own lawfully begotten offspring; but the angel's command brooked not
      remonstrances, and willed that I should raise up seed of Ruth Ashford: for she is blessed, in
      that her name is Ruth.'—This explanation was deemed perfectly satisfactory: and, when the
      deacons and elders had departed, my father succeeded some how or another not only in pacifying
      his wife, but also in reconciling her to the amour which he still carried on with Miss
       Ashford.[19]
"Thus my father preserved both his mistress and his sanctity—at least for some considerable
      time longer. The fruit of that amour was myself; and my name is consequently Ashford—James
      Ashford—although my father insisted upon calling me Cuffin. Time wore on; but by degrees the
      jealousies which my father had at first succeeded in appeasing, developed themselves in an
      alarming manner between the wife and the mistress. Scenes of violence occurred at the house of
      his Reverence; and the neighbours began to think that their minister's amour was not quite so
      holy in its nature as he had represented it. The congregation fell off; and my father's
      reputation for sanctity was rapidly wearing out. Still he would not part with my mother and
      me; and the result was that his lawful wife left the house with all her own children. My
      father refused to support them; the parish officers interfered; and the scandal was grievously
      aggravated. Death arrived at this juncture to carry away the principal bone of contention. My
      mother became dangerously ill, and after languishing in a hopeless condition for a few weeks,
      breathed her last.
"Having thus stated the particulars of my birth, it will not be necessary to dwell on this
      portion of my narrative. I will only just observe that, at the death of Miss Ashford, a
      reconciliation was effected between my father and his wife; and that the former contrived to
      maintain his post as minister of the chapel—though with a diminished flock, and consequently
      with a decreased revenue. Nevertheless, I obtained a smattering of education at the school
      belonging to the chapel, and was treated with kindness by my father, although with great
      harshness by his wife. Thus continued matters until I was fifteen, when my father died; and I
      was immediately thrust out of doors to shift for myself.
"I was totally friendless. Vainly did I call upon the deacons and elders of the
      congregation; even those who had adhered to my father to the very last, had their eyes opened
      now that he was no longer present to reason with them. They spurned me from their doors; and I
      was left to beg or steal. I chose the former; but one night I was taken up by a watchman
      (there were no police in those times) because I was found wandering about without being able
      to give a satisfactory account of myself. You may look astonished; but I can assure you that
      when a poor devil says, 'I am starving—houseless—friendless—pennyless,' it is
      supposed to mean that he can't give a satisfactory account of himself! In the morning I was
      taken before the magistrate, and committed to the House of Correction as a rogue and
      vagabond.
"In prison I became acquainted with a number of young thieves and pickpockets; and, so
      desperate was my condition, that when the day of emancipation arrived, I was easily persuaded
      to join them. Then commenced a career which I would gladly recall—but cannot! Amongst my new
      companions I obtained the nickname of 'Crankey,' because I was subject to fits of
      deep despondency and remorse, so that they fancied I was not right in my head. In time I
      became the most expert housebreaker in London—Tom the Cracksman alone excepted. My exploits
      grew more and more daring; and on three occasions I got into trouble. The first and second
      times I was sent to the hulks. I remember that on my second trial a pal of mine was acquitted
      through a flaw in the indictment. He was charged with having broken into and burglariously
      entered a jeweller's shop. It was, however, proved by one of the prosecutor's own witnesses
      that the shop door had been accidentally left unlocked and unbolted, and that consequently he
      had entered without any violence at all. Thanks to the laws, he escaped on that ground,
      although judge and jury were both convinced of his guilt. Time wore on; and I formed new
      acquaintances in the line to which I was devoted. These were Tom the Cracksman, Bill Bolter,
      Dick Flairer, the Buffer, and the Resurrection Man. With them I accomplished many successful
      burglaries; but at length I got into trouble a third time, and a stop was put to my career in
      London. It was in the year 1835 that the Resurrection Man and I broke into a jeweller's shop
      in Princes Street, Soho. We got off with a good booty. The Resurrection Man went over to the
      Mint: I let Dick Flairer into the secret, gave him a part of my share in the plunder, and then
      took to a hiding-place which there is in Chick Lane, Smithfield. Now I knew that Dick was
      stanch to the back-bone; and so he proved himself—for he brought me my food as regularly as
      possible; and at the end of a week, the storm had blown over enough to enable me to leave my
      hiding-place. I hastened to join the Resurrection Man in the Mint, where I stayed two or three
      days. Then the miscreant sold me, in order to save himself; and we were both committed to
      Newgate. Tidkins turned King's Evidence; and I was sentenced to transportation for life. The
      Resurrection Man was discharged at the termination of the business of the sessions.
"Myself and several other convicts, who were sentenced at the same session, were removed
      from Newgate to the Penitentiary at Millbank. Amongst the number were two persons whose names
      you may have heard before, because their case made a great noise at the time. These were
      Robert Stephens and Hugh Mac Chizzle, who were the principal parties concerned in a conspiracy
      to pass a certain Eliza Sydney off as a young man, and defraud the Earl of Warrington out of a
      considerable property. We remained about a fortnight in the Penitentiary, and were then
      transferred to the convict-ship at Woolwich. But before we left Millbank, we were clothed in
      new suits of grey, or pepper-and-salt, as we called the colour; and we were also ironed. The
      convict-ship was well arranged for its miserable purpose. On each side of the between-decks
      were two rows of sleeping-berths, one above the other: each berth was about six feet square,
      and was calculated to hold four convicts, eighteen inches' space to sleep in being considered
      ample
      room enough for each individual. The hospital was in the fore-part of the vessel,
      and was separated from the prison by means of a bulk-head, in which partition there were two
      strong doors, forming a means of communication between the two compartments. The fore and main
      hatchways, between decks, were fitted up with strong wooden stanchions round them; and in each
      of those stanchions there was a door with three padlocks, to let the convicts in and out, and
      secure them effectually at night. In each hatchway a ladder was placed, for us to go up and
      down by; and these ladders were always pulled on deck after dusk. Scuttle-holes, or small
      ports to open and shut for the admission of air, were cut along the vessel's sides; and in the
      partition between the prison and the hospital was fixed a large stove, with a funnel, which
      warmed and ventilated both compartments at the same time. When we were placed on board the
      convict-ship, we had each a pair of shoes, two pairs of trousers, four shirts, and other warm
      clothing, besides a bed, bolster, and blanket. Of Bibles, Testaments, and Prayer-Books, there
      was also plenty.
"The moment the surgeon came on board, he arranged the mess-berths and mess-tables. All the
      clothing, linen, bedding, and other articles were marked with consecutive numerals in black
      paint, from No. 1. up to the highest number of convicts embarked. Thus, we messed and slept
      along the prison-deck in regular numerical progression. In food we were not stinted: each man
      had three-quarters of a pound of biscuit daily; and every day, too, we sate down to beef,
      pork, or pease-soup. Gruel and cocoa were served out for breakfast and supper. Every week we
      received a certain quantity of vinegar, lime-juice, and sugar, which were taken as
      preventatives for scurvy. Each mess selected a head, or chairman, who saw the provisions
      weighed out, and that justice was done in this particular to each individual at his table.
"The surgeon selected six of the most fitting amongst the convicts to act the part of petty
      officers, whose duty it was to see his orders punctually executed, and to report instances of
      misconduct. Four of these remained in the prison; and the other two were stationed on deck, to
      watch those convicts who came up in their turns for airing. The Captains of the Deck,
      as the officers were called, had some little extra allowance for their trouble, and were
      moreover allowed a certain quantity of tobacco.
"It was in January, 1836, that we sailed for Sydney. Although I had no wife,—no
      children,—and, I may almost say, no friend that I cared about,—still my heart sank within me,
      when, from the deck of the convict-ship, I caught a last glimpse of the white cliffs of Old
      England. Tears came into my eyes; and I, who had not wept since childhood, wept then. But
      there were several of my companions who had left wives and children, or parents, behind them;
      and I could read on their countenances the anguish which filled their inmost souls!
"The surgeon was a kind and humane man. The moment we were out of sight of land, he ordered
      our chains to be taken off; and he allowed us to enjoy as much air upon deck as we could
      possibly require. The guard, under the command of a commissioned officer, consisted of
      thirty-one men, and did duty on the quarter-deck in three alternate watches. A sentry, with a
      drawn cutlass, stood at each hatchway; and the soldiers on watch always had their fire-arms
      loaded.
"When we had been to sea a little time, most of the convicts relapsed into their old habits
      of swearing, lying, and obscene conversation. They also gambled at pitch and toss, the stakes
      being their rations. Thieving prevailed to a very great extent; for the convict who lost his
      dinner by gambling, was sure to get one by stealing. They would often make wagers amongst
      themselves as to who was the most expert thief; and when the point was put to a practical
      test, dreadful quarrels would arise, the loser of the wager, perhaps, discovering that he
      himself was the victim of the trial of skill, and that his hoard of lime-juice, sugar,
      tobacco, or biscuit had disappeared. Stephens, who was at the same mess with myself, did all
      he could to discourage these practices; but the others pronounced him 'a false
       magician,' and even his friend, Mac Chizzle, turned against him. So at last he gave up
      the idea of introducing a reformation amongst his brethren in bondage. The fact is, that any
      convict who attempts to humbug the others by pretensions to honesty, or who expresses some
      superior delicacy of sentiment, which, of course, in many instances is actually experienced,
      had better hang himself at once. The equality of the convict-ship is a frightful equality,—the
      equality of crime,—the levelling influence of villany,—the abolition of all social
      distinctions by the hideous freemasonry of turpitude and its consequent penalties! And yet
      there is an aristocracy, even in the prison of the convict-ship,—an aristocracy consisting of
      the oldest thieves, in contra-distinction to the youngest; and of townies, in opposition to yokels.[21] The deference paid by the younger thieves to the elder
      ones is astonishing; and that man who, in relating his own history, can enumerate the greatest
      number of atrocities, is a king amongst convicts. Some of the best informed of the convicts
      wrote slang journals during the passage, and read them once a-week to the rest. They generally
      referred to the sprees of the night, and contained some such entries as this:—'A peter
       cracked and frisked, while the cobbles dorsed; Sawbones came and found the glim doused;
       fadded the dobbins in a yokel's crib, while he blew the conkey-horn; Sawbones lipped a
       snitch; togs leered in yokel's downy; yokel screwed with the darbies.' The exact meaning
      of this is:—'A chest broken open and robbed while the convicts slept: surgeon came in and
      found the lamp put out; the thief thrust the clothes which he had stolen into a countryman's
      berth, while he was snoring fast asleep; the surgeon ordered a general search; the clothes
      were found in the countryman's bed; and the countryman was put into irons.'
"I must observe, that while the ship was still in the Thames, none of the convicts would
      admit that they deserved their fate. They all proclaimed themselves much-injured individuals,
      and declared that the Home Secretary was certain to order a commutation of their sentence. The
      usual declarations were these:—'I am sure never to see New South Wales. The prejudice of the
      judge against me at the trial were evident to all present in the court. The jury were totally
      misled by his summing-up. My friends are doing every thing they can for me; and
      I am sure to get off.'—Out of a hundred and ten convicts, at least a hundred
      spoke in this manner. But the ship sailed,—England was far behind,—and not one single
       convict had his hopes of a commuted sentence gratified. Then, when those hopes had
      disappeared, they all opened their budget of gossip most freely, and related their exploits in
      so frank a manner, that it was very easy to perceive the justice of the verdicts which had
      condemned them.
"The voyage out was, on the whole, a tolerably fine one. It lasted four months and a half;
      and it was, consequently, in the middle of May that we arrived in sight of Sydney. But, when
      thus at the point of destination, the sea became so rough, and the wind blew such 'great
      guns,' that the captain declared there was mischief at hand. The convicts were all ordered
      into the prison, the ports of which were closed; and the heat was stifling. The tempest came
      with appalling violence. Crash went every loose thing on board,—the timbers creaked as if they
      would start from their settings,—the ropes rattled,—and the wind whistled horribly through the
      rigging. The ship was lifted to an immense height, and then by the fall of the mountain wave,
      was plunged into the depths of the trough of the sea;—at one moment dipping the studding-sail
      boom into the water,—and the next lying nearly on its beam-ends on the opposite side. I
      afterwards learnt from a sailor, that the waves were forty feet high, twenty below the
      ordinary level of the sea, and twenty above it. Thus, when we were in the trough, they were
      forty feet above our heads! Towards evening the storm subsided; and early next morning Sydney
      broke more clearly upon our view.
"Sydney is beautifully situated. It possesses a fine ascent from a noble harbour; and its
      bays, its coves, its gardens, its gentlemen's seats, form a pleasing spectacle. Then its
      forests of masts—the Government-house, with its beautiful domain—the numerous wharfs—the
      thousands of boats upon the glassy water—and Wooloomooloo, with its charming villas and its
      windmills,—all these combine to enhance the interest of the scene. The town itself is far more
      handsome than I had expected to find it. The shops are very fine—particularly the
      silversmiths', the haberdashers', and confectioners', which would not disgrace the West End of
      London. They are mostly lighted with gas, and in the evening have a brilliant appearance.
      There is an astonishing number of grog-shops—nearly two hundred and fifty, for a population of
      30,000 souls. George Street and Pitt Street are the principal thoroughfares: and the rents are
      so high that they average from three to five hundred pounds a-year. There are no common sewers
      in Sydney; and, although the greater portion of the town stands upon a height, yet many of the
      principal streets are perfectly level, and the want of a vent for the foul water and other
      impurities is sadly felt. I may add, that the first appearance of Sydney and its inhabitants
      does not impress a stranger with the idea of being in a country so far away from Europe; the
      language, the manners, and the dress of the people being so closely similar to those of
      England. But wait a little while, and a closer observation produces a different effect.
      Presently you will see the government gangs of convicts, marching backwards and forwards from
      their work in single military file,—solitary ones straggling here and there, with their white
      woollen Paramatta frocks and trousers, or grey or yellow jackets with duck overalls, all
      daubed over with broad arrows and initial letters to denote the establishment to which they
      belong,—and then the gaol-gang, moving sulkily along with their jingling leg-chains,—all these
      sad spectacles telling a tale of crime and its effects, and proclaiming trumpet-tongued the
      narrative of human degradation!
"The ship entered the harbour; our irons had already been put on again some days previously;
      and we were all landed under the care of the guard. We were marched to the gaol-yard; and
      there our clothes were all daubed over with broad arrows and the initials P. S.—meaning
       'Prisoners' Barracks,' to which establishment we were conducted as soon as the
      ceremony of painting our garments was completed. This barrack had several large day-rooms and
      numerous sleeping wards, the bedsteads being arranged in two tiers, or large platforms, but
      without separation. In every room there was a man in charge who was answerable for the conduct
      of the rest; but no one ever thought of complaining of the misbehaviour of his companions. A
      tread-mill was attached to the building: there were moreover several solitary cells—a species
      of punishment the horrors of which no tongue can describe.
"In the course of a few days we were all divided into sections, according to the degrees of
      punishment which we were to undergo. Stephens and Mac Chizzle were kept at Sydney: I was sent
      with some thirty others to Port Macquarie—a place about two hundred and sixty miles, as the
      crow flies, to the north of Sydney.
"The scenery is magnificent in the neighbourhood of Macquarie Harbour: but the life of the
      convict—oh! that is fearful in the extreme! I know that I was a great criminal—I know that my
      deeds demanded a severe punishment; but death had been preferable to a doom like that!
      Compelled to endure every kind of privation,—shut out from the rest of the world,—restricted
      to a very limited quantity of food, which never included fresh meat,—kept in chains
      and under a military guard with fixed bayonets and loaded fire-arms,—with no indulgence for
      good conduct, but severe penalties, even flogging or solitary confinement, for the smallest
      offences,—constantly toiling in the wet, at felling timber and rolling it to the water,—forced
      to support without murmuring the most terrible hardships,—how did I curse the day when I
      rendered myself liable to the discipline of this hell upon earth! I will give you an idea of
      the horrors of that place:—during the six months that I remained there, nineteen deaths
      occurred amongst two hundred and twenty convicts; and of those nineteen, only five
      were from natural causes. Two were drowned, four were killed by the falling of trees, three
      were shot by the military, and five were murdered by their comrades! And why were those
      murders perpetrated? Because the assassins were tired of life, but had not the courage to
      commit suicide; and therefore they accomplished crimes which were sure to be visited by death
      upon the scaffold!
"The chain-gang to which I belonged was stationed at Philip's Creek; and our business was to
      supply timber for the ship-builders on Sarah's Island. We were lodged in huts of the most
      miserable description; and though our toils were so long and arduous, our rations were
      scarcely sufficient to keep body and soul together. The timber we cut was principally Huon
      pine; no beasts of burden
      were allowed; and we had to roll the trunks of trees to an immense distance. What
      with the humid climate, the want of fresh meat, and the severity of the labour, no man who
      fell ill ever entertained a hope of recovery. Talk of the civilised notions of the
      English—talk of the humane principles of her penal laws,—why, the Inquisition itself could not
      have been more horrible than the doom of the convict at Macquarie Harbour! Again I say, it was
      true that we were great criminals; but surely some adequate mode of punishment—some mode
      involving the means of reformation—might have been devised, without the application
      of so much real physical torture! I have heard or read that when the Inquisition put its
      victims to the rack, it afterwards remanded them to their dungeons, and allowed them leisure
      to recover and be cured;—but in the penal settlement of Port Macquarie those tortures were
      renewed daily—and they killed the miserable sufferers by inches!
"Our rations consisted daily of one pound and a half of flour, from which twelve per cent.
      of bran had been subtracted, one pound and a half of salt meat, and half an ounce of soap. No
      tea—no vegetables. The flour was made into cakes called damper, cooked in a
      frying-pan; and this wasteful mode of preparing it greatly diminished its quantity. Besides,
      divide those rations into three parts, and you will find that the three meals are little
      enough for men toiling hard from sunrise to sunset. The convict who did not keep a good
      look-out on his provisions was certain to be robbed by his comrades; and some men have been
      plundered to such an extent as actually to have been on the very verge of starvation.
"I had not been at Macquarie Harbour more than five months, when Stephens and Mac Chizzle
      arrived, and were added to our chain-gang. This punishment they had incurred for having
      endeavoured to escape from Sydney, where they had been treated with some indulgence, in
      consequence of their station in life previous to their sentence in England. So miserable was
      I, with hard work and scanty food, that I resolved to leave the place, or perish in the
      attempt. I communicated my design to Stephens and Mac Chizzle; and they agreed to accompany
      me. Escape from Macquarie was known to be a most difficult undertaking; and few convicts who
      essayed it were ever able to reach the settlements in other parts of the Colony. They were
      either murdered by their comrades for a supply of food, or perished in the bush. Formidable
      forests had to be traversed; and the chance of catching kangaroos was the only prospect of
      obtaining the means of existence. Nevertheless, I resolved to dare all those horrors and
      fearful risks, rather than remain at Philip's Creek. Five or six others, in addition to
      Stephens and Mac Chizzle, agreed to adopt this desperate venture with me; and one night we
      stole away—to the number of ten—from the huts.
"Yes—we thus set out on this tremendous undertaking, each individual possessing no more food
      than was sufficient for a single meal. And ere the sun rose all our store was consumed; and we
      found ourselves in the middle of a vast forest—without a guide—without victuals—almost without
      a hope! Convicts are not the men to cheer each other: misfortunes have made them selfish,
      brutal, and sulky. We toiled on in comparative silence. One of my companions, who had been ten
      years at Macquarie Harbour, was well acquainted with the mode in which the natives search for
      traces of the opossum; and, when hunger began to press upon us, he examined every tree with a
      hollow limb, and also the adjacent trees for marks of the opossum's claws. For, I must tell
      you, that this animal is so sagacious, that it usually runs up a neighbouring tree and thence
      jumps to the one wherein its retreat is, in order to avoid being traced. The convict to whom I
      have alluded, and whose name was Blackley, at length discovered the trail of an opossum, and
      clambered up the tree in which its hole was found, by means of successive notches in the bark,
      to place the great toe in. Having reached the hole, he probed it with a long stick, and found
      that there actually was an opossum within. Thrusting in his hand, he seized the animal by the
      tail, pulled it out, and killed it by a swinging dash against the trunk of a tree. But this
      was little enough among so many. We, however, made a fire, cooked it, and thus contrived just
      to mitigate the terrible cravings of hunger. The flesh of the opossum is like that of a
      rabbit, and is therefore too delicate to enable a hearty appetite to make a good meal on a
      tenth portion of so small an animal.
"On the following day Blackley managed to kill a kangaroo, weighing about sixty pounds; and
      thus we were supplied with food for three or four days, acting economically. The flesh of the
      kangaroo is much like venison, and is very fine eating. We continued our way amidst the
      forest, which appeared endless; and in due time the kangaroo's flesh was consumed. Blackley
      was unwearied in his exertions to provide more food; and, so much time was wasted in these
      endeavours, that we made but little progress in our journey. And now, to our terror, Blackley
      could find no more opossums—could kill no more kangaroos. We grew desperate: starvation was
      before us. Moody—sulky—glaring on each other with a horribly significant ferocity, we dragged
      ourselves along. Four days elapsed—and not a mouthful of food had we touched. On the fifth
      night we made a fire, and sate round it at considerable distances from each other. We all
      endeavoured to remain awake: we trembled at the approach of drowsiness—for we knew the
       consequences of sleep in our desperate condition. There we sate—none uttering a
      word,—with cracked and bloody lips—parched throats—eyes glowing with cannibal fires,—our minds
      a prey to the most appalling thoughts. At length Mac Chizzle, the lawyer, fell back in a sound
      slumber, having no doubt found it impossible to bear up against the weariness which was
      creeping over him. Then Blackley rose, and went farther into the wood. It required no ghost to
      tell us that he had gone to cut a club for a horrible purpose. The most breathless silence
      prevailed. At length there was a strange rustling amongst the trees at a little distance; and
      then cries of indescribable agony fell upon our ears. These tokens of distress were in the
      voice of Blackley, who called us by name, one after another. A vague idea of the real truth
      rivetted us to the spot; and in a short time the cries ceased altogether. Oh! what a night of
      horror was that! An hour had elapsed since Blackley's disappearance; and we had ceased to
      trouble ourselves concerning his fate:—our own intolerable cravings for food were the sole
      objects of our thoughts. Nor was Mac Chizzle doomed to escape death. A convict named Felton
      determined to execute
      the purpose which Blackley had entertained—though in a different manner. Afraid
      to venture away from the party to cut a bludgeon, he drew a large clasp-knife from his pocket,
      and plunged the long sharp blade into the breast of the sleeper. A cry of horror burst from
      Stephens and myself; and we rushed forward—now that it was unfortunately too late—to save the
      victim. We were well aware of the man's intentions when he approached his victim; but it was
      not until the blow was struck that we had the courage to interfere. It was, however, as I have
      said—too late! Mac Chizzle expired without a groan.
"I cannot dwell upon this scene: depraved—wicked—criminal as I was in many respects, my soul
      revolted from the idea of cannibalism, now that the opportunity of appeasing my hunger by such
      horrible means was within my reach. Stephens and I retired a little from the rest, and turned
      our backs upon the frightful work that was in progress. Again I say—oh! the horrors of that
      night! I was starving—and food was near. But what food? The flesh of a fellow-creature! In
      imagination I followed the entire process that was in operation so close behind me; and
      presently the hissing of the flesh upon the embers, and the odour of the awful cookery,
      convinced me that the meal would soon be served up. Then how did I wrestle with my own
      inclinations! And Stephens, I could well perceive, was also engaged in a terrific warfare with
      the promptings of hunger. But we resisted the temptation: yes—we resisted it;—and our
      companions did not trouble themselves to invite us to their repast.
"At length the morning dawned upon that awful and never-to-be-forgotten night. The fire was
      now extinguished; but near the ashes lay the entrails and the head of the murdered man. The
      cannibals had completely anatomised the corpse, and had wrapped up in their shirts (which they
      took off for the purpose) all that they chose to carry away with them. Not a word was spoken
      amongst us. The last frail links of sympathy—if any really had existed—seemed to have been
      broken by the incidents of the preceding night. Six men had partaken of the horrible repast;
      and they evidently looked on each other with loathing, and on Stephens and myself with
      suspicion. We all with one accord cut thick sticks, and advanced in the direction whence
      Blackley's cries had proceeded a few hours previously. His fate was that which we had
      suspected: an enormous snake was coiled around the wretch's corpse—licking it with its long
      tongue, to cover it with saliva for the purpose of deglutition. We attacked the monstrous
      reptile, and killed it. Its huge coils had actually squeezed our unfortunate comrade to death!
      Then—for the first time for many, many years—did a religious sentiment steal into my soul; and
      I murmured to myself: 'Surely this was the judgment of God upon a man who had meditated
       murder.'
"That same day Stephens and myself gave our companions the slip, and struck into another
      direction together. We were fortunate enough to kill a kangaroo; and we made a hearty meal
      upon a portion of its flesh. Then how did we rejoice that we had withstood the temptation of
      the cannibal banquet! Stephens fell upon his knees and prayed aloud: I imitated his example—I
      joined in his thanksgiving. We husbanded our resources as much as possible; and God was
      merciful to us. We succeeded in killing another kangaroo, even before the first was entirely
      consumed; and this new supply enabled us to reach a settlement without further experiencing
      the pangs of hunger. Prudence now compelled us to separate; for though we had rid ourselves of
      our chains, we were still in our convict garb; and it was evident that two persons so clad
      were more likely to attract unpleasant notice, than one individual skulking about by himself.
      We accordingly parted; and from that moment I have never heard of Stephens. Whether he
      succeeded in escaping from the colony altogether, or whether he took to the bush again and
      perished, I know not:—that he was not retaken I am sure, because, were he captured, he would
      have been sent to Norfolk Island; and that he did not visit that most horrible of all
      the penal settlements—at least during a period of eighteen months after our escape from
      Macquarie—I am well aware, for reasons which I shall soon explain.
"In fact, I was not long at large after I separated with Stephens. My convict-dress betrayed
      me to a party of soldiers: I was arrested, taken to Sydney, tried, and sentenced to
      transportation to Norfolk Island. Before I left England in 1836, and since my return towards
      the end of 1839, I have heard a great many persons talk about Norfolk Island; but no one
      seemed to know much about it. I will therefore tell you something concerning it now.
"A thousand miles to the eastward of Sydney there are three islands close together. As you
      advance towards them in a ship from Sydney, Philip Island, which is very high land, and has a
      bold peak to the south, comes in view: close beyond it the lower hills of Norfolk Island,
      crowned with lofty pines, appear in sight; and between those two islands is a small and
      sterile speck called Nepean Island. Norfolk Island is six miles and a half long, and four
      broad—a miserable dot in the ocean compared to the vast tract of Australia. The soil is
      chiefly basaltic, and rises into hills covered with grass and forest. Mount Pitt—the loftiest
      eminence in the island—is twelve hundred feet above the level of the sea. The Norfolk Island
      pine shoots to a height of a hundred feet,—sometimes growing in clumps, elsewhere singly, on
      the grassy parts of the island, even to the very verge of the shore, where its roots are
      washed by the sea at high water. The apple-fruited guava, the lemon, grapes, figs, coffee,
      olives, pomegranates, strawberries, and melons have been introduced, and are cultivated
      successfully. The island is every where inaccessible, save at an opening in a low reef
      fronting the little bay; and that is the point where the settlement is situated. The
      Prisoners' Barracks are pretty much upon the same plan as those at Sydney, and which I
      described to you just now. There is a room, called the Court-House, where the Protestant
      prisoners meet on Sunday to hear prayers; and there is another, called the Lumber-Yard room,
      for the Roman Catholics. The prayers in both places are read by prisoners. The principal
      buildings in the settlement are the Commandant's Residence, the Military Barracks, the
      Penitentiary, the Gaol, and the Hospital. The convicts are principally employed in quarrying
      stone; and as no gunpowder is used in blasting the rocks, and the stone is raised by means of
      levers, the labour is even more crushing than that of wood-felling at Port Macquarie.
      The prisoners, moreover, have to work in irons; and the food is not only
      insufficient, but bad—consisting only of dry maize bread and hard salt meat. Were it not for
      the supply of wild fruits in the island, the scurvy would rage like a pestilence. Between
      Macquarie Harbour and Norfolk Island I can only draw this distinction—that the former is
       Purgatory, and the latter Hell!
"There is no attempt to reform the prisoners in Norfolk Island, beyond prayer-reading—and
      this is of scarcely any benefit. The convicts are too depraved to be amended by mere moral
      lessons: they want education; they require to be treated like human beings,
      instead of brute beasts, criminal though they are; they need a sufficiency of wholesome
       food, to enable them to toil with something approaching a good will; they ought to be
       protected against the tyranny of overseers, who send them to gaol for the most
      trivial offences, or on the slightest suspicions; they should not be forced to labour in
       chains which gall their ankles almost to the bone, when a guard with loaded muskets is
      ever near, and seeing that shackles on the legs would not prevent violence with the hands were
      they inclined to have recourse to it; nor should they be constantly treated as if they
       were merely wild beasts whom it is impossible to tame save by means of privation,
       heart-breaking toil, and the constant sense of utter degradation. How can men be
      redeemed—reclaimed—reformed by such treatment as this? Let punishment be terrible—not
      horrible. It is monstrous to endeavour to render the criminal more obstinate—to make the
      dangerous one more ferocious—to crush in the soul every inducement to amend—to convert vice
      into hardened recklessness. The tortures of semi-starvation and overwhelming toil, and the
      system of retaining men's minds in a state of moral abasement and degradation in their own
      eyes, will never lead to reform. When at Macquarie Harbour, or at Norfolk Island, I have often
      thought how comparatively easy it would be to reclaim even the very worst among the convicts.
      Teach them practically that while there is life there is hope,—that it is never
       too late to repent,—that man can show mercy to the greatest sinner, even as God
      does,—that the most degraded mind may rise from the depths of its abasement,—that society
      seeks reformation and prevention in respect to crime, and not vengeance,—that the Christian
      religion, in a word, exists in the heart as well as in a book. But what sentiments do the
      convicts entertain? They are taught, by oppressive treatment, to lose sight of their own
      turpitude, and therefore to consider that all mankind is bent on inflicting a demoniac
      vengeance upon them;—they look upon the authorities as their persecutors;—they begin to fancy
      that they are worms which are justified in turning on those who tread them under foot;—they
      swear, and blaspheme, and talk obscenely, merely because there is no earthly solace left
       them save in hardening their own hearts against all kindly sympathies and emotions;—they
      receive the Word of God with suspicion, because man does not practically help them to a belief
      in the divine assurance relative to the efficacy of repentance;—they are compelled by terrific
      and unceasing hardships to look upon the tears of a contrite heart as the proofs of moral
      weakness:—and, in a word, they study how to avoid reflections which can lead, so far as they
      can see, to no beneficial end. They therefore welcome hardness of heart, obstinacy, and
      recklessness of disposition as an actual means of escape from thoughts which would, under
      favourable circumstances, lead to moral amendment and reformation.
"You may be surprised to hear such ideas from my lips; but I have pondered much and often
      upon this subject. And if ever these words which I am now uttering to you, Henry Holford,
      should find their way into print,—if ever my narrative, with its various reflections, should
      go forth to the world,—be you well assured that these ideas will set people thinking on the
      grand point—whether society punishes to prevent crime and to reclaim the offender, or
       merely to avenge itself upon him?
"My own prospects were gloomy enough. My life was to be passed in exile, misery, and
      torture. I loathed my associates. They took all possible pains to tease and annoy each other.
      They converted a beautiful spot—one of the loveliest islands in the world—into a perfect hell
      upon earth;—and seemed determined to supply any deficiency which the authorities had left in
      the sum of our unhappiness. They concocted various schemes of mischief, and then the most
      hardened would betray their comrades merely for the pleasure of seeing them flogged! I never
      shall forget a convict saying to me one day, 'I doubt the existence of a God; but I wish, if
      there is one, that he would take away my life, for I am so very miserable. I have only six
      years more to serve; and I am determined either to escape, or to murder some one and get
      hanged for it.'—This man's name was Anson; and from that moment he and I had frequent
      conversations together relative to an escape from the island. But how few were our hopes?
      Surrounded by the ocean—pent up in so narrow a space, as it were—so distant from all other
      lands—fearful to confide in our companions—and unable to carry our scheme into effect without
      assistance, we were frequently induced to give it up in despair.
"Not very far from the Commandant's house was a singular little cave, hollowed in the rugged
      limestone that forms two low hills,—the flat and the reef on the south of the island. This
      cave was near a lime-kiln, and was concealed by a stone drawn over its mouth. I had been
      nearly eighteen months on the island, (during which time, as I before said, Stephens was not
      sent to join the gangs; and therefore I concluded that he either perished in Australia, or
      effected his escape to Europe,)—eighteen months, I say, had elapsed, when Anson and I were one
      day at work in the lime-kiln, with a small gang. When the mid-day meal-time came, he and I
      strolled apart from the rest; and none of the sentries took any notice of us, because escape
      from that point in the broad day-light was impossible. As we were walking along and
      conversing, we discovered the cave. This circumstance gave a new impulse to our ideas, and to
      our hopes of an escape; and a few days afterwards, we put our plan into execution. We enlisted
      two other convicts in the scheme,—two men in whom we imagined that more confidence was to be
      placed than in any of the rest. By their aid we contrived to purloin at dusk a sack of
      biscuits; and this we conveyed to the cave. On the next night one of our new accomplices
      contrived to rob a small house of entertainment for seamen, of three suits of sailors'
      clothes; and these were conveyed to the cave. Our plans were now all matured. A small decked
      yacht, cutter-rigged, and belonging to the
      Commandant, lay close by the shore; and we knew that there were only a man and a
      boy on board at that time. Our project was a desperate one; but the risk was worth running,
      seeing the result to be gained—namely, our freedom. When our arrangements were completed, we
      all four one evening absconded as we were returning home from the day's toils, and took refuge
      in the cave. No time was to be lost. About midnight, Anson and I swam off to the yacht,
      contrived to get on board, seized each a windlass-bar, and, descending to the cabin, mastered
      the man and the boy. We bound them in such a way that they could not leave their hammocks; and
      then we fastened down the hatchway to drown their cries in case they should shout for
      assistance. We next lowered the little skiff, and returned to land. Our companions joined us,
      with the bag of biscuit and the clothes, at a point previously agreed upon; and we all
      succeeded in reaching the cutter in safety. Then we set sail; and, favoured by the darkness of
      the night, got clear away without having excited on shore a suspicion that the yacht had moved
      from its moorings.
"As we had conjectured, there was very little provision on board; for the Commandant never
      used the yacht for more than a few hours' trip at a time. We had therefore done wisely to
      provide the biscuit; but there was not two days' supply of meat on board. We accordingly
      steered for the back of Philip Island, which we knew to abound in pigs and goats, and to be
      uninhabited by man. Anson and another of our companions went on shore with fire-arms, which we
      had found in the cutter; and within two hours after day-light they shot four pigs and thirteen
      goats. Myself and the other convict, who remained on board to take care of the vessel and
      guard the seaman and the boy, caught several king-fish and rock-cod. We were thus well
      provisioned; and another trip to the shore filled our water-casks. We next proposed to the
      seaman and boy either to join us, or to take the skiff and return to Norfolk Island as best
      they might. They preferred the latter offer; and we accordingly suffered them to depart, after
      compelling the sailor to exchange his clothes for one of our convict suits; so that we had now
      a proper garb each. In their presence we had talked of running for New Caledonia—an Island to
      the north of Norfolk Island; but the moment they were gone, we set sail for New Zealand, which
      is precisely in a contrary direction—being to the south of Norfolk Island. Our craft was but
      little better than a cockle-boat: it was, however, decked; fine weather prevailed; and
      moreover, it was better to die by drowning than perish by the gradual tortures of a penal
      settlement.
"We were in sight of New Zealand, when a fearful storm came on suddenly at an early hour on
      the thirteenth morning after we had quitted Norfolk Island. A tremendous sea broke over our
      little craft, and washed poor Anson over-board. The other two convicts and myself did all we
      could to save the vessel, and run her into a bay which we now descried in the distance; but
      our inexperience in nautical matters was put to a severe test. When our condition was
      apparently hopeless, and we expected that the sea would swallow us up, a large bark hove in
      sight. We made signals of distress; and the vessel steered towards us. But a mountainous wave
      struck the stern of the cutter, and stove in her timbers. She immediately began to fill. We
      cut away the boom, and clung to it as to a last hope. The vessel went down; and, small as it
      was, it formed a vortex which for a few moments sucked us under, spar and all. But we rose
      again to the surface, clinging desperately to the boom. Suddenly one of my comrades uttered a
      fearful cry—a cry of such wild agony that it rings in my ears every time I think of that
      horrible incident. I glanced towards him: the water was for an instant tinged with blood—a
      shark had bitten off one of the wretched man's legs! Oh! what an agony of fear I experienced
      then. The poor creature continued to shriek in an appalling manner for a few seconds: then he
      loosened his hold upon the spar, and disappeared in the raging element. My only surviving
      companion and myself exchanged looks of unutterable horror.
"We were drifting rapidly in the direction of the bark, which on its side was advancing
      towards us. When within hail, it lowered a boat. But I was destined to be the only survivor of
      the four convicts who had escaped from Norfolk Island. When only a few yards from the boat, my
      companion suddenly relaxed his hold upon the spar, and sank with a loud cry—to rise no more.
      The water was not tinged with blood—and therefore I do not suppose that he was attacked by a
      shark: most probably a sudden cramp seized him;—but, whatever the cause, he perished! I was
      dragged in an exhausted state into the boat, and was speedily safe on board the bark.
"The vessel was a trading one, and bound for Hobart Town, whence it was to sail for England.
      I gave so plausible an account of the shipwrecked cutter, that the real truth was not
      suspected, especially as I was attired in a sailor's dress; and as the bark was not to remain
      many days at Hobart Town, where, moreover, I was not known, I entertained the most sanguine
      hopes of being able to ensure my safe return to England. In three weeks,—after encountering
      much bad weather—we entered the Derwent; and, taking in a pilot, were carried safe up to
      Sullivan's Cove.
"Hobart Town is the capital of Van Diemen's Land, and is beautifully placed on the banks of
      an estuary called the Derwent. The streets are spacious: the houses are built of brick; and
      the roofs, covered with shingles, have the appearance of being slated. Mount Wellington rises
      behind the town to the height of 4000 feet, and is almost entirely clothed with forests. There
      is in Hobart Town a spacious House of Correction for females: it is called the Factory, and
      contained at that time about two hundred and fifty prisoners. They were employed in picking
      and spinning wool, and in washing for the Hospital, Orphan-School, and other institutions. The
      women were dressed in a prison garb, and had their hair cut close, which they naturally
      considered a grievous infliction of tyranny. When they misbehaved themselves, they were put
      into solitary confinement; and I heard that many of them had gone raving mad while enduring
      that horrible mental torture. I saw a chain-gang of a hundred and ten convicts, employed in
      raising a causeway across a muddy flat in the Derwent: they looked miserably unhealthy, pale,
      and emaciated, being half-starved, over-worked, and compelled to drink very bad water. The
      Government-House is a fine building, on the banks of the Derwent, and about a mile from the
      town. The Penitentiary at Hobart Town contains
      about six hundred prisoners, and is the principal receptacle for newly-arrived
      convicts. They are sent out in gangs, under overseers and guards, to work on the roads, or as
      carpenters, builders, sawyers, or masons, in the various departments.

"After remaining almost a fortnight at Hobart Town, the bark sailed for England, by way of
      Cape Horn; and I was now relieved from all fears of detection—at least for the present. As I
      have spoken of the condition of the female convicts in Hobart Town, I may as well give you
      some account of how transportation affects women; for you may be sure that I heard enough of
      that subject both at Sydney and at Macquarie Harbour. A female-convict ship is fitted up on
      precisely the same plan as that of the men, with the addition of shelves whereon to stow away
      the tea-crockery. The women's rations are the same as the men's, with the extra comforts of
      tea and sugar. This they have for breakfast, and oatmeal for supper. No guard of soldiers is
      required on board: nor is there a bulk-head across the upper deck in mid-ships. Instead of
       captains of the vessel, there are matrons appointed by the surgeon to take care of
      the morals of the rest; and these matrons are usually old brothel-keepers or
      procuresses, who know how to feign a sanctity which produces a favourable impression in their
      behalf. Women convicts are dreadfully quarrelsome; and their language is said to be more
      disgusting and filthy than that of the men. However vigilant the surgeon may be, it is
      impossible altogether to prevent intercourse between the females and the sailors; and it often
      happens that some of the fair ones, on their arrival in the colony, are in a way to
      increase the Australian population. Perhaps the surgeon himself may take a fancy to one or two
      of the best-looking; and these are sure to obtain great indulgences—such as being appointed
      nurses to the sick, or being permitted to remain on the sick-list throughout the voyage, which
      is an excuse for allowing them wine and other little comforts. The women always speak
       to and of each other as ladies; and the old procuresses, when
      chosen as matrons, are treated with the respectful Mrs. Thus it is always,
       'Ladies, come for'ard for your pork;' or 'Ladies, come up for your
      biscuit;' or 'Ladies, the puddings are
      cooked.' Of an evening they dance or sing,—and as often quarrel and fight. This
      cannot be wondered at, when it is remembered that there is no attempt at classification; and
      women who may have been chaste in person, though criminal in other respects, are compelled to
      herd with prostitutes of all degrees, from the lowest trull that skulks in the courts leading
      out of Fleet Street to the fashionable nymph who displays her charms at the theatre. The very
      chastity of a woman who has been sentenced perhaps for robbing furnished lodgings, or
      plundering her master in her capacity of servant, or for committing a forgery, is made a
      reproach to her by the prostitutes and old procuresses; and her life is miserable. Moreover,
      it is next to impossible that she can escape a contamination which prepares her for a life of
      profligacy when she reaches the colony.
"Before the female convict-ship leaves the Thames, numbers of old procuresses and
      brothel-keepers go on board to take leave of the girls with whom they are acquainted. These
      hags, dressed out in their gayest garb, and pretending to be overwhelmed with grief (while
      they really are with gin), represent themselves to be the mothers or aunts of the 'poor
       dear creatures' who have got into trouble, and assure the surgeon that their so-called
      daughters or nieces were most excellent girls and bore exemplary characters previous to their
      present 'misfortune.' The surgeon—if a novice, or a humane man—believes the tale, and
      is sure to treat with kindness the 'poor creatures' thus recommended to him. About
      twenty years ago a Religious Society in London sent out, in an emigrant ship, twelve
       'reclaimed unfortunate girls,' with the hope that they might form good matrimonial
      connexions among the free settlers in the colony; there always having been—especially at
      first—a great dearth of European females in Australia. These girls were called the Twelve
       Apostles; and all England rang with the good work which had been accomplished by the
      Religious Society. But on the arrival of the Twelve Apostles at Sydney, seven of them were
      found to be in the family way by the sailors; and the others immediately entered on a course
      of unbounded licentiousness.[22]
"A few days before the female convict-vessel arrives at Sydney, the women—old and young—busy
      themselves in getting ready their finery for landing. The debarkation of female convicts
      always takes place with great effect. The prostitutes appear in their most flaunting attire;
      and many of them have gold ornaments about them. They are then sent to the Paramatta Factory.
      This establishment cannot be looked on as a place of punishment—nor as a place of reformation.
      The inmates are well fed, and are put to no labour. There is an extensive garden, in which
      they can walk at pleasure. Some of them are allotted to free settlers requiring servants; but
      the grand hope of the female convict is to marry. This prospect is materially aided by the
      fact that both free settlers and ticket-of-leave convicts are allowed to seek for help-mates
      in the Factory. When they call for that purpose, the fair penitents are drawn up in a row; and
      the wife-seeking individual inspects them as a general does his army, or a butcher the sheep
      in Smithfield Market. If he fancies one of the candidates, he beckons her from the rank, and
      they retire to a distance to converse. Should a matrimonial arrangement be made, the business
      is soon finished by the aid of a clergyman; but if no amicable understanding is come to, the
      nymph returns to the rank, and the swain chooses another—and so on, until the object of his
      visit is accomplished. So anxious are the unmarried free settlers or the ticket-of-leave
      convicts to change their single state of blessedness, and so ready are the fair sex to meet
      their wishes, that few women whose husbands die remain widows a couple of days; some not more
      than four-and-twenty hours. A few years before I was in the colony, an old settler saw a
      convict-girl performing penance on a market-day, with her gown-tail drawn over her head, for
      drunkenness and disorderly conduct in the Factory. He walked straight up to her—regardless of
      the hootings of the crowd—and proposed marriage. She was candid enough to confess to him that
      she was five months gone in the family way by a master to whom she had been allotted ere she
      returned to the Factory; but the amorous swain, who was nearly sixty, was so much struck by
      her black eyes and plump shape, that he expressed his readiness to take her 'for better or
      worse;' and she had not left the place of punishment an hour, ere she was married to one of
      the richest settlers in the colony.[23]
"I will tell you one more anecdote relative to Australian marriages. A very handsome woman
      was transported for shop-lifting—her third offence of the kind. She left a husband behind her
      in England. On her arrival at Sydney she was allotted to an elderly gentleman, a free settler,
      and who, being a bachelor, sought to make her his mistress. She, however, resisted his
      overtures, hoping that he would make her his wife, as he was not aware that she had a husband
      in her native country. Time wore on, he urgent—she obstinate,—he declining matrimonial bonds.
      At length she received a black-edged letter from her mother in England; and upon being
      questioned by her master, she stated 'that its contents made a great alteration in her
       circumstances.' More she would not tell him. He was afraid of losing his handsome
      servant; and agreed to marry her. They were united accordingly. When the nuptial knot was
      indissolubly tied, he begged his beloved wife to explain the nature of the black-edged letter.
       'There is now no need for any further mystery,' she said, 'The truth is, I could
       not marry you before, because I had a husband living in England. That black-edged letter
       conveyed to me the welcome news that he was hanged five months ago at the Old Bailey; and
       thus nothing now stands in the way of our happiness.'—And that woman made the rich
      settler a most exemplary wife.
"I have now given you an insight into the morals of the female, as well as those of the male
      convicts; and you may also perceive that while transportation is actually a means of pleasing
      variety of scene and habits to the woman, it is an earthly hell to the man. I know that
      transportation is spoken of as something very light—a mere change of climate—amongst those
      thieves in England who have never yet crossed the water; but they are woefully mistaken!
      Transportation was once a trivial punishment, when all convicts were allotted to
      settlers, and money would purchase tickets-of-leave; or when a convict's wife, if he had one,
      might go out in the next ship with all the swag which his crimes had produced, and on her
      arrival in the colony apply
      for her husband to be allotted to her as her servant, by which step he became a
      free man, opened a public-house or some kind of shop, and made a fortune. Those were glorious
      times for convicts; but all that system has been changed. Now you have Road-Gangs, and
      Hulk-Gangs, and Quarrying-Gangs,—men who work in chains, and who cannot obtain a sufficiency
      of food! There is also Norfolk Island—a Garden of Eden in natural loveliness, rendered an
      earthly hell by human occupation. Oh! let not the opinion prevail that transportation is no
      punishment; let not those who are young in the ways of iniquity, pursue their career under the
      impression that exile to Australia is nothing more than a pleasant change of scene! They will
      too soon discover how miserably they are mistaken; and when they feel the galling chain upon
      their ankles,—when they find themselves toiling amidst the incessant damps of Macquarie, or on
      the hard roads of Van Diemen's Land, or in the quarries of Norfolk Island,—when they are
      labouring in forests where every step may arouse a venomous snake whose bite is death, or
      where a falling tree may crush them beneath its weight,—when they are exposed to the brutality
      of overseers, or the still more intolerable cruelty of their companions,—when they sleep in
      constant dread of being murdered by their fellow-convicts, and awake only to the dull monotony
      of a life of intense and heart-breaking labour,—then will they loathe their very existence,
      and dare all the perils of starvation, or the horrors of cannibalism, in order to escape from
      those scenes of ineffable misery!
"But I need say no more upon this subject. The bark, in which I worked my passage to Europe,
      reached England in safety; and I was once more at large in my native country. Yes—I was free
      to go whithersoever I would—and to avenge myself on him who had betrayed me to justice! The
      hope of some day consummating that vengeance had never deserted me from the moment I was
      sentenced in the Central Criminal Court. It had animated me throughout all the miseries, the
      toils, and the hardships which I have related to you. It inspired me with courage to dare the
      dangers of an escape from Macquarie: its effect was the same when I resolved upon quitting
      Norfolk Island. I have once had my mortal foe within my reach; but my hand dealt not the blow
      with sufficient force. It will not fail next time. I know that vengeance is a crime; but I
      cannot subdue those feelings which prompt me to punish the man whose perfidy sent me into
      exile. In all other respects I am reformed—completely reformed. Not that the authorities in
      Australia or Norfolk Island have in any way contributed to this moral change which has come
      over me: no—my own meditations and reflections have induced me to toil in order to earn an
      honest livelihood. I will never steal again: I will die sooner. I would also rather die by my
      own hand than return to the horrors of Macquarie or Norfolk Island. But my vengeance—Oh! I
      must gratify my vengeance;—and I care not what may become of me afterwards!"
Crankey Jem then related so much of his adventures with the gipsies as did not involve a
      betrayal of any of their secrets, and concluded his recital by a concise account of his sudden
      meeting with, and attack upon, the Resurrection Man at a certain house in St.
      Giles's.
</div></body></text></TEI>