<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="83">
CHAPTER LXXXIII. THE BLACK CHAMBER AGAIN.
A FEW days after the incidents just narrated, the following letters were opened in the Black
      Chamber of the General Post-Office.
The first was from the Under Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Castelcicala to the
      representative of that state at the British court:—

"Montoni, Castelcicala.
"The undersigned is desired by his lordship the Marquis of Gerrano, Minister of Foreign
       Affairs, to inform your excellency that the information you forwarded relative to the
       Englishwoman Eliza Sydney, has failed to produce the desired effect. Your excellency stated
       that Mrs. Arlington, the correspondent of the said Eliza Sydney, was the mistress of the Earl
       of Warrington; and that Eliza Sydney herself had been confined for two years in a criminal
       prison in England. Your excellency moreover forwarded the English newspapers of the time,
       containing a full and detailed report of her crime and trial. These statements have failed to
       produce any effect in a certain quarter, in consequence of the infatuation of a high
       personage in respect to this Eliza Sydney, and the apparent frankness (as the Marquis of
       Gerrano has learnt) with which she avowed the entire history of her past life to the high
       personage alluded to. It is now of the greatest consequence that your excellency should
       ascertain whether Eliza Sydney's conduct has ever been tainted with incontinence; whether, in
       a word, she has not indulged in immoral and vicious courses. The result of your excellency's
       inquiries must be forwarded by courier without
        delay; as you will perceive, by the inclosed copy of a ducal ordinance issued
       this morning, that the infatuation above alluded to grows to a very dangerous point.
"The undersigned avails himself of this opportunity to state that the Marquis of Gerrano is
       greatly afflicted at the perverse and obstinate conduct of the Prince Alberto, in steadily
       refusing the offers of a pension for life made by the government of his reigning Highness
       through your excellency. The Marquis of Gerrano desires your Excellency to redouble your
       assiduity in inducing the prince to accept the terms proposed, for which purpose a farther
       delay of three months will be granted; and should his reply then continue unfavourable, the
       government of his Highness will adopt measures to ensure the succession to the ducal throne
       of Castelcicala to a Neapolitan Prince.
"The undersigned renews his expressions of perfect consideration toward your
       excellency.
"BARON RUPERTO, "Under Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.
"July 13, 1839."


The following is a copy of the ducal ordinance to which reference was made in the above
      letter:—

"ANGELO III., BY THE GRACE OF GOD, GRAND DUKE OF CASTELCICALA,
"To all present and to come, Greeting:
"We have ordered and do order that which follows:—
"I. The style and title of Marchioness of Ziani are conferred upon the Signora Eliza
       Sydney.
"II. A pension of one thousand ducats annually shall be paid to the Marchioness of Ziani
       from the public treasury.
"III. Our Minister Secretary of State for the Department of the Interior will execute the
       first article of this ordinance; and our Minister Secretary of State for the Department of
       Finance will execute the second article.
"By the Grand Duke, ANGELO III. "MARQUIS OF VINCENZA, "Minister of the
       Interior.
 "COUNT OF MARCOTTI, "Minister of Finance.
"July 13, 1839."

The next letter, read in the Black Chamber upon this occasion, ran as follows:—

"Montoni, Castelcicala.
"I received your charming letters, my dearest Diana, and return you my most sincere thanks
       for the kind expressions of love and friendship which they contain, and for the advice which
       you proffer me. You moreover inform me that you have shown my letters of March, April, and
       May, to the Earl of Warrington; and that his lordship approves of the cautious manner in
       which I have acted, and recommends me to accept the honourable offer of marriage made to me
       by his Highness Angelo III. I
        assured you that his highness never once insulted me by hinting at the
       possibility of a connexion upon any other terms than those of marriage; and when he proposed
       a morganatic union, it was merely in accordance with the practice of many European
       sovereigns. I however expressed myself firmly to his serene highness upon this head, stating
       that, although a morganatic marriage was perfectly valid so far as the religious ceremonies
       went, still it was not strictly legal, and would not please those who wished me well in
       England.
"In my last letter I informed you that some one had represented to the Grand Duke my
       misfortunes in England. Happily this announcement failed to produce any change in his conduct
       or views with regard to me, as I had previously made him acquainted with all those
       particulars, of my own accord.
"In a word, my dearest Diana, his Serene Highness has offered me his hand,—offered to raise
       me to a seat by his side on the ducal throne,—offered to make me his bride in sight of the
       world. Could I refuse? or why should I? You ask me if I can love his Serene Highness? Ah! how
       can I help revering one who shows such love for me? And then, human nature has its weak
       points; and rank, honour, wealth, and distinction cannot fail to attract even one naturally
       so retiring as myself. Oh! how pleasant will it be to possess riches and influence for the
       mere purpose of doing good!
"Well, then—all is decided: I am to be Grand Duchess of Castelcicala. The marriage is to
       take place in six weeks from the present date. The daughters of General Grachia are to be my
       bridesmaids. As a preliminary step towards this high honour, the Grand Duke has conferred
       upon me a title and a pension. To the world I am now the Marchioness of Ziani: to you, Diana,
       I am still, and always shall be—Eliza Sydney.
"I was surprised to learn from you that the villain Montague Greenwood has succeeded in
       obtaining a seat in the English Parliament. Ever since I have had power and wealth in the
       prospective, I have meditated upon the best means of protecting others from that villany
       which he designed against me, but which providence so signally frustrated. At length I
       thought of a plan, and despatched a trusty person to England a few days ago to execute it.
       This person has instructions from me to call upon you on his arrival in England, and
       communicate to you my scheme. He is also the bearer of a trifling token of my sincere
       friendship and gratitude towards you, dear Diana, and which little token I hope you will
       accept for my sake.
"I need scarcely say that you will oblige me by tendering my best thanks to the Earl of
       Warrington for the kind advice he sent me through you, and renew to him the expression of my
       eternal gratitude for all he has done for me.
"You shall hear again shortly from your devoted and attached
"ELIZA SYDNEY.
"July 13, 1839."

The third letter read upon this occasion, was addressed to Count Alteroni, Richmond, and ran
      in the following manner:—

"Montoni, Castelcicala,
 "July 13, 1839.
"Things, my lord, are growing towards a crisis in this country. No. 29 is literally
       infatuated with No. 1. He has this morning created her a marchioness: and in a month or six
       weeks he will, it is said, espouse her. There is no possibility of preventing this, No. 29
       being quite despotic; and now his foolish ministers see their mistake in having maintained
       him in his absolutism, and refused the country a constitution."

"Number 29, you will understand," interrupted the Examiner, "evidently means the Grand Duke;
      and No. 1 represents Eliza Sidney. Proceed."
The clerk who read the letter continued as follows:—

"The ministers know not what to do. They are at their wits' end. I know for a fact that
       they obtained from England certain information relative to No. 1, which proved that she had
       been in a criminal gaol; but No. 29 made no account of it. No. 1 is very beautiful;
       fascinating in manners; somewhat shy and reserved; and yet amiable. She is also accomplished.
       When she first came to Montoni she spoke the Italian language imperfectly: she now speaks it
       fluently;—and this knowledge she has acquired in a few months. There can be no doubt that she
       will exercise an immense influence over No. 29, if she choose to make use of it. And who
       knows what a woman, suddenly rising from private life to the first ducal throne in the world,
       may do? She does not, however, seem to be ambitious. Nevertheless, something ought to be
       done. If this marriage take place, you are well aware that issue may follow, for No. 1 is
       young; and in that case * * * * I really think that if your lordship were to land suddenly
       upon the Castelcicalan coast, without delay, this union might be prevented. I hinted to your
       lordship in my last letter the immense ascendancy gained by No. 1 over No. 29: your
       lordship's reply astonished me. Your lordship states that if No. 29 choose to marry according
       to his fancy, no human power has a right to control him. With due deference, is not this
       carrying liberality of opinion a little too far? Your lordship expresses a determination to
       trust to the issue of events, and do nothing that may stand the chance of plunging the
       country into a civil war. These self-denying sentiments are no doubt highly patriotic and
       noble;—but is it in human nature to resign without a struggle * * * * In any case I am your
       lordship's faithful servant, and am anxious only to execute your lordship's wishes. I
       therefore await your lordship's instructions.
"NUMBER 17."

"You have taken copies of these letters?" said the Examiner.
"Yes, sir," replied the clerk thus addressed.
"Then let them be immediately conveyed to the office of the Secretary of State for Foreign
      Affairs, as their contents are highly important."
"Yes, sir."
And this order was forthwith obeyed.
</div></body></text></TEI>