<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="49">
CHAPTER XLIX. THE DOCUMENT.
THE more civilization progresses, and the more refined becomes the human intellect, so does
      human iniquity increase.
It is true that heinous and appalling crimes are less frequent;—but every kind of social,
      domestic, political, and commercial intrigue grows more into vogue: human ingenuity is more
      continually on the rack to discover the means of defrauding a neighbour or cheating the
      world;—the sacred name of religion is called in to aid and further the nefarious devices of
      the schemer;—hypocrisy is the cloak which conceals modern acts of turpitude, as dark nights
      were trusted to for the concealment of the bloody deeds of old: mere brute force is now less
      frequently resorted to; but the refinements of education or the exercise of duplicity are the
      engines chiefly used for purposes of plunder. The steel engraver's art, and the skill of the
      caligrapher, are mighty implements of modern misdeed:—years and years are expended in
      calculating the chances of cards and dice;—education, manners, and good looks are essential to
      the formation of the adventurers of the present day;—the Bankruptcy Court itself is a frequent
      avenue to the temple of fortune;—and, in order to suit this new and refined system of things,
      the degrees of vices themselves are qualified by different names, so that he who gambles at a
      gaming-table is a scamp, and he who propagates a lie upon the Exchange and gambles
      accordingly, and with success, is a respectable financier. Chicanery, upon a small scale, and
      in a miserable dark office, is a degradation;—but the delicate and elaborate chicanery of
      politics, by which a statesman is enabled to outwit parties, or deceive whole nations, is a
      masterpiece of human talent! To utter a falsehood in private life, to suit a private end, is
      to cut one's-self off from all honourable society:—but to lie day and night in a public
      journal—to lie habitually and boldly in print—to lie in a manner the most shameless and
      barefaced in the editorial columns of a newspaper, is not only admissible, but conventional,
      and a proof of skill, tact, and talent.
Thus is modern society constituted:—let him deny the truth of the picture who can!
London is filled with Mr. Greenwoods: they are to be found in numbers at the West End. Do
      not for one moment believe, reader, that our portrait of this character is exaggerated.
In pursuing the thread of a narrative like this, there will naturally be found much to
      alarm, to astonish, and to shock: but however appalling the picture, it teaches lessons which
      none can regret to learn. The chart that would describe the course to virtue must point out
      and lay bare the shoals, the quicksands, and the rocks of vice which render the passage
      perilous and full of terrors.
With these few remarks, we pursue our history. At seven o'clock in the evening of the day
      following the one on which we have seen Mr. Greenwood conducting his multifarious schemes and
      transactions with the precision of a minister of state, Count Alteroni arrived at that
      gentleman's house in Spring Gardens. He was shown into the elegantly furnished drawing-room,
      where Mr. Greenwood received him. The count was, however, the only one of all the financier's
      visitors who did not seem dazzled by the proofs of wealth and luxury that prevailed around.
      The Italian nobleman remarked these indications of great riches, and considered them the
      guarantees of Mr. Greenwood's prosperous position in the world: but, apart from this view of
      the splendour and sumptuousness of the mansion, he neither appeared astonished nor struck with
      admiration. The truth was, that Mr. Greenwood's abode, with all its magnificent decorations
      and ornaments, its costly furniture, and its brilliant display of plate, was a mere hovel
      compared to the count's own palace at Montoni, the capital city of Castelcicala.
Mr. Greenwood and the count had not exchanged many words, ere dinner was announced. The
      banquet, although only provided for the founder of the feast and his one guest, was of a most
      magnificent description, every luxury which London could produce appearing upon the table.
At half-past eight o'clock, the clerk of Mr. Greenwood's solicitor arrived, and was
      introduced into the dining-room. He had brought with him a deed by which Greenwood bound
      himself to be answerable to Count Alteroni for the sum of fifteen thousand pounds, which the
      latter had placed in the hands of the former for the purpose of speculation in a certain
      Steam-packet Company, Greenwood recognising his responsibility towards the count to the above
      extent whether the company should succeed or not, it having been originally agreed that he
      (Greenwood) should incur all risks, as he had undertaken the sole direction of the enterprise.
      This deed was signed by George M. Greenwood, witnessed by the attorney's clerk, and handed to
      Count Alteroni.
The clerk then withdrew.
Mr. Greenwood ordered a bottle of the very best Burgundy to be opened, and drank a bumper to
      the health of the Signora Isabella.
Scarcely was this toast disposed of, when Lafleur entered the room, and said, "A courier
      with despatches from your correspondents in Paris, sir, has just arrived, and requests to see
      you instantly. I have shown him into the study."
"Very good," exclaimed Mr. Greenwood, suddenly assuming a business air. "Will you excuse me,
      count, for a few minutes?"
"I shall take my leave, since you are likely to be much occupied," said the nobleman.
"On the contrary—pray remain—I insist upon it! I shall not be long with this messenger,"
      cried Mr. Greenwood: "and we must empty another bottle before I allow you to take your
      departure."
The count suffered himself to be over-ruled; and Mr. Greenwood repaired to his study,
      well-knowing
       that, instead of a courier from Paris, he should there find Tom the
      Cracksman.
Nor was he mistaken. That individual was sitting very comfortably in an arm-chair near the
      fire, gazing around him, and wondering, amongst other things, where the master of the house
      kept his strong-box.
"You are known, I believe," said Greenwood, carefully closing the door, "as the
      Cracksman?"
"That's my title, sir—for want of a better," answered the villain.
"You are, perhaps, astonished that I have sent for you here," continued Greenwood: "but I
      wish a certain service performed this very night, and for which I will pay you liberally."
"What's the natur' of the sarvice?" demanded the Cracksman, darting a keen and penetrating
      glance at Greenwood.
"A highway robbery," coolly answered this individual.
"Well, that's plain enow," said the Cracksman. "But first tell me how you come to know of
      me, and where I was to be seen: because how can I tell but what this is all a plant of yours
      to get me into trouble?"
"I will answer you candidly and fairly. A few years ago, when I first entered on a London
      life, I determined to make myself acquainted with all the ways of the metropolis, high or low,
      virtuous or vicious. I disguised myself on several occasions, in very mean clothes, and
      visited all the flash houses and patter-cribs—amongst others, the boozing-ken on Great
      Saffron-hill. There you were pointed out to me; and your skill, your audacity, and your
      extraordinary luck in eluding the police, were vaunted by the landlord of that place in no
      measured terms."
"Well—this is singular:—blow me if it ain't!" cried the Cracksman. "Another person found me
      out jist in the same way this wery morning, only, and he wants a little private job done for
      him. But that's for to-morrow night. Howsomever, I never blab to one, of what I have done or
      am going to do for another. You to-night—him to-morrow night! Arter all, the landlord's a fool
      to talk so free: how did he know you wasn't a trap in disguise?"
"Because I told him that my object was merely to see life in all its shapes: and I was then
      so very young I could scarcely have been considered dangerous. However, I have occasionally
      indulged in such rambles, even very lately; and only a few weeks ago I looked in at the
      boozing-ken dressed as a poor countryman. There I saw you again; and I overheard you say to a
      friend of yours whom you called the Buffer, that you were generally there every evening to see
      what was going on."
"All right!" cried the Cracksman. "Now what's the robbery, and what's the reward?"
"Are you man enough to do it alone?"
"I'm man enow to try it on; but if so be the chap is stronger than me——"
"He is a tall, powerful person, and by no means likely to surrender without a desperate
      resistance."
"Well, all that can be arranged," said the Cracksman, coolly. "Not knowing what you wanted
      with me, I brought two of my pals along with me, and they're out in the street, or in the
      alley leading into the park. If there'd been anythink wrong on your part, they would either
      have rescued me, or marked you and your house for future punishment."
"I am glad that you have your companions so near. Of course they will assist you?"
"In anythink. The Resurrection Man and the Buffer will stick to me like bricks."
"Very good. I will now explain to you what I want done. Between eleven and twelve o'clock a
      gentleman will leave London for Richmond. He will be in his own cabriolet, with a tiger, only
      twelve years old, behind. The cab is light blue—the wheels streaked with white. This is
      peculiar, and cannot be mistaken. The horse is a tall bay, with silver-mounted harness. This
      gentleman must be stopped; and every thing his pockets contain—every thing, mind—must be
      brought to me. Whatever money there may be about him shall be yours; and I will add fifty
      guineas to the amount:—but all that you find about his person, save the money, must be handed
      over to me."
"I understand," said the Cracksman. "Does he carry pistols?"
"I should imagine not."
"Never mind: the Resurrection Man has got couple of barkers. But supposing he shouldn't come
      at all—what then?"
"You shall have twenty guineas for your loss of time. Here are ten as an earnest."
"That's business," said the Cracksman. "Any more instructions?"
"No. I need scarcely say that no unnecessary violence is to be used?"
"Leave all that to me. You will sit up and wait for me?"
"Yes. Give a low single knock at the door, and the same servant who sought you out last
      night, and let you in just now, will admit you again."
The Cracksman gave a significant nod and took his departure.
Mr. Greenwood returned to the dining-room, where he had left the count.
"My news from Paris is of the most satisfactory nature," he observed. "My correspondents in
      that city, moreover, promise me their best support in our new enterprise."
"I am delighted to hear that your letters have pleased you," said the count.
The two gentlemen then broached another bottle of Burgundy; and Mr. Greenwood conversed with
      even more sprightliness than usual. Indeed, the count fancied that he had never found his host
      so agreeable and entertaining.
At eleven o'clock precisely, the count's cabriolet was announced; and the nobleman took his
      departure, with the conviction, that, under his present circumstances, Mr. Greenwood was the
      most eligible suitor for the hand of Isabella that was likely to present himself.
As soon as the count had taken his departure, Mr. Greenwood rang for his slippers and
      dressing-gown, drew close to the cheerful fire that burnt in the grate, and ordered Lafleur to
      make him a tumbler of the best pine-apple rum-punch. This exhilarating beverage and a fragrant
      Havannah cigar enabled Mr. Greenwood to pass the time away in a most comfortable and
      soul-soothing manner.
And it was thus that he mused as he watched the pale blue transparent smoke of his cigar
      wreathing upwards to the ceiling:—
"I began the world without a shilling, and at an age when I had no experience in the devious
      ways of society;—and what am I now? The possessor of sixty thousand pounds! A few years ago I
      slept in coffee-houses, paying eight-pence a night for my bed: I breakfasted for three-pence
      halfpenny; dined for ten-pence; and supped for two-pence. Now the luxuries of the four
      quarters of the world tempt my palate at every meal. At the outset of my career, my
      transactions were petty rogueries: now I play my
       false cards to produce me thousands at a stake. I once purchased my coat for
      twelve shillings in Holywell-street; there is not now a tailor at the west-end who will not
      give credit to George Greenwood. My wealth purchases me every kind of pleasure. I can afford
      to bestow a thousand guineas upon the woman, who, daughter of a peer, and wife of a baronet,
      throws herself into my arms. One single scheme produces me ten times that amount. And
      Isabella—beauteous Isabella shall be my wife. I shall receive no dowry with her, it is
      true—because I have obtained all her father's fortune in advance;—but I shall be proud to
      introduce a lovely wife—the daughter of a count, and descended from a long line of ancestry,
      in that fashionable sphere to which I must henceforth belong. I shall be a member of
      parliament: Lord Tremordyn can easily obtain for me a baronetcy in due time;—and then, the
      peerage is not a height too difficult to aspire to! Oh! if with a coronet upon my
      brow, and Isabella by my side, I can drive in my chariot to——"
Lafleur entered the room at this moment, and handed a letter to his master. Greenwood opened
      it, and read as follows:—

"I have done your bidding in every particular up to the present moment. Louisa set off this
       afternoon for Birmingham, having received a letter stating that her only sister is at the
       point of death in that town. You will of course understand by whom that letter was written. I
       have, moreover, invented an excuse, relative to the date of the departure of the New York
       packets from Liverpool, by which means I am enabled to remain in London without exciting the
       suspicions of Eliza. I shall pass to-morrow evening with her. You may rely upon being
       admitted at midnight."

Greenwood full well understood the meaning of this note without a signature; and its
      contents tended to augment that happiness which the success of his schemes infused into his
      breast.
Hour after hour passed away;—at length midnight sounded; and all the servants, save Lafleur,
      were dismissed to their sleeping apartments.
The cigars, the rum-punch, and the pleasurable reflections into which the financier plunged,
      made the time elapse rapidly. One o'clock struck; and he had not found a single moment
      tedious. He was not anxious, nor a prey to suspense, as other men would have been; he felt
      certain that his wishes would be accomplished, and he was therefore as composed as if he had
      already been assured of their success.
The clock struck two; and a low knock was heard at the front door. Lafleur answered the
      summons; and in a few moments introduced the Cracksman to the room where his master was
      sitting.
"All right, sir," said that worthy, the moment Lafleur had withdrawn.
"And no violence, I hope?" cried Greenwood.
"Not a bit," returned the Cracksman. "We was as gentle as lambs. We on'y pitched the small
      boy into a dry ditch that was by the side of the road; and as for the gentleman, I just tapped
      him over the head with the butt of a pistol to keep him quiet; but I did it myself to make
      sure that it wasn't done too hard."
"You surely have not murdered him?" said Greenwood, his whole countenance suddenly convulsed
      with horror.
"Don't be afeard; he was on'y stunned—you may take my word for that," returned the
      Cracksman, coolly. "But here's all the papers we found in his pocket; and as for his purse—it
      had but a few pounds in it."
Mr. Greenwood received the papers from the hands of the Cracksman, and observed with a
      glance that amongst them was the document which he had given a few hours previously to
      guarantee the safety of the fifteen thousand pounds placed in his hands by Count Alteroni.
"You are sure," he said, with some uneasiness depicted upon his countenance, "that there is
      no danger to be apprehended from the blow——"
"Danger be d——d!" cried the Cracksman; "I know from experience exactly what kind o' blow
      will stun, or break a limb, or kill outright. I'll forfeit my reputation if there's any harm
      in that there whack which I gave to-night."
"We must hope that you are right in your conjecture," said Greenwood;—then, taking his purse
      from his pocket, he counted down forty-two sovereigns upon the table, adding, "That will make
      up the fifty guineas promised."
The Cracksman consigned the money to his fob, and then took leave of his employer, hoping
       "that he should have his custom in future."
The moment he was gone, Greenwood thrust the document, which he had thus got back by a crime
      of an infamous nature, into the fire. When it was completely consumed, he proceeded to examine
      the other papers. These consisted chiefly of letters written in cypher, addressed to Count
      Alteroni, and bearing the post-mark of Montoni, Castelcicala: the rest were notes and
      memoranda of no consequence whatever.
Mr. Greenwood, being unable to unriddle the letters written in cypher, and considering that
      they were upon political subjects with which he had little or no interest, consigned the
      entire packet of papers to the flames.
He then retired to rest, and slept as soundly as if his entire day had been passed in
      virtuous deeds.
At about ten o'clock in the morning he received the following letter from Richmond:—

"My Dear Mr. Greenwood,
"As I was on my way home last evening, I was suddenly attacked by three villains in a dark
       and lonely part of the road. One of the miscreants stunned me with the blow of a pistol, and
       threw the little jockey into a ditch. Fortunately we are neither of us seriously injured. The
       robbers plundered me of every thing I had about my person—my purse containing thirty-four
       sovereigns, and all my papers, amongst which was the security I had received from your hands
       a few hours before. You will perhaps have another drawn.
"I do not think it is worth while to make any disturbance relative to the matter, as, in
       consequence of the darkness of the night, I should be totally unable to recognise the
       miscreants.
"Yours faithfully,

"ALTERONI."

"Thank heavens, there is no danger in that quarter!" exclaimed Mr. Greenwood, when he had
      perused this letter. "He is not hurt—and he will not adopt any means to detect the culprits.
      As for having another document drawn up—I can take my time about that, and he will not dare
      press me for it as he did for the first. Besides, he will consider my honourable intentions in
      the matter fully proved by having given the one which he has lost! Thus have I obtained
      fifteen thousand pounds without much trouble—thus have I thrown dust into the eyes of this
      count, and still do I retain his confidence. And his lovely daughter—the beautiful Isabella,
      with her large black eyes, her raven hair, her sweet red lips, and her sylph-like form,—she
      shall be mine! I shall lead her to the altar—that charming Italian virgin, whose very looks
      are heaven. Every thing progresses well: success attends all my plans;—and to-night—to-night,"
      he added, in a tone of triumph, "to-night will ensure me the gratification
       of my desires and my vengeance with regard to that haughty fair one of the
      villa!"
</div></body></text></TEI>