<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="143">
CHAPTER CXLII.   GIBBET.
A fortnight had passed since the incidents just related.
It was a Monday morning.
The clock of St. Giles's had just struck six, when the faint, flickering gleam of a candle
      struggled through the uppermost windows of the hangman's house.
The few persons who were passing along at that hour, and on that dark winter's morning,
      shuddered as they caught a glimpse of the sickly glare through the obscurity and the mist—for
      they thought within themselves, "The executioner is up early on account of the man that's to
      be hanged at eight o'clock."
And such was indeed the case.
Smithers rose shortly before six; and, having lighted the solitary candle that stood upon
      the mantel, proceeded to the floor below to call his son.
"Gibbet, you lazy hound!" he cried, thundering with his fist at the door of the hump-back's
      room; "get up."
"I'm getting up, father," replied the lad, from the interior of the chamber.
"Well, make haste about it," said the executioner in a savage tone.
He then returned to the loft.
There was something horribly fantastic in the appearance of that place. The dim and sickly
      light of the candle did but little more than redeem from complete obscurity the various
      strange objects which we have already described. But as the penetrating eye of the executioner
      plunged into the visible darkness of the loft, and beheld the ominous figure balancing beneath
      the beam, while its mask of a livid white hue wore a ghastly appearance in contrast with the
      black body and limbs which it surmounted,—no sentiment of horror nor of alarm agitated his
      heart.
The avocations of the man had brutalized him, and blunted every humane feeling which he had
      once possessed.
He walked up and down the room impatiently for several minutes, until the door opened and
      his son entered.
The hideous countenance of the lad was ghastly pale, and distorted with horror. His eyes
      glared fearfully, as if terrific apparitions flitted before them.
"Gibbet," said his father, "you shall try your hand this morning on a living being instead
      of a puppet."
"This morning!" repeated the lad, his teeth chattering, and his knees knocking together.
"To be sure. Didn't I tell you so last night?" cried the executioner. "Why, you hump-backed
      scoundrel, you—you ought to have prayed that no reprieve might be sent for the chap that's to
      be tucked up this morning, instead of working yourself up to this state of cowardly
      nervousness. But I'll take it out of you, I will."
With these words, Smithers seized his leathern thong, and was advancing towards the
      hump-back, when the wretched lad threw himself on his knees, clasped his hands together, and
      cried, "No,—don't, father—don't! I can't bear that lash! You don't know how it hurts.—I'll do
      all you tell me."
"Well, that's speaking proper—that is," said the executioner, dropping the already uplifted
      thong.
"It's all for your good that I use it now and then, Gibbet. Don't I want to make a man of
      you? Look at the money you can earn if you'll only make yourself a name like me. D'ye think
      the sheriffs throughout England would all apply to me to do their work for them, if I wasn't
      celebrated for my skill? Why—even the criminals themselves must look upon it as a regular
      blessing to have such a
      knowing hand as me to tie their last cravat for them. I'd bet a pound that the man
      who's to be turned off presently, isn't half as miserable as people think—'cos why, he's well
      aware that I shan't put him to no pain."
"I know you've got a great name in your business, father——"
"We'll call it profession in future, Gibbet; it's more genteel. And, after all,
      it's as good as a barrister's; for the barrister gets the man hanged—and I hang him. That's
      all the difference."
"I know it's very respectable, father," resumed the lad, submissively; "but—still—I——"
"Still what?" cried Smithers, savagely, and taking up the thong again.
"Nothing—nothing, father," faltered Gibbet.
"So much the better. Now come to the model, and take and pinion the figure—'cos that's what
      I mean you to do presently down at Newgate. Begin by degrees, as the saying is; you shall
      pinion this man to day; you shall let the drop fall for the next—and you shall put the halter
      on the one that comes arter him, whoever he may be."
"Must I—pin—in—ion the man this morning, father?" inquired the lad, the workings of whose
      countenance were now absolutely terrific.
"Must you? Of course you must," answered Smithers. "Why, what the devil are you snivelling
      at now? I'd wager a crown to a brass farthin' that there's many a young nobleman who'd give
      fifty pounds to be able to do it. Look how they hire the winders opposite Newgate! Lord bless
      their souls, it does me good to think that the aristocracy and gentry patronises hanging as
      well as the other fine arts. What would become of the executioners if they didn't? Why—the
      legislature would abolish capital punishment at once."
Gibbet clasped his hands together, and raised his eyes in an imploring manner, as much as to
      say, "Oh! how I wish they would!"
Fortunately for him, his father did not perceive this expression of emotion, for the
      executioner had approached the candle to the model-gallows, and was now busily occupied in
      arranging the figure for his son's practice.
"I'll tell you who are the patrons of my business—profession, I mean," continued the
      executioner; "and if you had a grain of feeling for your father, you'd go down on your knees
      night and morning and pray for them. The old Tories and the Clergy are my friends; and, thank
      God! I'm a stanch Tory, too. I hate changes. What have changes done? Why swept away the good
      old laws that used to hang a man for stealing anything above forty shillings. Ah! George the
      Third was the best king we ever had! He used to tuck 'em up—three, four, five, six—aye, seven
      at once! Folks may well talk of the good old times—when an executioner could make his twenty
      or thirty guineas of a morning! I'd sooner take two guineas for each man under such an
      excellent system, than have the ten pounds as I do now."
While Smithers was thus talking, he had lowered the figure until it stood upon the drop. He
      then took off the halter; but the puppet still retained its upright position, because it was
      well stiffened and had heavy plates of lead fastened to the soles of its feet.
"Now what a cry the rascally radical Sunday papers make against the people they call the
       saints," continued Smithers, as he unfastened the cord which pinioned the arms of
      the puppet; "and yet those very saints are the ones that are most in favour of
      punishment of death. For my part, I adore the saints—I do. When Fitzmorris Shelley
      brought forward his measure to do away with capital penalty, didn't Dinglis and Cherrytree and
      all those pious men make a stand against him? And don't they know what's right and proper? Of
      course they do! Ah! I never read so much of House of Commons' business before, as I did
      then:—but I was in a precious fright, it's true. I thought of calling a public meeting of all
      the executioners in the kingdom to petition Parliament against the measure; but I didn't do
      it—because the House of Commons might have thought that we was interested."
Smithers paused for a moment, and contemplated the puppet and the model-gallows with great
      admiration. He had fashioned the one and built the latter himself; and he was not a little
      proud of his handiwork.
"Now, come, Gibbet," he at length exclaimed; "it's all ready. Do you hear me, you infernal
      hump-back?"
"And if I am a hump-back, father," returned the lad, bursting into tears, "you know——"
"What?" cried the executioner his countenance assuming an expression truly ferocious.
"You know that it isn't my fault," added the unfortunate youth, shrinking from the glance of
      his savage parent.
"None of this nonsense, Gibbet," said the man, a little softened by the reminiscence that he
      himself had made his son the object of the very reproach levelled against his personal
      deformity. "Come and try your hand at this work for a few minutes before breakfast; and then
      we'll go down yonder together."
Gibbet approached the model-gallows; but his countenance still denoted the most
      profoundly-rooted disgust and abhorrence.
"Let's suppose that the culprit is as yet in his own cell, Gibbet," continued the
      executioner. "Well, it's time to pinion him, we'll say; there's the sheriffs standing
      there—and here's the chaplain. Now, you go for'ard and begin."
Gibbet took the whip-cord which his father handed to him.
"That's right. Now you won't bounce up to the poor devil just like a wild elephant: remember
      that he's more or less in an interesting situation—as the ladies say. You'll rather glide
      behind him, and insinuate the cord between his arms, whispering at the same time, 'Beg
       pardon.' Mind and don't forget that; because we're under an obligation to him to some
      extent, as he's the means of putting money in our pocket, and we get the reversion of his
      clothes."
Here Gibbet cast a hasty but terrified glance towards his father's attire.
"Ah! I know what you're looking at, youngster," said Smithers, with a coarse laugh; "you
      want to see if I've got on my usual toggery? To be sure I have. I wear it as a compliment to
      the gentleman that we're to operate on this morning. This coat was the one that Pegsworth cut
      his last fling in: this waistcoat was Greenacre's; and these breeches was William Lees's. But
      go on—we mustn't waste time in this way."

Gibbet approached the puppet, and endeavoured to manipulate the string as his father
      instructed him; but his hand trembled so convulsively that he could not even pass it between
      the arms of the figure.
While he was still fumbling with the cord, and vainly endeavouring to master his emotions,
      the leathern thong descended with tremendous violence upon his back.
An appalling cry burst from the poor lad; but the executioner only showered down curses on
      his head.
At length Gibbet contrived, through fear of another blow, to pinion the figure in a manner
      satisfactory to his brutal parent.
"There!" exclaimed Smithers; "I shall make something of you at last. What virtue there must
      be in an old bit of leather: it seems to put the right spirit into you, at all
      events. Well, that's all you shall do this morning down at Newgate; and mind and do it as if
      the thong was hanging over your head—or it will be all the worse for you when we get home. Try
      and keep up the credit of your father's name, and show the Sheriffs and the Chaplain how you
      can truss their pigeon for them. They always take great notice—they do. Last time there was an
      execution, the Chaplain says to me, says he, 'Smithers, I don't think you had your hand
       nicely in this morning?'—'Don't you, sir?' says I.—'No,' says he;
       'I've seen you do it more genteel than that.'—'Well, sir,' says I,
       'I'll do my best to please you next time.'—'Ah! do, there's a good fellow,
       Smithers,' says the Chaplain; and off he goes to breakfast with the Sheriffs and
      governor, a-smacking his lips at the idea of the cold fowl and ham that he meant to pitch
      into. But I only mention that anecdote, to show you how close the authorities take
      notice—that's all. So mind and do your best, boy."
"Yes, father," returned Gibbet.
"So now we've done the pinioning," continued Smithers, once more busying himself with the
      puppet, which he surveyed with an admiration almost amounting to a kind of love. "Well, we can
      suppose that our chap has marched from the cell, and has just got on the scaffold. So far, so
      good. We can't do better than polish him off decently now
      that he is here," proceeded Smithers, alluding to the figure, and rather
      musing aloud than addressing himself to his son. "Now all we've got to do is to imagine that
      the bell's a-ringing:—there stands the parson, reading the funeral service. Here I am. I take
      the halter that's already tied nicely round the poor devil's neck—I fix the loop on this hook
      that hangs down from the beam of the gibbet—then I leave the scaffold—I go underneath—I pull
      the bolt—and down he falls so!"
"O God!" cried Gibbet, literally writhing with mental agony, as the drop fell with a
      crashing sound, and the jerking noise of the halter met his ear a moment afterwards.
"Now, then, coward!" exclaimed the executioner; and again the leathern thong elicited
      horrible screams from the hump-back.
The lad was still crying, and his father was in the midst of sundry fearful anathemas,
      levelled against what he called his son's cowardice, when a knock was heard at the door of the
      loft.
"Come in!" shouted the executioner.
The invitation was obeyed; and an elderly man, dressed in a shabby suit of black, entered
      the room with an affected solemnity of gait.
</div></body></text></TEI>