<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
CHAPTER XXXIX. THE DREAM.
THREE weeks passed away in a most agreeable manner, and Richard frequently expressed his
      gratitude to Armstrong for the pleasure he had procured him by this visit.
The more he saw of Count Alteroni's daughter, the more he was compelled to admire her
      personal and mental qualifications. But he felt somewhat annoyed when he discovered that
      Captain Smilax Dapper was paying his addresses to her: for he was interested in so charming a
      young lady, and would have regretted to see her throw herself away on such a coxcomb. He did
      not however find that Isabella gave the captain any encouragement: on the contrary he had
      frequently seen an erratic smile of contempt upon her lips when the military aspirant to her
      hand uttered an absurdity or indulged in an air of affectation.
By the constant and unvaried respect, and the absence of all familiarity on the part of
      Dapper towards the lovely Italian, Markham also argued that he had not as yet declared his
      sentiments, because had he been a favoured suitor, the truth would have betrayed itself in
      some trifling manner or another. Moreover, as Isabella conducted herself in only just the same
      friendly way towards Captain Dapper as she manifested towards her father's other guests,
      Richard saw no reason to believe that this passion was reciprocal.
Markham was thrown much in the signora's society during his visit at her father's house. He
      soon perceived that she preferred a conversation upon edifying and intellectual subjects to
      the frivolous chit-chat of Sir Cherry Bounce and Captain Dapper; and he frequently found
      himself carrying on a lengthened discourse upon music, poetry, painting and Italian
      literature, while the others were amusing themselves in the billiard or smoking-rooms. But
      Isabel was no blue-stocking; she was full of vivacity and life, and her conversation was
      sprightly and agreeable, even when turning upon those serious subjects.
In a few days after Richard's arrival, it was always
       he who turned the leaves of Isabella's music-book, "because Captain Dapper
      didn't know when;" she always took his arm when they walked round the shrubbery and garden
      after breakfast, "because Captain Dapper was constantly leaving her to play Sir Cherry some
      trick;" and somehow or another at meal-times, Richard and Isabella were invariably seated next
      to each other.
Such was the state of things at the expiration of three weeks, to which extent, although
      contrary to the original proposal of Armstrong, the visit had already extended; and Captain
      Smilax Dapper more than once fancied that he saw a rival in Richard Markham. At length he
      determined to communicate his suspicions to his friend Sir Cherry Bounce—a resolution which he
      carried into effect in the following manner.
"Cherry, my dear fellow," said he, one morning, taking the effeminate young baronet with him
      into the garden, up the gravel walks of which he walked in a very excited state; "Cherry, my
      dear fellow, I have something upon my mind, strike me! and I wish to unburden myself to
      you."
"Do you, Thmilackth? What can pothibly be the matter?" demanded the youth, turning very
      pale. "Ith it veway terwible? becauth if it ith, I had better call the count, and he will
      bwing hith blunderbuth."
"Strike me an idiot, Cherry, if you ain't a fool with your counts and blunderbusses. Now
      listen to me! I love Isabella, and have been doing the agreeable to her——"
"On my thoul I never could thee it!"
"I dare say not! strike me, if I didn't keep it so precious snug and quiet! However I love
      the girl; and curse me if I don't have her too—that's more! She shall be Mrs. Smilax Dapper,
      as sure as she's born, and I hope the mother of a whole regiment of little Smilaxes. And then
      Cherry, you shall stay a month or six weeks with us at a time, and fondle the little ones on
      your knees, you shall, and every thing will go on comfortable and smooth."
"Oh! veway thmooth!" cried Sir Cherry Bounce, making a slight grimace at the pleasing
      prospect of fondling the Little Dappers upon his knees.
"And I suppose I am not presumptuous in aspiring to the hand of Isabella? My father is a
      peer—and my uncle is a peer—and I have three thousand a-year of my own, beside expectations.
      Strike me, if I'm a man to be sneezed at!"
"Who thinkth of thneething at you?"
"I don't know exactly. And then I am not such a very bad looking fellow either. You are not
      ugly, Cherry, you are not—that is, not particularly ugly, although you have got pink eyes, and
      white lashes, and a pug nose;—but I'm more athletic, strike me!"
"I'm thure I don't dithpute what you thay."
"Well then—acknowledging all this," proceeded the captain, "how should I treat a fellow who
      endeavours to cut me out?"
"Thallenge him to fight with thword and pithtol," answered Sir Cherry. "But who ith he?"
"That upstart fellow, Markham, who was brought here by that odious, republican, seditious,
      disloyal scoundrel Armstrong, and who talks all day about poetry and music, and God knows
      what. However, I can't say I admire that plan of yours," continued the hussar; "swords and
      pistols, you know are so very dangerous; and—and—"
"And what elth?"
"Why, you're a fool, Cherry. I thought you would have hit upon some plan to enable me to
      secure the prize."
"Well then—thuppothing we carwy the girl off, to Wochethter for inthanth."
"Deuce take Rochester! my regiment is quartered at Chatham."
"Well—to Canterbury then?"
"Yes—that will do—strike me blind if it won't!" ejaculated the captain. "But if I could only
      get rid of this Markham somehow or another, I should prefer it. The fellow——"
Captain Smilax Dapper stopped short: for at that moment, as he and his companion were
      turning the angle of a summer-house, they ran against Richard Markham.
"It wath'nt me—it wath'nt me who thpoke!" ejaculated Sir Cherry Bounce; and having uttered
      these words, he very fairly took to his heels, leaving his friend the captain to settle
      matters as best he might.
"Who was taking a most unwarrantable liberty with my name?" demanded Richard, walking
      straight up to Captain Smilax Dapper.
"I certainly made an observation," answered the captain, turning mighty pale, "and I do not
      hesitate to say, sir——"
"What, sir?"
"Why, sir—that I feel, sir—that strike me, sir!"
"Yes, sir—I shall strike you," very coolly answered Markham; "and that will teach
      you not to speak lightly of one, who is a comparative stranger to you, on another
      occasion."
As he uttered these words, he seized the captain by the collar, and gave him a couple of
      boxes on the ears. Dapper endeavoured to pluck up a spirit and resist; but the ceremony was
      performed before he could release himself from his assailant's clutches and he then returned
      to the house, muttering threats of vengeance.
That same afternoon Markham took leave of his new friends.
On his return home, he found his dwelling more lonely and cheerless than ever. He felt that
      he was isolated in the world; and his heart seemed to be pierced with a red-hot iron when the
      remembrance of all his wrongs returned to his imagination.
Oh! if we would but study the alphabet of fate, and remember that each leaf which falls,
      each flower that dies, is but the emblem of man's kindred doom, how much of the coldness, the
      selfishness, the viciousness of life would be swept away, and earth would be but a proof-sheet
      of heaven's fairer volume—with errors and imperfections, it is true, but still susceptible of
      correction and amendment, ere its pages be unfolded before the High Chancery of heaven!
Spring now asserted its tranquil reign once more; and May strewed the earth with flowers,
      and covered the trees with foliage.
One evening Richard sate in his library reading until a very late hour. Night came, and
      found him at his studies; and the morning dawned ere he thought of retiring to slumber.
He hastened to his bed-room, with the intention of seeking his couch; but he felt no
      inclination to sleep. He walked up to the window, drew aside the curtain, and gazed forth into
      the open air. The partial obscurity seemed to hang like a dusky veil against the windows: but
      by degrees the darkness yielded to the grey light of the dawn.
He glanced in the direction of the hill upon the summit of which stood the two trees; and he
      thought of his brother. He wondered, for the thousandth time, whether the appointment would be
      eventually
       kept, and why Eugene came not to revisit the home of his birth.
He was in the midst of cogitations like these, when his eyes were suddenly struck by an
      object which seemed to be moving between the trees upon the top of the hill. A superstitious
      fear seized upon Richard's mind. In the first moment of his surprise he imagined that the
      apparition of his brother had been led back to the trysting-place by those leafy banners that
      proclaimed the covenant of the heart. But he speedily divested himself of that momentary
      alarm, and smiled at his folly in believing it to be extraordinary that any one should visit
      the hill at that early hour.
The object was still there—it was a human being—and, as the morning gradually grew brighter,
      he was enabled to distinguish that it was a man.
But that was the hour at which labourers went to their daily toils:—still, why should one of
      those peasants linger upon the top of the hill, to reach which he must have gone out of his
      way?
Markham felt an indescribable curiosity to repair to the hill;—but he was ashamed to yield
      to the superstitious impulse under the influence of which he still more or less laboured;—and
      the sudden disappearance of the object of his anxiety from the hill confirmed him in his
      resolution to remain in his chamber. He accordingly closed the blind, and retired to his
      couch, where he shortly sank into a deep slumber.
Markham was now plunged into the aërial world of dreams. First he saw himself walking by the
      side of Isabella in a cool and shady grove, where the birds were singing cheerily in the
      trees; and it seemed to him that there reigned a certain understanding between himself and his
      fair companion which allowed him to indulge in the most delightful and tender hopes. He
      pressed her hand—she returned the token of affection and love. Suddenly this scene was rudely
      interrupted. From a deep recess in the grove appeared a wretch, covered with rags, dirty and
      revolting in appearance, with matted hair, parched and cracked lips, wild and ferocious eyes,
      and a demoniac expression of countenance. Isabella screamed: the wretch advanced, grasped
      Richard's hand, gave utterance to a horrible laugh, and claimed his friendship—the friendship
      of Newgate! It seemed to Richard that he made a desperate effort to withdraw his hand from
      that rude grasp;—and the attempt instantly awoke him.
He opened his eyes;—but the horror experienced in his dream was now prolonged, for a human
      countenance was bending over him!
It was not, however, the distorted, hideous, and fearful one which he had seen in his
      vision,—but a countenance handsome, though very pale, and whose features were instantly
      familiar to him.
"Eugene, my brother—Eugene, dearest Eugene!" ejaculated Richard; and he stretched out his
      arms to embrace him whom he thus adjured.
But scarcely had his eyes opened upon that countenance, when it was instantly withdrawn; and
      Richard remained for a few moments in his bed, deprived of all power of motion, and
      endeavouring to assure himself whether he was awake or in a vision.
A sudden impulse roused him from his lethargy;—he sprang from his couch, rushed towards the
      door, and called aloud for his brother.
The door was closed when he reached it; and no trace seemed to denote that any visitor had
      been in that chamber.
He threw on a dressing-gown, hurried down stairs, and found all the doors fast closed and
      locked as usual at that hour. He opened the front-door, and looked forth,—but no one was to be
      seen. Bewildered and alarmed, he returned to his bed-chamber, and once more sought his couch.
      He again fell asleep, in the midst of numerous and conflicting conjectures relative to the
      incident which had just occurred; and when he awoke two hours afterwards, he was fain to
      persuade himself that it was all a dream.
He dressed himself, and walked towards the hill. On his arrival at the top, he instinctively
      cast his eyes upon the name and date carved in the bark of his brother's tree. But how great
      was his surprise—how ineffable his joy, when he beheld fresh traces of the same hand imprinted
      on that tree. Beneath the former memento—and still fresh and green, as if they had only been
      engraved a few hours—were the words—
Eugene.
May 17th, 1838.
"My God!" exclaimed Richard, "it was then no dream!"
He threw himself upon the seat between the two trees and wept abundantly.
</div></body></text></TEI>