<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="251">
CHAPTER CCL.   EGERTON'S LAST DINNER PARTY.
We have already stated that Egerton was deeply affected by the result of the imposture which
      he had practised upon his relations. During the drive back to London, his four
      friends—Dunstable, Cholmondeley, Harborough, and Chichester—vainly endeavoured to rally him:
      he was silent and thoughtful, and replied only in monosyllables.
On their arrival at Stratton Street, Egerton took leave of his friends at the door without
      inviting them to enter; but they were not so easily disposed of. They urged him to accompany
      them to some place of amusement: he remained inaccessible to their solicitations, and firmly
      declared his intention of passing the remainder of the evening alone.
They were at length compelled to leave him—consoling themselves with the hope that he would
      "sleep off his melancholy humour," and rise in the morning as pliant and ductile in their
      hands as ever.
The four gentlemen had not long departed, when Major Anderson called at the house; and
      having represented to the servant that his object was an affair of some importance, he was
      admitted into the drawing-room where Egerton was lying upon the sofa.
"At length I find you alone, Mr. Egerton," said the Major. "I have called every evening for
      the last few days, and have never until now been fortunate enough to learn that you were at
      home."
"To what am I to attribute the honour of this visit?" asked the young man, whom it struck
      that he had seen the Major before—but when or where he could not remember.
"Pardon me if, ere I reply to that question, I pause to observe that you survey me with some
      attention," said Anderson; "and I can divine what is passing in your mind. You think that my
      features are not altogether unknown to you? I believe this to be the case—for you have seen me
      before. Indeed I should have begun by thanking you—most gratefully thanking you for that
      generous intention on your part which was interrupted at the door of the St. James's
      Club-House——"
"Ah! I recollect!" cried Egerton, starting up from his reclining position. "But——"
"Again I can read what is passing in your mind," observed the Major, with a smile; "and I
      can appreciate the delicacy which made you thus stop short. You notice the change that has
      taken place in my appearance? Yes—my circumstances are indeed altered; and from a wandering
      mendicant, I have become a gentleman once more. But that change has been effected by the very
      individual whose interposition on that night to which I have just now alluded, prevented you
      from exercising your intended benevolence towards me."
"And that individual was the Prince of Montoni," said Egerton.
"Oh! then you know him by sight——"
"I knew him not, otherwise than by name, until that evening," interrupted Egerton; "and it
      was from Sir Rupert Harborough and Mr. Chichester that I learnt who the stranger was."
"Ah! his Highness has good cause to remember them also!" cried Anderson, to whom the Prince
      had related his entire history a day or two previously.
"Indeed," exclaimed Egerton, "I now recollect that they seemed alarmed at his presence, and
      mentioned his name with trepidation."
"Well might they do so!" said the Major, indignantly. "But the Prince himself will explain
      to you those particulars to which I allude."
"The Prince—explain to me!" cried Egerton.
"Yes: my object in calling upon you is to request that you will either visit the Prince as
      soon as convenient, or appoint a day and an hour when his Highness may visit you."
"Oh! I should be indeed joyful to form the acquaintance of that illustrious hero of whom
      every Englishman must feel proud!" exclaimed Egerton, with the enthusiasm that was natural to
      him. "Valour, integrity, and the most unbounded humanity are associated with the name of
      Richard Markham. But upon what business can the Prince be desirous to honour me with his
      acquaintance?"
"That his Highness will himself explain," was the reply. "What hour will you
      appoint for to-morrow to wait upon the Prince at his own residence?"
"I will be there punctually at mid-day," answered Egerton.
"And in the meantime," said Major Anderson, after a moment's hesitation, "it will be as well
      if you do not mention to those persons with whom you are intimate, the appointment which you
      have made."
"I understand you, sir," rejoined Egerton: "it shall be as you suggest."
The Major then took his leave; and Egerton—who entertained a faint suspicion of the object
      which the Prince had in view—received consolation from the idea that his illustrious fellow
      countryman
      experienced some degree of interest in his behalf.
That suspicion was engendered by the known philanthropy and anxiety to do good which
      characterised Markham; by the allusion made by Anderson to certain explanations which the
      Prince intended to give relative to Harborough and Chichester; and also by the injunction of
      secrecy in respect to the appointment that had been made.
Well knowing that his four friends would not fail to visit him early next day,—and
      determined that they should not interfere with his visit to one whose acquaintance he so
      ardently desired to form,—Egerton repaired to an hotel, where he passed the night.
On the following morning he was greatly surprised, and to some extent shocked, to read in
      the newspaper the tidings of the fearful conflagration which had not only destroyed
      Ravensworth Hall, but in which the lady who owned the mansion had herself perished.
"And there likewise is entombed the mystery of the dead body!" said Egerton, as he laid
      aside the paper.
His toilette was performed with great care; and, punctual to the moment, the young man
      knocked at the door of Markham Place.
He was conducted into an elegantly furnished apartment, where the Prince advanced to receive
      him in a most kind and affable manner.
"You will perhaps imagine that I have taken a very great liberty with you, Mr. Egerton,"
      said Richard, "in requesting you to call upon me in this manner; but when you are made
      acquainted with my motives in seeking the present interview, you will give me credit for the
      most sincere disinterestedness. In a word, I consider it to be my duty to warn you against at
      least two of those persons who call themselves your friends."
"My lord, I was not unprepared for such an announcement," said Egerton, in a deferential
      manner.
"Then is my task the more easy," exclaimed Richard. "I allude to Sir Rupert Harborough and
      Mr. Chichester, the latter of whom assumes the distinction of Honourable."
"And is he not of noble birth, my lord?" inquired Egerton.
"He is the son of a tradesman," answered Markham. "But that is no disgrace in my estimation:
      far from it! The industrious classes are the pillars of England's greatness; and I for one
      would rather walk arm-in-arm along the most fashionable thoroughfare with the honest mechanic
      or upright shopkeeper, than boast of intimacy even with a King who is unworthy of esteem and
      respect."
Egerton surveyed with unfeigned admiration the individual from whose lips these noble
      sentiments emanated—sentiments the more noble, inasmuch as they were expressed by one whose
      rank was so exalted, and who stood so high above his fellow-men.
"Yes," continued Markham, "your friend Mr. Chichester is one of those impostors who assume
      title and distinction as well to aid their nefarious courses as to gratify their own
      grovelling pride. I do not speak with malignity of that man—although I once suffered so much
      through him: for were he to seek my forgiveness, heaven knows how readily it would be
      accorded. Neither is it to gratify any mean sentiment of revenge that I now warn you against
      these two individuals. My present conduct is dictated by a sense of duty, and by an ardent
      desire to save a young and confiding young man, as I believe you to be, from the snares of
      unprincipled adventurers."
"Oh! now a light breaks in upon me," exclaimed Egerton; "and I recognise in the actions of
      those whom I lately deemed my friends, all the designing intrigues to which your Highness
      alludes! Fool that I was to be thus deceived!"
"Rather thank heaven that the means of redemption have arrived ere it be too late," said the
      Prince, impressively; "for I can scarcely believe, from all I have heard concerning you, that
      your affairs are in a state of ruin which admits of no hope."
"Your Highness argues truly," exclaimed Egerton: "I have yet sufficient resources remaining
      to furnish me with the means of an honourable livelihood."
"Then you need scarcely regret the amount you have paid for the purchase of experience,"
      said the Prince. "But allow me to place in your hands proofs of the iniquity of Sir Rupert
      Harborough and his friend. Behold these two documents! They contain the narrative of as foul a
      scheme of turpitude as ever called the misdirected vengeance of the law upon an innocent
      victim. The first of these papers is the confession of an engraver whom Harborough and
      Chichester made the instrument of that project which at one time covered my name with so dark
      a cloud. You seem astonished at what I say? Oh! then you are ignorant of that episode in my
      chequered life."
"Never have I heard rumour busy with your lordship's name, save to its honour and glory,"
      observed Egerton, in a tone of convincing sincerity.
"Peruse these papers—they will not occupy you many minutes," returned our hero, after a
      temporary pause. "The second document, which I now hand you, only came into my possession this
      morning: it was signed yesterday afternoon, by Sir Rupert Harborough and Mr. Chichester——"
"Yesterday afternoon, my lord!" cried Egerton. "Those gentlemen were in my company—at a
      short distance from London——"
"At Ravensworth Park," said Richard, with a smile. "You see that I know all. It was indeed
      at that very mansion—which, as you are doubtless aware, was reduced to ashes during the
      night—that this confession was drawn up and signed by your two friends. The engraver, whose
      name is appended to the first of those papers, was led by accident to Ravensworth Hall; and
      there he encountered the two adventurers who had once made him their instrument—their vile
      tool! He compelled them to draw up and sign that second paper, which you hold in your hands,
      and which, through gratitude for some trifling act of kindness that I was once enabled to show
      him, he obtained by working on their fears. Scarcely an hour has elapsed since I experienced
      the satisfaction of receiving that document from him; and my delight was enhanced by the
      conviction that he is now an honest—a worthy—and a prosperous member of society."
Egerton perused the two confessions, and thereby obtained a complete insight into the real
      characters of Sir Rupert Harborough and Mr. Chichester. If any doubt had remained in his mind,
      this elucidation was even more than sufficient to convince him that he had only been courted
      by his fashionable
      friends on account of his purse; and heart-felt indeed was the gratitude which he
      expressed towards the Prince for having thus intervened to save him from utter ruin.

But how was that gratitude increased, and how profound became the young man's horror of the
      course which he had lately been pursuing, when Richard drew a forcible and deeply touching
      picture of the usual career of the gambler,—importing into his narrative the leading incidents
      of Major Anderson's own biography, without however specifying that gentleman's name,—and
      concluding with an earnest appeal to Egerton henceforth to avoid the gaming-table, if he hoped
      to enjoy prosperity and peace.
"Would you rush madly into a thicket where venomous reptiles abound?" demanded the Prince:
      "would you plunge of your own accord into a forest where the most terrible wild beasts are
      prowling? would you, without a sufficient motive, leave the wholesome country and take up your
      abode in a plague-stricken city? No: and it would be an insult to your understanding—to that
      intelligence with which God has endowed you—to put such questions to you, were it not for the
      purpose of conveying a more impressive moral. For the gaming-house is the thicket where
      reptiles abound—it is the forest where wild beasts prowl, ravenous after their prey—it is the
      city of pestilence into which one hurries from the salubrious air. Pause, then—reflect, my
      young friend,—and say whether the folly of the gambler be not even as great as his
      wickedness?"
Egerton fell at our hero's feet: he seized the Prince's hand, and pressed it to his
      lips—covering it also with his tears.
"You have converted me, my lord—you have saved me!" cried the young man, retrospecting with
      unfeigned horror upon the desperate career which he had lately been pursuing: "Oh! how can I
      express my gratitude? But you may read it in those tears which I now shed—tears of contrition
      for the past, and bright hopes for the future!"
Richard raised the penitent from his kneeling posture, saying, "Enough! I see that you are
      sincere. And now listen to the plan which I have conceived to shame the men who have been
      preying upon you; for such punishment is their due—and it may even be salutary."
The Prince then unfolded his designs in this respect
      to Egerton; but it is not necessary to explain them at present. Suffice it to say
      that the young man willingly assented to the arrangement proposed by one on whom he naturally
      looked at his saviour; and when the scheme was fully digested, our hero conducted his new
      friend into an adjoining apartment, where luncheon was served up.
Egerton was then enabled to judge of the domestic happiness which prevailed in that mansion
      where virtue, love, and friendship were the presiding divinities of the place.
The faultless beauty of the Princess Isabella,—the splendid charms of Ellen,—and the
      retiring loveliness of Katherine, fascinated him for a time; but as the conversation developed
      the amiability of their minds and evinced the goodness of their hearts, he learnt that woman
      possesses attractions far—far more witching, more permanent, and more endearing than all the
      boons which nature ever bestowed upon their countenances or their forms!
Old Monroe was present; and while he looked upon our hero with all the affection which a
      fond father might bestow upon a son, the Prince on his part treated him with the respect which
      a good son manifests towards an honoured father. Between Markham, too, and Mario Bazzano the
      most sincere friendship existed: in a word, the bond which united that happy family was one
      that time could never impair.
Three days after the event just recorded, Albert Egerton gave a dinner-party at his lodgings
      in Stratton Street.
The guests were Lord Dunstable, Colonel Cholmondeley, Sir Rupert Harborough, and Mr.
      Chichester.
The dinner-hour was seven; and, contrary to the usual arrangements, the table was spread in
      the drawing-room, instead of the dining-room, which was behind the former, folding doors
      communicating between the two apartments.
Let us suppose the cloth to have been drawn, and the dessert placed upon the table.
The wine circulated rapidly; and never had Egerton appeared in better spirits, nor more
      affably courteous towards his friends.
"Well, I really began to suppose that you had determined to cut us altogether," said
      Dunstable, as he sipped his wine complacently. "For three whole days we saw nothing of
      you——"
"Have I not already assured you that I was compelled to pass that time with my relatives, in
      order to appease them after the exposure at Ravensworth?" exclaimed Egerton.
"And we have accepted the apology as a valid one," observed Chichester.
"Upon my honour," said the baronet, "if I had known you were doing the amiable on Finsbury
      Pavement, I should have called just to help you in your endeavours to regain the favour of
      those excellent ladies."
"I am afraid your reception would have been none of the best, Harborough," exclaimed Colonel
      Cholmondeley.
"I must confess that the old lady was terribly enraged," said Egerton; "not only against me,
      but also against you all, as she looked upon you as my accomplices in the cheat."
"Well, we must take some opportunity of making our peace in that quarter," observed Lord
      Dunstable. "I will send her a dozen of champagne and a Strasburg pie to-morrow, with my
      compliments. But what shall we do to pass away an hour or two?"
"What shall we do?" repeated Chichester. "Why, amuse ourselves—as gentlemen of rank and
      fashion are accustomed—eh, Egerton?"
"Oh! decidedly. I am willing to fall in with your views. You have been my tutor," he added,
      with a peculiar smile; "and the pupil will not prove rebellious."
"Well said, my boy!" cried Dunstable. "Have you your dice-box handy?"
"My rascal of a tiger has lost it," answered Egerton. "But I know that the baronet seldom
      goes abroad without the usual implements."
"Ah! you dog!" chuckled Sir Rupert, as if mightily amused by this sally. "You are, however,
      quite right; and I do not think that any fashionable man about town should forget to provide
      himself with the means of the most aristocratic of all innocent recreations. Upon my honour,
      that is my opinion."
"Just what my friend the Duke of Highgate said the other day—even to the very words,"
      exclaimed Dunstable.
"How singular!" observed the baronet, as he produced a box and a pair of dice.
"By the by, Dunstable," said Egerton, "you promised to introduce me to his Grace."
"So I did, my dear boy—and so I will. Let me see—I shall see the Duke on Monday, and I will
      make an appointment for him to join us at dinner somewhere."
"The very thing," said Egerton: "I shall be quite delighted—particularly if his Grace be one
      of your own sort."
"Oh! he is—to the utmost," returned Dunstable, who did not perceive a lurking irony beneath
      the tranquillity of Egerton's manner.
"I am glad of that," continued the young man. "If I only knew three or four more such gay,
      dashing, good-hearted fellows as you all are, I should be as contented as possible. By the
      way, Chichester, I will tell you a very odd thing."
"Indeed! what is it?" inquired that gentleman.
"Oh! nothing more than a strange coincidence. Just this:—I told you that I had been staying
      a day or two with my respected aunt on the Pavement. Well, yesterday I wandered through the
      Tower Hamlets—merely for a ramble—and without any fixed purpose: but, as I was strolling down
      Brick Lane—a horrid, low, vulgar neighbourhood——"
"Dreadful!" cried Chichester, sitting somewhat uneasily on his chair.
"Oh! terrible—filthy, degrading," continued Egerton, emphatically. "You may therefore
      conceive my surprise when I perceived the aristocratic name of Chichester painted in
      huge yellow letters, shaded with brown, over a shop-front in that same Brick Lane."
"How very odd!" ejaculated Chichester, filling himself a bumper of champagne.
"Yes—but those coincidences of course do occur," said the baronet, who, after
      eyeing his host suspiciously, saw nothing beneath his calm exterior to indicate a pointed
      object in raising the present topic.
"And what made the thing more ludicrous,"
      continued the young man, "was that over the aristocratic name of
       Chichester hung three dingy yellow balls."
"Capital! excellent!" exclaimed the gentleman whom this announcement so particularly
      touched, and who scarcely knew how to cover his confusion.
"Yes: I had a good laugh at the coincidence," said Egerton. "At the same time I knew very
      well that there could be nothing in common between Mr. Chichester, the pawnbroker of Brick
      Lane, and the Honourable Arthur Chichester of the fashionable world."
"I should hope not, indeed!" exclaimed Chichester, reassured by this observation.
"Come—take the box, Egerton," said Sir Rupert Harborough.
"Oh! willingly," replied the young man. "But we must play on credit, because I have no money
      in the house; and he who loses shall pay by cheque or note of hand."
"With pleasure," said the baronet.
The two gentlemen began to play; and Egerton lost considerably. He, however, appeared to
      submit with extraordinary patience and equanimity to his ill-luck, and continued to chatter in
      a gay and unusually jocular manner.
"Seven's the main. Come, Dunstable, fill your glass: the wine stands with you. By the by,
      has your rascally steward sent you up your remittances yet? You know you were complaining to
      me about him the other day."
"No—he is still a defaulter," returned the young nobleman, laughing.
"And likely to continue so, I'm afraid," added Egerton. "But where is that estate of yours,
      old fellow?"
"Oh! down in the country——"
"Yes—I dare say it is. But where?"
"Why—in Somersetshire, to be sure. I thought you knew that," cried Dunstable, not
      altogether relishing either the queries themselves or the manner in which they were put.
"That makes seven hundred I owe you, Harborough," said Egerton. "Do pass the wine,
      Chichester. Five's the main. Let me see—what were we talking about? Oh! I
      recollect—Dunstable's estate. And so it's in Somersetshire? Beautiful county! What is the name
      of the estate, my dear fellow?"
"My own name—Dunstable Manor," was the reply; but the nobleman began to cast suspicious
      glances towards his friend.
"Dunstable Manor—eh? What a sweet pretty name!" ejaculated Egerton. "And yet it is very
      strange—I know Somersetshire as well as any one can know a county; but I do not recollect
      Dunstable Manor. How foolish I must be to forget such a thing as that."
With these words, he rose from the table and took down a large volume from the
      book-case.
"What are you going to do?" inquired Dunstable, now feeling particularly uneasy.
"Only refreshing my memory by a reference to this Gazetteer," answered Egerton, as
      he deliberately turned over the pages of the book.
"Oh! come—none of this nonsense!" exclaimed Dunstable, snatching the volume from Egerton's
      hands. "Who ever thinks of reading before company?"
"It would be rude, I admit," said Egerton, recovering the volume from the other's grasp,
      "were we not such very particular and intimate friends—so intimate indeed, that we have one
      purse in common between us all five, and that purse happens to be the one which I have the
      honour to carry in my pocket."
"Egerton, what is the matter with you?" demanded Lord Dunstable, who was now
      convinced that something was wrong.
"Matter! nothing at all, my dear boy," answered the young man, as he continued to turn the
      leaves of the volume. "Here it is—Somersetshire—a very detailed account—not even the smallest
      farm omitted. But how is this? Why—Dunstable Manor is not here!"
"Not there!" cried the nobleman, blushing up to his very hair.
"No—indeed it is not!" rejoined Egerton. "Now really this is a great piece of negligence on
      the part of the compiler of the work; and if I were you, Dunstable, I would bring an action
      against him for damages. Because, only conceive how awkward this would make you appear before
      persons of suspicious dispositions. Well—upon my honour, as the baronet says—this
      coincidence is almost as extraordinary as that of the pawnbroker in Brick Lane."
While Egerton was thus speaking, his four friends exchanged significant glances which seemed
      to ask each other what all this could possibly mean.
"Yes—suspicious people would be inclined to imagine that the Dunstable estate was in the
      clouds rather than in Somersetshire," proceeded Egerton, who did not appear to notice the
      confusion of his guests. "But the world is so very ill-natured! Would you believe that there
      are persons so lamentably scandalous as to declare that our friend Chichester is no more an
       Honourable than I am, and that he really is the son of the pawnbroker in Brick
      Lane?"
"The villains!" cried Chichester, starting from his seat: "who are those persons that
      dare——"
"Wait one moment!" exclaimed Egerton: "it is my duty as a sincere friend to tell you each
      and all what I have heard. Those same scandalous and ill-natured people exceed all bounds of
      propriety; for they actually assert that Sir Rupert Harborough has for years been known as a
      profligate adventurer——"
"By God, Mr. Egerton!" cried the baronet: "I——"
"And they affirm in quite as positive a manner," continued the young man, heedless of this
      interruption, "that you, Dunstable, and you too, Cholmondeley, are nothing more nor less than
      ruined gamesters."
"Egerton," exclaimed the Colonel, foaming with indignation, "this is carrying a joke too
      far."
"A great deal too far," added Dunstable.
"It really is no joke at all, my lord and gentlemen," said the young man, now speaking in a
      tone expressive of the deepest disgust: "for every word I have uttered is firmly believed by
      myself!"
"By you!" cried the four adventurers, speaking as it were in one breath.
"Yes—and by all the world," exclaimed Egerton, rising from his seat, and casting indignant
      glances upon his guests.
"This is too much!" said Cholmondeley; and, unable to restrain his passion, he rushed upon
      the young man, seized him by the collar, and would have
      inflicted a severe chastisement on him had not assistance been at hand.
But the door communicating with the dining-room was suddenly thrown open, and the individual
      who now made his appearance, threw himself upon Cholmondeley, tore him away from his hold upon
      Albert Egerton, and actually hurled him to the opposite side of the apartment.
"The Prince of Montoni!" ejaculated Harborough, as he rushed towards the door, with
      Chichester close at his heels.
But the Prince hastened to intercept them; and, leaning his back against the door, he
      exclaimed, "No one passes hence, at present. Mr. Egerton, secure those dice."
Dunstable darted towards that part of the table where the dice lay; but Egerton had already
      obtained possession of them.
Richard in the meantime locked the door, and put the key in his pocket.
"Be he a king," cried Cholmondeley, who had caught the words uttered by the baronet, "he
      shall suffer for his conduct to me;"—and the Colonel advanced in a menacing manner towards the
      Prince.
"Beware, sir, how you place a finger on me!" cried Richard. "Approach another step nearer,
      and I will lay you at my feet!"
The Colonel muttered something to himself, and retreated towards the folding-doors
      communicating with the dining-room; but there his way was interrupted by the presence of two
      stout men in plain clothes and two of Richard's servants in handsome liveries.
"Let no one pass, Whittingham," said the Prince, "until our present business be
      accomplished."
"No, my lord," answered the old butler, who was one of the stout men in plain clothes: then,
      having given the same instructions to the two servants in livery, Whittingham exclaimed in a
      loud tone, "And mind, my men, that you on no account let them sneaking willains Scarborough
      and Axminster defect their escape!"
"My lord, what means this conduct on your part?" demanded Dunstable of the Prince. "By what
      authority do you detain us here as prisoners?"
"Yes—by what authority?" echoed Cholmondeley, again stepping forward.
"By that authority which gives every honest man a right to expose unprincipled adventurers
      who are leagued to plunder and rob an inexperienced youth," answered Richard, in a stern tone.
      "Mr. Egerton, give me those dice."
This request was immediately complied with; and the other stout man in plain
       clothes now stepped forward from the dining-room.
To the infinite dismay of Harborough and Chichester, they immediately recognised Pocock, who
      did not, however, take any notice of them: but producing a very fine saw from his pocket, he
      set to work to cut in halves one of the dice which Richard handed to him.
The four adventurers now turned pale as death, and exchanged glances of alarm and
      dismay.
"Behold, Mr. Egerton," said the Prince, after examining the die that had been sawed in
      halves, "how your false friends have been enabled to plunder you. Heaven be thanked that I am
      entirely ignorant of the disgraceful details of gamesters' frauds; but a child might
      understand for what purpose this die has been thus prepared."
"Loaded, your Highness, is the technical term, observed Pocock. "That scoundrel
      there," pointing to Chichester, "once told me all about them things, at the time I was leagued
      with him and his baronet friend."
"I hope your Highness will not make this affair public," said Lord Dunstable, his manner
      having changed to the most cringing meekness. "Egerton—you cannot wish to ruin me
      altogether?"
"Would you not have ruined me?" inquired the young man, bitterly.
"Oh! what a blessed day it is for me to be a high-witness of the disposure of them
      scoundrels Marlborough and Winchester!" ejaculated the old butler, rubbing his hands joyfully
      together. "Send 'em to Newgate, my lord—send 'em to Newgate—and then let 'em be disported to
      the spinal settlements, my lord!"
"Pray have mercy upon me—for the sake of my father and mother!" said Dunstable,
      whose entire manner expressed the most profound alarm. "Your Highness is known to possess a
      good heart——"
"It is not to me that you must address yourself," interrupted Markham, in a severe tone.
      "Appeal to this young man whom you have basely defrauded of large sums—upon whom you have been
      preying for weeks past—and whom you have tutored in the ways that lead to destruction:—appeal
      to him, I say—and not to me."
"I am entirely in the hands of your Highness," observed Egerton, with a grateful glance
      towards the Prince.
"Then we will spare these men, bad and unprincipled though they be," exclaimed Richard: "we
      will spare them—not for their own sakes, Egerton—but for yours. Were it known, through the
      medium of the details of a public prosecution, that you have been so intimately connected with
      a gang of cheats and depredators, your character would be irretrievably lost; for the world is
      not generous enough to pause and reflect that you were only a victim. Therefore, as you are
      determined to retrieve the past, it will be prudent to forego any criminal proceedings against
      those who have made you their dupe."
"Your Highness has spoken harshly—very harshly," said Lord Dunstable; "and yet I feel I have
      deserved all that vituperation. But this leniency with which your lordship has treated me—and
       your forbearance, Egerton—will not have been ineffectual. I now see the fearful
      brink upon which I stood—and I shudder; for had you resolved to drag me before a tribunal of
      justice, I would have avoided that last disgrace by means of suicide."
The young nobleman spoke with a feeling and an evident sincerity that touched both our hero
      and Egerton; but Cholmondeley turned away in disgust from his penitent friend, and Harborough
      exchanged a contemptuous look with Chichester.
"Lord Dunstable," said Markham, in an impressive tone, "your conduct has been bad—very bad;
      but much of its blackness is already wiped away by this manifestation of regret and
      contrition. Do not allow that spark of good feeling to be extinguished—or destruction must
      await you. And above all, I conjure you to avoid the companionship of such men as those who
      have even now by their manner scoffed at your expressions of repentance."
"Farewell, my lord," returned the young nobleman, tears trickling down his cheeks: "the
      events of this evening will never be forgotten by me.
      Egerton, take this pocket-book: it contains the greater portion of the last sum
      of money that I borrowed of you; and I shall never know peace of mind, until I have restored
      all of which I have been instrumental in plundering you."
With these words, Dunstable bowed profoundly to the Prince, and hurried from the room,
      without casting a single glance upon his late confederates in iniquity.
"My lord, isn't Newgate to become more familiarly acquainted with them scrape-graces
      Aldborough and Winchester?" asked the old butler, as soon as Dunstable had disappeared from
      the room.
"Were it not that I had promised this honest and grateful man," said the Prince, turning
      towards the engraver, "that no criminal proceedings should be instituted on the document that
      he obtained from you, Sir Rupert Harborough, and from you also, Mr. Chichester, I should
      consider myself bound, in justice to myself and as a duty owing to society, to expose in a
      public tribunal the black artifices by which you once inveigled me into your toils. But for
      his sake—for the sake alike of his personal security and of the good character which he now
      enjoys—I must leave your punishment to your own consciences. And, though scoffing smiles may
      now mark the little weight which my prediction carries with it in respect to you, yet rest
      assured that the time will come when your misdeeds shall be visited with those
      penalties which it may seem wise to a just heaven to inflict."
Having uttered these words, the Prince turned away, with undisguised aversion, from the two
      villains whom he had so impressively and solemnly addressed.
They slunk out of the apartment, with chap-fallen countenances, while Whittingham followed
      them to the door of the dining-room, through which they passed, and conveyed to them the
      satisfactory intelligence that "if it had impended on him, they should have been confided with
      strong letters of commendation to the governor of Newgate."
As soon as they had departed, Colonel Cholmondeley inquired in an insolent tone whether the
      Prince had any thing to say to him; but finding that Markham turned his back
      contemptuously upon him, he swaggered out of the room, muttering something about "satisfaction
      in another manner."
Early the next morning, Mrs. Bustard received the following letter:—

"King Square, Goswell Road.

"Faithful to the promise which I made to you the day before yesterday, my dear aunt, I have
       quitted the West End, and am once more located in a quiet neighbourhood. Thanks to the kind
       interference of that most amiable and excellent nobleman the Prince of Montoni, and to the
       encouragement given me by your forgiveness of the deception which I so shamefully practised
       upon you, I have been completely awakened to the errors of my late mode of life. I shall
       pledge myself to nothing now: my future conduct will prove to you how effectually wise
       counsels and past experience have changed my habits, my inclinations, and my ideas. One
       thing, however, I may state on the present occasion: namely, that I am convinced there is no
       character so truly dangerous and so thoroughly unprincipled as the one who delights in the
       name of 'the man about town.'
"I must also declare that I yesterday handled the dice-box for the last time. Much as I
       loathed the idea, after the dread warnings which I received from the lips of the Prince, I
       nevertheless consented to play a last game—and it shall remain the last! But, start
       not, dear aunt—I did so by the desire of the Prince, and that I might induce one of my false
       friends to produce the dice which he always carried about with him. The result was as the
       Prince had anticipated: those dice were so prepared that it was no wonder if their owner was
       constantly a winner. And had not the Prince known my repentance to be sincere, he would not
       for a moment have permitted me to touch those dice again—even though it were to accomplish an
       aim that might the more effectually expose the men by whom I was surrounded!
"To the Prince my unbounded gratitude is due. He has saved me from utter ruin, and has
       advised me how to employ the remainder of my fortune so as to recover by my industry what I
       have lost by my folly. It appears that his august father-in-law, the sovereign of
       Castelcicala,—and who has set so good an example to the Italian States by giving a
       Constitution and a national representation to his own country,—has established a line of
       steam-packets between London and Montoni; and it is my intention to trade between the two
       capitals. But the details of this project I will explain to you to-morrow, when I shall have
       the pleasure of calling upon you.
"Your affectionate Nephew,
ALBERT EGERTON."

</div></body></text></TEI>