<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="157">
CHAPTER CLVI.   THE DECISION.
Richard Markham retired to rest, but not to immediate slumber.
The proposal of Colonel Morosino was of a most perplexing nature.
Our hero longed to be enabled to show his devotion to Isabella by exerting himself in what
      must eventually prove her father's cause; but he was afraid of acting in a manner which might
      displease the Prince.
Then he reflected that the Prince had uttered those expressive words, "Were I less than
       I am, I would consent to take up arms in defence of the liberties of Castelcicala."
The more Richard pondered upon these words, the more was he inclined towards the service
      proposed to him; and when he remembered that he should be associated with some of the most
      gallant and disinterested of Italian patriots, he felt a generous ardour animate his
      bosom.
"Oh! if I could but achieve some deed that would render me worthy of Isabella," he thought,
      "how should I bless the day when I adopted the cause of those brave exiles who now seek my
      aid! Yes—I will join them, heart and soul; and in me they shall have no lukewarm supporter!
      The die is cast;—and this resolution must either make or mar me for ever!"
Richard then gradually fell into a profound slumber: but the subjects of his latest thoughts
      became the materials of which his dreams were woven.
Imagination carried him away from his native land, and whirled him on board a vessel which
      was within sight of the Castelcicalan coasts. Presently a descent upon the land was effected;
      and then Richard fancied himself to be involved in the thickest of a deadly fight. Next he saw
      himself entering Montoni at the head of a victorious army; and it seemed to him as if he were
      the object of attraction—as
      if the salutations of countless multitudes were addressed to him—and as if he
      returned them! Then the scene changed, by one of those rapid transitions so peculiar to
      dreams; and he found himself standing at the altar, the lovely Isabella by his side. A tiara
      of diamonds adorned her brow and on his own was a princely coronet. Then the ceremony was
      completed; and friends with smiling countenances gathered around to congratulate him and his
      lovely bride; and the swelling words "Your Highness" and "My Lord" echoed upon his ears. He
      turned to address his thanks to those who thus felicitated him—and awoke!
"A dream—a dream!" he exclaimed, as the gay pageantry of the vision yet dwelt vividly in his
      mind: "but will the most happy episode therein ever be fulfilled?"
Richard rose with depressed spirits; for a dream of that nature—by raising us to the highest
      eminence to which our aspirations ever soared, and then dashing us back again to the cold
      realities of earth—invariably leads to a powerful reaction.
The day passed without any incident of importance; and by the time the evening arrived,
      Richard had recovered his mental serenity.
Punctual to his appointment, Colonel Morosino made his appearance.
He came in a chaise, accompanied by another individual; but the latter did not alight from
      the vehicle.
"Mr. Markham," said the Colonel, when he was alone with our hero, in the library, "have you
      made up your mind?"
"I have," answered Richard, in a decided tone.
"And your decision——"
"Is to join you, heart and soul—to throw myself with enthusiasm into your cause—to
      co-operate with you as if I were a Castelcicalan subject," said Richard, his handsome
      countenance glowing with animation, his fine dark eyes flashing fire, and his nostrils
      dilating with the ardour which filled his soul.
"I am no prophet, if you ever repent this decision," said Colonel Morosino, pressing
      Richard's hands warmly. "Will you now permit me to introduce a gentleman who has accompanied
      me?"
"With much pleasure," answered Markham.
The Colonel stepped out, and at the expiration of a few moments returned, accompanied by a
      tall, thin, military-looking man, whose lofty bearing and eagle eye bespoke him as one who had
      been accustomed to command.
"Mr. Markham," said the Colonel, "may you soon become better acquainted with General
      Grachia."
The veteran proffered Richard his hand with true military frankness, and observed, "I
      rejoice to find that your decision is favourable to our views."
"You will also find that I shall be zealous and unwearied in your service," rejoined
      Markham.
"Our proceedings," continued General Grachia, "must be conducted with caution, so that no
      rumour prejudicial to our measures may reach Castelcicala."
"I believe it to be understood," said Markham, "that should the Grand Duke change his policy
      to such an extent that the Castelcicalans may obtain their just rights and privileges by means
      of his concessions, before our own projects shall be ripe for execution,—that, in this case,
      we at once abandon them."
"Assuredly," replied General Grachia. "God knows the purity of my motives, and that I would
      not plunge my country into civil war without the pressure of a dire necessity. Neither am I
      adopting extreme measures from vindictive motives because the Grand Duke has banished me not
      only from office but also from the territory. Had I assented to his despotic decrees I might
      have retained my high position in the cabinet, and aggrandized my own fortunes at the same
      time. As a proof of my integrity, Mr. Markham, read this document."
The General produced from his pocket-book a letter which had been sealed with the ducal
      signet, and was addressed "To His Excellency General Grachia, Minister Secretary of State
       for the Department of War."
This document he handed to Richard, who found that it was an autograph letter from the Grand
      Duke to the General, written at the time when the military disturbances occurred at Montoni.
      It remonstrated with General Grachia for refusing to countersign the ordinance decreeing the
      disbandment of the three regiments, and promising him the rank of Marquis and the Premiership
      if he would but consent to aid his Serene Highness in carrying out the proposed rigorous
      measures.
"To this letter I replied by sending in my resignation," said General Grachia; "and thus I
      wrecked my own fortunes, and made my wife and children exiles."
"You acted nobly—like a true patriot," cried Markham, contemplating the veteran with
      admiration. "If for one instant I entertained a scruple in embracing your cause, it is now
      annihilated; for you have honoured me with the most convincing proofs of your patriotism."
"I served the Grand Duke faithfully," said the General; "and I cannot reproach myself for
      any measure which I ever recommended to his Serene Highness. Although deeply attached to
      Prince Alberto, I did not oppose the marriage of the Grand Duke; because I believed that, upon
      principle, sovereigns are entitled to as much freedom in affairs so nearly touching their
      domestic happiness, as any of their subjects. I saw in the present Grand Duchess an amiable
      lady; and I knew that she was a virtuous one from the strong recommendations which she
      received from his Highness Prince Alberto and the Earl of Warrington to myself and my family.
      I supported, then, that marriage upon principle—upon a conviction which I entertain. I believe
      that sovereigns have a right to consult their own happiness in marriage; but I never will
      admit that they have a right to enslave their subjects. I will maintain the privileges of
      princes, when I consider them encroached upon by the people: with equal readiness will I
      protect the people against the tyranny of princes."
Richard listened with admiration to these noble sentiments; and he could not help
      exclaiming, "How blind sovereigns often seem to the merits and honesty of those who would
      counsel them wisely!"
"Such is too frequently the case," observed Colonel Morosino.
"The plan upon which I propose to act is simply this," resumed General Grachia:—"one of the
      most humble, but not the least sincere, of those
      refugees who support us, will take a house in London in his own name; and there
      shall our head-quarters be fixed. There shall we hold our meetings; and thence will our
      correspondence be expedited to those whom we can trust, and on whose support we can rely. In
      order to avoid all cause of suspicion, I shall take a house for myself and suite at the West
      End, where I shall, however, lead a comparatively secluded life. Fortunately, the greater
      portion of my property consisted in money in the public funds of Castelcicala; and for that I
      obtained securities which may be easily realised in London. My friend Morosino stands in the
      same position. Between us we can muster some twenty thousand pounds; and other exiles, who are
      favourable to our views, can throw ten thousand more into the common stock."
"To which I shall also be permitted to contribute my quota," interrupted
      Richard.
"Not if we can manage without it," answered General Grachia; "and I have no doubt that
      pecuniary resources will not be wanting in this good cause."
The General then proceeded to a more detailed development of his plans; but as we shall have
      to deal with them fully hereafter, we will take leave of the subject for the present.
Before we conclude this chapter we must record two or three little incidents that maintain
      the continuous thread of our narrative.
A week after the demise of Miss Gregory, the funeral took place at a suburban cemetery. The
      bereaved father and afflicted brothers were the chief mourners; but Richard also followed the
      remains of the departed girl to the tomb. An elegant but chaste and unassuming monument marks
      the spot where she reposes in her narrow bed.
At the expiration of the seven days during which she had been remanded, Katherine was
      examined a second time before the magistrate, and was fully committed for trial.
A Coroner's Inquest had in the meantime recorded a verdict of Wilful Murder against
      her.
She was accordingly conveyed to Newgate.
But Richard Markham did not neglect her interests; and Morris Benstead was busy in adopting
      every possible measure to fathom the deep mystery in which the awful deed was still
      shrouded.
</div></body></text></TEI>