<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="189">
CHAPTER CLXXXVIII.   THE BATTLES OF PIACERE AND ABRANTANI.
We must now request our readers to accompany us once more to Castelcicala.
In an incredibly short time, and by dint of a forced march which put the mettle of his
      troops to a severe test,—at which, however, they did not repine, for they were animated by the
      dauntless courage and perseverance of their commander.—Richard Markham arrived beneath the
      walls of Villabella.
During his progress towards the town, he had been joined by upwards of four hundred
      volunteers, all
      belonging to the national militia, and armed and equipped ready for active
      service.
The daring exploit which had made him master of Estella, had created an enthusiasm in his
      favour which he himself and all his followers considered to be an augury of the final success
      of the Constitutional Cause; and in every village—in every hamlet through which his army had
      passed, was he welcomed with the most lively demonstration of joy.
When, early on the morning of the 1st of January, his advanced guard emerged from the woods
      which skirted the southern suburb of Villabella, the arrival of the Constitutional Army was
      saluted by the roar of artillery from the ramparts; and almost at the same moment the
      tri-coloured flag was hoisted on every pinnacle and every tower of the great manufacturing
      town.
"We have none but friends there!" exclaimed Richard, as he pointed towards Villabella. "God
      grant that we may have no blood to shed elsewhere."
The army halted beneath the walls of Villabella, for Richard did not deem it proper to enter
      those precincts until formally invited to do so by the corporation.
He, however, immediately despatched a messenger to the mayor, with certain credentials which
      had been supplied him by the Committee of Administration at Estella; and in the course of an
      hour the municipal authorities of Villabella came forth in procession to welcome him.
The mayor was a venerable man of eighty years of age, but with unimpaired intellects, and a
      mind still young and vigorous.
Alighting from his horse, Richard hastened forward to meet him.
"Let me embrace you, noble young man!" exclaimed the mayor. "Your fame has preceded you—and
      within those walls," he added, turning and pointing towards Villabella, "there breathes not a
      soul opposed to the sacred cause which heaven has sent you to direct."
Then the mayor embraced Richard in presence of the corporation—in presence of the
      Constitutional Army; and the welkin rang with shouts of enthusiastic joy.
The formal invitation to enter Villabella was now given; and Markham issued the necessary
      orders.
The corporation led the way: next came the General, attended by his staff; and after him
      proceeded the long lines of troops, their martial weapons gleaming in the morning sun.
The moment our hero passed the inner drawbridge, the roar of cannon was renewed upon the
      ramparts; and the bells in all the towers commenced a merry peal.
As at Estella, the windows were thronged with faces—the streets were crowded with
      spectators—and every testimonial of an enthusiastic welcome awaited the champion of
      Constitutional Liberty.
Then resounded, too, myriads of voices, exclaiming, "Long live Alberto"—"Long live the
      General!"—"Down with the Tyrant!"—"Death to the Austrians!"
In this manner the corporation, Markham, and his staff, proceeded to the Town-Hall, while
      the troops defiled off to the barracks, where the garrison—a thousand in number—welcomed them
      as brethren-in-arms.
All the officers of the troops in Villabella, moreover—with the exception of the
      colonel-commandant,—declared in favour of the Constitutionalists; and even that superior
      functionary manifested no particular hostility to the movement, but simply declared that
      "although he could never again bear arms in favour of the Grand Duke, he would not fight
      against him."
When he had transacted business at the Town-Hall, and countersigned a proclamation which the
      municipality drew up, recognising the Committee of Administration of Estella, and constituting
      itself a permanent body invested with similar functions,—Markham repaired to the barracks.
Thence he immediately despatched couriers to the excellent banker at Pinalla, to the mayor
      of Estella, and to the Committee of Government at Montoni.
He then issued an address to his army, complimenting it upon the spirit and resolution with
      which the forced march to Villabella had been accomplished; reminding it that every thing
      depended upon the celerity of its movements, so as to prevent a concentration of any great
      number of adverse troops, before the Constitutional force could be augmented sufficiently to
      cope with them; and finally ordering it to prepare to resume the march that afternoon at three
      o'clock.
By means of new volunteers and a portion of the garrison of Villabella, Richard found his
      army increased to nearly four thousand men.
At the head of this imposing force he set out once more, at the time indicated, and
      commenced another rapid march in the direction of Piacere.
On the ensuing evening—the 2d of January—the towers of that important city broke upon the
      view of the van-guard of the Constitutionalists.
The commandant of the garrison of Piacere was an old and famous officer—General
      Giustiniani,—devoted to the cause of the Grand Duke, and holding in abhorrence every thing
      savouring of liberal opinions.
Markham was aware of this fact; and he felt convinced that Piacere would not fall into his
      hands without bloodshed. At the same time, he determined not to pass it by, because it would
      serve as a point of centralisation for the troops of Veronezzi and Terano (both being seats of
      the military administration of Captains-General), and moreover afford the enemy a means of
      cutting off all communication between himself on the one hand, and Villabella and Estella on
      the other.
Certain of being attacked, Markham lost no time in making the necessary arrangements. He
      ordered the van-guard to halt, until the troops in the rear could come up, and take their
      proper places; and he planted his artillery upon a hill which commanded almost the entire
      interval between his army and the city.
Nor were his precautions vainly taken; for in a short time a large force was seen moving
      towards him from Piacere, the rays of the setting sun irradiating their glittering bayonets
      and the steel helmets of a corps of cuirassiers.
In another quarter of an hour the enemy was so near as to induce Richard to order his
      artillery to open a fire upon them: but General Giustiniani, who commanded in person, led his
      forces on with such rapidity, that the engagement speedily commenced.
Giustiniani had about three thousand five hundred men under his orders; but although this
      force was numerically inferior to the Constitutionalists, it was
      superior in other respects—for it comprised a large body of cuirassiers, a
      regiment of grenadiers, a corps of rifles, and twenty field-pieces: it was, moreover fresh and
      unwearied, whereas the Constitutionalists were fatigued with a long march.
For a few minutes a murderous fire was kept up on both sides; but Richard led his troops to
      close quarters, and charged the cuirassiers at the head of his cavalry.
At the same time the Cingani, in obedience to an order which he had sent their chiefs,
      turned the right flank of the rifles by a rapid and skilful manœuvre, and so isolated them
      from their main body as to expose them to the artillery upon the hill.
Excited, as it were to desperation, by the conduct of our hero, the Constitutional cavalry
      performed prodigies of valour; and after an hour's hard fighting in the grey twilight,
      succeeded in breaking the hitherto compact body of cuirassiers.
Leaving his cavalry to accomplish the rout of the enemy's horse-guards, Richard flew to the
      aid of his right wing, which was sorely pressed by the grenadiers, and was breaking into
      disorder.
"Constitutionalists!" he cried: "your brethren are victorious elsewhere: abandon not the
      field! Follow me—to conquest or to death!"
These words operated with electrical effect; and the Constitutional infantry immediately
      rallied under the guidance of their youthful leader.
Then the battle was renewed: darkness fell upon the scene; but still the murderous conflict
      was prolonged. At length Richard engaged hand to hand with the colonel of the grenadiers, who
      was well mounted on a steed of enormous size. But this combat was short; the officer's sword
      was dashed from his hand; and he became our hero's prisoner.
These tidings spread like wild-fire; and the enemy fell into confusion. Their retreat became
      general: Richard followed up his advantage; and Giustiniani's army was completely routed.
The Constitutionalists pressed close upon them; and Richard, once more putting himself at
      the head of his cavalry, pursued the fugitives up to the very walls of Piacere—not with the
      murderous intention of exterminating them, but with a view to secure as many prisoners as
      possible, and prevent the enemy from taking refuge in the city.
At the very gates of Piacere he overtook General Giustiniani, and, after a short conflict,
      made him captive.
He then retraced his steps to the scene of his victory, and took the necessary steps for
      concentrating his forces once more.
That night, the Constitutionalists bivouacked in the plains about a mile from Piacere.
Early in the morning of the 3d of January, the results of the brilliant triumph of the
      preceding evening were known. Eight hundred of the enemy lay dead upon the field; and fifteen
      hundred had been taken prisoners. The Constitutionalists had lost three hundred men, and had
      nearly as many wounded.
Scarcely had the sun risen on the scene of carnage, when messengers arrived from Piacere,
      stating that the corporation had declared in favour of the Constitutionalists, and bearing
      letters from the municipal authorities to Markham. Those documents assured our hero that the
      sympathies of the great majority of the inhabitants were in favour of his cause; and that deep
      regret was experienced at the waste of life which had been occasioned by the obstinacy and
      self-will of General Giustiniani. Those letters also contained an invitation for him to enter
      the city, where the tri-coloured flag was already hoisted.
These welcome tidings were soon made known to the whole army, and were received with shouts
      of joy and triumph.
Richard returned a suitable answer to the delegates, and then sought General Giustiniani. To
      this commander he offered immediate liberty, on condition that he would not again bear arms
      against the Constitutionalists. The offer was spurned with contempt. Markham accordingly
      despatched him, under a strong escort, to Villabella.
At nine o'clock Markham entered Piacere, amidst the ringing of bells, the thunder of cannon,
      and the welcome of the inhabitants. The corporation presented him with the keys, which he
      immediately returned to the mayor, saying, "I am the servant, sir, and not the master of the
      Castelcicalans."
This reply was speedily circulated through Piacere, and increased the enthusiasm of the
      inhabitants in his favour.
Richard determined to remain until the following morning in this city. Having seen his
      troops comfortably lodged in the barracks, he adopted his usual course of despatching
      couriers, with accounts of his proceedings, to Villabella, Estella, Pinalla, and Montoni. Need
      we say that every letter which he addressed to the worthy banker contained brief
      notes—necessarily brief—to be sent by way of Naples, to Mr. Monroe and Isabella?
Having performed these duties, Richard repaired to the Town-Hall, where he countersigned a
      decree appointing the municipal body a Committee of Administration; and a proclamation to that
      effect was speedily published.
He next, with the most unwearied diligence, adopted measures to increase his army, for he
      resolved to march with as little delay as possible towards Abrantani; where a strong Austrian
      and Castelcicalan force was lying, under the command of the Captain-General of that province.
      At that point Richard well knew an important struggle must take place—a struggle in comparison
      with which all that he had hitherto done was as nothing.
But his endeavours in obtaining recruits were attended with great success. Volunteers
      flocked to the barracks; and the city-arsenal was well provided with all the uniforms, arms,
      ammunition, and stores that were required.
On the west of Piacere was a vast plain, on which Richard determined to review his troops at
      day-break, and thence march direct upon Abrantani.
The order was accordingly issued; and half an hour before the sun rose, the army defiled
      through the western gates. Nearly all the inhabitants repaired to the plain, to witness the
      martial spectacle; and many were the bright eyes that glanced with admiration—and even a
      softer feeling—at the handsome countenance of that young man whose name now belonged to
      history.
Colonel Cossario, the second in command, directed the evolutions. The army was drawn up in
      divisions four deep, and mustered five thousand strong.
And now, on the 4th of January, a morning golden with sun-beams, the review began. Each
      regiment had its brass band and its gay colours;
      and the joyous beams of the orb of day sported on the points of bayonets, flashed
      on naked swords, and played on the steel helmets of four hundred cuirassiers whom Richard had
      organised on the preceding evening.
Stationed on an eminence, attended by his staff, and by his faithful Morcar, who had
      comported himself gallantly in the battle of the 2d, Markham surveyed, with feelings of
      indescribable enthusiasm, that armament which owned him as its chief.
Cossario gave the word—it was passed on from division to division; and now all these
      sections are wheeling into line.
The line is formed—the bands are stationed in front of their respective corps: and all is as
      still as death.
Again the Colonel gives the word of command—"General salute! Present arms!"—and a long din
      of hands clapping against the muskets echoes around.
The bands strike up the glorious French air of the Parisienne; and
      Markham gracefully raises his plumed hat from his brow, in acknowledgment of the salute of his
      army.
The music ceases—the word, "Shoulder arms!" is passed from division to division, along that
      line of half a mile from flank to flank.
Then Markham gallops towards the troops, followed by his staff; the ranks take open order;
      he passes along, inspecting the different corps,—addressing them—encouraging them.
Again he returns to the eminence: the line is once more broken into divisions; close columns
      are formed; and the whole army is put in motion, to march past its General, the bands playing
      a lively air.
From the plain the troops defiled towards the road leading to Abrantani.
But scarcely had Markham taken leave of the mayor and the municipal authorities, in order to
      rejoin his army, when a courier, covered with dust, galloped up to him. He was the bearer of
      letters from Signor Viviani. Those documents afforded our hero the welcome intelligence that
      Pinalla had hoisted the tri-colour, declared in favour of the cause of liberty, recognised
      Markham as the General-in-Chief of the Constitutional Armies of Castelcicala, and had
      despatched a reinforcement of two thousand men to fight under his banner.
Richard hastily communicated these tidings to the corporation of Piacere, and then joined
      his army, throughout the ranks of which the news of the adhesion of so important a city as
      Pinalla to the great cause diffused the utmost joy.
"Every thing favours me!" thought Richard, his heart leaping within him. "Oh! for success at
      Abrantani; and such will be its moral effect upon my troops that I shall fear nothing for the
      result of the grand and final struggle that must take place beneath the walls of Montoni! And,
      then, Isabella, even your father will acknowledge that I have some claim to your hand as a
      reward for placing him upon the ducal throne!"
The road that the army now pursued was most favourable for the rapid march which Richard
      urged. It was wide and even, and afforded an easy passage to the artillery.
Shortly after mid-day the van-guard entered the beautiful province of Abrantani; and there
      the troops were received by the inhabitants with an enthusiasm of the most grateful
      description. For it was in this district that the tyranny of the Grand Duke's
       régime, under the auspices of Count Santa-Croce, had been most severely
      felt.
No wonder, then, that the Constitutional Army was greeted with rapture and delight;—no
      wonder that blessings were invoked upon the head of its General! The old men went down upon
      their knees by the road-sides, to implore heaven to accord success to his mission;—mothers
      held up their children to catch a glimpse of the youthful hero;—and young maidens threw
      garlands of flowers in his path.
Volunteers poured in from all sides; and the army increased in its progress, like the
      snowball rolling along the ground.
At sunset the entire force halted in the precincts of a large town, the inhabitants of which
      hastened to supply the soldiers with provisions and wine.
During that pause, couriers arrived from Veronezzi, with the joyful tidings that it had
      declared in favour of the Constitutional cause, and was sending reinforcements. Thus the whole
      of the south of Castelcicala was now devoted to the movement of which Markham was the head and
      chief.
For two hours was the army permitted to rest: it then continued its march until midnight,
      when it bivouacked in a wide plain, a wood protecting its right wing, and a hill, whereon the
      artillery was planted, defending its left.
Richard adopted every precaution to avoid a surprise; for he was well aware that the Count
      of Santa-Croce was not a man to slumber at such a crisis. But it afterwards appeared that the
      Captain-General did not dare to quit the neighbourhood of the city of Abrantani, for fear that
      it should pronounce in favour of the Constitutionalists.
It was, therefore, under the walls of Abrantani itself that the contest was to take
      place.
There was a flat eminence to the east of the city; and on this had Santa-Croce taken up his
      position at the head of seven thousand men—three thousand Castelcicalans, and four thousand
      Austrians.
Against this force was Richard to contend, at the head of six thousand soldiers, the
      volunteers who had joined him since he left Piacere amounting to a thousand.
But to return to our narrative in the consecutive order of events.
At five o'clock in the morning of the 5th, the Constitutionalists quitted their position
      where they had bivouacked, and pursued their way towards the city of Abrantani.
The day passed—night came once more—and the troops bivouacked in the immediate vicinity of a
      large hamlet.
The morning of the 6th saw them again in motion; but Richard allowed them to proceed with
      diminished celerity, as he had already enough chances against him to warn him not to increase
      them by over-fatiguing his army.
It was not, therefore, until the evening that he came in sight of the tall spire on the
      Cathedral of Abrantani.
"By this time to-morrow," exclaimed Richard, pointing in the direction of the city, "the
      tower on which yon spire stands shall echo with the sounds of its bells to celebrate our
      triumph!"
"Amen!" ejaculated Morcar, who was close behind him.

The Constitutionalists took up a strong position, with a village on their right and a range
      of extensive farm-buildings on their left. They were all animated by an enthusiasm worthy of
      the great cause in which they were embarked; and their ardour was manifested by singing
      martial songs as they crowded round the fires of the bivouac.
Richard never closed his eyes during the night. Confident that his want of experience in
      military tactics must be compensated for by unceasing exercise of that intelligence and
      keenness of perception which had enabled him to direct the movements of his troops so as to
      achieve the victory of Piacere, he reconnoitred all the positions adjacent to his own—marked
      those where troops would be advantageously placed, and observed others where they would be
      endangered—visited the outposts—studied the maps of that part of the country—and held
      consultations with his most skilful officers. These subordinates were astonished at the
      soundness of his views, the excellence of his arrangements, and the admirable nature of his
      combinations.
Markham was resolved to effect two objects, which, he felt convinced, would lessen the
      chances that were now against him. The first was to throw up a small redoubt, where he might
      place a portion of his artillery, so as to command the flat eminence on which the
      Austro-Castelcicalan army was stationed. The second was to send off a small detachment before
      day-break, to gain a wood about two miles distant, whence it might debouch at the proper time,
      and fall upon the left flank of the enemy.
The redoubt was commenced, and proceeded rapidly; and an hour before sunrise the corps of
      Cingani departed on the important service which the General-in-Chief confided to it, with
      strict orders not to move from the wood until the enemy should have left the eminence and
      descended to the plain.
Thus, by the time the sun rose on the morning of the 7th, the Cingani were safely concealed
      in the wood; a redoubt, bristling with artillery, commanded the enemy's position; and the
      Constitutionalists were formed in order of battle.
Richard commanded the right wing; and Colonel Cossario the left.

The engagement began on the part of the Constitutionalists, with a cannonade from
      the redoubt; and so well did this battery perform its part, that—as Richard had foreseen—the
      Captain-General was compelled to descend into the plain, and endeavour to surround the right
      wing of the Constitutionalists, in order to terminate the carnage occasioned by that dreadful
      cannonade.
Meantime, Cossario, with his division, advanced to meet three battalions which the
      Captain-General had detached to attack the range of farm-buildings; and for an hour the combat
      raged in that point with inconceivable fury. The Austrians precipitated themselves with a
      desperate ardour upon Cossario's troops, who were at length compelled to retreat and occupy
      the farm.
On the right, Markham sustained a fearful contest with the force opposed to him. The fire of
      the musketry was at point-blank distance; and the firmness with which the action was
      maintained on both sides, rendered the result highly dubious.
But now the Cingani debouched from the wood, and fell upon the left wing of the enemy. The
      impetuosity of their attack was irresistible: the wing was turned by them; and the
      Austro-Castelcicalans were thrown into disorder. Then Richard, at the head of his cuirassiers,
      charged upon the centre of the enemy, and decided the fortune of the day.
In the meantime Cossario had completely rallied his division and had succeeded in repulsing
      the battalions that were opposed to him.
The Captain-General endeavoured to effect a retreat in an orderly manner towards the
      eminence which he had originally occupied; but Richard, perceiving his intention, was enabled
      to out-flank him, and to gain possession of the height. For an hour this important position
      was disputed with all the vigour and ardour of military combat; but, though the
      Austro-Castelcicalans manifested a vehemence bordering on rage, and a perseverance approaching
      to desperation, all their attempts to recover their lost ground were ineffectual.
And equally vain were the endeavours of Santa-Croce to secure an orderly retreat; his
      columns were shattered—his battalions broken; the flight of his troops became general; but
      they were closely pursued by their conquerors.
The Cathedral of Abrantani proclaimed the hour of three in the afternoon, when Richard, on
      the eminence commanding the city, sate down to pen hasty dispatches, announcing this great
      victory to the Committees of Montoni, Piacere, Villabella, Veronezzi, Pinalla, and Estella.
      Nor did he forget to enclose, in his letters to Signor Viviani, brief notes addressed to his
      friend Monroe and the Princess Isabella.
The results of the battle of Abrantani were most glorious to the Constitutional arms. While
      Richard's loss was small, that of the enemy had been enormous. Two thousand men—chiefly
      Austrians—lay dead upon the plain; and nearly as many were taken prisoners. Two of the
      Castelcicalan regiments rallied at a short distance from the scene of the conflict, and
      placing themselves at the disposal of Colonel Cossario, who had pursued them, joined the
      Constitutional cause.
The Captain-General, Count Santa-Croce, succeeded in effecting his escape, with several of
      his superior officers; and, hastening to join the Grand Duke, who was still besieging Montoni,
      the vanquished chief was the first to communicate to that Prince the fatal result of the
      battle.
That same evening Richard Markham entered the city of Abrantani, which joyfully opened its
      gates to receive him; and, as in the other towns which he had occupied, the thunders of
      artillery, the ringing of bells, and the plaudits of admiring crowds testified the enthusiasm
      which was inspired by the presence of the youthful General.
Richard determined to remain some days in the city of Abrantani. Montoni was besieged by a
      force nearly twenty-five thousand strong; and our hero felt the necessity of waiting for the
      reinforcements promised him, and of raising as many volunteers as possible, ere he could
      venture to cope with so formidable a force. But in every despatch which he had sent to the
      Committee of Government at Montoni, he had given the most solemn assurances of his resolution
      to march to the relief of the capital with as little delay as possible; and it was now, at
      Abrantani, that he anxiously expected official tidings from the besieged city.
Nor was he kept long in suspense. On the morning of the 10th a courier arrived with
      despatches from the Committee of Government. These documents are so important, that we do not
      hesitate to lay them before our readers.
The first was conceived thus:—

"Montoni, January 9th, 1841.
"The Committee of Government of the State of Castelcicala have received the various
       despatches which the General-in-Chief of the Constitutional Army has addressed to them
       respectively from Villabella, Piacere, and Abrantani. The Committee must reserve for a future
       occasion the pleasing duty of expressing how deeply they rejoice at the General-in-Chief's
       various successes, and how anxiously they watch the progress of that cause of which he has
       become the guide and champion.
"The Committee cannot, however, omit one duty which they now perform by virtue of the full
       powers of administration and government that have been vested in them by the inhabitants of
       the capital, and which powers are recognised by all faithful Castelcicalans who have declared
       in favour of the Constitutional cause.
"This duty is rendered imperious on the Committee by the eminent and unequalled services of
       the General-in-Chief.
"The Committee of Government have therefore ordained, and do ordain, that the style and
       title of Marquis of Estella be conferred upon the General-in-Chief, the most
       Excellent Signor Richard Markham.
"And a copy of this decree shall be forwarded to every city or town which has pronounced in
       favour of the Constitutional cause.
"By order of the Committee of Government—
"GAETANO, President TERLIZZI, Vice-President." 
The second despatch ran thus:—

"To the Marquis of Estella, General-in-Chief of the Constitutional Armies of
        Castelcicala.
"My Lord,
"We, the members of the Committee of Government of Castelcicala, have the honour to lay
       before your lordship a few particulars relative to the condition of the capital city of that
       State. Closely besieged by the foreign force whom the traitor Angelo has invited into the
       country, and blockaded at sea by the fleet of the Lord High Admiral, Montoni already enters
       upon the dread phase of famine. The garrison performs its duty nobly in defending
       the capital from the attacks daily directed against it by the insolent Austrian invaders; but
       it is impossible that we can hold out for any length of time. We are, however, happy to be
       enabled to assure your lordship that the inhabitants endure their lamentable condition with
       exemplary fortitude and patience, the brilliant
       achievements of your lordship and the Constitutional Army having inspired them
       with the most lively hopes of a speedy deliverance. So sorely are we pressed, that it has
       been only with the greatest difficulty that your lordship's couriers have been able to pass
       the lines of the besiegers, and gain entrance into the city.
"We feel convinced that these brief statements will be sufficient to induce your lordship
       to lose no time in marching to the deliverance of the capital.
 "We have the honour to remain, My Lord, 
"Your lordship's obedient servants, 
"For the Members of the Committee } GAETANO, President. 
} TERLIZZI, Vice-President. 
"Montoni, January 9th, 1841 (Six o'clock in the morning.)" 
Most welcome, in one sense, to our hero were these documents. Although he deeply deplored
      the condition to which Montoni was reduced, he could not do otherwise than experience the most
      thrilling and rapturous delight at the impression which his conduct had produced upon the
      Provisional Government of the State, and of the inhabitants of the capital.
Nor shall we depreciate the merits of Richard Markham, if we admit that he received, with
      the most heart-felt joy, that title of nobility which, he felt convinced, must lead him nearer
      to the grand aim of all his exertions—the hand of Isabella!
And as he looked back upon the events of the last fortnight,—when he reflected that at the
      commencement of that short interval he had issued from Pinalla on a desperate undertaking, and
      that these fourteen days had shed glory on his name, and placed the coronet of a Marquis upon
      his brow,—he was lost in admiration of the inscrutable ways of that Providence to whom he had
      never ceased to pray, morning and evening—as well when crowned with success as in the hour of
      danger!
But as we do not wish to dwell too much upon this grand and remarkable episode in our hero's
      history, we shall continue our narrative of these events in their proper order.
The Marquis of Estella each day saw his army increasing. The promised reinforcements arrived
      from Pinalla and Veronezzi: Lipari and Ossore declared for his cause, and furnished their
      contingents to the Constitutional forces; and each hour brought to Richard's head-quarters at
      Abrantani tidings of fresh movements in his favour. Troops poured in; and he was compelled to
      muster his forces in an encampment on the northern side of the town.
Indeed, the battles of Piacere and Abrantani had electrified Castelcicala; and the
      tri-coloured banner already floated on the walls of the principal cities and towns of the
      state. Addresses of confidence and congratulation were sent to our hero from all parts; and
      large sums of money were raised and forwarded to him, to enable him to reward his troops and
      equip his volunteers.
It was on the 20th of January that Markham put his army in motion. He was now at the head of
      sixteen thousand men, with a formidable train of artillery. Although the numerical odds were
      fearfully against him, he reposed the most perfect confidence in the valour of his
      troops—elated as they were by previous successes, and glorying in a cause which they deemed
      holy and sacred. Moreover, he knew that the moral strength of his army was incomparably
      superior to that of the mere drilled Austrian troops, who were trained under a soul-crushing
      system of discipline, and who regarded their chiefs rather as tyrants and oppressors than as
      generous superiors exercising a species of paternal influence over them.
On the morning of the 22d, the Constitutional Army reached Ossore, all the inhabitants of
      which town came out to behold the glorious procession, and testify their admiration of the
      young General.
It was during a brief halt near this place, that a courier, travel-soiled and sinking with
      fatigue, arrived from Montoni, with a letter addressed to the Marquis of Estella and
      containing only this laconic but urgent prayer:—

"Hasten, my lord—delay not! In forty-eight hours it will be too late!
"GAETANO."
Richard instantly despatched a messenger, on whose prudence and daring he could rely, with
      an answer equally brief and impressive:—

"Fear not, signor! By to-morrow night Montoni shall be delivered, or the army which I am
       leading to your rescue will be annihilated.
"ESTELLA."
The city was indeed sore pressed. The inhabitants were reduced to the utmost extremities in
      respect to provision; and the Austrians, headed by the Grand Duke in person and Marshal
      Herbertstein, were pushing the siege with a vigour that was almost irresistible.
But on the 22d of January those commanders were compelled to concentrate nearly all their
      troops on the southern side of Montoni: for they were well aware that the Constitutional Army
      was now approaching.
In the afternoon of the same day, the light cavalry of Richard's force entered upon the
      broad plain through which the Ferretti rolls its silver way; and at a distance of three miles
      the tower of Saint Theodosia reared its summit far above the white buildings of Montoni.
By nine o'clock on that night the entire Constitutional Army had taken up a strong position,
      its left being protected by high sand-banks which overlooked the sea, and its right defended
      by a large village.
Oh! it was a great cause which was so soon to be justified—and that was a glorious army
      which was now preparing for the final struggle!
A discharge of cannon from the walls of Montoni announced that the capital awaited its
      deliverance; and the Committee of Government issued orders that the bells of every church
      should ring for mass at day-break, in order that the inhabitants might offer up prayers for
      the success of the Constitutional Army.
As on the eve of the glorious fight of Abrantani, the Marquis of Estella was actively
      employed during the whole night in making the various dispositions for the great battle which,
      on the following day, must decide the fate of Castelcicala.
And most solemnly and sublimely interesting was that night! So close were the two armies to
      each other—only half a cannon shot distant—that every sound on either side could be mutually
      heard. The very outposts and sentinels were almost within speaking range; and the lights of
      the two positions were plainly visible. Watchfulness and keen observation characterised both
      sides.
An hour before sunrise—and by the lurid gleam of the bivouac fire in the grove of
      Legino—Richard addressed a letter, full of tenderness and hope, to
      the Princess Isabella; and this he despatched in another epistle to his excellent
      friend, the banker at Pinalla.
Then, when the first gleam of twilight heralded the advent of the sun, and while the bells
      were ringing in every tower of Montoni, the hero mounted his horse and prepared for the
      conflict that was now at hand.
</div></body></text></TEI>