<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="86">
CHAPTER LXXXVI. THE OLD HAG.
MARKHAM was not the man to remain idle now that his circumstances were so desperately
      reduced. He had a taste for literary pursuits, and he resolved to devote his talents to some
      advantage. His income was totally insufficient to support his establishment, and yet he knew
      not how to effect any very great economy in the mode of conducting it. He would not for worlds
      allow Mr. Monroe and Ellen to leave his house, and again enter upon a struggle with the world.
      With Whittingham nothing could have induced him to part;—Marian was the only female domestic
      he kept, and he could not dispense with her services. Holford alone was an incumbrance of
      which he thought of relieving himself. But before he adopted any measure of economical reform,
      he summoned the faithful Whittingham to a consultation with him in the library.
When Markham had made the butler acquainted with his altered circumstances, the old man
      shook his head, and observed—
"Well, Master Richard, all this here ruination—and when I make use of the paragraph
       ruination, I
       mean to express the common sentence, flooring—has been brought round
      about by your over generosity, and good disposition towards others. I can't a-bear, Master
      Richard, to see you circumlocuted and circumwented in this manner; and now all your property
      has gone to the canine species—or, wulgarly speaking, to the dogs."

"What is done, is done, Whittingham," said Richard; "nor did I send for you to criticise my
      conduct."
"Ah! Master Richard; don't go for to scold me—me that saw you bred and born," exclaimed the
      old butler, tears starting into his eyes. "I wouldn't be an ominous burden to you for all the
      world; so I'll get employment somewhere else—"
"No—no, my faithful friend," cried Richard, taking the old man's hand, "I would not allow
      you to leave me on any account. As long as I have a crust you shall share it. My present
      object is to acquaint you with the necessity of introducing the most rigid economy into our
      household."
"Ah! now I understand you, Master Richard. And talking of this reminds me that a gentleman
      in the neighbourhood requires a young youth of the nature of Holford; and so the lad might
      step quite permiscuous, as the saying is, into a good situation at once."
"Well, let him seek for another place, Whittingham; but tell him that he may stay here until
      he can succeed in finding one."
Markham and Whittingham then arranged other little methods of economy, and the debate
      terminated. Fortunately for these plans, Holford procured the place alluded to by Whittingham,
      and repaired to his new situation in the course of a few days.
Notwithstanding the solicitude with which Markham endeavoured to conceal his altered
      circumstances from Mr. Monroe and Ellen, the quick perception of the latter soon enabled her
      to penetrate into the real truth; and she immediately reflected upon the best means of turning
      her own acquirements to some good purpose. She did not mention to her father her suspicion
      that they were a burden upon Markham's resources; but she took an early opportunity of hinting
      to Richard her anxiety to avail herself of her education and accomplishments, in order to add
      to the general resources of the household. The young man was struck by the delicate manner in
      which she thus made him comprehend
       that she was not blind to the limited nature of his means; but he assured her
      that his property was quite commensurate with his expenditure. Ellen appeared to be satisfied;
      but she nevertheless determined within herself to lose no time in seeking for profitable
      employment for her leisure hours.
But where was she to seek for occupation? She knew the miserable rate at which the labours
      of the needle-women were paid; and she shuddered at the idea of returning to the service of a
      statuary, an artist, a sculptor, or a photographer. And yet she was resolved not to remain
      idle. She could not bear the thought that her father and herself were a burden upon the
      slender resources of their generous and noble-hearted benefactor:—she saw with pain that while
      Markham forced her father to partake of his wine as usual, he himself now invariably invented
      an excuse to avoid joining in the indulgence;—she saw that Richard rose earlier than
      heretofore, and remained in his library the greater portion of the day;—she learned from
      Marian that the surplus garden produce was sold;—in a word, she beheld a system of the most
      rigid economy introduced into the establishment, and which was only relaxed on behalf of her
      father and herself. All this gave her pain; and she was resolved to do somewhat to enable her
      to contribute towards the resources of the household—even though she should be compelled to
      return to the service of a statuary, an artist, a sculptor, or a photographer.
At one moment she thought of applying to Greenwood:—but he had already done all she asked in
      respect to their child. And then, even if she were to obtain money from him, in what manner
      could she account to her father and to Markham for its possession? for there was a secret—a
      terrible secret connected with Greenwood, which she dared not reveal—even though such
      confession were to save her from a death of lingering tortures!
Thus thought Ellen Monroe. Was it extraordinary if the idea of applying to the old hag—that
      nameless woman—dwelling in a nameless court in Golden Lane, and exercising a nameless
      avocation—often entered the young lady's imagination? Was it strange that she should gradually
      overcome her repugnance to seek the presence of the filthy-souled harridan, and at length look
      upon such a step as the only means through which her ardent desire to obtain employment could
      be gratified?
It was decided! she would go.
Accordingly, one morning, she dressed herself in the most simple manner, and proceeded by an
      omnibus into the City. It was mid-day when she reached Golden Lane.
With what strange feelings did she proceed along the narrow and dirty thoroughfare! Pure and
      spotless was she when, nearly three years back, she had first set foot in that vile lane;—how
      much had she seen—how much passed through—how much endured since that period?
      Dishonoured—unwedded—she was a mother. Her virgin purity was gone for ever—the evidence of her
      shame was living, and could at any moment be brought forward to betray her. And if she now
      pursued a virtuous course, it was scarcely for virtue's sake, but through dread of the
      consequences of a fresh fault. The innate chastity of her soul had dissolved, like snow before
      the mid-day sun's effulgence, beneath the glances of the statuary, the artist, the sculptor,
      and the photographer. It was true that she looked upon her services to those masters with
      disgust; but the feeling had little reference to pure and unadulterated feminine modesty.
      Still she was of a proud spirit in one respect;—she detested a life of slothful dependence
      upon an individual who had not enough for himself!
Such was Ellen Monroe when she retraced her way, on the present occasion, to the dwelling of
      the old hag—that way which had led her to so frightful a precipice before!
The old woman was sitting in her great easy chair, watching the steam that rose from a large
      saucepan upon the hob. That saucepan contained the harridan's dinner—tripe and cow-heel
      stewing with onions, and filling the close apartment with a sickly odour. But the hag savoured
      that smell with a hideous expression of delight; to her nostrils it was a delicious perfume.
      From time to time she glanced—almost impatiently—towards her Dutch clock, as if anxious for
      the arrival of the happy moment when she might serve up her mess. She was just spreading a
      filthy napkin upon one corner of her table, when a knock was heard at her door.
Instead of inviting the visitor, whoever it might be, to enter, the hag hastened to answer
      the summons by opening the door a few inches. She was already afraid that some poor neighbour
      might seek a portion of her dainty meal!
But when she recognised Ellen Monroe, a gleam of joy suddenly illumined her lowering
      countenance, and the young lady immediately obtained admittance, for the hag thought within
      herself—"There is gold yet to be gained by her!"
Re-assured as to the undivided enjoyment of the stew, and having satisfied herself with a
      glance that Ellen was above immediate want, the old woman conducted her fair visitant to a
      seat, saying—
"My bird of beauty, you have come back to me again; I have been waiting for your return a
      long long time."
"Waiting for me?" cried Ellen, with surprise.
"Yes, miss—certainly. I know the world—and I felt convinced that you could not always
      contrive for yourself, without me."
"I am at a loss to understand you," said Ellen.
"Well—well, no matter!" exclaimed the hag, lifting off the lid of her saucepan, and ogling
      the stew. "At all events," she continued, after a pause, "you require my services now—else why
      are you come?"
"Yes—I require your services," answered the young lady. "I want employment—can you tell me
      of any thing likely to suit me?"
"In what way?" demanded the hag, with an impudent leer.
Ellen remained silent—absorbed in thought. That question recalled to her mind the
      difficulties of her position, and convinced her how little scope there was for the exercise of
      choice in respect to employment.
The old woman surveyed her fair visitant with attention; the sardonic expression of her
      countenance changed into one of admiration, as she contemplated that lovely girl. Her head was
      so gracefully inclined the least thing over one shoulder as she sat wrapt up in her
      reflections;—there was a shade of such bewitching melancholy upon her classic countenance: the
      long, dark fringes that shadowed her deep blue eyes, gave so Murillo-like a softness to her
      cheek as she glanced downwards; her bust, since she had become a mother, had expanded into
      such fine proportions, yet without destroying the perfect symmetry of her shape;—and her
      entire air had something so languishing—something of an only partially-subdued
      voluptuousness—that the old hag regarded her with mingled sentiments of admiration, envy, and
      pleasure.
      
"In what way can I serve you?" said the harridan again, after a long time.
"Alas! I have scarcely made up my mind how to answer the question," replied Ellen, smiling
      in spite of her melancholy thoughts. "I am not actually in want; but my father and myself are
      dependent upon the bounty of one who is by no means able to support us in idleness. My father
      can do nothing; he is old—infirm, and broken down by affliction. It therefore remains for me
      to do something to earn at least a trifle."
"A young lady of your beauty cannot be at a loss for friends who will treat her nobly," said
      the old woman, affecting to busy herself with her stew, but in reality watching Ellen's
      countenance with a reptile-like gaze as she spoke.
"Ah! I know that I am not the ugliest person in existence," exclaimed the young lady,
      smiling once more; "but I am anxious," she added, her countenance suddently assuming a serious
      expression, "to live a quiet—an honourable—and a virtuous life. I know there is nothing to be
      gained by the needle. I dislike the menial and degrading situation of a copy or a model:—are
      you aware of no other occupation that will suit me?"
"Have you any money in your pocket?" demanded the hag, after a few moments' reflection.
"I have three sovereigns and a few shillings," answered Ellen, taking her purse from her
      reticule.
"I know of an employment that will suit you well," continued the old woman; "and my price
      for putting it in your way will be the three sovereigns in your purse."
"Of what nature is the employment?" asked Ellen.
"That of patient to a Mesmerist," was the reply.
"Patient to a mesmerist!" exclaimed the young lady: "I do not understand you."
"There is a French gentleman who has lately arrived in London, and who lectures upon Animal
      Magnetism at the West End," said the hag. "He has created a powerful sensation; and all the
      world are running after him. But he requires patients to operate upon; and the photographer,
      with whom he is acquainted, recommended him to apply to me. You will answer his purpose; and
      you well know that I have always performed my promises to you hitherto; so you need not be
      afraid to pay me my price at once. I will then give you the mesmerist's card."
"First explain the nature of the services that will be demanded of me," said Ellen.
"You will be placed in a chair, and the magnetiser will pass his hands backwards and
      forwards in a particular way before your eyes; you will then have to fall asleep—or pretend to
      do so, whichever you like; and the professor will ask you questions, to which you must reply.
      This is the main business which he will require at your hands."
"But it is a gross deception," said Ellen.
"You may embrace or refuse my offer, just as you choose. If you are so very particular,
      Miss," added the old woman ironically, "why do you not obtain the situation of a governess, or
      go out and give lessons in music and drawing?"
"Because I should be asked for references, which I cannot give;—because there would be a
      perpetual danger of my former occupations transpiring;—and because——"
"Because—because you do not fancy that employment," exclaimed the hag impatiently. "See
      now—my dinner is ready—you are wasting my time—I have other business to attend to anon. Do you
      refuse or accept my offer?"
"What remuneration shall I be enabled to earn?" demanded Ellen, hesitatingly.
"Thirty shillings a-week."
"And how long shall I be occupied each day?"
"About two hours at the evening lectures three times a week; and perhaps an hour every day
      to study your part."
"Then I accept your offer," said Ellen; and she placed three sovereigns upon the table.
The eyes of the old woman glistened at the sight of the gold, which she clutched hastily
      from the table for fear that Ellen might suddenly repent of her bargain. She wrapped the three
      pieces carefully up in a piece of paper, and hastened to conceal them in the interior of her
      old Dutch clock. She then opened her table-drawer, and begin to rummage, as on former
      occasions when Ellen visited her, amongst its filthy contents.
The search occupied several minutes; for the old woman had numerous cards and notes
      scattered about in her drawer.
"You see that I have a good connexion," she observed, with a horrible smile of
      self-gratulation, as she turned the cards and notes over and over with her long bony hands:
      "all the fashionable young men about town know me, and do not hesitate to engage my services
      on particular occasions. Then they recommend me, because I give them satisfaction; and so I
      always have enough to do to give me bread. I am not idle, my dear child—I am not idle, I can
      assure you. Day and night I am at the beck and call of my patrons. I help gentlemen to
      mistresses, and ladies to lovers. But, ah! the pay is not what it used to be—it is not what it
      used to be!" repeated the old hag, shaking her head dolefully. "There is a great competition,
      even in my profession, miss—a very great competition. The shoemakers, the tailors, the
      publicans, the butchers, the bakers, all complain of competition;—but they have not half so
      much right to complain as I have. Now and then I pick up a handsome sum in one way;—and, while
      I think of it, miss, I may as well mention to you—for who can tell what may happen?—you are
      young, and beautiful, and warm—and such a thing is almost sure to befall you as well as any
      other woman. But, as I was saying, miss—I may as well mention to you, that if you should
      happen—in consequence of a fault—to——"
The old woman leant forward, and whispered something in Ellen's ear.
The young lady started; and an exclamation of mingled disgust and horror escaped her
      lips.
"Do not alarm yourself, my dear child," said the old hag, resuming her search with the most
      imperturbable coolness: "I did not mean to offend you. I can assure you that many a young
      lady, of higher birth than yours, and dwelling in the most fashionable quarters of London, has
      been glad to avail herself of my services. What would often become of the indiscreet miss if
      it wasn't for me? what, indeed?—what, indeed?"
"Haste and give me the card," exclaimed Ellen, in a tone of ill concealed disgust and
      aversion; "I am in a hurry—I can wait no longer."
"There it is, my dear," said the old hag. "I know the situation will suit you. When you
      require another, come to me."
Miss Monroe received the card, and took her departure without another moment's delay.
As soon as the young lady had left that den, the old hag proceeded to serve up her stew,
      muttering to herself all the while, "One of my stray sheep come back to me again! This is as
      it should be.
       There is yet much gold to be made by that girl: she cannot do long without
      me!"
Then the horrible wretch fetched from the cupboard the champagne-bottle which contained her
      gin; and she seated herself cheerfully at the table covered with the dainties that she
      loved.
</div></body></text></TEI>