<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="242">
CHAPTER CCXLI.   CROCKFORD'S.
Sir Rupert Harborough, Mr. Albert Egerton, and Mr. Arthur Chichester were walking
      arm-in-arm, and smoking cigars, along the West Strand, about ten minutes after the little
      incident which closed the preceding chapter, when they were met by two tall and
      fashionable-looking gentlemen, who immediately recognised the baronet and Chichester.
Both parties stopped; and the two gentlemen were in due course introduced to Mr. Egerton as
      Lord Dunstable and the Honourable Colonel Cholmondeley.
By the significant tone and manner of the baronet,—a sort of freemasonry known only to the
      initiated,—both Dunstable and the Colonel were given to understand that a flat had been caught
      in the person of Mr. Albert Egerton; and they immediately received their cue as completely as
      if they had been prompted by half an hour's explanation.
"What have you been doing with yourselves, gentlemen, this evening?" inquired Dunstable, as
      they all now proceeded together through Trafalgar Square.
"My friends and myself have been supping at the Paradise," answered the baronet,
      carelessly.
Mr. Egerton drew himself up an inch higher immediately, although somewhat top-heavy with the
      champagne and cigars;—but he felt quite proud—quite another man, indeed—at being numbered
      amongst Sir Rupert Harborough's friends, and at walking familiarly in the company of
      a real lord.
"Cholmondeley and I were thinking of looking in at Crockford's before we encountered you,"
      observed Dunstable, forgetting at the moment that himself and friend were proceeding in quite
      a contrary direction when the meeting alluded to took place. "What say you? shall we all go to
      Crockford's?"
Egerton noticed not the little oversight. The word "Crockford's" perfectly electrified him.
      He had often passed by the great pandemonium in St. James's Street, and looked with wistful
      eyes at its portals—marvelling whether they would ever unfold to give admission to him; and
      now that there seemed a scintillation of a chance of that golden wish, which he had so often
      shadowed forth, being substantially gratified, he could scarcely believe that he was in truth
      Albert Egerton, the son of an outfitter, and having a very respectable widowed aunt engaged in
      the haberdashery line on
      Finsbury Pavement;—but it appeared as if he had suddenly received a transfusion
      of that aristocracy in whose company he found himself.
Already did he make up his mind to cut the good old aunt and the half-dozen of fair
      cousins—her daughters—for ever:—already did he vow never to be seen east of Temple Bar again.
      But then he thought how pleasant it would be to drop in at Finsbury Pavement on some
      Sunday—just at the hour of dinner, which he could make his lunch—and then astound his
      relatives with the mention of his aristocratic acquaintances,—no, his friends,—Lord
      Dunstable, Sir Rupert Harborough, the Honourable Colonel Cholmondeley, and the Honourable
      Arthur Chichester!
And what glorious names, too:—nothing plebeian about them—nothing lower than an
      Honourable!
Had he known how cheaply Mr. Chichester held his titular decoration, Albert Egerton would
      have perhaps assumed one himself: but he did not entertain the least suspicion concerning the
      matter, and therefore envied the pawnbroker's son almost as much as either of the others.
But to return.
Lord Dunstable had said, "Shall we all go to Crockford's?"
Deep was the suspense of Mr. Egerton until Sir Rupert Harborough replied, "With much
      pleasure. It would be the very thing to teach our young friend Egerton here a little of
      life."
"But I am not a member" he murmured, in a disconsolate tone.
"We are all members, however," said Lord Dunstable; "and can pass you in with ease.
      Let me and Harborough take charge of you."
This arrangement was rendered necessary by the fact that Mr. Chichester was not a
      member of Crockford's, and would, therefore, require to be introduced by Colonel Cholmondeley.
      Dunstable, Harborough, and Egerton accordingly walked on together; while the Colonel and
      Chichester followed at some little distance, as it was not thought worth while to allow the
      young flat to perceive that the Honourable Arthur Chichester must be smuggled in, as it were,
      as well as himself.
In this manner the two parties repaired to the celebrated—or rather notorious—Saint James's
      Club; and Egerton's wildest dream was realized—the acmé of his ambition was reached—the
      portals of Crockford's were darkened by his plebeian shadow!
Although excited by wine and by the novelty of his situation, he nevertheless maintained his
      self-possession so far as to avoid any display of vulgar wonderment at the brilliant scene
      upon which he now entered. Leaning on the arms of Lord Dunstable and Sir Rupert Harborough, he
      passed through the marble hall, and was conducted to the coffee-room on the right-hand
      side.
There they waited for a few minutes until Cholmondeley and Chichester joined them; and
      Egerton had leisure to admire the superb pier-glasses, the magnificent chandeliers, the
      handsome side-boards, the costly plate, and the other features of that gorgeous apartment.
When the Colonel and Chichester made their appearance, the party proceeded to the
      supper-room. There Egerton's eyes were completely dazzled by the brilliant looking-glasses,
      all set in splendid frames with curious designs—the crystal chandeliers—the elegant
      sconces—the superb mouldings—the massive plate—and the immense quantities of cut glasses and
      decanters. The curtains were of the richest damask silk; the walls were hung with choice
      pictures; and the whole magic scene was brilliantly lighted up with innumerable wax candles,
      the lustre of which was reflected in the immense mirrors. In a word, the voluptuousness and
      luxury of that apartment surpassed any thing of the kind that young Egerton had ever before
      witnessed.
Seated near one of the fire-places in conversation with an elderly gentleman, was an old
      man, somewhat inclined to stoutness, and very slovenly in his costume. His clothes were good;
      but they appeared to have been tossed upon him with a pitch-fork. His coat hung in large loose
      wrinkles over his rounded shoulders: his trousers appeared to hitch up about the thighs, as if
      through some defect in their cut; two or three of his waistcoat buttons had escaped from their
      holes, or else had not been fastened in them at all; his cravat was limp; and his shirt-frill
      was tumbled. His countenance was pale and sickly, and totally inexpressive of that natural
      astuteness and sharpness which had raised him from the most obscure position to be the
      companion of the noblest peers in the realm. His eyes were of that lack-lustre species which
      usually predicate mental dullness and moral feebleness, but which was at variance with the
      general rule in this instance. In a word, his entire appearance bespoke an individual whose
      health was wasted by long vigils and the want of needful repose and rest.
When Lord Dunstable's party entered the room, there were already three or four groups
      occupying supper-tables, on which the French dishes, prepared in Ude's best style steamed,
      with delicious odour.
"Will you take supper, Mr. Egerton?" inquired Lord Dunstable.
"No, I thank you, my lord," was the reply. "I believe Sir Rupert Harborough informed you
      that we had already been feeding together."
It was not true that Egerton had supped with the baronet and Chichester, as the reader
      knows; but Sir Rupert had already said so of his own accord, and Mr. Egerton was not the young
      man to contradict a statement which seemed to place him upon a certain degree of intimacy with
      the aforesaid baronet.
"Vot, no supper, my lord?" cried the stout gentleman, rising from his seat near the fire,
      and accosting Dunstable. "Yes—your lordship and your lordship's friends vill do that honour to
      Mosseer Ude's good things."
"No, I thank you," said Dunstable, coolly: "we shall not take any supper. We mean to step
      into the next room and amuse ourselves for an hour or so—eh, Mr. Egerton?"
And a significant glance, rapid as lightning, from Lord Dunstable's eyes, conveyed his
      meaning to the stout elderly gentleman with the sickly face.
"Wery good, my lord. I'll send some nice cool claret in; and the groom-porters is there.
      Valk that vay, my lord: valk that vay, gentlemen;—valk that vay, sir."
These last words were addressed to Egerton, and were accompanied by a very low bow.
Dunstable took the young man's arm, and led him into the next apartment, where there was a
      French hazard table.

"Who is the good-natured old gentleman that spoke so very politely, my lord?"
      inquired Egerton, in a whisper, when they had passed from the supper-room.
"That good-natured old gentleman!" cried Dunstable, aloud, and bursting out into a fit of
      laughter so hearty that the tears ran down his cheeks: "why—that's Crockford!"
"Crockford!" repeated Egerton, in astonishment; for, although he had denominated the
      presiding genius of the place "a good-natured old gentleman," he had not failed to observe the
      execrable English which he spoke, and was overwhelmed with surprise to learn that the friend
      of nobles was at such open hostilities with grammar.
"Yes—that is no other than the great Crockford," continued Lord Dunstable, in an under tone.
      "He once kept a small fishmonger's shop near Temple Bar; and he is now rich enough to buy up
      all the fishmongers' shops in London, Billingsgate to boot. But let us see what is going on
      here."
There were only three or four persons lounging about in the Hazard-Room, previously to the
      entrance of Dunstable, Egerton, Harborough, Cholmondeley, and Chichester; and no play was
      going on. The moment, however, those gentlemen made their appearance, the loungers to whom we
      have just alluded, and who were decoy-ducks connected with the establishment, repaired to the
      table and called for dice, while his croupiers took their seats, and the groom-porter
      instantly mounted upon his stool.
"What does he get up there for?" asked Egerton, in a whisper.
"To announce the main and chance," replied Lord Dunstable. "But don't you
      play hazard?"
"No, no—that is, not often—not very often," said the foolish young man, afraid of being
      deemed unfashionable in the eyes of his new acquaintances if he admitted that he never yet
      handled a dice-box in his life.
"Oh! no—not often—of course not!" exclaimed Dunstable, who saw through the artifice:
      "neither do I. But here comes Crockey with the bank."
And, as he spoke, Mr. Crockford made his appearance, holding in his hands an elegant
      rosewood case, which he placed upon the table, and behind which he immediately seated
      himself.
The dice-box was now taken by Lord Dunstable, who set ten sovereigns, called "five" as a
      main, and threw seven.
"Seven to five!" exclaimed the groom-porter.
"Three to two are the odds," said Sir Rupert Harborough to Egerton: "I'll take them of you
      in fifties?"
"Done," cried Egerton; and in another moment he had the pleasure of handing over his money
      to the baronet.
After Lord Dunstable had thrown out, Mr. Chichester took the box, and Cholmondeley in his
      turn ensnared Egerton into a private bet, which the young man of course lost. But he parted
      from his bank-notes with a very good grace; for, although considerably sobered by the
      soda-water which he had drunk at the Paradise, yet what with the wine and the idea of being at
      that moment beneath Crockford's roof, he was sufficiently intoxicated to be totally reckless
      of his financial affairs.
Thus, after having lost a bet to each of his friends, he was easily persuaded to take the
      box, and dispense a little more of his cash for the especial benefit of Mr. Crockford.
"I'll set a hundred pounds," cried Egerton, "and call five the main."
He then threw ten.
"Ten to five!" cried the groom-porter.
"Put down three fifties," said Dunstable; "and you have four fifties to three. That's right.
      Now go on."
Egerton threw.
"Five—trois, deuce—out!" cried the groom-porter.
And the young man's money was swept towards the bank in a moment.
"Try a back, Egerton," exclaimed Chichester.
"Well—I don't mind," was the reply—for the waiter had just handed round goblets of the most
      delicious claret, and the lights began to dance somewhat confusedly before the young victim's
      eyes. "I'll set myself again in two hundred; and five's the main."
"Five's the main," cried the groom-porter: "deuce, ace—out."
And away went the bank-notes to the rosewood case at the head of the table.
Colonel Cholmondeley now took the box.
"Will you set me a pony, Egerton?" he said.
"I should not mind," was the reply, given with a stammer and a blush; "but—to tell you the
      truth—I have no more money about me. If my cheque will do——"
Dunstable nodded significantly to Crockford.
"Oh! my dear sir," said the old hell-keeper, rising from his seat and shuffling towards
      Egerton, whom he drew partially aside; "I means no offence, but if you vants monies, I shall
      be werry 'appy to lend you a thousand or two, I'm sure."
"Take a thousand, Egerton," whispered Lord Dunstable. "You'll have better luck, perhaps,
      with old Crockey's money—there's a spell about it."
"I—I," hesitated the young man for a moment, as the thought of his previous losses flashed
      to his mind, even amidst the dazzling influence of Crockford's club and his aristocratic
      acquaintances: "I——"
"Glass of claret, sir?" said the waiter, approaching him with a massive silver salver on
      which stood the crystal goblets of ruby wine.
"Thank you;"—and Egerton quaffed the aromatic juice to drown the unpleasant ideas which had
      just intruded themselves upon him: then, as he replaced the glass upon the salver, he said,
      "Well, give me a thousand—and I'll have another throw."
Sir Rupert Harborough took the box, set himself in ten pounds, and cried, "Nine's the
      main."
He then threw.
"Six to nine!" exclaimed the groom-porter.
"Five to four in favour of the caster," observed Colonel Cholmondeley.
"I'll bet the odds," cried Egerton.
"'Gainst the rules, sir," said the pompous groom-porter: "you're not a setter this
      time."
"Pooh, pooh!" cried Crockford, affecting a jocular chuckle. "The gentleman has lost—let the
      gentleman have a chance of recovering his-self. Take the hodds of the gentleman."
"Then I bet five hundred to four in favour of the caster," said Egerton, now growing
      interested in the play as he began to understand it better.

Sir Rupert threw a few times, and at last turned up six and three.
"Nine—six, trois—out!" cried the groom-porter.
Egerton now insisted upon taking the box again; and in a few minutes he had not a fraction
      left of the thousand pounds which he had borrowed.
He turned away from the table and sighed deeply.
"Glass of claret, sir?" said the waiter, as composedly as if he were offering the wine
      through civility and not for the systematic purpose of washing away a remorse.
Egerton greedily swallowed the contents of a goblet; and when he looked again towards the
      table, he was astounded to find another bundle of Bank notes thrust into his hand by the
      obliging Mr. Crockford, who said in his blandest tones, "I think you vas vaiting, sir, for
      more monies."
"Take it—take it, old chap," whispered Dunstable: "you can turn that second thousand into
      ten."
"Or into nothing—like the first," murmured Egerton, with a sickly smile: but still he took
      the money.
He then played rapidly—wildly—desperately,—drinking wine after each new loss, and inwardly
      cursing his unlucky stars.
The second thousand pounds were soon gone; and Dunstable whispered to Crockford, "That's
      enough for to-night. We must make him a member in a day or two—and then you'll give me back
      the little I. O. U. you hold of mine."
"Certainly—certainly," answered the hell-keeper. "But mind you doesn't fail to bring him
      again."
"Never fear," returned Dunstable;—then turning towards his party, he said aloud, "Well, I
      think it is pretty nearly time to be off."
"So do I, my lord——hic," stammered Egerton, catching joyfully at the chance of an immediate
      escape from the place where fortunes were so speedily engulphed;—for tipsy as he now was
      again, the idea of his losses was uppermost in his mind.
"Well, my lord—well gentlemen," said Crockford, bowing deferentially; "I wishes you all a
      wery good night—or rather morning. But perhaps your friend, my lord, would just give me his
      little I. O. U.——"
"Oh! certainly, he will" interrupted Dunstable.
      "Here, Egerton, my boy—give your I. O. U. for the two thousand——"
"I'd ra-a-ther—hic—give my draft," returned the young man.
But, as his hand trembled and his visual faculties were duplicated for the time, he was ten
      minutes ere he could fill up a printed cheque in a proper manner.
The business was, however, accomplished at last, and the party withdrew, amidst the bows of
      decoy-ducks, croupiers, waiters, groom-porters, door-porters, and all the menials of the
      establishment.
William Crockford was the founder of the Club which so long bore his name, and which was
      only broken up a short time ago.
He began life as a fishmonger; and when he closed his shop of an evening, was accustomed to
      repair to some of the West End hells, where he staked the earnings of the day. Naturally of a
      shrewd and far-seeing disposition, he was well qualified to make those calculations which
      taught him the precise chances of the hazard-table; and a lucky bet upon the St. Leger
      suddenly helped him to a considerable sum of ready money, with which he was enabled to extend
      his ventures at the gaming-house.
In due time he gave up the fish-shop, and joined some hellites in partnership at the West
      End. Fortune continued to favour him; and he was at length in a condition to open No. 50, St.
      James's Street, as a Club.
The moment the establishment was ready for the reception of members, announcements of the
      design were made in the proper quarters; and it was advertised that all persons belonging to
      other Clubs were eligible to have their names enrolled without ballot as members of
      the St. James's. The scheme succeeded beyond even the most sanguine hopes of Crockford
      himself; and hundreds of peers, nobles, and gentlemen, who were fond of play, but who dared
      not frequent the common gaming-houses, gladly became supporters and patrons of the new
      Club.
In the course of a short time No. 51 was added to the establishment; and No. 52 was
      subsequently annexed. The rules and regulations were made more stringent, because several
      notorious black-legs had obtained admission; but, until the very last, any member was
      permitted to introduce a stranger for one evening only, with the understanding that such
      visitor should be balloted for in due course. The entrance-fee was fixed at twenty guineas a
      year; and an annual payment of ten guineas was required from every member.
The three houses, thrown into one, were soon found to be too small for the accommodation of
      the members: they were accordingly pulled down, and the present magnificent building was
      erected on their site. It is impossible to say how much money was expended upon this princely
      structure; but we can assert upon undoubted authority that the internal decorations alone cost
      ninety-four thousand pounds!
The real nature of this most scandalous and abominable establishment soon transpired.
      Hundreds of young men, who entered upon life with fortune and every brilliant prospect to
      cheer them, were immolated upon the infernal altar of that aristocratic pandemonium. Many of
      them committed suicide:—others perpetrated forgeries, to obtain the means of endeavouring to
      regain what they had lost, and ended their days upon the scaffold;—and not a few became
      decoy-ducks and bonnets in the service of the Arch-demon himself. Even noblemen of high rank
      did not hesitate to fill these ignominious offices; and for every flat whom they took to the
      house, they received a recompense proportionate to the spoil that was obtained. To keep up
      appearances with their fellow members, these ruined lacqueys of the great hellite actually
      paid their subscriptions with the funds which he furnished them for the purpose.
So infamous became the reputation of Crockford's, that it was deemed necessary to devise
      means to place the establishment apparently upon the same footing with other Clubs. A
      committee of noblemen and gentlemen (what precious noblemen and gentlemen,
      good reader!) was formed to administer the affairs of the institution; but this proceeding was
      a mere blind. The Committee's jurisdiction extended only to the laws affecting the
      introduction of new members, the expulsion of unruly ones, and the choice of the wines laid in
      for the use of the Club. The French Hazard Bank and all matters relating to the gambling-rooms
      were under the sole control of Crockford, who reaped enormous advantages from that
      position.
Thus was it that a vulgar and illiterate man—a professed gambler—a wretch who lived upon the
      ruin of the inexperienced and unwary, as well as on the vices of the hoary sinner,—thus was he
      enabled to make noble lords and high-born gentlemen his vile tools, and thrust them forward as
      the ostensible managers of a damnable institution, the infamous profit of which went into his
      own purse![36]
</div></body></text></TEI>