<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="223">
CHAPTER CCXXII.   THE ARRIVAL AT HOME.
On the same evening Mr. Monroe, Ellen, and Katharine were assembled in the drawing-room at
      Markham Place.
The lamp burnt bright, and there were books open upon the table; but none of the little
      party had any inclination to read:—some event of importance was evidently expected.
"He will assuredly return this evening," observed Mr. Monroe, after a long pause in the
      conversation. "The last letter he wrote to us was positive in naming the day when he
      calculated upon arriving in England."
"But as he said that he should be compelled to
      come back to his native land in one of the government steamers of Castelcicala,"
      said Ellen, "it is impossible to conjecture what delay adverse weather may have caused."
"True," exclaimed Mr. Monroe; and he walked to the window, whence he looked forth into the
      bright clear night.
It is a strange fact that whenever people are expecting the arrival of some one near or dear
      to them, they invariably go to the windows, where they watch with a sort of nervous
      agitation—as if by so doing they could hasten the coming which they anticipate.
The two young ladies drew close to each other on the sofa, and exchanged a few words in
      whispers.
"You seem low-spirited, dearest Kate," said Ellen; "and yet our benefactor is about to
      return to us. I feel convinced that you are more annoyed than you choose to confess, on
      account of the, non-appearance of the handsome stranger."
"I should be telling you an untruth, Ellen," answered Kate, blushing deeply, "were I to
      declare that I do not sometimes think of him whom you alluded to. But have I not another cause
      of vexation? do you imagine that the recent interview which I had with that odious Mr.
      Banks——"
"Yes, dear Kate: all that he told you was well calculated to render you anxious and
      unsettled in mind," interrupted Ellen. "But it was necessary to await the return of him who
      can best counsel you; and the time now approaches when you may communicate to Richard all that
      has passed."
Katherine was about to reply, when Mr. Monroe, who was still watching at the window,
      suddenly exclaimed, "A carriage—at last!"
The two young ladies hurried to the casement, and beheld the lamps of the vehicle rapidly
      approaching, while the sound of its wheels also reached their ears.
Then they both hastened from the room, followed by Mr. Monroe, to receive Markham the moment
      he should alight.
Whittingham and Marian joined them; and the whole party was stationed on the steps of the
      front door when the carriage drove up.
In another moment Richard was amongst them; and there were such congratulations—such shaking
      of hands—and such proofs of joy as were seldom known or seen even on occasions of similar
      happiness.
As for the old butler, he was literally mad with the excitement of his feelings. He hugged
      his young master with a warmth that could not possibly have been exceeded had they stood in
      the relation of father and son, and the fervour of which considerably deranged the position of
      our hero's epaulettes and aiguillettes—for he was in his uniform, as the reader will remember.
      Then, when Whittingham had thus far testified his joy at his master's return, he seized upon
      Marian and compelled her to perform three or four rapid pirouettes with him in the hall—to the
      infinite peril of that good woman's equilibrium. She disengaged herself from him with
      considerable difficulty; and the old man, quite overcome by his feelings and performances,
      sate down in one of the hall-chairs, and began to whimper like a child—exclaiming as well as
      he could, "Don't mind me—don't mind me! I can't help it! It's the unawoidable commotions
      here!" and he slapped his breast. "Master Richard's come back to the home of his successors;
      and he's a great man too—in spite of all that them willains Marlborough and Axminster once did
      to him!"
"Compose yourself, my excellent old friend," said the young Prince, pressing Whittingham's
      hand: "I am indeed come back—and to remain, too, for a long—long time."
The footman who attended upon the Grand-Duke's carriage now approached our hero, and with
      head uncovered, said in a tone of extreme deference, "Is it the pleasure of your Highness that
      the chariot should remain, or return to Richmond?"
"I wish you to stay here until the morning," answered Richard; "as I shall visit his Serene
      Highness to-morrow."
The footman bowed, and retreating to the hall-steps, cried aloud to the coachman, "The
      Prince commands us to remain."
"Hey! what's that?" ejaculated Whittingham, who, together with the others present, had
      caught those swelling titles. "I heerd, Master Richard, that you was a Markiss; but——"
"It has pleased the gracious sovereign to whose service I have the honour to belong, to
      invest me with the rank which has surprised you," answered Richard, laughing at his old
      dependant's bewilderment: "at the same time I can assure you that you will please me best by
      addressing me ever as you have been accustomed to do from my childhood."
The butler seemed to reflect profoundly for a few moments, with his eyes fixed on the marble
      floor then, suddenly raising his head, he exclaimed, "No, Master Richard—it can't be done! It
      would be to treat you as if you was still a boy. There's such a thing in the world as
      epaulette—etiquette, I mean; and I know myself better than to lose sight on it. Besides,
      Master Richard—it isn't every one as is butler to a Prince; and I'm proud of the office. So
      now I've called you Master Richard for the last time. Marian, bustle about the
      supper—and see that the servants with the carriage is well taken care of. You can show 'em
      round to the stables; while I light his Highness to the drawing-room."
Having issued these commands in a tone of pompous importance which the old man had not
      adopted for some years past, he seized a candle and led the way in a solemn and dignified
      manner up stairs.
"Poor Whittingham scarcely knows whether he stands on his head or his feet," whispered
      Richard, laughing, to Ellen and Katharine, as he placed himself between them, and gave them
      each an arm. "Let us, however, humour the good old man, and ascend with due ceremony to the
      drawing-room."
The reader will not require us to detail all the conversation which ensued. Markham had so
      much to tell, and his hearers so much to learn, that the time slipped away with lightning
      speed. Our hero not only related at length all that had occurred to him in Italy, but also
      entered upon explanations which he had never broached before relative to his attachment to
      Isabella. He made Whittingham sit down and listen to all he had to say; and he concluded by
      acquainting those present with his intended marriage.
"But," he hastened to add, "this event will make no difference in regard to the dear friends
      by whom I am surrounded. You, Mr. Monroe and Ellen, must continue to dwell with me; and you,
      Katherine, must look upon this house as your home. It is
      large enough for us all—even for those servants whom it will now be necessary to
      add to our establishment, and who will increase the department over which you, my faithful
      friend,"—addressing himself to Whittingham,—"preside so ably."
"I shall know how to distrain 'em all in order, my lord," said the butler, with an air of
      considerable importance.
Ellen's countenance had suddenly become thoughtful, when she heard that Richard was so
      shortly to be married.
Leaning towards him, as she sate by his side, she murmured in a hasty whisper, "Tell
      Whittingham to leave the room: I wish to speak to you and my father immediately."
Markham requested the old man to see that the servants of the Grand-Duke were well cared
      for; and Whittingham accordingly withdrew.
Richard then glanced inquiringly towards Ellen, who rose and whispered to Katherine, "Leave
      us, my sweet friend, for a few moments: I wish to speak to Richard and my father on a subject
      which nearly concerns myself."
Kate cheerfully complied with this request, and retired.
"What does this mean, Ellen?" inquired Richard with some degree of anxiety. "God grant that
      no cause of unhappiness may interrupt the joy of my return!"
"No—reassure yourself on that head," said Ellen. "My dear benefactor—and you, beloved
      father—listen to me for a few moments. You, Richard, are about to bring home a bride whom you
      love—whom you respect—and who must be respected,—a lady endowed with every quality that can
      render her worthy of you,—pure, chaste, and stainless as snow. Richard, she must not be placed
      in the companionship of one who occupies an equivocal situation in society—like myself!"
"Ellen, my Isabella is of too generous—too charitable a mind——" began Richard, deeply
      affected by these words, which recalled so many unpleasant reminiscences with respect to
      Monroe's daughter.
"Nay—hear me out," continued Ellen, with a sweet smile of gratitude for the sentiment which
      Markham had half expressed: "I shall not keep you in suspense for many moments. You wish me to
      be the companion of your Isabella, Richard?—I will be so—and not altogether unworthily either
      in respect to her or to myself. And now I am about to communicate to you both a secret which I
      should have treasured up until the proper time to elucidate it had arrived—were it not for the
      approaching event which has compelled me to break silence. But in imparting this secret, I
      must confide in your goodness—your forbearance—not to ask me more than I dare reveal.
      Richard—father—I am married!"
"Married!" repeated our hero, joyfully.
"Come to my arms, Ellen!" cried Mr. Monroe: "let me embrace you fondly—for now indeed are
      you my own daughter for whom I need not blush!"
And he pressed her to his heart with the warmest enthusiasm of paternal affection.
"Yes," continued Ellen, after a short pause, "I am married—married, too, to the father of my
      child;—and that is all that I dare reveal to you at present! I implore you—I beseech you both
      to ask me no questions; for I could not respond truly to them, and be consistent with a solemn
      promise of temporary secrecy which I have pledged to my husband! The motives of that mystery
      are not dishonourable, and do not rest with me. In two or three years there will be no
      necessity to keep silent. And now tell me, dear father—tell me, Richard—have you sufficient
      confidence in me, to believe what I have unfolded you, without knowing more?"
"Believe you, Ellen!" exclaimed Markham: "oh why should I doubt you? Your motive in
      revealing the happy fact of your marriage—a motive instigated by delicacy towards her who is
      so soon to accompany me to the altar—is so generous, so pure, so noble, that it speaks volumes
      in your favour, Ellen; and I love you as a sister—a very dear sister."
"Yes—it is with a brother's love that you must regard me," exclaimed Ellen, emphatically and
      joyfully; "and you know not what happiness your assurance imparts to me! Let me not, however,
      be misunderstood in any thing that I have already stated. I would not have you infer that I
      have been married long—nor that I was a wife when I became a mother," continued Ellen, casting
      down her eyes, and blushing deeply. "No—it was only on the 3d of January, in the present year,
      that I was united to him who will one day give a father's name to his child."
"I care not to know more, Ellen!" exclaimed Mr. Monroe. "You are a wife—and your son, as he
      grows up, need never be made acquainted with the true date of his parents' union. That
      innocent deception will be necessary."
"Your father is satisfied—and I am satisfied, dear Ellen," said Richard: "we should be wrong
      to seek to penetrate into a secret which your good sense would not induce you to retain
      inviolable without sufficient motives. I cannot express to you my joy at the revelation which
      you have made; and, believe me, you will now have no cause to blush in the presence of my
      Isabella."
"Father—Richard," murmured Ellen, pressing their hands affectionately in her own, "you have
      made me happy—because you have placed confidence in my word!"
And as tears of joy stood in her large melting blue eyes, and her face and neck were
      suffused in blushes, how beautiful did she appear—sweet Ellen!
"You have banished your young friend from the room," said Markham, after a short pause.
"But I will speedily summon her hither again," answered Ellen; "for she also has something
      important to reveal to you."
"A continuation, doubtless, of the narrative of the mysterious proceedings of the vilest of
      men and his female accomplice, and concerning which you wrote me full details some weeks ago?"
      observed Richard.
"Yes—there is another chapter in that strange history for you to hear," replied Ellen.
She then hurried from the room, and in a short time returned with Katherine.
"Tell Richard the remainder of your story in your own way, dear Kate," said Ellen, as the
      young ladies seated themselves side by side upon the sofa.
"It was nearly a week ago," began Katherine "that I rambled forth a little way alone. Ellen
      was somewhat indisposed and unable to accompany me; and Mr. Monroe had gone into town upon
      some business. I ascended the hill, and, having enjoyed the prospect for a short time, passed
      down on the opposite
      side, and walked through the fields. I was thinking of various matters,—but
      chiefly of the cruel disappointment which I had experienced in my recently awakened hopes of
      obtaining information relative to my parentage,—when I suddenly observed a person approaching;
      and I was somewhat alarmed when I perceived that it was that odious Mr. Banks, the undertaker,
      whom Ellen mentioned to you in the letter which related all that had taken place at the farm.
      I was about to retrace my steps, when Mr. Banks called after me, assuring me that I had no
      reason to be afraid of him, and declaring that he had important news to communicate. My hopes
      were revived—I felt convinced that his business was to renew those negotiations between myself
      and the old woman which had been so suddenly interrupted; and I no longer experienced any
      alarm. He accosted me, and, in his peculiar phraseology—an imitation of which I shall not
      inflict upon you—declared that a friend of his possessed certain papers which would entirely
      clear up the mystery wherein my parentage was involved. You may conceive the emotions which
      this communication excited within me: I trembled to put implicit faith in what I heard—in case
      of disappointment—in case of deception; and yet I clung—oh! I clung to the hope of at length
      being enlightened in matters so dear to my heart. Mr. Banks spoke candidly and
      intelligibly—though with wearisome circumlocution and a mass of hypocritical cant. He said
      that his friend had purchased the papers of the old woman for a large sum; and that he would
      only part with them for a larger sum still. In a word, he demanded five hundred pounds; and he
      assured me that I should not regret the bargain—for there were letters in my poor mother's own
      handwriting."
Kate wiped away the tears that had started into her eyes as she thus alluded to her maternal
      parent.
"I represented to Mr. Banks," she continued, after a pause, "that I was unpossessed of the
      immediate command of the sum demanded, and that I must either apply to the solicitor who had
      the management of my affairs, or wait until your return, Richard, from Italy. I moreover
      explained to him the extreme improbability that either Mr. Wharton or yourself would permit me
      to pay so large an amount for the papers, unless they were previously ascertained to be of the
      value represented. He seemed prepared for this objection; for he immediately declared that if
      I would name a day and an hour when I would call upon him, accompanied by any one friend, male
      or female, whom I might choose to select, he would have the papers in readiness, and that I
      might glance over them in order to satisfy myself of their value and authenticity."
"That was certainly a fair proposal for such a gang of villains to make," observed Richard;
      "and it invests the entire affair with the utmost importance. Did you give the man any
      definite answer?"
"I assured him that I could do nothing without consulting my friends; but that I would write
      to him in the course of a day or two. He advised me to lose no time; as his friend was not a
      person to be trifled with."
"And that friend," said Markham, "is the villain Anthony Tidkins—beyond all doubt. He does
      not dare appear actively himself in this business, for fear of affording me a clue to his
      haunts; and therefore he employs this Banks as his agent. The whole scheme is as transparent
      as possible."
"Before I parted from the undertaker," observed Katherine, "I objected to visit his house,
      and proposed to him that, in the event of my friends permitting me to purchase the papers, he
      should allow the cursory inspection of them either at Mr. Wharton's office or at Markham
      Place. But to this arrangement he expressed his entire hostility, stating emphatically that
      the documents must be examined and the purchase-money paid at his own house—and that, too,
      with four-and twenty-hours' notice of the time which I should appoint for the purpose."
"I see through it all!" exclaimed Richard. "Tidkins is afraid to trust his own agent with
      the papers or with the money paid for their purchase; and he will be concealed somewhere in
      Banks's house when the appointment takes place. Hence the notice required. It is as clear as
      the noon-day sun."
"On my return to the Place," continued Katherine, "I acquainted Mr. Monroe and Ellen with
      the particulars of the interview between the undertaker and myself; and as your letter,
      announcing the day when you hoped to set foot on the English soil again, had arrived that very
      morning, it was arranged that no decisive step should be taken until you were present to
      advise and to sanction the course to be adopted. I accordingly wrote a note to Mr. Banks,
      stating that I would communicate with him in a positive manner in the course of a week or ten
      days."
"You acted wisely, dear Kate," said Richard; "and I now question whether the Resurrection
      Man has not allowed his suspicious avarice to get the better of his prudence. But of that we
      will speak on a future occasion. You shall purchase the documents, Katherine—and without
      troubling Mr. Wharton upon the subject. Thanks to the liberality of the Castelcicalan
      government, my fortune is now far more ample than that which I lost; and pecuniary vexations
      can never again militate against my happiness. Yes, Katherine, we will yield to the extortion
      of these villains who are trading in the dearest ties and holiest sympathies of the human
      heart; but I must tax your patience somewhat—for you can well understand that for a few days I
      shall be unable to devote myself to even an affair so important as this. To-morrow you can
      write to Mr. Banks, and fix an appointment at his own house—one week hence—the hour to be
      eight o'clock in the evening, for it is then dark."
Katherine expressed her gratitude to our hero for this additional proof of his kindness
      towards her.
The happy party remained in conversation until a late hour—unconscious of the rapid lapse of
      time, so deeply were they interested in the various topics of their discourse.
It was, indeed, nearly two o'clock in the morning when the last light was extinguished in
      Markham Place.
Nevertheless, the inmates of that happy dwelling rose at an early hour—for there was much to
      be done that day, and little time for the purpose.
Ellen and Mr. Monroe repaired to town the moment breakfast was over, to make a variety of
      purchases in order to render the mansion as complete in all its arrangements as possible for
      the reception of the bride. Money is endowed with a wondrously electric power to make
      tradesmen bustling and active; and in spite of the little leisure left for choice
      and selection, the business-habits of Mr. Monroe and the good taste of his
      daughter enabled them to accomplish their task in a manner satisfactory to all concerned.
      Thus, in the afternoon, waggons piled with new and costly furniture, carts laden with
      chinaware and glass, and others containing carpets, curtains, and handsome hangings for the
      windows, were on their way to Markham Place.
And at the mansion, in the meantime, all was bustle and activity. Richard had departed early
      in the Grand-Duke's carriage for Richmond; but Katherine superintended all the domestic
      arrangements; Marian obtained the assistance of two or three char-women in her special
      department; and Whittingham forthwith added to the establishment, upon his own responsibility,
      two footmen and a page, all of whom were well known to him and happened to have been out of
      place at the moment.
Thus, by the time the young Prince returned home to dinner at five o'clock, the old mansion
      exhibited an appearance so changed, but withal so gay and tastefully handsome, that he was
      unsparing in his praises of those who had exhibited so much zeal in rendering it fit to
      receive his bride on the following day.
</div></body></text></TEI>