<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="46">
CHAPTER XLVI. RICHARD AND ISABELLA.
RICHARD Markham had determined to lose no time in revealing to Count Alteroni those
      adventures which had rendered him an inmate of the Giltspur Street Compter for two years.
And yet it was hard to dare the destruction of the bright visions which had dawned upon him
      in respect to the Signora Isabella: it was cruel to dash away from his lips the only cup of
      enjoyment which he had tasted for a long time.
He knew not how the count would receive such a narrative as he had to tell. Doubtless it
      would alarm him: "for society," thought Richard, "was too apt to judge rashly by outward
      appearances." Should the count, however, nobly and generously rise above the prejudices of the
      world, and believe the statement of Markham's innocence, corroborated as it was by the
      document signed by Talbot, alias Pocock, much would have been gained by a candid and
      honourable confession. But if the reverse ensued, and the count banished Richard from his
      friendship, the young man felt that he himself would only have performed a melancholy duty,
      and broken asunder of his own accord those bonds which, were he to remain silent, an accident
      might one day snap abruptly and rudely.
"I feel happy," said Markham to himself, as he arose in the morning after the day on which
      the fruitless search mentioned in the preceding chapter took place,—"I feel happy even while
      about to consummate a sacrifice which may destroy the most golden of my dreams! The Infinite
      Being has declared that the days of our life shall be marked with sorrow; and they are—as I
      can well testify! But the afflictions to which we are subject are attended with blessed
      antidotes;—moral sources of enjoyment are given to us, as fruits and flowers for the soul; and
      the teachings of interest, as well as the impulses of gratitude, should lead us to consider
      with attention those duties we owe each other, for the sake of the bounties the Almighty
      showers upon us."
So reasoned Richard Markham.
That evening he arrived at the count's abode near Richmond, a few minutes before dinner.
A kind welcome awaited him on the part of the count and countess; and the eyes of Signora
      Isabella expressed the satisfaction she experienced at his return.
When Markham was seated with the count after dinner, he determined to commence the
      explanation which he had resolved to give.
He was just about to broach the subject, when the count observed, "By the bye, I am happy to
      inform you that I received letters from Greenwood this morning; and he assures me that the
      speculation looks admirably."
"I am delighted to hear it," returned Richard. "But the chief object of my present
      visit——"
"Was to speak about this Steam Packet business, no doubt," interrupted the count. "Well, if
      you like to take shares in it, it is not too late. But what do you think? I am going to tell
      you a secret. You know that I look upon you as a friend of the family; besides, I am well
      aware that you respect Isabel and love her like a brother——"
"What did you say, count?" stammered Markham.
"I was going to tell you that Mr. Greenwood—who is immensely rich—has taken a liking to
      Isabella——"
"Indeed!"
"Yes—and I gave him some little encouragement."
"What! without previously ascertaining whether the Signora's feelings are reciprocal?" cried
      Richard.
"As for that, my dear Markham, remember that a dutiful daughter knows no will and no
      inclination save those of her parents."
"This is not an English doctrine," said Markham, "so far as the principle applies to affairs
      of the heart."
      
"It is nevertheless an Italian doctrine," exclaimed the count, somewhat haughtily; "and I
      have no doubt that Isabella will ever recognise the authority of her parents in this as in all
      other matters."
As the count uttered these words, he rose and led the way to the drawing-room; and thus
      deprived Markham of that opportunity of making the confession he had intended.
Richard was unhappy and dispirited. He perceived that the count was inclined to favour Mr.
      Greenwood's suit; and he now felt how dear Isabella was to him—how profoundly seated was his
      love for the beauteous Italian!
Misfortunes never come alone. Richard was destined to receive a crushing blow, although
      innocently inflicted, the moment he entered the drawing-room.
The countess was conversing with her daughter upon her own family connections.
"Do not let us interrupt your conversation," said the count, as he took his seat upon the
      sofa near his wife.
"We were only talking about the Chevalier Guilderstein, whose death was mentioned in
      yesterday's newspaper," observed the countess. "I was saying that I remembered how delighted I
      was when I discovered a few years ago that the chevalier was not related to our family, as he
      had always pretended to be."
"And why so?" inquired the count.
"Because the father of the chevalier was put to death in Austria for coining—or rather upon
      a charge of coining," answered the countess; "and although his innocence was discovered and
      proclaimed a few years after his death, I should not like to have amongst my ancestors a man
      who had been criminally convicted, however innocent he may in reality have been."
"Certainly not," said the count. "I should be very sorry for any one whose character had
      ever been tainted with suspicion, to have the slightest connection with our family."
"I cannot say that I agree with you," observed Isabel. "There can be no disgrace attached to
      one who has suffered under a false accusation: on the contrary—such a person is rather
      deserving of our deepest sympathy and——"
"Heavens, Mr. Markham!" ejaculated the countess; "are you ill? Bella, dear—ring the bell—get
      Mr. Markham a glass of water——"
"It is nothing—nothing, I can assure you," stammered Richard, whose countenance was as pale
      as that of a corpse. "Miss Isabella, do not give yourself any trouble! It was only a sudden
      faintness—a spasm: but it is over now."
With these words Markham hurried to the bed-chamber which was always allotted to him when he
      visited the count's residence.
All the horrible tortures which man can conceive, harassed him at that moment. He threw
      himself upon his couch—he writhed—he struggled, as if against a serpent which held him in its
      embraces. His eyes seemed as if they were about to start from their sockets; his teeth were
      fast closed—he wrung his hair—he beat his breast—and low moans escaped from his bosom. The
       fiat of the count had gone forth. He who would claim or aspire to connection with
      his family must be like the wife of Cæsar—beyond all suspicion. It was not enough that such an
      one should be innocent of any crime: he must never have even been accused of one. Such was the
      disposition of the count—elicited by an accident, and unexpectedly; and Markham could now
      divine the nature of the treatment which he would be likely to experience, were he to reveal
      his misfortunes to a nobleman who entertained such punctilious and extremely scrupulous
      notions!
"But I was mad to imagine that Isabella would ever become mine," thought Markham within
      himself, as soon as he became somewhat more tranquillised. "It was folly—supreme folly—rank,
      idiotic, inconceivable folly, in me to have cherished a hope which could never be realised!
      All that now remains for me to do, is to abandon myself to my adverse fate—to attempt no more
      struggles against the destinies that await me,—to leave this house without delay—to return
      home, and bury myself in a solitude from which no persuasions nor attractions shall henceforth
      induce me to emerge! Would that I could leave this house this very evening;—but appearances
      compel me to remain at least until to-morrow! I must endeavour to assume that ease of
      manner—that friendly confidence, which is reciprocal here:—for a few hours I must consent to
      act the hypocrite; and to-morrow—to-morrow, I shall be relieved from that dread necessity,—I
      shall be compelled to bid adieu to Isabella for ever! No avowal of my past sufferings is now
      required—since I shall to-morrow leave this hospitable mansion, never to return!"
A flood of tears relieved the unfortunate young man; and he descended once more to the
      drawing-room—very pale, but as calm and tranquil as usual. Isabella glanced towards him from
      time to time with evident anxiety; and, in spite of all his endeavours to appear cheerful and
      at his ease, he was embarrassed, cool, and reserved. Isabella was wounded and mortified by his
      conduct:—she attempted to rally him, and to ascertain whether he was really chilling in his
      manners on purpose, or only melancholy against his will: but she received frigid and laconic
      replies, which annoyed and disheartened the poor girl to such an extent that she could
      scarcely refrain from tears. Markham felt that, as an honourable man, he could no longer
      aspire to the hand of the signora, after the expression of opinion accidentally conveyed to
      him by the count and countess; and he therefore forbore from any attempt to render himself
      agreeable, or to afford the slightest testimony of his passion. Acting with these views, and
      endeavouring to seem only properly polite, he fell into the opposite extreme, and grew cold
      and reserved. The count and countess imagined that he was unwell, and were not therefore
      annoyed by his conduct;—but poor Isabella, who was deeply attached to him, set down his
      behaviour to indifference. This idea on her part was confirmed, when Markham, in the course of
      conversation, intimated his intention of returning home on the following day.
"Return home! and what for?" ejaculated the count. "You have no society there, and here you
      have some—unamusing and tedious though it may be."
"Never did I pass a happier period of my existence than that which I have spent in your
      hospitable abode," said Richard.
"Then remain with us at least ten days or a fortnight," cried the count. "We shall then be
      visiting London ourselves, for we have promised to pass a few weeks with Lord and Lady
      Tremordyn."
"Lord Tremordyn!" exclaimed Richard.
"Yes—do you know him?"
"Only by name. But did not his daughter marry Sir Rupert Harborough?" said Markham,
      shuddering as he pronounced the abhorred name.
"The same. Sir Robert treats her shamefully—neglects her in every way, and passes whole
      months
       away from his home. He has, moreover, expended all the fortune she brought him,
      and is again, I understand, deeply involved in debt."
"Poor Lady Cecilia!" ejaculated Isabella. "She is deeply to be pitied!"
"But to return to this sudden resolution of yours to depart to-morrow," said the count.
"Which resolution is very suddenly taken," added the signora, affecting to be engaged in
      contemplating a book of prints which lay upon the table before her, while her beautiful
      countenance was suffused with a deep blush.
"My resolution is sudden, certainly," observed Richard. "Circumstances over which I have no
      control, and which it would be useless to communicate to you, frequently compel me to adopt
      sudden resolutions, and act up to them. Be assured, however, that the memory of your kindness
      will always be dear to me."
"You speak as if we were never to meet again," exclaimed the count.
"We cannot dispose of events in this world according to our own will," said Markham,
      emphatically. "Would to God we could!"
"But there are certain circumstances in which we seem to be free agents," said Isabella,
      still holding down her head; "and remaining in one place, or going to another, appears to be
      amongst those actions which depend upon our own volition."
At this moment a servant entered the room and informed the count that the private secretary
      of the envoy of the Grand Duke of Castelcicala to the English court desired to speak with him
      in another apartment.
"Oh! I am interested in this," exclaimed the countess; and, upon a signal of approval on the
      part of her husband, she accompanied him to the room where the secretary was waiting.
Markham was now alone with Isabella.
This was a probable occurrence which he had dreaded all that evening. He felt himself
      cruelly embarrassed in her presence; and the silence which prevailed between them was awkward
      to a degree.
At length the signora herself spoke.
"It appears that you are determined to leave us, Mr. Markham?" she said, without glancing
      towards him, and in a tone which she endeavoured to render as cool and indifferent as
      possible.
"I feel that I have been too long here already, signora," answered Richard, scarcely knowing
      what reply to make.
"Do you mean to tax us with inattention to your comfort, Mr. Markham?"
"God forbid, signora! In the name of heaven do not entertain such an idea!"
"Mr. Markham has been treated as well as our humble means would admit; and he leaves us with
      an abruptness which justifies us in entertaining fears that he is not comfortable."
"How can I convince you of the injustice of your suspicions?" ejaculated Markham. "You would
      not wantonly wound my feelings, Miss Isabella, by a belief which is totally unfounded? No!
      that is not the cause of my departure. My own happiness—my own honour—every thing commands me
      to quit a spot where—where I shall, nevertheless, leave so many reminiscences of joy and
      tranquil felicity behind me! I dare not explain myself farther at present; perhaps
       never will you know the cause—but, pardon me, signora—I am wandering—I know not what
      I say!"
"Pray compose yourself, Mr. Markham," said Isabella, now raising her head from the book, and
      glancing towards him.
"Compose myself, Isabella—signora, I mean," he exclaimed: "that is impossible! Oh!
      if you knew all, you would pity me! But I dare not now reveal to you what I wish. A
      word which this day dropped from your father's lips has banished all hope from my mind. Now I
      am wandering again! In the name of heaven, take no notice of what I say; I am mad—I am
      raving!"
"And what was it that my father said to annoy you?" inquired Isabella timidly.
"Oh! nothing—nothing purposely," answered Markham. "He himself was unaware that he fired the
      arrow from his bow."
"Am I unworthy of your confidence in this instance?" asked Isabella; "and may I not be made
      acquainted with the nature of the annoyance which my father has thus unintentionally caused
      you to experience?"
"Oh! why should I repeat words which would only lead to a revelation of what it is now
      useless to reveal. Your father and mother both delivered the same sentiment—a sentiment that
      destroys all hope. But, oh! you cannot understand the cause of my anxiety—my grief—my
      disappointment!"
"And why not entrust me with that cause? I could sympathise with you as a friend."
"As a friend! Alas, Isabella, is it useless for me now to deplore the visions which I had
      conjured up, and which have been so cruelly destroyed? You yourself know not what is in store
      for you—what plans your father may have formed concerning you!"
"And are you acquainted with those plans?" asked the beauteous Italian, in a tone of voice
      rendered almost inaudible by a variety of emotions—for the heart of that innocent and charming
      being fluttered like a bird in the net of the fowler.
"Do not question me on that head, Isabella! Let me speak of myself—for it is sweet to be
      commiserated by such as you! My life for some time past has been a scene of almost unceasing
      misery. When I came of age I found my vast property dissipated by him to whom it was
      entrusted. And other circumstances gave a new and unpleasant aspect to those places which were
      dear to me in my childhood. What wild hopes, in early life, had I there indulged,—what dreams
      for the future had there visited my mind in its boyhood!—what vain wishes, what strong
      yearnings, what ambitious aspirations had there first found existence! When I returned to
      those spots, after an absence of two years, and thought of the feelings that there once
      agitated my bosom, and contrasted them with those which had displaced them,—when I traced the
      history of each hope from its inception there, and followed it through the vista of years
      until its final extinction,—when I thought how differently my course in life had been shaped
      from that career which I had there marked out, and how vain and futile were all the efforts
      and strivings which I exerted against the tide of events and the force of circumstances,—I
      awoke, as it were from a long dream,—I opened my eyes upon the path which I should thenceforth
      have to pursue, and judged of it by the one I had been pursuing;—I saw the nothingness of
      men's lives in general, and the utter vanity of the main pursuits which engross their minds,
      and waste their energies;—and I then felt convinced that I was indeed but an instrument in the
      hands of another, and that the ends which I had obtained had not been those for which I had
      striven, but which the Almighty willed! So is it with me now, Isabella. I had planned a
      dream—a dream of Elysium, with which to cheer and bless the remainder of my
       existence; and, behold! like all the former hopes and aspirations of my life,
      this one is also suddenly destroyed!"
"How know you that it is destroyed?" inquired Isabella, casting down her eyes.
"Oh! I am unworthy of you, Isabella—I do not deserve you; and yet it was to your hand that I
      aspired;—you were the star that was to irradiate the remainder of my existence! Oh! I could
      weep—I could weep, Isabella, when I think of what I might have been, and what I am!"
"You say that you aspired to my hand," murmured the lovely Italian maiden, casting down her
      large dark eyes and blushing deeply; "you did me honour!"
"Silence, Isabella—silence!" interrupted Richard. "I dare not now hear the words of hope
      from your lips! But I love thee—I love thee—God only knows how sincerely I love
      thee!"
"And shall I conceal my own feelings with regard to you, Richard?" said Isabella,
      approaching him and laying her delicate and beautifully modelled hand lightly upon his
      wrist.
"She loves me in return—she loves me!" ejaculated Markham, half wild with mingled joy and
      apprehensions;—and, yielding to an impulse which no mortal under such circumstances could have
      conquered, he caught her in his arms.
He kissed her pure and chaste brow—he felt her fragrant breath upon his cheek—her hair
      commingled with his own—and he murmured the words, "You love me?"
A gentle voice breathed an affirmative in his ear; and he pressed his lips to hers to ratify
      that covenant of two fond hearts.
Suddenly he recollected that Count Alteroni had declared that no one against whom there was
      even a suspicion of crime should ever form a connection with his family. Markham's high sense
      of honour told him in a moment that he had no right to secure the affections of a confiding
      and gentle girl whose father would never yield an assent to their union: his brain, already
      excited, now became inflamed almost to madness;—he abruptly turned aside from her who had just
      avowed her attachment to him,—he muttered some incoherent words which she did not comprehend,
      and rushed out of the room.
He hurried to the garden at the back of the house, and walked rapidly up and down a shady
      avenue of trees which ran along the wall that bounded the enclosure on the side of the public
      road.
By degrees he grew calm and relaxed the speed of his pace. He then fell into a long and
      profound meditation upon the occurrences of the last half hour.
He was beloved by Isabella, it was true;—but never might he aspire to her hand;—never could
      it be accorded to him to lead her to the altar where their attachment might be ratified and
       his happiness confirmed! An inseparable barrier seemed to oppose itself to his
      wishes; and he felt that no alternative remained to him but to put his former resolution into
      force, and take his departure homewards on the ensuing morning.
Thus was it that he now reasoned.
The moon shone brightly; and the heavens were studded with stars.
As Markham was about to turn for the twentieth time at that end of the avenue which was the
      more remote from the house, the beams of the moon suddenly disclosed to him a human face
      peering over the wall at him.
He started, and was about to utter an exclamation of alarm, when a well-known voice fell
      upon his ears.
"Hush!" was the word first spoken; "I have just one question to ask you, and then one thing
      to tell you; and the last will just depend upon the first."
"Wretch—miscreant—murderer!" exclaimed Richard; "nothing shall now prevent me from securing
      you on the behalf of justice."
"Fool!" coolly returned the Resurrection Man—for it was he; "who can catch me in the
      darkness and the open fields?"
"True!" cried Markham, stamping his foot with vexation. "But God grant that the day of
      retribution may come!"
"Come, come—none of this nonsense, my dear boy," said the Resurrection Man, with diabolical
      irony. "Now, answer me—will you give me a cool hundred and fifty? If not, then I will get swag
      in spite of you."
"Why do you thus molest and persecute me? I would sooner handle the most venomous serpent,
      than enter into a compromise with a fiend like you!"
"Then beware of the consequences!"
The moon shone full upon the cadaverous and unearthly countenance of the Resurrection Man,
      and revealed the expression of ferocious rage which it wore as he uttered these words. That
      vile and foreboding face then suddenly disappeared behind the wall.
"Who are you talking to, Markham?" cried the voice of the count, who was now advancing down
      the avenue.
"Talking to?" repeated Richard, alarmed and confused.
"Yes—I heard your voice, and another answering you," said the count.
"It was a man in the road," answered Markham.
"I missed you from the drawing-room on my return; and Bella said she thought you were
      unwell, and had gone to walk in the garden for the fresh air. The news I have received from
      Castelcicala, through the Envoy's secretary, are by no means favourable to my hopes of a
      speedy return to my native land. You therefore see that I have done well to lay out my capital
      in this. But we will not discuss matters of business now; for there is company up stairs, and
      we must join them. Who do you think have just made their appearance?"
"Mr. Armstrong and other friends?" said Markham inquiringly.
"No—Armstrong is on the Continent. The visitors are Sir Cherry Bounce and Captain Smilax
      Dapper; and I am by no means pleased with their company. However, my house must
      always remain open to them in consequence of the services rendered to me by their deceased
      relative."
Markham accompanied the count back to the drawing-room, where Captain Smilax Dapper had
      seated himself next to the signora; and Sir Cherry Bounce was endeavouring to divert the
      countess with an account of their journey that evening from London. They both coloured deeply
      and bowed very politely when Richard entered the apartment.
"Well, ath I wath thaying," continued Sir Cherry, "one of the twatheth bwoke at the bottom
      of the hill, and the hortheth took to fwight. Thmilakth thwore like a twooper; but nothing
      could thwop the thaithe till it wolled thlap down into a dwy dith. Dapper then woared like a
      bull; and I——"
"And Cherry began to cry, strike me if he didn't!" ejaculated the gallant hussar, caressing
      his moustache. "A countryman who passed by asked him if his mamma knew he was out: Cherry
      thought that the fellow was in earnest, and assured him that he had her permission to
      undertake the journey. I never laughed so much in my life!"
      
"Oh! naughty Dapper to thay that I cwied! That really ith too cwuel. Well, we got the
      thaithe lifted out of the dith, and the twathe mended."
"You are the heroes of an adventure," said the count.
"I intend to put it into verse, strike me ugly if I don't!" cried the young officer; "and
      perhaps the signora will allow me to copy it into her Album?"
"Oh! I must read it first," said Isabella, laughing. "But since you speak of my
       Album, I must show you the additions I have received to its treasures."
"This is really a beautiful landscape," observed Captain Dapper, as he turned over the
      leaves of the book which the beautiful Italian presented to him. "The water flowing over the
      wheel of the mill is quite natural, strike me! And—may I never know what fair woman's smiles
      are again, if those trees don't seem actually to be growing out of the paper!"
"Thuperb?" ejaculated Sir Cherry Bounce. "The wiver litewally wollth along in the picthure.
      The cowth and the theepe are walking in the gween fieldth. Pway who might have been the
      artitht of thith mathleth producthion?"
"That is a secret," said the signora. "And now read these lines."
"Read them yourself, Bella," said the count. "No one can do justice to them but you."
Isabella accordingly read the following stanzas in a tone of voice that added a new charm to
      the words themselves:—

LONDON.
'Twas midnight—and the beam of Cynthia shone
In company with many a lovely star,
Steeping in silver the huge Babylon
Whose countless habitations stretch afar,
Plain, valley, hill, and river's bank upon,
And in whose mighty heart all interests jar!—
O sovereign city of a thousand towers,
What vice is cradled in thy princely bowers!
If thou would'st view fair London-town aright,
Survey her from the bridge of Waterloo;
And let the hour be at the morning's light,
When the sun's earliest rays have struggled through
The star-bespangled curtain of the night,
And when Aurora's locks are moist with dew:
Then take thy stand upon that bridge, and see
London awake in all her majesty!
Then do her greatest features seem to crowd
Down to the river's brink:—then does she raise
From off her brow the everlasting cloud,
(Thus with her veil the coquette archly plays)
And for a moment shows her features, proud
To catch the Rembrandt light of the sun's rays:—
Then may the eye of the beholder dwell
On steeple, column, dome, and pinnacle.
Yes—he may reckon temple, mart, and tower—
The old historic sites—the halls of kings—
The seats of art—the fortalice of power—
The ships that waft our commerce on their wings—
All these commingle in that dawning hour;
And each into one common focus brings
Some separate moral of life's scenes so true,
As all those objects form one point of view!
The ceaseless hum of the huge Babylon
Has known no silence for a thousand years;
Still does her tide of human life flow on,
Still is she racked with sorrows, hopes, and fears;
Still the sun sets, still morning dawns upon
Hearts full of anguish, eye-balls dimmed with tears:—
Still do the millions toil to bless the few—
And hideous Want stalks all her pathways through!

"Beautiful—very beautiful!" exclaimed Captain Dapper. "Strike me if I ever heard more
      beautiful poetry!"
"Almotht ath good ath your lineth on the Thea Therpent. Wath the poem witten by the thame
      perthon that painted the landthcape?"
"The very same," answered Isabella. "His initials are in the corner."
"R. M. Who can that be?" exclaimed Dapper.
"Robert Montgomery, perhaps?" said Isabella, smiling with a charmingly arch expression of
      countenance.
"No—Wichard Markham!" cried Sir Cherry; and then he and his friend the hussar captain were
      excessively annoyed to think that they had been extolling to the skies the performances of an
      individual who had frightened the one out of his wits, and boxed the ears of the other.
Thus passed the evening; but Markham was reserved and melancholy. It was in vain that
      Isabella exerted herself to instil confidence into his mind, by means of those thousand little
      attentions and manifestations of preference which lovers know so well how to exhibit, but
      which those around perceive not. Richard was firm in those resolutions which he deemed
      consistent with propriety and honour; and he deeply regretted the explanation and its
      consequences into which the enthusiasm of the moment had that evening led him.
At length the hour for retiring to rest arrived.
Richard repaired to his chamber—but not to sleep. His mind was too much harassed by the
      events of the evening—the plans which he had pursued, and those which he intended to
      pursue—the love which he bore to Isabel, and the stern opposition which might be anticipated
      from her father—the persecution to which he was subject at the hands of the Resurrection
      Man—and the train of evil fortune which appeared constantly to attend upon him;—of all these
      he thought; and his painful meditations defied the advance of slumber.
The window of his bed-chamber overlooked the garden at the back of the house; from which
      direction a strange and alarming noise suddenly broke in upon his reflections. He listened—and
      all was quiet: he therefore felt convinced that his terror was unfounded. A few moments
      elapsed; and he was again alarmed by a sound which seemed like the jarring of an unfastened
      shutter. A certain uneasiness now took possession of him; and he was determined to ascertain
      whether all was safe about the premises. He leapt from his bed, raised the window, and looked
      forth. The night was now pitch dark; and he could distinguish nothing. Not even were the
      outlines of the trees in the garden discernible amidst that profound and dense obscurity.
      Markham held his breath; and the whispering of voices met his ears. He could not, however,
      distinguish a word they uttered:—a low hissing continuous murmur, the nature of which it was
      impossible to mistake, convinced him that some persons were talking together immediately
      beneath his window. In a few moments the jarring of a door or shutter, which he had before
      heard, was repeated; and then the whispering ceased.
By this time his eyes had become accustomed to the darkness; and he could now faintly
      discern the outlines of three human forms standing together at the back door of the house. He
      could not, however, distinguish the precise nature of their present employment. It was,
      nevertheless, evident to him that they were not there with any honest intention in view; and
      he resolved to adopt immediate measures to defeat their burglarious schemes. He hastily threw
      on his clothes, struck a light, and issued from his room.
Cautiously advancing along a passage was the count, only half-dressed, with a pistol in each
      hand and a cutlass under his arm.
      
"This is fortunate!" whispered the count: "I was coming to alarm you: there are thieves
      breaking in. You and I can manage them; it is of no use to call Bounce or Dapper. Take this
      cutlass, and let us descend gently. Here come the men-servants."
The count hurried down stairs, followed by Markham, and the three male domestics of the
      household.
A noise was heard in the pantry, which was situate at the back of the house on the same
      level with the hall.
"Douse the darkey, blow the glim, and mizzle," cried a hoarse gruff voice, as the count,
      Richard, and the servants approached the pantry: "there's five on 'em—it's no use——"
The count rushed forward, and burst open the door of the pantry, closely followed by
      Markham, holding the candle.
Two of the burglars made a desperate push down the kitchen stairs and escaped: the third was
      captured in an attempt to follow his companions.
The light of the candle fell upon the villain's countenance, which was literally ghastly
      with a mingled expression of rage and alarm.
Richard shuddered: for the captured burglar was no other than the Resurrection Man.
"Wretch!" exclaimed Markham, recovering his self-command: "the law will at length reach
      you."
"What! do you know this fellow?" demanded the count, somewhat surprised by the
      observation.
"Know me!" cried the Resurrection Man: "of course he does. But supposing someone was to tell
      you a piece of valuable information, count—about a matter closely concerning yourself and
      family—would you be inclined to be merciful?"
"Of what nature is that information? It must be very valuable indeed, if you think that I
      will enter into any compromise with such as you."
"Pledge me your word that you will let me go scot free, and I will tell you something that
      concerns the peace and happiness—perhaps the honour of your daughter."
"Miscreant!" cried Markham: "profane not that lady by even alluding to her!"
"Stay—curse the fellow's impudence," said the count: "perhaps he may really have somewhat
      worth communicating. At all events, I will try him. Now, then, my man, what is it that you
      have to say? If your statement be worth hearing, I swear that I will neither molest you, nor
      suffer you to be molested."
"Hold, count," exclaimed Markham: "make no rash vow—you know not what a wretch——"
"Silence, my dear friend," said the count authoritatively: "I will hear the man, let him be
      who or what he may!"
"And you will do well to hear me, sir," continued the Resurrection Man. "You harbour a
      villain in your house; and that villain is now before you. He boasts of having secured the
      affections of your daughter, and hopes to gull you into allowing him to marry her."
"Miscreant—murderer!" exclaimed Markham, no longer able to contain his indignation: "pollute
      not innocence itself by these allusions to a lady whose spotless mind——"
"Hush!" said the count. "Let us hear patiently all this man has to say. I can soon judge
      whether he be speaking the truth; and if he deceives me, I will show him no mercy."
"But, count—allow me one word—I myself will unfold——"
"Excuse me, Markham," interrupted the Italian noble, with dignified firmness: "I will hear
      this man first. Proceed!"
"The villain I allude to is of course that Markham," continued the Resurrection Man. "It was
      him, too, that induced me and my pals, the Cracksman and the Buffer, to make this attempt upon
      your house to-night."
"What foul—what hideous calumny is this!" almost screamed the distracted Markham, as this
      totally unexpected and unfounded accusation met his ears.
The count himself was shocked at this announcement; for he suddenly recollected Richard's
      moody, embarrassed, and thoughtful manner the whole evening, and his sudden intention of
      departing the next day.
"Go on," said the count.
"I met that man," continued the body-snatcher, pointing contemptuously towards Markham, "a
      little more than a fortnight ago in this neighbourhood: he was walking with your daughter; and
      it was in consequence of certain little arrangements with me that he went back to London next
      day. Oh! I am well acquainted with all his movements."
"And you sought my life in a manner the most base——" began Markham, unable to restrain his
      feelings.
"Silence, Markham!" exclaimed the count, still more authoritatively than before. "Your time
      to speak will come."
"We planned this work while he was in London," continued the Resurrection Man; "and this
      very evening he told me over the garden wall that all was right."
"Merciful God!" cried the count: "this is but too true!"
"Yes, sir—I certainly spoke to him," said Richard,—"and from the garden too——"
"Mr. Markham, this continued interruption is indecent," exclaimed the count emphatically,
      while a cold perspiration burst out upon his forehead; for he had recalled to mind the
      incident respecting the garden.
"I have little more to add, count," said the Resurrection Man. "This Markham told me that
      you had plenty of plate and money always in the house; and as he had lost nearly all his
      property, he should not be displeased at an opportunity of getting hold of a little swag. It
      was agreed that we should meet in London to arrange the business; and so we did meet at the
       Dark House in Brick Lane, where we settled the affair along with the Cracksman and
      the Buffer, who have just made off. This is all I have to say—unless it is that me and your
      friend Markham first got acquainted in Newgate——"
"Newgate!" ejaculated the count, with a thrill of horror.
"Yes—Newgate; where he was waiting to be tried for forgery, for which he got two years in
      the Compter. And that's all. Let him deny it if he can."
Scarcely were these terrible words uttered by the Resurrection Man, when a loud—long—and
      piercing scream was heard, coming from the direction of the staircase; and then some object
      instantly fell with violence upon the marble floor of the hall.
"Isabella! Isabella!" ejaculated Markham, turning hastily round to hurry to her
      assistance.
"Stop, sir—seek not my daughter," cried the count, in a stern voice, as he caught Richard's
      arm and held him back. "Let not a soul stir until my return!"
There was a noble and dignified air of command
       about Count Alteroni, as he uttered these words, which could not escape the
      notice of Richard Markham, even amidst the crushing and overwhelming circumstances that
      surrounded him.

The count took the candle from Markham's hand, and hastened to the aid of his daughter, who,
      half-dressed, was lying upon the cold marble of the hall. He hastened to raise her; and at
      that moment the countess appeared upon the stairs, followed by a lady's-maid bearing a
      lamp.
The count reassured her in respect to the safety of the house, consigned Isabella to her
      care, and then returned to the pantry, where his presence was awaited in silence.
"Have you any thing more to say?" demanded the count of the Resurrection Man.
"Nothing. Have not I said enough?"—and he glanced with fiendish triumph towards Markham.
"Now, sir," said the count, turning to Richard; "is the statement of this man easy to be
      refuted?"
"Alas! I am compelled to admit that, the victim of the most extraordinary circumstantial
      evidence ever known to fix guilt upon an innocent man, I was a prisoner in Newgate and the
      Compter; but——"
"Say no more! say no more! God forgive me, that I should have allowed such a man to become
      the friend of my wife and daughter!"
The count uttered these words in a tone of intense agony.
"Count Alteroni, allow me one word of explanation," said Richard. "Only cast your eyes over
      this paper, and you will be convinced of my innocence!"
Markham handed the document signed by Talbot, alias Pocock, to the count; but the
      nobleman tossed it indignantly on the floor.
"You have confessed that you have been an inmate of the felons' gaols: what explanation can
      you give that will wipe away so foul a stain? Depart—begone! defile not my house longer with
      your presence!"
Vainly did Markham endeavour to obtain a hearing. The count silenced him with an air of
      command and an imposing dignity of manner that struck him with awe. Never did the Italian
      nobleman appear more really noble than when he was thus performing that which he considered to
      be an imperious duty. His fine form was drawn up to its full height
      —his chest expanded—his cheeks were flushed—and his eyes flashed fire. Yes—even
      beneath his dark complexion was the rich Italian blood seen mantling his countenance.
"Go, sir—hasten your departure—stay not another minute here! A man accused of
      forgery—condemned to an infamous punishment,—a liberated felon—a freed convict in my family
      dwelling—— Holy God! I can scarcely restrain myself within the bounds of common patience when
      I think of the indignity that myself, my wife, and my innocent daughter have endured."
With these words the colonel pushed Markham rudely from the pantry, and ordered a servant to
      conduct him to the front door.
The blood of the young man boiled in his veins at this ignominious treatment;—and yet he
      dared not rebel against it!
The Resurrection Man took his departure at the same time by the garden at the back of the
      house.
As Markham turned down the shrubbery, a window on the third floor of the count's dwelling
      was thrown open; and the voices of Sir Cherry Bounce and the Honourable Captain Dapper were
      heard loading him with abuse.
Bowed down to the earth by the weight of the misfortune which had just fallen upon his
      head,—crushed by unjust and unfounded suspicions,—and sinking beneath a sense of shame and
      degradation, which all his innocence did not deprive of a single pang,—Markham dragged himself
      away from the house in which he had passed so many happy hours, and where he left behind him
      all that he held dear in this life.
He seated himself upon a mile-stone at a little distance from the count's mansion, to which
      he turned his eyes to take a last farewell of the place where Isabella resided.
Lights were moving about in several rooms;—perhaps she was ill?
Most assuredly she had heard the dread accusations which had issued from the lips of the
      Resurrection Man against her lover;—and she would haply believe them all?
So thought Richard. Human language cannot convey an adequate idea of the heart-rending
      misery which the poor oppressed young man endured as he sate by the road-side, and pondered
      upon all that had just occurred.
Shame upon shame—degradation upon degradation—mountain upon mountain rolled on his breast,
      as if he were a modern Titan, to crush him and keep him down—never more to rise;—this was now
       his fate!
At length, afraid of being left alone with his own thoughts, which seemed to urge him to end
      his earthly woes in the blood of a suicide, he rose from the cold stone, turned one last
      sorrowful and lingering glance towards the mansion in the distance, and then hurried along the
      road to Richmond as if he were pursued by bloodhounds.
And not more fearful nor more appalling would those bloodhounds have been than the horrible
      and excruciating thoughts which haunted him upon his way, and of which he could not divest
      himself; so that at length a species of delirium seized upon him as he ran furiously onward,
      the mark of Cain appearing to burn like red-hot iron upon his brow, and a terrible voice
      thundering in his ear—"Freed Convict!"
</div></body></text></TEI>