<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="202">
CHAPTER CCI.   THE HANDSOME STRANGER.—DISAPPOINTMENT.
On the ensuing morning Farmer Bennet departed early for London.
After breakfast, Ellen said, with a significant smile: "The weather is fine, Kate: let us
      take advantage of it. Your country air does me so much good."
Katherine blushed, and then smiled also; but she offered no objection to the proposed
      walk.
The toilette of the young ladies was soon complete; and they sallied forth on their little
      excursion.
"Mr. Bennet has promised to call at Markham Place," observed Ellen. "I have written a note
      to my father, stating that I shall return to-morrow, or next day at latest; and I have
      intimated my intention of bringing you with me. I most sincerely hope that some fresh tidings
      have been received from Richard."
"And in that wish I earnestly partake," said Katherine. "But wherefore do you choose this
      path?" she added in a tremulous tone, and with downcast eyes.

"Because it is the most pleasant," answered Ellen, laughing. "It seems, moreover,
      that your handsome stranger was determined to seek you in one direction, as well as in
      another; and if he be in the neighbourhood this morning, rest assured that he will see
      you—whichever way you may pursue. Love has as many eyes in this respect as Argus. I am with
      you, dear Kate—you have a companion; and there is no indiscretion in even taking this very
      path where you have on most occasions met your unknown. Besides, should he be here to-day, I
      am anxious to catch a glimpse of him. To-morrow or next day you will leave this vicinity of
      pleasant memories—at least for a time; and——"
"Ellen, Ellen!" murmured Kate, suddenly; and she caught her companion by the arm.
"Ah! I understand!—compose yourself, Katherine—compose yourself," was the rapid reply. "It
      would be improper to betray any emotion. See—he is approaching slowly;—in the name of heaven
      compose yourself!"
And, in effect, a handsome young man,—with a dark complexion, fine and expressive eyes, and
      a graceful figure,—was advancing in the opposite direction. But he came slowly, as if anxious
      to keep some favourite object as long in view as possible!
How the pulse of the maiden's young heart quickened, as she beheld her unknown lover
      approaching.
And now the handsome stranger came near:—and Katherine drew close to her companion, as the
      timid fawn relies for protection on the stately deer.
The look of the stranger was cast for a moment upon Ellen; but not the bright glance of her
      eye—nor the rich colouring of her cheeks, framed as they were in masses of glossy hair—nor
      that symmetry of swelling bust, delicate waist, and matchless proportions of a finely-moulded
      form,—not this assemblage of charms induced the stranger to dwell for more than an instant on
      Katherine's companion. No:—it was to Katherine herself that his eyes reverted with adoring
      glance; and though he gazed fixedly upon the retiring maiden, yet there was something so
      respectful in his manner, that it was impossible to take offence at it.
He made way for the two ladies, and raised his hat as they passed.
Katherine returned the salutation without turning her eyes towards him.
"Your stranger is not only handsome," observed Ellen, when they were at such a distance as
      to incur no danger of being overheard; "but he is also of an appearance so respectable—so
      superior,——I had almost said noble,——that I cannot for a moment suppose his intentions to be
      dishonourable. At the same time, why does he not address you? He might, without impropriety,
      have taken advantage of my presence to speak to you; and, to tell you the truth, it was to
      afford him such an opportunity that I brought you in this direction."
We need not record the conversation that ensued: the reader does not require to be informed
      that its principal topic was the love of the young maiden—a theme on which she was naturally
      pleased to speak, and in the discussion of which Ellen indulged her;—not, however, with the
      view of fanning the flame of incipient passion; but with the affectionate motive of warning
      her against the encouragement of hopes which might never be fulfilled.
The walk was prolonged until two o'clock, when the young ladies retraced their steps to the
      farm. Mr. Bennet had not yet returned from London: dinner was however served up. The fresh air
      had given Ellen an appetite; but Katherine ate little, and was somewhat pensive.
Indeed, the maiden had sufficient to engage the meditation of her young mind. The evident
      impression which the handsome stranger had made upon her, and the hope that evening would
      bring her the much-desired information relative to her parents, divided her thoughts.
But of what nature would the old woman's secrets prove? in what manner were they to be a
      source of comfort to her? It will be remembered that Smithers had made her acquainted with
      certain particulars relative to her mother; and the sad inference had been that Katherine was
      of illegitimate birth. Would the tendency of the old woman's communications be to clear up
      this mystery in a manner satisfactory to the young maiden? As yet all was doubt and
      uncertainty; and conjecture was vain!
It was about four o'clock when the farmer made his appearance.
He entered the parlour, where Ellen, Katharine, and Mrs. Bennet were sitting, with a
      countenance expressive of supreme satisfaction.
"I have glorious news for you, young ladies," he exclaimed; "and, indeed, all who know Mr.
      Markham——I beg his pardon, the Marquis——must be rejoiced."
"Oh! what of him?" ejaculated Ellen and Kate, as it were in one breath.
"Patience for a moment," said the farmer. "Here is a letter from Mr. Monroe to you,
      Miss,"—addressing Ellen; "and that will explain every thing yet known of the affair."
Ellen hastily tore open her father's note, and began to read its contents aloud:—
January 29th, 1841.
"You will be supremely delighted, dearest Ellen, to hear the joyful tidings which I am about
      to communicate. This morning's newspapers publish a Telegraphic Despatch from Toulon,
      stating that a grand and decisive battle took place beneath the walls of Montoni on the 23d.
      Richard was completely victorious. The Austrian army was routed with tremendous loss; the
      Grand Duke fled; and the capital was delivered. Our dear benefactor is safe. The steamer which
      conveyed these tidings to Toulon left Montoni in the afternoon of the 24th, at the moment when
      Richard was entering the city—as the Regent of Castelcicala!
"Nothing more is known at present; but this is enough not only to reassure us all—but to
      fill our hearts with joy. My blood glows in my veins, old as I am, when I think of Richard's
      grand achievements. To what a proud height has he raised himself—second only to a sovereign!
      As I looked forth from the casement ere now, and beheld the two trees on the hill-top, I could
      not avoid a sorrowful reflection concerning Eugene. What can have become of him? I——"
"Heavens! dearest Ellen, are you ill?" exclaimed Katherine, seeing that her friend suddenly
      turned ashy pale.
"No, Kate: it is nothing! The abruptness with which we have received these tidings——"
"Yes—you are unwell," persisted Katherine; and she hastened to procure water.
Ellen drank some; and the colour slowly returned to her cheeks.
"I am better now, Kate," she said. "Do you terminate the perusal of my father's letter."

Katherine, perceiving that her friend really seemed to have revived, read the
      remainder of the note in the following manner:—
"I fear that he will not be enabled to tell so glorious a tale as his younger brother,—even
      if the appointment be really kept on his part! But enough of that. You speak of bringing Miss
      Wilmot, to pass a few days at the Place. I entirely approve of the project, if the excellent
      people with whom she is living, and of whom Richard has spoken to us so highly, be willing to
      part with her.
"I must not forget to mention that poor Whittingham is nearly crazed with joy at Richard's
      success. You remember his extravagant but unfeigned manifestation of delight when we received
      the tidings of the battle of Abrantani and its results. Then the worthy fellow danced and
      capered madly, exclaiming, 'Master Richard a Markis!' all day long. But when I read
      him the Telegraphic Despatch this morning, he took his hat and kicked it all round the room,—a
      new hat too,—until it was battered into a state beyond redemption,—shouting all the time,
       'Here's a glorious cataplasm!'—(meaning 'catastrophe,' no doubt):—'Master
       Richard a Markis, and a Regency! I'll get drunk to-night, sir: I haven't been intoxicated for
       many a year; but I'll get drunk to-night, in spite of all the Teetotalers in London! Thank
       God for this glorious cataplasm!' And he rushed out of the room to communicate the news
      in his own way to Marian. But conceive my surprise when I presently heard the report of
      fire-arms: I listened—a second report followed—a third—a fourth. I became alarmed, and
      hastened into the garden. There was Whittingham firing a salute with his old blunderbuss; and
      Marian's new plaid shawl was floating, by way of a banner, from the summit of a clothes' prop
      fixed in the ground. Poor Marian did not seem to relish the use to which her Sunday shawl was
      thus unceremoniously converted; but all the satisfaction she could obtain from Whittingham
      was, 'It's a glorious cataplasm! Master Richard's a Regency!' And away the old
      blunderbuss blazed again, until the salute was complete. I do really believe the
      excellent-hearted old man intends to illuminate the Place this evening; and I shall not
      interfere with the ebullition of his honest joy.
"I write this long letter while Mr. Bennet partakes of some refreshment.
"Trusting to see you and your young friend to-morrow or next day at latest, I am, dearest
      Ellen," etc. etc.
It is unnecessary to state that the news from Montoni diffused the most lively joy amongst
      the party assembled in the parlour of the farm-house.
Ellen speedily recovered her usual flow of excellent spirits, and expressed her sincere
      satisfaction at that remarkable elevation on the part of Richard which had excited the
      enthusiasm of her father.
Mr. and Mrs. Bennet offered no objection to the proposal that Kate should pay a visit to
      Markham Place: on the contrary, though grieved to part with her, they considered that change
      of scene could not do otherwise than benefit her.
And now the appointed hour for the meeting with the old woman drew near; and Mr. Bennet
      provided Kate with the necessary funds for her purpose.
Shortly before seven, the farmer (provided with a brace of loaded pistols) and Ellen
      repaired to the same hiding-place which they had occupied on the preceding evening; and, with
      a beating heart, Katherine hastened to the spot where she expected to encounter one who had
      promised to reveal secrets so nearly concerning her.
The old woman did not, however, make her appearance.
The minutes passed slowly away—and still she came not.
Katherine's anxiety was intense.
Half an hour had elapsed: still there was no sign of the hag.
The young maiden waited until past eight o'clock; and at length she suddenly perceived two
      persons advancing towards her at a little distance.
For a moment she felt afraid; but the farmer's voice speedily reassured her.
Ellen and he were alarmed at Katherine's prolonged absence, and had come to seek her.
Finding that the old woman had not made her appearance, they began to view the entire affair
      with some suspicion; and Kate was compelled to return with them to the farm—a prey to the most
      cruel disappointment.
"If the old woman was prevented, by any unforeseen circumstance, from meeting you," said the
      farmer, "she will communicate with you early to-morrow. Perhaps we may be favoured with
      another visit from her emissary, Mr. Banks; but should he come, I shall take good care that he
      treats us to a sight of no more model-coffins."
During the remainder of the evening Kate was pensive and melancholy; nor could all Ellen's
      affectionate endeavours wean her from her sorrowful thoughtfulness.
They retired to rest early; and Katherine rose next morning with the hope of receiving
      tidings from the old woman.
But hour after hour passed without gratifying her wish.
Ellen purposely delayed their departure for London, to afford a fair opportunity for the
      arrival of any intelligence which the old woman might forward; but three o'clock came, and
      still all was blank disappointment and mystery in respect to the affair.
Then Kate herself saw the inutility of tarrying longer; and, having taken an affectionate
      farewell of Mrs. Bennet, the young ladies were accompanied by the farmer to Hounslow. There
      they obtained a conveyance for the capital, and Mr. Bennet saw them depart in safety.
</div></body></text></TEI>