<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="203">
CHAPTER CCII.   THE PRINCESS ISABELLA.
We must now succinctly record a few incidents which occurred at the mansion of Prince
      Alberto in the vicinity of Richmond, from the period when Richard bade adieu to Isabella ere
      his departure for Castelcicala in the month of October, 1840, until the end of January,
      1841—that is, up to the date at which we have brought our narrative in the preceding
      chapter.
The Princess Isabella declared, at her farewell meeting with Richard, that wild hopes and
      exalted visions filled her imagination when she contemplated the enterprise on which her lover
      was about to embark. So well did she read the true character of our hero, and so elevated was
      her opinion of his high qualifications, that she felt persuaded he only required an
      opportunity to open for himself a grand and brilliant career.
Her boundless affection for Richard Markham aided her not only in fostering these
      convictions, but also in shadowing forth and defining the elements of a glorious success and
      rapid rise on the part of one to whom her first and undivided love was given.

But when she tore herself away from his last embrace,—when she breathed the
      mournful word "Farewell," and then separated from the generous, the high-minded, and handsome
      young man who possessed her heart,—oh! how acute was the anguish that filled her soul!
For some minutes—when he was no longer in sight—all her golden dreams and glorious visions
      fled from her imagination;—she strove to recall them, as a drowning person in the dark hour of
      night struggles to gain the surface of the waters once more to catch another glimpse of the
      bright stars above;—but hope seemed to have yielded to blank despair.
The Princess, however, possessed a firm mind; and when the primal burst of anguish was over,
      she wrestled with her gloomy imaginings, until she gradually triumphed over their mournful
      influence.
Having purposely prolonged her walk homewards, in order to compose herself, Isabella did not
      re-enter the mansion until she had collected her scattered thoughts and had wiped away the
      traces of her tears.
Her father had all along discountenanced the expedition to Castelcicala, so far as he was
      concerned; although he could not do otherwise than wish it success. Indeed, as he himself had
      intimated to General Grachia, he would no doubt have joined in it, had he been differently
      situated. It was therefore with feelings of admiration that the Prince had from the first
      heard of Markham's enthusiasm in the Constitutional cause: and at that period he frequently
      found himself dwelling attentively upon all the good points in Richard's character which had
      once made our hero so welcome a guest at the mansion.
As for Isabella's mother, this Princess was more than ever favourable towards Markham; for
      she saw in his present conduct nothing save a profound devotion to the cause of her
      illustrious husband, and a laudable ambition to render himself worthy of her daughter's
      love—that love which was no secret to the parents of the amiable girl!
When Isabella returned to the drawing-room after her interview with Richard, her still
      melancholy demeanour attracted the notice of her affectionate parents.
"Where have you been, Isabel?" inquired the Prince, eyeing her attentively.
"My dear father," was the instantaneous reply, "I went for my usual walk in the adjacent
      fields, and I met Mr. Markham."
"Ah!" exclaimed the Prince, a little impatiently.
"I do not pretend that it was accidentally on his part," continued Isabella, in a
      tone expressive of the pride of truth; "because he is the last person in the world to sanction
      duplicity of any kind. It was, however, accidental in reference to myself—for I knew not of
      his intention to seek an interview with me this day."
"But you have met?" said the Prince, in a softening voice, and with a manner which denoted
      how justly proud he was of the upright mind of his daughter.
"We have met, dear father," answered Isabel, wiping away a tear; "and—we have
      separated—perhaps," she added in a faltering tone, "never to meet again. Oh! be not angry with
       him—nor with me, my dearest parents,—especially not with him!"
"No—we are not angry, my child," said the Princess of Castelcicala, hastily. "Indeed, for my
      part, I wish that Mr. Markham had come to wish us all farewell. But perhaps he will
      write——"
"I did not refuse his request on that subject," murmured Isabella, casting down her eyes and
      blushing: "Oh! no—I could not! And now, my dear parents, you know all. If I have done wrong, I
      am deeply grieved;—but my conscience tells me that I have not outraged the devotion and love
      that I owe to you."
The Prince made no reply: but the expression of his countenance was not severe; and the
      Princess of Castelcicala embraced her daughter affectionately.
From that time the mansion contained three anxious hearts; for the exiled family was deeply
      interested in the results of the expedition to Castelcicala.
Who, then, can depict the disappointment with which the tidings of the fatal affair of
      Ossore were received, at the end of November, in that dwelling?
The Prince and Princess perceived in the failure of the enterprise a deep blow to their own
      cause in the Duchy, inasmuch as it was calculated to afford the supporters of the Grand Duke
      an excuse for heaping opprobrium on the name of Alberto, whom they would point out as the
      instigator of the invasion;—and Isabella was overwhelmed with grief by the mystery which at
      that period enveloped the fate of Richard.
Several days of heart-breaking suspense elapsed: the colour forsook the maiden's cheek; and
      her countenance became expressive of a deep melancholy.
Nor was this terrible uncertainty concerning Richard's fate the only cause of affliction
      which she was now doomed to experience. Her father was so profoundly affected by the failure
      of the expedition, and the evils which he believed would result to his own interests in many
      respects, that he became ill, and was soon unable to leave his bed.
Then how assiduous was the poor girl to her parent, while her own heart was often well-nigh
      breaking! The Prince grew irritable and impatient, and even reproached his daughter for
      fretting on account of one who, as he declared, "had helped to hurry the Constitutional
      cause,—a cause that might have triumphed in time,—to a most ruinous catastrophe." But Isabella
      bore all this without a murmur; and as her father grew more harsh, her attentions towards him
      were redoubled. In her mother's kindness and sympathy the afflicted maiden found a
      consolation; but she could with difficulty bear up against the agony of suspense and alarm
      which she experienced on account of her lover.
At length,—about a week after the receipt of the fatal tidings connected with the battle of
      Ossore,—Whittingham called at the mansion, and placed in Isabella's hand a letter from
      Richard.
"He lives! he lives!" were the maiden's first words of reviving hope; "heaven be thanked—he
      lives!"
But Isabella's joy was speedily overclouded once more; for she saw, by the guarded manner in
      which he wrote and by the omission of his signature, that her lover was in danger.
Nevertheless—"where there is life, there is hope," as the proverb says; and, somewhat
      consoled by his conviction, she was less miserable than before!

And now came another tedious interval of suspense, the wretchedness of which was
      enhanced by the increasing indisposition of the Prince.
At length—at the expiration of about three weeks—the Princess Isabella received a letter
      from Signora Viviani, the nature of which, as already known to our readers, was not extremely
      well calculated to reassure the affectionate girl relative to her lover. It was true that she
      was informed of Richard's safe arrival at Pinalla, where he was in the society of kind
      friends; but vague and torturing fears were aroused by the fact that he himself had been
      unable to write to her.
Again was there a weary interval of silence; but this was suddenly broken in a manner
      calculated to re-awaken all the bright hopes which Isabella had once entertained relative to
      the future greatness of Richard Markham. On the 16th of January, the news of the glorious
      exploit at Estella reached the mansion of the exiled family in England; and inspired the young
      Princess with the most enthusiastic feelings of admiration towards him whom she loved so
      fondly, and of whom she had always thought so well.
"Oh! why am I bound to this bed of sickness?" exclaimed the Prince, when Signor Viviani's
      letter narrating that event was read to him. "Why am I not permitted to hasten to my native
      country, and take part with that gallant youth! No consideration of policy or delicacy should
      now restrain me; for the Austrian is in the land, and every true Castelcicalan should draw the
      sword and fling away the scabbard!"
"Compose yourself, dearest father," said Isabella, enraptured at the manner in which he had
      spoken of her lover: "excitement will only delay your recovery;—and something tells me that
      Castelcicala will soon demand your presence!"
But the Prince could not tranquillize his mind: the thraldom of a sick bed had
      become more intolerable to him than ever; and, although he now ceased to reproach his
      daughter, his irritability of temper painfully increased.
Three days afterwards letters were received at the mansion announcing Richard's entry into
      Villabella. Then the colour came back again to the cheeks of the charming Italian maiden; and
      her eyes shone with all their wonted brilliancy. Forgotten were her recent sorrows—gone was
      her agonising suspense—banished was the memory of her cruel doubts;—her lover was already a
      hero—and hope was once more enthroned in her heart.
The Prince now began to perceive the absolute necessity of avoiding the excitement of
      useless repinings at that illness which still chained him to his bed. Richard's letters told
      him how the inhabitants of Villabella had shouted the thrilling words "Long live Alberto!"—and
      the Prince was inspired with hopes the extent of which he did not seek to conceal.
Four days elapsed; and when the postman was again descried by the watchful Isabella
      advancing through the shrubbery towards the mansion, how quickly beat the hearts of the
      illustrious exiles!
Yes—there were letters from Castelcicala:—never were sealed documents more quickly torn
      open! And, oh! what joyous news did they contain—the victory of Piacere!
Isabella's feelings found vent in tears:—she was so happy—that she wept!
"These are indeed glorious tidings!" said the Prince, raising himself upon his pillow; then,
      after a moment's pause, he exclaimed warmly, "Richard Markham is a hero!"
Ah! how touchingly grateful was the glance which Isabella cast upon her father through her
      tears, to thank him for that generous sentiment relative to one in whom she felt so deep an
      interest!
Another short interval now occurred; and then fresh letters came, bringing farther tidings
      of success. The battle of Abrantani was a worthy sequence to that of Piacere!
"Oh! my beloved Isabella," now exclaimed the Prince, pressing her to his heart, "can you
      forgive me for the reproaches I have so unjustly—so wantonly uttered relative to Richard
      Markham?"
"Think not of the past, dearest father," answered the maiden: "the present is so full of
      joy, and hope, and glory, that we should not feel wearied of contemplating it."
"And, whatever may be the result of this contest," observed the Princess of Castelcicala to
      her husband, "you will always acknowledge that Richard is a hero?"
"He is a young man whom the greatest sovereign in the world might be proud to claim as a
      son!" ejaculated the Prince, enthusiastically.
Isabella pressed her mother's hand tenderly for having obtained this most welcome
      avowal.
The health of Prince Alberto now rapidly improved; and in a few days he was enabled to leave
      the couch to which he had been confined for many weary weeks.
And Isabella—Oh! all the charming carnation tinge had come back to her cheeks; and her eyes
      were brilliant with the purest rays of happiness and hope. Her fondest dreams—her brightest
      visions were all but realised: her lover was accomplishing those grand destinies of which her
      mental vision had caught glimpses ere his departure from England; and the world was already
      busy with his name. And now, too, was that name ever upon the tongue of her father, who
      pronounced it with admiration and respect.
A few days after the arrival of the intelligence of the decisive victory of Abrantani, the
      newspapers acquainted the illustrious Italian family with the fact that the Committee of
      Government at Montoni had bestowed the title of Marquis of Estella upon the youthful
      Commander-in-Chief of the Armies of Castelcicala.
Oh! with what joyous feelings—with what ineffable emotions of enthusiasm, did the charming
      Isabella read aloud to her parents that account of her lover's elevation,—an elevation which,
      as he himself had felt convinced, must remove one grand obstacle that had hitherto existed in
      the way of their happiness.
And how did her young heart beat and her bosom heave, when her father exclaimed, in an
      emphatic tone, "Yes—Richard is now a Marquis, and may take his rank amongst the proudest peers
      in the universe;—but there is a higher grade which he yet may reach—and it will be a happy day
      for us all when I shall say to him, 'Receive my daughter as the reward of your
       achievements, and become a Prince!'"
Isabella threw herself at her father's feet, and pressed to her lips the hand which she also
      moistened with her tears. She endeavoured to murmur
      words of gratitude for that most welcome assurance; but her heart was too
      full—she could only weep!
It was a most touching scene; and, perhaps, never had that exiled family experienced more
      perfect happiness than on this occasion.
But the sentiment was soon destined to give way to new fears and fresh anxieties. It was
      well-known that Montoni was besieged by an immense Austrian force; and the English newspapers,
      in commenting upon the position of the Constitutionalists, declared that though the moral
      effects of so decisive a victory as that of Abrantani must be very great, there was
      nevertheless much room to doubt whether the Marquis of Estella would be able to assemble an
      army sufficiently strong to march to the relief of the capital.
Prince Alberto trembled as he read these observations; because he not only comprehended
      their justice, but was also well aware that the fate of Castelcicala could be alone decided by
      a pitched battle between the Austrians and the Constitutionalists.
He endeavoured to conceal his misgivings from his wife and daughter: but they saw what was
      passing in his mind;—and thus all was still anxiety and hope—uncertainty and fervent
      aspiration, at the mansion of the Prince.
Thus did a few days pass; and Alberto suffered a slight relapse, in consequence of the
      nervous state of doubt in which he was plunged.
All his hopes—all his interests—all his prospects were at stake. If the Constitutionalists
      were successful, a crown awaited him: if the Austrians triumphed, the Grand Duke Angelo had
      pledged himself to adopt a scion of the imperial family of Vienna as the heir to the throne.
      Thus Prince Alberto hovered between a glorious elevation or a fatal fall.
The Princess, his wife, entertained sanguine hopes that a campaign so successfully begun,
      would terminate in triumph; and Isabella called every argument to her aid to convince her
      father and mother that all must end well! Nevertheless, poor girl! she also had her intervals
      of doubt and alarm; and many were the tears which she shed in secret as she prayed for the
      safety of her lover.
And now how eagerly was the arrival of the postman looked for every day; how anxiously was
      the presence of the newspaper awaited!
At length, on the morning of the 29th of January, all doubts were cleared up—all
      uncertainties terminated.
The illustrious family was seated at the breakfast table—a mere ceremonious mockery, for
      they were unable to eat a morsel.
Presently a servant entered, and presented the morning paper to the Prince.
Alberto opened it with a trembling hand: his wife and daughter watched him attentively.
Suddenly he started—his eyes were lighted up with their wonted fires—a flush appeared on his
      pale cheek—and he exclaimed in a fervent tone, "O God! I thank thee!"
He could say no more: his emotions nearly overpowered him, weakened as he was by a long
      illness.
Isabella caught the paper as it was falling from his hands. One glance was sufficient: it
      told her all! For there—conspicuously displayed at the head of a column—was the following
      glorious announcement:—

"CASTELCICALA.
 "TOTAL DEFEAT OF THE AUSTRIANS—DELIVERANCE OF MONTONI. 
"The French Government have received the following Telegraphic Despatch from Toulon:—
"'The Castelcicalan steamer Torione has just arrived. The Austrians were
        completely routed on the 23rd. Montoni is delivered. The Grand Duke has fled.
The Marquis of Estella
entered the capital at three o'clock on the 24th. He has been appointed Regent until the
        arrival of
Alberto I. The Torione left while the cannon were saluting the presence
        of the
Marquis.'"
"Let me be the first to congratulate your Serene Highness on this glorious result!"
      exclaimed Isabella, falling at the feet of her father, and pressing his hand to her lips.
"No—not on your knees, dearest Isabel!" cried Alberto, now Grand Duke of Castelcicala: "but
      come to my arms, sweet girl—and you also, beloved companion of my banishment," he added,
      turning towards his wife, who was nearly overcome by these sudden tidings of joy:—"come to my
      arms—for we are no longer exiles—we shall once more behold our native land!"
How sweet—how sweet were the caresses which those three illustrious personages now
      exchanged:—how unalloyed was that happiness which they now experienced!
And when they were enabled to compose their feelings so far as to discourse upon the
      triumphant result of the Constitutional cause, the name of Richard Markham was not
      forgotten!
</div></body></text></TEI>