<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="259">
CHAPTER CCLVIII.   THE APPOINTMENT KEPT.
It was the 10th of July, 1843.
The bell upon the roof of Markham Place had just proclaimed the hour of nine, and the
      morning was as bright and beautiful as the cheerful sun, the cloudless sky, and the gentle
      breeze could render a summer-day,—when a party of eight persons ascended the hill on which
      stood the two trees.
Those emblems of the fraternal affection of early years were green, verdant, and
      flourishing; and on the one which had been planted by the hands of the long-lost brother, were
      the following inscriptions:—

Eugene.
 Dec. 25, 1836. Eugene.
 May 17th, 1838. Eugene.
 March 6, 1841. Eugene.
 July 1st, 1843.

This last inscription, as the reader will perceive, had only been very recently added; and
      Richard regarded it as a promise—a pledge—a solemn sign that the appointment would be
      kept.
It was nine o'clock in the evening when the parting between the brothers took place in the
      year 1831; and, although it was impossible to determine at what hour of the day on which the
      twelve years expired, Eugene would return, nevertheless Richard, judging by his own anxiety to
      clasp a brother in his arms, felt certain that this brother would not delay the moment that
      was to re-unite them.
Accordingly, at nine o'clock on the morning of the 10th of July, 1843, the Prince, repaired
      to the eminence on which he hoped—oh! how fondly hoped—full soon to welcome the long-lost
      Eugene.
His seven companions were the Princess Isabella, Ellen, Mr. Monroe, Katherine, Mario
      Bazzano, Eliza Sydney, and the faithful Whittingham.
Richard could not conceal a certain nervous suspense under which he laboured; for although
      he felt assured of Eugene's appearance, yet so long a period had elapsed since they had
      parted, and so many vicissitudes might have occurred during the interval, that he trembled
      lest the meeting should be characterised by circumstances which would give his brother
      pain.
The Princess Isabella, naturally anxious to become acquainted with her brother-in-law, also
      looked forward to the return of the long-lost one with emotions which enabled her to
      comprehend those that animated her husband; and pressing his hand tenderly as they seated
      themselves on the bench between the trees, she whispered, "Be of good cheer, Richard: your
      brother will keep the appointment—and oh! what joy for us all!"
On her side, Katherine was the prey to various conflicting feelings,—anxiety to know a
      brother whom she had as yet never seen—fear lest he should not come—and curiosity to be
      convinced whether he were as amiable, as generous-hearted, and as deserving of her sisterly
      love as Richard.
And Ellen—poor Ellen!—how difficult for her was the task of concealing all the emotions
      which agitated her bosom now! But she nevertheless derived much encouragement and hope from
      the frequent looks of profound meaning which were directed towards her by Eliza Sydney.
Bazzano endeavoured to soothe the anxiety of his beloved Katherine; while Mr. Monroe and
      Whittingham shared to a considerable degree the suspense which now animated them all.
It was about a quarter past nine o'clock, when Mr. Greenwood halted by the road-side, at a
      spot which commanded a view of the hill-top whereon stood the two trees.
He was on foot; and though he had so far recovered from his recent accident as to exhibit
      only a very trifling lameness in his gait, still the short walk which he had taken from
      Islington to the immediate vicinity of Markham Place, compelled him to pause and rest by the
      way-side.
He looked towards the hill, and could plainly distinguish the number of persons who were
      stationed on that eminence.
A deadly pallor overspread his countenance; and tears started from his eyes.
But in a few moments he exercised a violent effort over his emotions, and exclaimed aloud,
      with a kind of desperate emphasis, "I have promised her to go through the ordeal—and
      I must nerve myself to do so! Ah! Ellen," he added, his voice suddenly changing to a plaintive
      tone, "you have forced me to love you—you have taught me to bless the affectionate care and
      solicitude of woman!"
This apostrophe to his wife seemed to arouse all the better feelings of his soul; and
      without farther hesitation, he pursued his way towards the hill.
In a few minutes he reached a point where the road took a sudden turn to the right, thus
      running round all one side of the base of the eminence, and passing by the mansion itself.
There he paused again;—for although the party assembled on the hill were plainly perceived
      by him, he was yet unseen by them—a hedge concealing him from their view.
"Oh! is the dread ordeal so near at hand?" he exclaimed, with a temporary revival of
      bitterness of spirit. "Scarcely separated from him by a distance of two hundred
      yards—a distance so soon cleared—and yet—and yet——"
At that instant he caught sight of the figure of his wife, who, having advanced a few paces
      in front
      of her companions, stood more conspicuously than they upon the brow of the
      hill.
"She anxiously awaits my coming!" he murmured to himself. "Oh! why do I hesitate?"
And, as he spoke, he was about to emerge from the shade of the high hedge which concealed
      him,—about to turn the angle of the road, whereby he would immediately be perceived by those
      who stood on the hill,—when his attention was suddenly called elsewhere.
For, no sooner had the words—"Oh! why do I hesitate?" issued from his lips, than a
      post-chaise, which was dashing along the road towards London at a rapid rate, upset only a few
      paces from the spot where he had paused to glance towards the hill.
One of the fore-wheels of the vehicle had come off; and the chaise rolled over with a heavy
      crash.
The postillion instantly stopped his horses; while a man—the only traveller whom the vehicle
      contained—emerged from the door that was uppermost, and which he had contrived to open.
All this occurred so rapidly that the traveller stood in the road a few instants after the
      upsetting of the chaise.
Greenwood drew near to inquire if he were hurt: but, scarcely had his eyes caught a glimpse
      of that man's features, when he uttered a cry of mingled rage and delight, and sprang towards
      him.
For that traveller was Lafleur!
"Villain!" cried Greenwood, seizing hold of the Frenchman by the collar: "to you I owe all
      my misfortunes! Restore me the wealth of which you vilely plundered me!"
"Unhand me," exclaimed the ex-valet; "or, by heaven——"
"Wretch!" interrupted Greenwood: "it is for me to threaten!"
Lafleur gnashed his teeth with rage, and endeavoured to shake off his assailant with a
      sudden and desperate effort to hurl him to the ground.
But Greenwood, weakened though he was by illness, maintained his hold upon the Frenchman,
      and called for assistance.
The postillion knew not whose part to take, and therefore remained neutral.
Lafleur's situation was most critical; but he was not the man to yield without a desperate
      attempt to free himself.
Suddenly taking a pistol from his pocket, he aimed a furious blow, with the butt-end of the
      weapon, at the head of Greenwood, whose hat had fallen off in the struggle.
The blow descended with tremendous force: and in the next moment Greenwood lay senseless on
      the road, while Lafleur darted away from the spot with the speed of lightning.
For an instant the postillion hesitated whether to pursue the fugitive or attend to the
      wounded man; but he almost immediately decided in favour of the more humane course.
Upon examination he found that Greenwood's forehead had received a terrible wound, from
      which the blood was streaming down his temples.
He was moreover quite senseless; and the postillion, after binding the wound with a
      handkerchief, vainly endeavoured to recover him.
"Well, it won't do to let the poor gentleman die in this way," said the man to himself; and,
      after an instant's reflection, he remembered that Markham Place was close at hand.
Depositing Greenwood as comfortably as he could on the cushions which he took from the
      chaise, he hastened to the mansion, and related to the servants all that had occurred.
Without a moment's hesitation,—well knowing that their conduct would be approved of by their
      excellent master,—three stout footmen hastened, with the means of forming a litter, to the
      spot where the postillion had left Greenwood.
On their arrival they found that he had to some extent recovered his senses; and a cordial,
      which one of the footmen poured down his throat, completely revived him.
But, alas! he was aroused only to the fearful conviction that he had received his
      death-blow; for that mysterious influence which sometimes warns the soul of its approaching
      flight, was upon him!
"My good friends," he said, in a faint and languid tone, "I have one request to make—the
      request of a dying man!"
"Name it, sir," returned the senior footman; "and command us as you will."
"I conjure you, then," exclaimed Greenwood, speaking with more strength and animation than
      at first,—"I conjure you to remove me on that litter which your kindness has prepared, to the
      spot where your master, his family, and friends are now assembled. You hesitate! Oh! grant me
      this request, I implore you—and the Prince will not blame you!"
The servants were well aware of the motive which had induced their master and his companions
      to repair to the hill-top thus early on this particular day; and the urgent request of
      Greenwood now excited a sudden suspicion in their minds.
But they did not express their thoughts: there was no time to waste in question or
      comment—for the wounded gentleman, who had proffered so earnest a prayer, was evidently in a
      dying state.
Exchanging significant glances, the servants placed Greenwood upon the litter; and, aided by
      the postillion, set out with their burden towards the hill.
The angle of the road was passed; and the party bearing the wounded man, suddenly appeared
      to the view of those who were stationed on the hill.
"Merciful heaven!" exclaimed Richard, with a shudder: "what can this mean?"
"Be not alarmed," said Ellen: "it can have no reference to Eugene. Doubtless some poor
      creature has met with an accident——"
"But my own servants are the bearers of that litter which is approaching!" cried the Prince,
      now becoming painfully excited. "A man is stretched upon it—his head is bandaged—he lies
      motionless—Oh! what terrible fears oppress me!"
And as he uttered these words, Richard sank back almost fainting upon the seat.
The gallant warrior, whose heart had never failed in the thickest of the battle—whose
      courage was so dauntless when bullets were flying round him like hail—and whose valour had
      given him a name amongst the mightiest generals of the universe,—this man of a chivalrous soul
      was subdued by the agonising alarm that had suddenly menaced all his fond fraternal hopes with
      annihilation!
For so ominous—so sinister appeared to be the approach of a litter at the very moment when
      he was anxiously awaiting the presence of a long-lost brother, that his feelings experienced a
      revulsion as painful as it was sudden.
And now for a few moments the strange spectacle
      of the litter was forgotten by those who crowded round our hero in alarm at the
      change which had come over him.
Even Ellen turned away from the contemplation of that mournful procession which was toiling
      up the hill;—for she had seen Greenwood on the preceding evening—she had left him in good
      health—she had raised his spirits by her kind attentions and her loving language—and she did
      not for one moment apprehend that he could be the almost lifeless occupant of that
      litter!
"Pardon me, sweet Isabella—pardon me, dear Kate—and you also, my devoted friends," said
      Richard, at the expiration of a few minutes: "I am grieved to think that this weakness on my
      part should have distressed you—and yet I cannot be altogether ashamed of it!"
"Ashamed!" repeated Isabella, tenderly: "Oh! no, Richard—that word can never be associated
      with act or feeling on your part! For twelve years you have been separated from your
      brother—that last inscription on his own tree promises his return—and your generous heart is
      the prey of a suspense easily aggravated by the slightest circumstance of apparent ill
      omen."
"You describe my feelings exactly, dearest Isabel," said Markham, pressing with the
      tenderest warmth the hand of his lovely young wife.
"Because I know your heart so well," answered the Princess, with a sweet smile.
"Let us not believe in omens of an evil nature," said Katherine. "Some poor creature has met
      with an accident——"
"But wherefore should the servants bring him hither?" asked Richard.
This question produced a startling effect upon all who heard it: and no wonder that it did
      so—for the consideration which it involved had escaped all attention during the excitement of
      the last few minutes.
"Oh! heavens—now I am myself alarmed!" whispered Ellen to Eliza Sydney. "And yet it is
      foolish——"
At that moment the litter had approached so near the brow of the hill, that as Ellen glanced
      towards it while she spoke, her eyes obtained a full view of the countenance of him who lay
      stretched upon that mournful couch.
A piercing shriek burst from her lips; and she fell back, as if suddenly shot through the
      heart, into the arms of Eliza Sydney.
Richard sprang forward: a few steps brought him close by the litter, which the bearers now
      placed upon the ground beneath the foliage of the very tree whereon the inscriptions were
       engraved!
One look—one look was sufficient!
"Eugene—my brother Eugene!" exclaimed our hero, in a tone of the most intense anguish, as he
      cast himself on his knees by the side of the litter, and threw his arms around the dying man.
      "Oh! my God—is it thus that we meet? You are wounded, my dearest brother: but we will save
      you—we will save you! Hasten for a surgeon—delay not a moment—it is the life of my brother
      which is at stake!"
"Your brother, Richard!" cried Isabella, scarcely knowing what she said in that moment of
      intense excitement and profound astonishment: "your brother, my beloved husband? Oh! no—there
      is some dreadful mistake—for he whom you thus embraced is Mr. George Montague Greenwood!"
"Montague—Greenwood!" ejaculated Richard, starting as if an ice-bolt had suddenly entered
      his heart. "No—no—impossible, Isabella! Tell me—Eugene—tell me—you cannot be he of whom I have
      heard so much?"
"Yes, Richard—I am that villain!" answered Eugene, turning his dying countenance in an
      imploring manner towards his brother. "But do not desert me—do not spurn me—do not even
      upbraid me now!"
"Never—never!" cried the Prince, again embracing Eugene with passionate—almost frantic
      warmth. "Upbraid you, my dearest brother! Oh! no—no! Forget the past, Eugene—let it be buried
      in oblivion. And look up, my dear—dear brother: they are all kind faces which surround you!
      Here is Katherine—our sister, Eugene—yes, our sister——"
"I am acquainted with all that concerns her, Richard," said Eugene. "Come to my arms,
      Katherine—embrace me, my sweet sister;—and say—can you also forgive a brother who has
      done so much ill in the world, and whose name is covered with infamy?"
"Speak not thus, my dearest Eugene!" cried Kate, also falling on her knees by the side of
      her brother, and embracing him tenderly.
"And you, too, Isabella—for you also are my sister now," continued Eugene,
      extending his hand towards her: "do you pardon him who once inflicted so much injury upon your
      father?"
"You are my husband's brother—and you are therefore mine, Eugene," answered the Princess,
      tears trickling down her countenance. "None but affectionate relatives and kind friends now
      surround you; and your restoration to health shall be our earnest care!"
"Alas! there is no hope of recovery!" murmured Eugene.
"Yes—there is hope, my dearest husband!" exclaimed Ellen, who, having regained her
      consciousness through the kind attentions of Eliza Sydney, now flew to the litter.
"Your husband, Ellen!" cried Mr. Monroe and Richard as it were in the same breath.
"Yes—Eugene is my husband—my own, much-loved husband!" ejaculated Ellen: "and now you can
      divine the cause which led to the maintenance of that secret until this day!"
"And you, Mr. Monroe," said Eugene, a transient fire animating his eyes, as he clasped Ellen
      in his arms, "may be proud of your daughter—you also, Richard, may glory in her as a
      sister—for she has taught me to repent of my past errors—she has led me to admire and worship
      the noble character of Woman! But our child, Ellen—where is my boy—my darling Richard?"
"We will remove you into the house, Eugene," said his wife, bending over the litter with the
      tenderest solicitude; "and there you shall embrace your boy!"
"No—no—leave me here!" exclaimed her husband: "it is so sweet to lie beneath the foliage of
      this tree which bears my own name, and reminds me of my youthful days,—surrounded, too, by so
      many dear relatives and kind friends!"
"Amongst the latter of whom you must now reckon me," said Eliza Sydney, approaching the
      couch, and extending her hand to Eugene, who wrung it cordially. "Hush!" added Eliza,
      perceiving
      that he was about to address her: "no reference to the past! All that is
      unpleasant is forgotten:—a happy future is before us!"
"Admirable woman!" cried Eugene, overpowered by so many manifestations of forgiveness,
      affection, and sympathy as he had received within the last few minutes.
Mario Bazzano was then presented to his brother-in-law.
"May God bless your union with my sister!" said Eugene, in a solemn tone. "For a long time I
      have known that I possessed a sister—and much have I desired to see her. Richard, be not angry
      with me when I inform you that I was in a room adjacent to that apartment wherein the
      explanations relative to Katherine's birth took place between yourself and the Marquis of
      Holmesford;—be not angry with me, I say, that I did not discover myself, and rush into your
      arms,—but I was then the victim of an insatiable ambition! Do not interrupt me—I have much to
      say. Let some one hasten to fetch my child; and do you all gather round me, to hear my last
      words!"
"Your last words!" shrieked Ellen: "Oh! no—you must recover!"
"Yes—with care and attention, dearest Eugene," said Richard, his eyes dimmed with tears,
      "you shall be restored to us."
Katherine and Isabella also wept abundantly.
A servant had already departed to fetch a surgeon: a second was now despatched to the house
      for the little Richard and the young Prince Alberto.
It was at length Whittingham's turn to go forward; and, whimpering like a child, he pressed
      Eugene's hand warmly in his own. The old man was unable to speak—his voice was choked with
      emotion; but Eugene recognised him, and acknowledged his faithful attachment with a few kind
      words which only increased the butler's grief.
"Listen to me for a few minutes, my dearest relatives—my kindest friends," said Eugene,
      after a brief pause. "I feel that I am dying—I have met my fate at the hands of the villanous
      Lafleur, who plundered me more than two years and a half ago, and whom I encountered ere now
      in my way hither. Alas! I have pursued a strange career—a career of selfishness and crime,
      sacrificing every consideration and every individual to my own purposes—raising at one time a
      colossal fortune upon the ruin of thousands! I was long buoyed up by the hope of making myself
      a great name in the world, alike famous for wealth and rank,—that I might convince you, my
      brother, how a man of talent could carve out his way without friends, and without capital at
      the beginning! But, alas! I have for some months been convinced—thanks to the affectionate
      reasoning of that angel Ellen, and to the contemplation of your example, Richard, even from a
      distance—that talent will not maintain prosperity for ever, unless it be allied to virtue! And
      let me observe, Richard—as God is my witness!—that with all my selfishness I never sought to
      injure you! When you were ruined by the speculations of Allen, I knew not that it was
       your wealth of which I was plundering him: I had not the least suspicion
      that Mr. Monroe was even acquainted with that man! The truth was revealed to me one day at the
      dwelling of Isabella's parents: and heaven knows how deeply I felt the villany of my conduct,
      which had robbed you! Do not interrupt me—I conjure you to allow me to proceed! Many
      and many a time did I yearn to hasten to your assistance when misfortune first overtook you,
      Richard:—but, no—the appointment had been made for a certain day—and I even felt a secret
      pleasure to think that you might probably be reduced to the lowest state of penury, from which
      in one moment, when that day should come, I might elevate you to an enjoyment of the half of
      my fortune! But that I have ever loved you, Richard, those inscriptions on the tree will
      prove; and, moreover, I once penetrated into the home of our forefathers—the study-window was
      not fastened—I effected an entrance—I sought your chamber—I saw you sleeping in your
      bed——"
"Oh! then it was not a dream!" exclaimed Richard. "Dearest Eugene, say no more—we require no
      explanations—no apology for the past! Here is your child, Eugene—and mine also: your son and
      your little nephew are by your side!"
Eugene raised himself, by Ellen's aid, upon the litter, and embraced the two children with
      the most unfeigned tenderness.
For a few moments he gazed earnestly upon their innocent countenances: then, yielding to a
      sudden impulse, as the incidents of his own career swept through his memory, he exclaimed,
      "God grant that they prove more worthy of the name of Markham than I!"
Richard and Ellen implored him not to give way to bitter reflections for the past.
"Alas! such counsel is offered as vainly as it is kindly meant!" murmured Eugene. "My life
      has been tainted with many misdeeds—and not the least was my black infamy towards that
      excellent man, who afterwards became your friend, Richard—I mean Thomas Armstrong!"
"He forgave you—he forgave you, Eugene!" exclaimed the Prince.
"Ellen has informed me that you have in your possession a paper which he gave you on his
      death-bed——"
"And which is to be opened this day," added Richard.
Then, drawing forth the document, he broke the seal.
A letter fell upon the ground.
"Read it," said Eugene: "all that concerns you is deeply interesting to me."
The Prince complied with his brother's request, and read the letter aloud. Its contents were
      as follow:—

"I have studied human nature to little purpose, and contemplated the phases of the human
       character with small avail, if I err in the prediction which I am now about to record.
"Richard, you will become a great man—as you are now a good one.
"Should necessity compel you to open this document at any time previously to the 10th of
       July, 1843, receive the fortune to which it refers as an encouragement to persevere in
       honourable pursuits. But should you not read these words until the day named, my hope and
       belief are that you will be placed, by your own exertions, far beyond the want of that sum
       which, in either case, is bequeathed to you as a testimonial of my sincerest regard and
       esteem.
"Signor Viviani, banker at Pinalla, in the State of Castelcicala, or his agents, Messrs.
       Glyn and Co., bankers, London, will pay over to you, on presentation of this letter, the sum
       of seventy-five thousand pounds, with all interest, simple and compound, accruing thereto
       since the month of July, 1839, at which period I placed that amount in the hands of Signor
       Viviani.

"One word more, my dear young friend. Should you ever encounter an individual
       who speaks ill of the memory of Thomas Armstrong, say to him, 'He forgave his
        enemies!' And should you ever meet one who has injured me, say to him, 'In the name
        of Thomas Armstrong I forgive you.'
"Be happy, my dear young friend—be happy!
"THOMAS ARMSTRONG."


It would be impossible to describe the emotions awakened in the breast of all those who
      heard the contents of this letter.
"Now, my dearest brother," exclaimed Richard, after a brief pause, "in the name of
       Thomas Armstrong, you are forgiven the injury which you did to him!"
"Thank you, dear brother, for that assurance: it relieves my mind of a heavy load! And,
      Richard," continued Eugene, in a voice tremulous with emotions and faint with the ebb of
      life's spirit, "the prediction is verified—you are a great man! The world is filled with the
      glory of your name—and you are as good as you are great! The appointment has been kept:—but
      how? We meet beneath the foliage of the two trees—you as the heir apparent to a throne—I as a
      ruined profligate!"
"No—no!" exclaimed the Prince; "you shall live to be rich and prosperous——"
Eugene smiled faintly.
"Merciful heavens! he is dying!" ejaculated Ellen.
And it was so!
Terrible was the anguish of those by whom he was surrounded.
Mr. Wentworth, the surgeon, appeared at this crisis; but his attentions were ministered in
      vain.
Eugene's eyes grew dim—still he continued sensible; and he knew that his last moments were
      approaching.
Richard—Ellen—Katherine—Eliza Sydney—the two children—Mario Bazzano—Isabella—Mr. Monroe—and
      the faithful Whittingham—all wept bitterly, as the surgeon shook his head in despair!
"My husband—my dearest husband!" screamed Ellen, wildly: "look upon me—look upon your
      child—oh! my God—this day that was to have been so happy!"
Eugene essayed to speak—but could not: and that was his last mortal effort.
In another moment his spirit had fled for ever!
</div></body></text></TEI>