<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="130">
CHAPTER CXXX. MENTAL STRUGGLES.
THE rector of Saint David's fell upon his knees, and, turning his face towards the casement
      through which the sun glanced so cheerfully into the chamber, poured forth his soul to the
      Being of whose universal dominion that radiance seemed an emblem.
Reginald could now pray. He had sinned deeply, and he implored pardon; for he conceived that
      heaven had deigned to convey a special warning to his mind through the medium of the clouds
      and the storm of the preceding night.
"Oh! I am not yet totally lost!" he exclaimed, joining his hands fervently together: "I am
      not yet an outcast from divine mercy! Heaven itself manifests an interest in my welfare: dare
      I neglect the warning? No—no! I have sinned—but there is repentance. Upon my otherwise
      spotless life there is one stain; but tears of regret shall be shed unceasingly until the mark
      be washed away! And thou, temptress—never more must we meet as we have lately met; I must shun
      thee as my evil genius! Yet I do not blame thee—for I myself was fond, and being fond, was
      weak. If I fell, and can yet aspire to pardon and forgiveness,—I who was strong,—what
      extenuation may not exist for thee—a poor, weak woman! Oh! let the light of divine grace shine
      in upon my soul, even as these bright beams of the orb of day penetrate with cheering
      influence to my very heart! Let me rise up from the depths of sin, stronger than when I
      fell,—so that sad experience may tend to confirm my resolves to pursue the paths of chastity
      and virtue!"
Thus spoke aloud Reginald Tracy, as he knelt in his chamber the day after his fall: thus did
      he breathe vows of future self-denial and purity.
He rose resigned, and penitent,—though at intervals a species of struggle took place in his
      breast—a conflict between his recently-experienced sensations of amorous delight and his
      present resolutions of abstinence from carnal pleasures.
In a moment when his better feelings were predominant, he wrote a brief letter to Lady
      Cecilia, imploring her to forget all that had taken place between them, and enjoining her, if
      she entertained the slightest interest in his earthly and immortal welfare, never to seek to
      see him again.
Then Reginald gathered all his most valued books around him, and plunged into his studies
      with an earnestness which augured well for the strength and permanency of his good
      resolutions.
This occupation was for a few minutes disturbed by a note from Lady Cecilia, imploring a
      last interview ere they parted for ever:—but the rector was immoveable in his present
      precautionary conduct; and he answered her, not angrily, but firmly, to beseech her not to
      "lead him into temptation."
      
Yes, this man of fiery passions wrestled gallantly with his inclinations: the combat was at
      times a fearful one; but he exerted all his strength, and all his power, and all his energy,
      to subdue those desires which were smouldering, and were not quenched, at the bottom of his
      soul.
It was in the evening of the fourth day after the rector's fall from the pedestal of his
      purity, that his studies were interrupted by the entrance of his housekeeper, who informed him
      that a gentleman desired to speak to him.
The rector ordered the visitor to be admitted; and Mr. Richard Markham was announced.
The object of our hero's call was speedily explained.
Mr. Monroe was lying in a dangerous state, and his life was despaired of. Mr. Wentworth, the
      surgeon, who attended upon him, had recommended him to settle all his earthly affairs, and
      prepare his soul to meet his Creator; and the old man, who was fully sensible of the
      importance of this advice, had expressed a wish to receive spiritual consolation from a
      minister whose sanctity had become proverbial.
"The desire of my dying friend," added Markham, "must serve as an apology for my intrusion
      upon you; but, I implore you, reverend sir, not to hesitate to soothe by your much-coveted
      presence the passage of a fellow-creature from this world to a better."
But for a moment the rector did hesitate:—was he fit to administer divine
      consolation to another,—he who was still deeply dyed with sin himself?
Such was the thought which floated rapidly through his imagination.
Richard urged his request with eloquence.
Reginald Tracy felt that he could offer no sufficient excuse, short of the revelation of his
      own guilt, for refusing to attend the death-bed of one who craved his presence; and he agreed
      to accompany the young man to Markham Place.
Richard had a vehicle at the door; and in a short time they reached our hero's abode.
Reginald was conducted to the room where Monroe lay.
Hanging over the pillow, on which the invalid reclined, was a charming female form, from
      whose bosom deep sobs emanated, and rendered almost inaudible the words of strangely
      commingled hope and despair which she addressed to her father.
She did not hear the door open; and it was only when Richard approached the bed, and
      whispered that the Reverend Mr. Tracy was present, that she raised her tearful
      countenance.
Then did the eyes of the rector glance upon one of the most lovely beings whom Nature ever
      invested with all her choicest gifts; and—even in that solemn moment when he stood by the bed
      of one who was pronounced to be dying—his soul was stirred by the presence of that
      transcendent beauty.
"Oh! sir," exclaimed Ellen, in that musical voice which was now rendered tremulous by deep
      emotions, "how grateful am I for this prompt attention to the wish of my dear—dear
      father!"
"I deserve no gratitude for the performance of a Christian duty," answered the rector, as he
      approached the bed.
Markham took Ellen's hand and led her from the chamber, in order to allow unrestrained
      converse between the clergyman and the invalid.
An hour elapsed, and the bell of the sick-room rang.
Ellen hurried thither, and found her father composed and resigned to meet his fate. The
      rector sate by his bed-side.
"This holy man," said Monroe, "has taught me how to die like a true Christian. Weep not,
      dearest Ellen; we shall meet again hereafter."
"Oh, my dearest father," exclaimed the young lady, bursting into an agony of tears; "it is
      I—I who have murdered you! My conduct——"
"Silence, Ellen—accuse not yourself in that dreadful manner," interrupted her father.
Reginald was astonished at the words which had just fallen from the daughter's lips; and he
      surveyed her with increased interest and curiosity.
At that moment Mr. Wentworth entered the room. He found the invalid better, and his
      countenance was animated with a ray of hope.
This expression of his inward feelings was not lost upon Ellen; and she interrogated him
      with a rapid and imploring glance.
"Mr. Monroe must be kept very—very quiet," said the surgeon in a whisper, which was
      addressed to both Ellen and Reginald Tracy.
"And then—there is hope?" murmured Ellen in breathless suspense.
"Yes—there is hope," repeated the surgeon solemnly.
"May heaven be thanked for that assurance on your part," said Ellen, fervently.
The rector contemplated her with an admiration which he could not restrain; and, in spite of
      himself, the thought flashed across his mind, how far more lovely was Miss Ellen Monroe than
      Lady Cecilia Harborough!
Then, indignant with himself for having allowed the comparison to force itself upon his
      attention, he rose to take his departure.
The invalid had just sunk into a deep slumber; and Mr. Wentworth intimated his intention of
      passing the night by his side.
"I will call again to-morrow morning," said Reginald, addressing Miss Monroe; "for I
      perceive that this gentleman is not without hopes."
"Thank you—thank you, sir, for your kindness," answered Ellen with grateful enthusiasm.
      "Your presence seems to have brought a blessing into this sick-room."
She extended her hand towards him, and he pressed it for a moment in his.
His whole frame seemed electrified with a sudden glow; and he hurried somewhat abruptly from
      the room.
When he reached his own abode once more, he felt a profound melancholy steal into his soul;
      for he seemed more lonely, and more solitary than he ever yet had been.
He retired to rest, and his dreams were filled with the images of Cecilia and Ellen.
When he awoke in the morning, he was discontented with himself—with the whole world: he
      experienced vague longings after excitement or change of scene;—he could not settle himself,
      as on the four previous days, to his studies—his books were hateful to him. He wandered about
      his house—from room to room—as if in search of something which he could not define, and which
      he did not discover: he was pursued by ideas only dimly comprehensible, but which were at
      variance with his recently formed resolutions of purity and virtue. He was
      restless—discontented—uneasy.
At length he remembered his promise to return to Markham Place. The idea seemed to give him
      pleasure: he longed to see Ellen Monroe once more;—and yet he did not choose to make this
      admission to himself.
With a beating heart did he cross the threshold of
       the house in which that delightful vision had burst, as it were, upon his sight
      on the previous evening. He was immediately conducted to the sick-room, where Ellen was
      sitting alone by her father's bed-side.

The old man slept.
Ellen rose and tripped lightly to meet him, a smile upon her charming, though pale and
      somewhat careworn countenance.
Laying her hand gently upon his, she whispered, "He will recover! Mr. Wentworth assures me
      that he will recover!"
"Most sincerely do I congratulate you upon this happy change," said Reginald. "I can well
      comprehend the feelings of an affectionate daughter who is allowed to hope that her parent may
      be restored to her."
"Yes, sir—and so good a father as mine!" added Ellen. "But it was all my fault——"
Then, suddenly checking herself, she cast down her eyes, and blushed deeply.
"Your fault, Miss Monroe?" repeated the rector, inspired with the most lively curiosity to
      penetrate the mystery of that self-accusation which he had now heard for the second time: "I
      cannot believe that any fault of yours—you whom I found hanging over your beloved
      father——"
"Let us speak no more upon that subject," interrupted Ellen, vexed with herself for having
      so unguardedly said what she had relative to the primal cause of her father's dangerous
      illness. "He will recover—something tells me that he will recover; and then—oh! how I will
      cherish him—how I will exert myself to make the remainder of his days happy!"
Her countenance became flushed as she spoke; and Reginald's glances were fixed, by a species
      of invincible fascination, upon the beautiful being in whose presence he stood.
He felt at that moment that he could sacrifice every thing for her love.
The surgeon and Richard Markham now entered the apartment; and Reginald received the thanks
      of our young hero for the attention which he had shown to the old man whose life had ceased to
      be despaired of.
After a somewhat protracted visit, the rector took his leave.
But throughout that day Ellen alone occupied all his thoughts. What fault of hers could have
       thrown her father upon a bed of sickness, whose only termination was at one time
      anticipated to be in death? what could have been the conduct of so fond a daughter to have
      produced such terrible results? Had she strayed from the path of virtue? This was the only
      feasible solution of such a mystery. Then a terrible pang of jealousy shot through his
      breast.
And why should he be jealous? What was that young girl to him?
He was jealous, because his ardent passions instinctively attracted him towards that
      beautiful creature;—and she was every thing to him, because she was so beautiful, and
      because he desired her!
Yes—a new flame now burnt in his heart—a flame as violent, as relentless, as fierce, as that
      which had already made him the slave of Lady Cecilia Harborough. But was he this time to
      become a slave or a victim?
He sat down and reasoned with himself. He endeavoured to crush the feelings of
      licentiousness which had been re-awakened in his heart.
But as vainly might he have endeavoured to lull the Maelstroom with a breath, or to subdue
      the rage of Vesuvius with a drop of water!
Such was his frame of mind, when an old woman sought his presence in the evening.
He had made it a rule, throughout his career, never to be difficult of access to those who
      wished to see him; and now that he felt the fabric of his fair fame to be tottering upon the
      verge of a precipice, he was not inclined to deviate from any of those outward forms which had
      aided in the consecration of his renown. He accordingly ordered his house keeper to admit the
      old woman to his presence.
The instant a hag, with a horribly wrinkled countenance, entered his study, he started—for
      that repulsive face was not altogether unknown to him.
Then, in another moment, he remembered that he had once seen her standing at the door of
      Lady Cecilia Harborough's abode in Tavistock Square; and that the glance which she had thrown
      upon him, on that occasion had for an instant struck him with sinister foreboding.
The old woman seated herself, and, without any preamble, said: "A man of great learning like
      you, reverend sir, cannot be otherwise than a man of great taste. This conviction has
      emboldened me to call upon you in preference to any other, relative to a most perfect work of
      art which fortune has thrown in my way."
Reginald gazed upon the old woman in speechless astonishment: her mysterious—indeed,
      incomprehensible language, induced him to believe that she was some unfortunate creature
      bereaved of her right senses.
"Listen to me for a few minutes, reverend sir," continued the hag, "and I will explain my
      meaning to you. Your charity, as well as your taste, is about to be appealed to."
"Speak," said the clergyman, somewhat impatiently, for he longed to be left alone again with
      his reflections, which had just assumed a most voluptuous complexion when his privacy was thus
      intruded upon.
"I will not detain you long—I will not detain you long," cried the old hag. "You must know,
      reverend sir, that a foreign sculptor—a poor Italian—came some few months ago to lodge at my
      humble dwelling. He was in the deepest distress, and had not the means to procure either
      marble or tools. I am very poor—very poor, myself, sir; but I could not see a fellow-creature
      starving. I bought him marble—and I bought him tools. He went to work, toiling day and night
      almost unweariedly; and a week ago he put the finishing stroke to the statue of a nymph. His
      art has enabled him, by means of colour, to give a life-like appearance to that admirable work
      of art; so that as you contemplate it, it seems to you as if the eyes were animated, the lips
      breathed, and the bosom rose and sank with respiration."
"And your artist is, no doubt, anxious to dispose of his statue?" said the rector.
"Precisely so," answered the hag. "I do not profess to be a judge myself; but I can speak of
      the effect which it produced upon me. When I saw it finished—standing upon its pedestal—I was
      about to address it as a living being."
"The effect must, then, be indeed striking," observed Reginald, with the voluptuous train of
      whose ideas this picture was well adapted to associate.
"Were you to judge for yourself, reverend sir," said the old hag, "you would find that I
      have not overrated the perfection of this masterpiece. The sculptor demands but a small price
      for his statue: it would be a charity were you to purchase it yourself, or recommend one of
      your friends to do so."
"When and where could I see this matchless work of art?" asked Reginald, whose curiosity was
      now strangely excited.
"At my own humble dwelling in Golden Lane is this statue concealed," replied the horrible
      old hag; "and no mortal eyes, save the sculptor's and mine own, have yet glanced upon it. If
      you will accompany me now, you can inspect it without delay."
Reginald referred to his watch, and found that it was past nine o'clock. The evening was
      pitch dark; and he did not, therefore, dread being seen in the company of that hideous old
      woman. Besides, even if he were—was he not often summoned at all hours to attend upon the last
      moments of some dying sinner?
"I will proceed with you at once to your abode," said the rector, after a few moments'
      hesitation.
"And you will do well," answered the hag; "for I can promise you a fine treat in what you
      are about to see."
While the rector stepped aside to put on his cloak and hat, a strange smile curled the lips
      of the wrinkled harridan; but as Reginald again turned towards her, her countenance instantly
      resumed its wonted composure.
They then went out together.
</div></body></text></TEI>