<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="194">

CHAPTER CXCIII.   ANOTHER VISIT TO BUCKINGHAM PALACE.
It was the evening following the one the incidents of which occupied the preceding
      chapter.
Beneath a sofa in the Ball Room of Buckingham Palace, Henry Holford lay concealed.
It would be a mere repetition of statements made in former portions of this work, were we to
      describe the means by which the young man obtained access to the most private parts of the
      royal dwelling. We may, however, observe that he had paid frequent visits to the palace since
      the occasion when we first saw him enter those sacred precincts at the commencement of
      January, 1839; and that he was as familiar with the interior of the sovereign's abode, even to
      its most retired chambers, as any of its numerous inmates.
He had run many risks of discovery; but a species of good fortune seemed to attend upon him
      in these strange and romantic ventures; and those frequent alarms had never as yet terminated
      in his detection. Thus he became emboldened in his intrusions; and he now lay beneath the sofa
      in the Ball Room, with no more apprehension than he would have entertained if some authority
      in the palace had actually connived at his presence there.
It was nine o'clock in the evening; and the Ball Room was brilliantly illuminated.
But as yet the low-born pot-boy was its sole occupant.
Not long, however, was he doomed to that solitude. By a strange coincidence, the two noble
      ladies whose conversation had so much interested him on the occasion of his first visit to the
      palace, entered the room shortly after nine o'clock. He recognised their voices immediately;
      and he was delighted at their arrival, for their former dialogues had awakened the most lively
      sentiments of curiosity in his mind. But since his intrusion in January, 1839, he had never
      seen nor heard them in his subsequent visits to the royal dwelling, until the present
      occasion; and now, as they advanced through the room together, he held his breath to catch the
      words that fell from them.
"The dinner-party was tiresome to-day, my dear countess," observed the duchess: "her Majesty
      did not appear to be in good spirits."
"Alas!" exclaimed the lady thus addressed, "our gracious sovereign's melancholy fits occur
      at less distant intervals as she grows older."
"And yet her Majesty has every earthly reason to be happy," said the duchess. "The Prince
      appears to be devotedly attached to her; and the Princess Royal is a sweet babe."
"Worldly prosperity will not always ensure felicity," returned the countess; "and this your
      grace must have perceived amongst the circle of your acquaintance. Her Majesty is a prey to
      frequent fits of despondency, which are distressing to the faithful subjects who have the
      honour to be near the royal person. She will sit for an hour at a time, in moody contemplation
      of that sweet babe; and her countenance then wears an expression of such profound—such
      plaintive—such touching melancholy, that I have frequently wept to behold her thus."
"What can be the cause of this intermittent despondency?" inquired the duchess.
"It is constitutional," answered the countess. "The fit comes upon her Majesty at moments
      when she is surrounded by all the elements of pleasure, happiness, and joy. It is a dark
      spirit against which no mind, however powerful, can wrestle. The only method of mitigating the
      violence of its attacks is the bustle of travelling:—then novelty, change of scene, exercise,
      and the demonstrations of popular devotion seem to relieve our beloved sovereign from the
      influence of that morbid, moody melancholy."
"I believe that when we conversed upon this topic on a former occasion,—it must be at least
      two years ago,—your ladyship hinted at the existence of hereditary idiosyncrasies in the Royal
      Family?" observed the duchess, inquiringly. "Indeed," added her grace, hastily, "I well
      remember that you alluded to the unfortunate attachment of George the Third for a certain
      Quakeress——"
"Yes—Hannah Lightfoot, to whom the monarch, when a prince, was privately united," answered
      the countess. "His baffled love—the necessity which compelled him to renounce one to whom he
      was devotedly attached—and the constant dread which he entertained lest the secret of this
      marriage should transpire, acted upon his mind in a manner that subsequently produced those
      dread results which are matters of history."
"You allude to his madness," said the duchess, with a shudder.
"Yes, your grace—that madness which is, alas! hereditary," replied the countess solemnly.
      "But George the Third had many—many domestic afflictions. Oh! if you knew all, you would not
      be surprised that he had lost his reason! The profligacy of some of his children—most of
      them—was alone sufficient to turn his brain. Many of those instances of profligacy have
      transpired; and although the public have not been able to arrive at any positive proofs
      respecting the matters, I can nevertheless assure your grace that such proofs are in
      existence—and in my possession!"
"Your ladyship once before hinted as much to me; and I must confess that without having any
      morbid inclination for vulgar scandal, I feel some curiosity in respect to those matters."
"Some day I will place in your hand papers of a fearful import, in connexion with the Royal
      Family," returned the countess. "Your grace will then perceive that profligacy the most
      abandoned—crimes the most heinous—vices the most depraved, characterised nearly all the
      children of George the Third. There is one remarkable fact relative to that prince's marriage
      with Hannah Lightfoot. The Royal Marriage Act was not passed until thirteen years after
       this union, and could not therefore set it aside; and yet Hannah Lightfoot was still
       living when the prince espoused Charlotte Sophia Princess of Mecklenburgh Strelitz in
       1761."
"Is this possible?" exclaimed the duchess, profoundly surprised.
"It is possible—it is true!" said the countess emphatically. "In 1772 the Royal Marriage
       Act[25] was passed, and provided that no member of the
      Royal Family should contract a marriage without the sovereign's consent. This measure was
      enacted for several reasons; but principally because the King's two brothers had formed
      private matrimonial connexions,—the
      Duke of Cumberland with Mrs. Horton, a widow—and the Duke of Gloucester with the
      widow of the Earl of Waldegrave."

"The act certainly appears to me most cruel and oppressive," said the duchess; "inasmuch as
      it interferes with the tenderest affections and most charming of human sympathies—feelings
      which royalty has in common with all the rest of mankind."
"I cordially agree with your grace," observed the countess. "The law is
      barbarous—monstrous—revolting; and its evil effects were evidenced by almost every member of
      the family of George the Third. In the first place, the Prince of Wales (afterwards George the
      Fourth) was privately united to Mrs. Fitzherbert, at the house of that lady's uncle, Lord
      Sefton. Fox, Sheridan, and Burke were present at the ceremony, in addition to my mother and
      several relations of the bride. Mr. Fox handed her into the carriage; and the happy pair
      proceeded to Richmond, where they passed a week or ten days. Queen Charlotte was made
      acquainted with the marriage: she sent for her son, and demanded an explanation. The prince
      avowed the truth. Your grace has, of course, read the discussion which took place in connexion
      with this subject, in the House of Commons, in 1787. Mr. Rolle, the member for Devonshire,
      mysteriously alluded to the union: Mr. Fox rose up, and denied it; but from that day forth
      Mrs. Fitzherbert never spoke to Fox again. Sheridan let the truth escape him:—he said, 'A
       lady who has been alluded to, is without reproach, and is entitled to the truest and most
       general respect.' How would Mrs. Fitzherbert have been without reproach, or entitled to
      respect, if she were not married to the prince? But I have proofs—convincing
      proofs—that such an union did actually take place, although it was certainly null and void in
      consequence of the Marriage Act."
"It nevertheless subsisted according to the feelings and inclinations of the parties
      interested," said the duchess; "and it was based on honour, if on no legal
      principle."
"Alas!" whispered the countess, casting a rapid glance around; "the word honour
      must not be mentioned in connexion with the name of George the Fourth. It pains me to speak
      ill of the ancestors of
      our lovely queen: but—if we converse on the subject at all—truth must influence
      our observations. The entire life of George the Fourth was one of profligacy and crime. Often
      have I marvelled how one possessing a soul so refined as Georgiana, the beautiful Duchess of
      Devonshire, could have resigned herself to such a degraded voluptuary—such a low debauchee.
      Yet she was his Queen of Love, surrounded by her graces, who, however, bore the modern names
      of Craven, Windham, and Jersey."
"Carlton House has, indeed, beheld strange and varied scenes," said the duchess; "low orgies
      and voluptuous revels—music floating here—dice rattling there—the refinements of existence in
      one room, and the most degraded dissipation in another."
"Such was the case," observed the countess. "But let us return to the consequences of the
      Royal Marriage Act. Rumour has told much in connexion with the coupled names of the Duke of
      York and Mrs. Clarke—the late King William and Mrs. Jordan; and so well known are these facts
      that I need not dwell upon them. The matrimonial connexions of the Duke of Sussex—first with
      Lady Augusta Murray, and afterwards with Lady Cecilia Underwood,[26] are all matters resting upon something more solid than mere conjecture."
"And the Duke of Cumberland—the present King of Hanover?" said the duchess inquiringly.
"It is dangerous to speak of him," whispered the countess; "because it is
      impossible to utter a word in his favour."
"You surely cannot believe all the tales that have been circulated against him?" exclaimed
      the duchess, earnestly watching the countenance of her companion, as if to anticipate her
      reply.
"Does your grace particularly allude to the death of Sellis?" asked the countess, turning
      her head so as to meet the glance of her friend. "Because," continued she, without waiting for
      a reply, "I should be sorry—nay, nothing should induce me—to state in plain terms my
      impression relative to that event. I may, however, allude to a few material points. Sir
      Everard Home, the medical attendant of the Duke of Cumberland, frequently observed, 'that
       too much pains were taken to involve that affair in mystery;' and another eminent
      physician, since dead, declared that 'the head of Sellis was nearly severed from his body,
       and that no man could inflict upon himself a wound of such a depth.' The Duke of
      Cumberland stated that his valet, Sellis, entered his bed-chamber and attacked him with a
      sword; and that having failed in his murderous purposes, he retired to his own room and
      committed suicide. Sir Everard Home distinctly proved, on the inquest, that the corpse was
      found lying on its side on the bed; and yet 'he had cut his own throat so
       effectually that he could not have changed his position after inflicting the wound.' I
      will not, however, make any observations upon that fact and this statement
      which seem so conflicting: the subject is almost too awful to deal with. There is still one
      remarkable point to which the attention of those who discuss the dark affair should be
      directed:—the hand-basin in Sellis's room was half full of blood-stained water, and it is very
      clear that the miserable wretch himself could not have risen to wash his hands after
      the wound was inflicted in his throat. But let us not dwell on this horrible event: the mere
      mention of it makes me shudder."
"The King of Hanover has been, at least, unfortunate in many circumstances of his life, if
      not guilty," observed the duchess; "because his enemies have insisted strongly upon the
      suspicious nature of the incident of which we have been speaking."
"The more so, because it was known that the Duke of Cumberland had intrigued with the wife
      of Sellis," returned the countess. "As your grace declares, that exalted personage has been
      indeed unfortunate—if nothing more. In 1830 Lord Graves committed suicide; and the improper
      connexion existing between the Duke of Cumberland and Lady Graves was notorious."
"I well remember," said the duchess, "that the conduct of the Duke and Lady Graves was far
      from prudent, to say the least of it, after that melancholy event. Scarcely were the remains
      of the self-slain nobleman cold in the tomb, ere his widow and her illustrious lover were seen
      driving about together in the neighbourhood of Hampton Court, where Lady Graves had
      apartments."
"True," exclaimed the duchess. "But we have travelled a long way from our first topic—the
      Royal Marriage Act. We were speaking of its pernicious effects in respect to the family of
      George the Third. And that was a fine family, too! My deceased mother often expatiated—and her
      secret papers dwell at length—upon the charms of the princesses. Alas! how sorrowfully were
      they situated! In the bloom of youth—in the glow of health—with warm temperaments and ardent
      imaginations, which received encouragement from the voluptuous indolence of their lives—they
      were denied the privileges of the meanest peasant girl in the realm:—they were unable to form
      matrimonial connexions where their inclinations prompted them. The consequences were those
      which might have been anticipated: the honour of the princesses became sacrificed to illicit
      passion—passion which was still natural, although illicit! Those amours were productive of
      issue; but the offspring of none has created any sensation in the world, save in the instance
      of Captain Garth, the son of the Princess Sophia. Relative to the mysterious birth of that
      individual, the secret papers left by my mother—and the existence of which is even unknown to
      my husband—contain some strange, some startling facts. Conceive the embarrassment—the perilous
      nature of the situation in which the princess was suddenly involved—when, during a journey
      from London to some fashionable watering-place, she found herself overtaken with the pangs of
      premature maternity—she, who up to that moment had managed to conceal her condition even from
      the attendants upon her person! Then imagine this princess—a daughter of the sovereign of the
      realm—compelled to put up at a miserable road-side inn—forced to make a confidant of her lady
      in attendance, and obliged also to entrust her secret to the surgeon of the village where her
      child was born! But you shall read the narrative, with all its details, in my private
      papers."
"What opinion has your ladyship formed relative to the circumstances which led to the Bill
      of Pains and Penalties instituted against Queen Caroline, the spouse of George the Fourth?"
      inquired the duchess.
"I firmly believe that most unfortunate and most persecuted princess to have been
       completely innocent," answered the countess, with solemn emphasis. "From the first
      she was hateful to her husband.
      When the Earl of Malmsbury, who was sent to Germany to escort the Princess to
      England, arrived with her in London, the Prince of Wales repaired instantly to pay his
      respects to his intended bride. But scarcely had he set eyes on her when he conceived a
      feeling of ineffable dislike; and, turning towards the Earl, he said, 'Harris,[27] a glass of brandy—I am ill!' Your grace has heard of love
      at first sight: here was hatred at first sight. Every thing attending that marriage was
      inauspicious: for if the Princess had the misfortune to make an unfavourable impression on the
      Prince, his Royal Highness wantonly wounded her feelings by grossly manifesting his dislike
      towards her on all occasions. On the bridal night he drank so deeply that he fell on a sofa in
      the nuptial chamber, and there slept with his clothes on. But to pass over many years, let us
      come to the circumstances which led to the memorable trial of Queen Caroline. During her
      continental travels, Baron Bergami was presented to her. He was a man of honourable character,
      good family, but ruined fortunes. His condition excited the compassion of the generous-hearted
      Caroline; and she gave him a situation in her household. His conversation was fascinating; and
      he was frequently her companion inside the travelling chariot. Perhaps an English lady would
      have acted with more prudence; but your grace will remember that there is a wide distinction
      between our manners and customs and those of the Continent. We see improprieties in
      actions which foreigners view as harmless courtesies or innocent proofs of friendly interest.
       We also seem ready to meet suspicions of evil half-way: foreigners, with more
      generous frankness and candour, say, 'Evil be to him who evil thinks.' But the
      marriage was hateful to King George the Fourth; and he was determined to dissolve it. He was
      resolved to sacrifice his wife to his aversions. She was to be made a victim. Then commenced
      that atrocious subornation of perjured witnesses which gave a colour to the proceedings
      against the unfortunate Queen. Her slightest levities were tortured into proofs of guilt: her
      generosity towards Bergami was branded as an illicit passion. The witnesses made statements
      which proved how well they had been tutored: they over-acted their parts; and, in their zeal
      to serve a master who paid them for their perjury, they deposed to more than they could
      possibly have known, even if the main accusation had been true. The nation was indignant—for
       the people, your grace, are possessed of much chivalry and noble generosity of
      character. Then, too, rose the portentous voices of Denman and Brougham, calling upon the
      hidden accuser to come forth and confront his victim. Oh! it was a vile proceeding; and I, as
      a woman—as a wife, feel my blood boiling in my veins when I think of all the foul wrongs which
      were heaped upon the most injured of my sex!"
"That trial," said the duchess, who was naturally of a more cautious disposition than her
      companion,—"that trial was certainly a dark blot on the page which records the annals of
      George the Fourth's reign."
"Say rather, your grace," exclaimed the countess, "the blackest of the innumerable black
      deeds which characterised his existence. Before the accusation in respect to Bergami was ever
      thought of, a charge was concocted against that injured lady, and commissioners were appointed
      to investigate it. Thus, your grace perceives, her bad husband was determined to ruin her.
      That charge accused her of having been delivered of a male child at her abode at Blackheath;
      and the affair certainly appeared suspicious at first. But how triumphantly was it met? how
      readily was it refuted? how easily was it explained! The injured lady had taken a fancy to the
      infant of poor but respectable people named Archer, living in that neighbourhood; and she had
      undertaken to adopt and provide for the boy. The unfortunate Princess felt the necessity of
      loving something—since her own child was taken from her. Thus was her goodness towards William
      Archer converted into a weapon wherewithal to assail her in the most tender point. Her
      husband's agents circulated the most odious calumnies concerning her, and even improperly
      coupled her name with that of Sir Sydney Smith, the hero of Acre. But the Archer story fell to
      the ground; and the Bergami scandal was subsequently propagated with a zeal which evinced the
      determination of George the Fourth to ruin Caroline of Brunswick."[28]
There was a pause in the conversation.
The duchess, who was possessed of a strong inclination for the mysterious or scandalous
      narratives connected with the family of George the Third, was so impressed by the vehemence
      and confident emphasis with which her companion had denounced the profligacy of George the
      Fourth, that a species of awe—an undefined alarm came over her:—it suddenly appeared as if it
      were a sacrilege thus to canvass the character of that deceased monarch within the very palace
      where he himself had dwelt;—and she hesitated to make any remark or ask any question that
      might lead to a continuation of the same topic.
On her side, the countess—who was much older than the duchess, and more deeply initiated in
      the
      mysteries of Courts—had become plunged into a deep reverie; for she possessed a
      generous mind, and never could ponder upon the wrongs of the murdered Queen Caroline without
      experiencing the most profound indignation and sorrow.[29]
The reader may probably deem it somewhat extraordinary that ladies attached to the Court
      should thus freely discuss the most private affairs, and canvass the characters of deceased
      members of the Royal Family. But we can positively assert that nowhere are scandal and
      tittle-tattle more extensively indulged in, than amongst the members of that circle of
      courtiers and female sycophants who crowd about the sovereign.[30]
The conversation of the duchess and countess was not renewed on the present occasion; for
      while they were yet plunged each in the depths of her own particular meditations, the regal
      train entered the Ball Room.
And all this while Henry Holford remained concealed beneath the sofa!
Victoria leant upon the arm of her consort; and the illustrious party was preceded by the
      Lord Chamberlain and the Lord Steward. The Queen and the Prince proceeded to the reserved
      seats which were slightly elevated in a recess, and were covered with white satin embroidered
      in silver.
Then the magnificent Ball-Room presented a truly fairy spectacle. Plumes were waving,
      diamonds were sparkling, bright eyes were glancing, and music floated on the air. The spacious
      apartment was crowded with nobles and gentlemen in gorgeous uniforms or court-dresses; and
      with ladies in the most elegant attire that French fashions could suggest or French milliners
      achieve. All those striking or attractive figures, and all the splendours of their appearance,
      were multiplied by the brilliant mirrors to an illimitable extent.
The orchestra extended across one end of the Ball-Room; and the musicians had entered by a
      side-door almost at the same moment that the royal procession made its appearance.
In the rooms adjoining, the Corps of Gentlemen-at-arms and the Yeomen of the Guard were on
      duty; and in the hall the band of the Royal Regiment of Horse Guards was in attendance.
The Queen and the Prince danced in the first quadrille; and afterwards they indulged in
      their favourite waltz—the Frohsinn mein Ziel. At the termination of each
      dance the royal party passed into the Picture Gallery, where they promenaded amidst a
      wilderness of flowers and aromatic shrubs. Then indeed the odour-breathing exotics—the
      whispering leaves—the light of the pendent lamps, mellowed so as to give full effect to the
      portraits of those who were once famous or once beautiful—the ribboned or gartered nobles—the
      blaze of female loveliness—the streams of melody—the presence of all possible elements of
      splendour, harmony, and pleasure, combined to render the whole scene one of enchantment, and
      seemed to realize the most glowing and brilliant visions which oriental writers ever shadowed
      forth!
The dancing was renewed in the Ball-Room: and as the beauteous ladies of the court swam and
      turned in graceful mazes, it appeared as if the art had become elevated into the harmony of
      motion. Dancing there was something more than mechanical: it was a true, a worthy, and a
      legitimate sister of poetry and music.
At twelve o'clock the doors of the supper-room were thrown open; and in that gorgeous
      banqueting-hall the crimson draperies, the service of gold, and the massive table ornaments
      were lighted up by Chinese lanterns and silver candelabra of exquisite workmanship. A splendid
      row of gold cups was laid on each side of the table. On the right of each plate stood a
      decanter of water, a finger-glass half filled with tepid water, a champagne glass, a tumbler,
      and three wine-glasses. Numerous servants in magnificent liveries were in attendance. No one
      asked for any thing: the servants offered the various dishes, of which the guests partook or
      which they rejected according to their taste. No healths were drunk during the Queen's
      presence; nor was the ceremony of taking wine with each other observed—not even on the part of
      the gentleman with the lady whom he had handed into the room. The domestics whose especial
      duty it was to serve the wine, never filled a glass until it was quite empty; nor did any
      guest ask for wine, but, when the servant approached him, merely stated the kind of wine he
      chose.
After sitting for about an hour, the Queen rose, and was conducted to the Yellow
      Drawing-Room by
      Prince Albert, the guests all rising as the royal couple retired.
Then the servants filled the glasses, and the Lord Steward said, "The Queen!" The health was
      drunk standing, in silence, and with a gentle inclination of the head. In a few minutes
      afterwards the gentlemen conducted the ladies into the Yellow Drawing-Room, where coffee and
      liqueurs were served.
The harp, piano, and songs by some of the ladies, occupied another hour; at the expiration
      of which the guests took their departure.
Holford had now been concealed nearly five hours beneath the sofa in the ball-room; and he
      was cramped, stiff, and wearied. During that interval he had experienced a variety of
      emotions:—wonder at the strange revelations which he had heard from the lips of the
      countess,—ineffable delight in contemplating the person of his sovereign,—envy at the exalted
      prosperity of Prince Albert,—thrilling excitement at the fairy-like aspect of the enchanting
      dance,—sensations of unknown rapture occasioned by the soft strains of the music,—and
      boundless disgust for his own humble, obscure, and almost serf-like condition.
During those intervals when the royal party and the guests were promenading in the
      Picture-Gallery or were engaged in the supper-apartment and the drawing-room, Holford longed
      to escape from his hiding-place and retreat to the lumber-closet where he was in the habit of
      concealing himself on the occasion of his visits to the palace; but there were too many
      persons about to render such a step safe.
It was not, therefore, until a very late hour,—or rather an early one in the morning,—that
      he was able to enter the supper-room and help himself to some of the dainties left upon the
      board; having done which, he retreated to his nook in the most retired part of the palace.
</div></body></text></TEI>