<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="120">
CHAPTER CXX. THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER.
IT was nine o'clock in the morning.
Ellen was lying, pale and tearful, in her bed, by the side of which sate her father.
The past night had worked a fearful change in the old man: his countenance was haggard, his
      look desolate and forlorn.
At one moment his lips quivered as if with concentrated rage: at another he wiped tears from
      his eyes.
Ellen watched him with the deepest interest.
"And you persist in refusing to acquaint me with
       the name of him who has dishonoured you?" said the old man, in slow and measured
      terms.
"Oh! my dear father, why will you persist in torturing me?" exclaimed Ellen. "Do you think
      that I have not suffered enough?"
"Oh! I can well believe that you have suffered, Ellen—suffered profoundly," returned Monroe;
      "for you were reared in the ways of virtue; and you could not have fallen into those of crime
      without a remorse. Suffered! but how have I not suffered during the last few hours! When I
      read that fearful secret, I became a madman. I had but two ideas: my daughter was a mother,
      and her child's name was Richard! What could I think? I went straight to the room
      where our benefactor was sitting: I closed the door; I approached him, with the rage of a
      demon in my breast, and I said, 'Villain! is my daughter's honour the price of the
       hospitality which you have shown towards us?' He was thunderstruck; and I showed him the
      letter. He burst into tears, exclaiming, 'Could you believe me capable of such infernal
       atrocity?' Then we reasoned together; we conversed upon the subject; and his noble
      frankness of manner convinced me that I had erred—grossly erred! He implored me to allow the
      night to pass ere I revealed to you the appalling discovery which I had made: he dreaded the
      effects of my excited state of mind; he thought that rest would calm me. But there was no rest
      for me! I retired to my room; and there—when alone—I felt that I could not endure meditation.
      I came to your chamber; and then—O God! the doubt to which I had yet so fondly clung was
      dissipated."
"My dear father, if you knew all," said Ellen, weeping, "you would pity me—oh! you would
      pity me! Do not think that I surrendered myself to him who is the father of my child, in a
      moment of passion: do not imagine that the weakness was preceded by affection on my part for
      him who led me astray!"
"Unhappy girl, what mean you?" ejaculated Mr. Monroe. "Would you rob yourself of the only
      plea of extenuation which woman in such a case can offer? Speak, Ellen!"
"I will tell you all—that is, all I know," added Ellen, with a blush. "You remember that
      when we returned to live in that horrible court in Golden Lane, the second time we were
      reduced to poverty,—you remember what fearful privations we endured! At length our misery
      reached a point when it became intolerable; and one morning you set out with the determination
      of seeking relief from the bounty of Richard Markham."
"I well remember it," said Monroe. "Proceed."
"You can then call to mind the circumstance of my absence when you returned home to our
      miserable abode——"
"I do—I do: hours passed—I had gold—and you were absent!" ejaculated the old man, with
      feverish impatience.
"And when I returned home—late—" continued Ellen, her voice scarcely rising above a whisper,
      and her face, neck, and bosom suffused with burning blushes, "did I not bring you gold
      also?"
"Merciful heavens!" cried Monroe, starting from his seat; "say no more, Ellen—say no more—or
      I shall go mad! Oh, God! I comprehend it all! You went and sold yourself to some libertine for
      gold!"
The old man threw himself into his daughter's arms, and wept bitterly.
"Father—dear father, calm yourself," said Ellen.
"I could not see you want—I had no faith in the success of your appeal to him who has since
      been our benefactor—I thought that there was but one resource left;—but," she added,
      her eyes kindling with the fire of pride, while her father sank back into his seat, "I call my
      God to witness that I acted not thus for myself. Oh, no! death sooner should have been my
      fate. But you, my dear father, you wanted bread; you were starving; and that was more than I
      could bear! I sinned but once—but once; and never, never have I ceased to repent of
      that fatal step—for my one crime bore its fruit!"
Monroe was convulsed with grief. The tears trickled through the wrinkled hands with which he
      covered his venerable countenance; his voice was lost in agonising sobs, and all he could
      utter were the words: "Ellen, my daughter, it is for me to ask pardon of you!"
"No, say not so, dear father—say not so!" ejaculated Miss Monroe, throwing her arms around
      him, and kissing his forehead and his hands. "No, my dear father, it was not your fault, if
      misery drove me to despair. But now you perceive," she added, solemnly, "that I was more to be
      pitied than to be blamed; and—and," she murmured, the falsehood at such a moment almost
      suffocating her, "you understand why I cannot tell you who was the father of my child!"
There was something so terrible in the idea that a young, virtuous, and lovely girl had
      prostituted herself to the first unknown libertine who had bid a price for her
      charms,—something so appalling to a father in the thought that his only child had been urged
      by excess of misery and profound affection for him, to such a dismal fate, that Monroe seemed
      to sink under the blow!
For some time did his daughter vainly endeavour to solace him; and it was only when she
      herself began to rave and beat her bosom with anguish and in despair, that the old man was
      recalled to a sense of the necessity of calming his almost invincible emotions.
The father and daughter were at length restored to partial tranquillity by each other's
      endeavours at reciprocal consolation, and were commingling their tears together, when the door
      opened.
Markham, followed by Marian, entered the room.
But what was the surprise of Mr. Monroe—what was the joy of Ellen, when Marian advanced
      towards the bed, and presented the child to her mother!
"A parent must not be separated from her offspring," said Richard; "henceforth, Ellen, that
      infant must be nurtured by thee."
"Oh! good, generous friend, my more than brother!" exclaimed Ellen, with an ebullition of
      feeling that might almost be termed a wild paroxysm of joy; and she pressed the infant to her
      bosom.
"Richard," said Mr. Monroe, "you possess the noblest soul that ever yet blessed or adorned a
      human being."
Marian stooped over the bed, apparently to caress the sleeping infant, but in reality to
      whisper these words in Ellen's ears:—"Fear nothing: I was sent to fetch the child; and Mr.
      Wentworth will keep your secret inviolably."
Ellen cast a look of profound gratitude upon Marian; for this welcome announcement assured
      her that the surgeon would never admit the fact of possessing any clue, direct or indirect, to
      the father of the babe which she held in her arms.
In a few minutes, when she had recovered herself from the horrible alarm that had filled her
      mind lest
       Markham had himself been to see Mr. Wentworth, and had learnt that the father of
      the child was so far known that he had engaged to furnish the means for its support,—in a few
      minutes, we say, she turned to her father, and said: "Our benefactor's goodness deserves every
      explanation from us; tell him the extent of my misfortune—reveal to him the origin and cause
      of my shame—let nothing be concealed."
"Ellen," said Richard, "I know all! Forgive me, but I reached the door of your room when you
      were telling your sad tale to your father; and I paused—because I considered that it was
      improper to interrupt you at such a moment. And, if I overheard that affecting narrative, it
      was not a mean curiosity which made me stop to listen—it was the deep interest which I now
      more than ever feel in your behalf."
"And you do not despise me?" said Ellen, hanging down her head.
"Despise you!" ejaculated Richard, "I deeply sympathise with you! Oh, no! you are not
      criminal; you are unfortunate. Your soul is pure and spotless."
"But the world—what will the world think," said Ellen, "when I am seen with this babe in my
      arms?"
"The world has not treated you so well, Ellen," returned Markham, "that its smiles should be
      deeply valued. Let the world say what it will, it would be unnatural—inhuman—to separate a
      mother from her child; unless, indeed," he added, "it is your desire that that innocent should
      be nursed among strangers."
"Oh, no—no!" exclaimed Ellen. "But my unhappy situation shall not menace your tranquillity;
      nor shall the tongue of scandal gather food from the fact of the residence of an unwedded
      mother beneath your roof. I will retire, with my father, to some secluded spot——"
"Ellen," interrupted Markham, "were I to permit that arrangement, it would seem as if I were
      not sincere in the interest and commiseration, instead of the blame, which I ere now expressed
      concerning you. No: unless you and your father be wearied of the monotonous life which you
      lead with me, here will you both continue to dwell; and let the world indulge in its idle
      comments as it will."
"Your benevolence finds a reason for every good deed which you practise," said Ellen. "Ah!
      Richard, you should have been born a prince, with a princely fortune: how many thousands would
      then have been benefited by your boundless philanthropy."
"My own misfortunes have taught me to feel for those of others," answered Richard; "and if
      the world were more anxious than it is to substitute sympathy for vituperation, society would
      not be the compound of selfishness, slander, envy, and malignity, that it now is."
"It is settled, then, Richard," murmured Ellen, "that my babe shall henceforth experience a
      mother's care!"
And Ellen covered her child with kisses and with tears.
At that moment the infant awoke; and a smile played over its innocent countenance.
Ellen pressed it more closely and more fondly to her bosom.
</div></body></text></TEI>