<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Mysteries of London; [two volumes] by George W. M.
      Reynolds.</title><author>Reynolds, George William McArthur
     (1814-1879)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1846</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER XIX. MORNING.
THE orgie lasted throughout the night in the "boozing-ken." There were plenty of kind guests
      who, being flush of money, treated those that had none; and thus Tom the Cracksman, Dick
      Flairer, and Bill Bolter, were enabled to indulge, to their heart's content, in the
      adulterated liquors sold at the establishment.
The cold raw November morning was ushered in with a fine mizzling rain. The gas-lights were
      extinguished in the parlour; and the dawn of day fell upon countenances inflamed with
      debauchery, and rendered hideous by dirt and dark bristling beards.
That was a busy hour for the landlord and landlady of the "boozing-ken." The neighbours who
      "used the house," came in, one after another—male and female, to take their "morning." This
      signified their first dram.
Then was it that the "all sorts" was in great demand. Old clothesmen, sweeps, dustmen,
      knackers, crimps, and women of the town, crowded round the bar, imbibing the strange but
      potent compound. Even young boys and girls of tender age seemed as a matter of course to
      require the morning stimulant ere they commenced the avocations or business of the day. Matted
      hair, blear-eyes, grimy faces, pestiferous breaths, and hollow cheeks, combined with rags and
      tatters, were the characteristics of the wretches that thronged about the bar of that lowest
      of low drinking-dens.
Nothing is more revolting to the eye than the unwashed aspect of dissipation by the dingy
      light of the early dawn. The women had evidently jumped from their beds and huddled on their
      miserable attire without the slightest regard to decency, in order to lose no time in
      obtaining their morning dram. The men appeared as if they had slept in their clothes all
      night; and the pieces of straw in the coarse matted hair of many of them, plainly denoted of
      what materials their beds were made.
They all entered shivering, cold, depressed, and sullen. The dram instantly produced an
      extraordinary change in each. Artificial gaiety—a gaiety which developed itself in ribald
      jokes, profane oaths, and obscene talk—was diffused around. Those who could afford it indulged
      in a second and a third glass; and some tossed for pots of beer. The men lighted their pipes;
      and the place was impregnated with the narcotic fumes of the strongest and worst tobacco—that
      bastard opium of the poor.
Presently the policeman "upon that beat" lounged in, and was complimented by the landlady
      with a glass of her "best cordial gin." He seemed well acquainted with many of the individuals
      there, and laughed heartily at the jokes uttered in his presence. When he was gone, the
      inmates of the "boozing-ken" all declared, with one accord, "that he was the most niblike[48] blue-bottle in the entire force."
In the parlour there were several men occupied in warming beer, toasting herrings, and
      frying sausages. The tables were smeared over with a rag as black as a hat, by a dirty
      slip-shod drab of a girl; and with the same cloth she dusted the frame of wire-work which
      protected the dingy face of the huge Dutch clock. Totally regardless of her presence, the men
      continued their obscene and filthy discourse; and she proceeded with her work as coolly as if
      nothing offensive met her ears.
There are, thank God! thousands of British women who constitute the glory of their
      sex—chaste, virtuous, delicate-minded, and pure in thought and action,—beings who are but one
      remove from angels now, but who will be angels hereafter when they succeed to their
      inheritance of immortality. It must be to such as these that the eyes of the poet are turned
      when he eulogises, in glowing and impassioned language, the entire sex comprehended under the
      bewitching name of Woman! For, oh! how would his mind be shocked, were he to wander
      for a few hours amidst those haunts of vice and sinks of depravity which we have just
      described;—his spirit, towering on eagle-wing up into the sunny skies of poesy, would flutter
      back again to the earth, at the aspect of those foul and loathsome wretches, who, in the
      female shape, are found in the dwelling-places of poverty and crime!
But to continue.
Bill Bolter took leave of his companions at about eight o'clock in the morning, after a
      night of boisterous revelry; and rapidly retraced his steps homewards.
Field Lane was now swarming with life. The miserable little shops were all open; and their
      proprietors were busy in displaying their commodities to the best advantage. Here Jewesses
      were occupied in suspending innumerable silk handkerchiefs to wires and poles over their
      doors: there the "translators" of old shoes were employed in spreading their stock upon the
      shelves that filled the place where the windows ought to have been. In one or two low dark
      shops women were engaged in arranging herrings, stock-fish, and dried haddocks: in another,
      coals, vegetables, and oysters were exposed for sale; and not a few were hung with "old
      clothes as good as new." To this we may add that in the centre of the great metropolis of the
      mightiest empire in the world—in a city possessing a police which annually costs the nation
      thousands of pounds—and in a country whose laws are vaunted as being adapted to reach and
      baffle all degrees of crime—numbers of receivers of stolen goods were boldly, safely, and
      tranquilly exposing for sale the articles which their agents had "picked up" during the
      preceding night.
There was, however, nothing in the aspect of Field Lane at all new to the eyes of Bill
      Bolter. Indeed he merely went down that Jew's bazaar, in his way homewards, because he was
      anxious to purchase certain luxuries in the shape of red-herrings for his breakfast, he having
      borrowed a trifle of a friend at the "boozing-ken" to supply his immediate necessities.
When he arrived at his lodgings in Lower Union Court, he was assailed with a storm of
      reproaches, menaces, and curses, on the part of his wife, for having stayed all night at the
      "boozing ken." At first that cruel and remorseless man trembled—actually turned pale and
      trembled in the presence of the virago who thus attacked him. But at length his passion was
      aroused by her taunts and threats; and, after bandying some horrible abuse and foul epithets
      with the infuriate woman, he was provoked to blows. With one stroke of his enormous fist, he
      felled her to the ground, and then brutally kicked her as she lay almost senseless at his
      feet.
He then coolly sate down by the fire to cook his own breakfast, without paying the least
      attention to the two poor children, who were crying bitterly in that corner of the room where
      they had slept.
In a few minutes the woman rose painfully from
       the floor. Her features were distorted and her lips were livid with rage. She
      dared not, however, attempt to irritate her furious husband any farther: still her passion
      required a vent. She looked round, and seemed to reflect for a moment.
Then, in the next instant, all her concentrated rage burst upon the heads of her unhappy
      offspring.
With a horrible curse at their squalling, the woman leapt, like a tiger-cat, upon the poor
      little boy and girl. Harry, as usual, covered his sister with his own thin and emaciated form
      as well as he could; and a torrent of blows rained down upon his naked flesh. The punishment
      which that maddened wretch thus inflicted upon him, was horrible in the extreme.
A thousand times before that day had Polly Bolter treated her children with demoniac
      cruelty; and her husband had not attempted to interfere. On the present occasion, however, he
      took it into his head to meddle in the matter—for the simple reason that, having quarrelled
      with his wife, he hated her at the moment, and greedily availed himself of any opportunity to
      thwart or oppose her.
Starting from his chair, he exclaimed, "Come, now—I say, leave those children alone. They
      haven't done nothing to you."
"You mind your own business," returned the woman, desisting for an instant from her attack
      upon the boy, and casting a look of mingled defiance and contempt at her husband.
That woman's countenance, naturally ugly and revolting, was now absolutely frightful.
"I say, leave them children alone," cried Bill. "If you touch 'em again, I'll drop down on
      you."
"Oh, you coward! to hit a woman! I wish I was a man, I'd pay you off for this: and if I was,
      you wouldn't dare strike me."
"Mind what you say, Poll; I'm in no humour to be teased this morning. Keep your mawleys[49] off the kids, or I'm blessed if I don't do for you."
"Ugh—coward! This is the way I dare you;" and she dealt a tremendous blow upon her boy's
      shoulder.
The poor lad screamed piteously: the hand of his mother had fallen with the weight of a
      sledge hammer upon his naked flesh.
But that ferocious blow was echoed by another, at scarcely a moment's interval. The latter
      was dealt by the fist of Bill Bolter, and fell upon the back part of the ruthless mother's
      head with stunning force.
The woman fell forward, and struck her face violently against the corner of the deal
      table.
Her left eye came in contact with the angle of the board, and was literally crushed in its
      socket—an awful retribution upon her who only a few hours before was planning how to plunge
      her innocent and helpless daughter into the eternal night of blindness.
She fell upon the floor, and a low moan escaped her lips. She endeavoured to carry her right
      hand to her now sightless eye; but her strength failed her, and her arm fell lifeless by her
      side. She was dying.
The man was now alarmed, and hastened to raise her up. The children were struck dumb with
      unknown fears, and clasped each other in their little arms.
The woman recovered sufficient consciousness, during the two or three seconds which preceded
      the exhalation of her last breath, to glance with her remaining eye up into her husband's
      face. She could not, however, utter an articulate sound—not even another moan.
But no pen could depict, and no words describe, the deadly—the malignant—the fiendish hatred
      which animated her countenance as she thus met her husband's gaze.
The tigress, enveloped in the folds of the boa-constrictor, never darted such a glance of
      impotent but profound and concentrated rage upon the serpent that held it powerless in its
      fatal clasp.
She expired with her features still distorted by that horrible expression of vindictive
      spite.
A few moments elapsed before the man was aware that his wife was dead—that he had murdered
      her!
He supported her mechanically, as it were; for he was dismayed and appalled by the savage
      aspect which her countenance had assumed—that countenance which was rendered the more hideous
      by the bleeding eye-ball crushed in its socket.
At length he perceived that she was no more; and, with a terrible oath, he let her head drop
      upon the floor.
For a minute he stood and contemplated the corpse:—a whirlwind was in his brain.
The voices of his children aroused him from his reverie.
"Father, what's the matter with mother?" asked the boy, in a timid and subdued tone.
"Mother's hurt herself," said Fanny: "poor mother!"
"Look at mother's eye, father," added the boy: "do look at it! I'm sure something dreadful
      is the matter."
"Damnation!" ejaculated the murderer: and, after another minute's hesitation, he hurried to
      the door.
"O, father, father, don't leave us—don't go away from us!" cried the little boy, bursting
      into an agony of tears: "pray don't go away, father! I think mother's dead," added he with a
      glance of horror and apprehension towards the corpse: "so don't leave us, father—and I and
      Fanny will go out and beg, and do anything you like; only pray don't leave us; don't, don't,
      leave us!"
With profound anguish in his heart, the little fellow clung to his father's knees, and
      proffered his prayer in a manner the most ingenuous—the most touching.
The man paused, as if he knew not what to do.
His hesitation lasted but a moment. Disengaging himself from the arms of his child, he said
      in as kind a tone as he could assume—and that tone was kinder than any he had ever used
      before—"Don't be foolish, boy; I shall be back directly. I'm only going to fetch a doctor—I
      shan't be a minute."
"Oh, pray don't be long, father!" returned the boy, clasping his little hands imploringly
      together.
In another moment the two children were alone with the corpse of their mother; while the
      murderer was rapidly descending the stairs to escape from the contemplation of that scene of
      horror.
</div></body></text></TEI>