
CHAPTER XXIX
The Opening of the Eyes of Mrs. Chick
MISS TOX, all unconscious of any such rare appearances in connexion with Mr. Dombey's house,
     as scaffoldings and ladders, and men with their heads tied up in pocket-handkerchiefs, glaring
     in at the windows like flying genii or strange birds,—having breakfasted one morning at about
     this eventful period of time, on her customary viands; to wit, one French roll rasped, one egg
     new laid (or warranted to be), and one little pot of tea, wherein was infused one little silver
     scoopful of that herb on behalf of Miss Tox, and one little silver scoopful on behalf of the
     teapot—a flight of fancy in which good housekeepers delight; went up stairs to set forth the
     bird waltz on the harpsichord, to water and arrange the plants, to dust the nick-nacks, and
     according to her daily custom, to make her little drawing-room the garland of Princess's Place. 
Miss Tox endued herself with a pair of ancient gloves, like dead leaves, in which she was
     accustomed to perform these avocations—hidden from human sight at other times in a table
     drawer—and went methodically to work; beginning with the bird waltz; passing, by a natural
     association of ideas, to her bird—a very high-shouldered canary, stricken in years, and much
     rumpled, but a piercing singer, as Princess's Place well knew; taking, next in order, the
     little china ornaments, paper fly-cages, and so forth; and coming round, in good time, to the
     plants, which generally required to be snipped here and there with a pair of scissors, for some
     botanical reason that was very powerful with Miss Tox. 
Miss Tox was slow in coming to the plants, this morning. The weather was warm, the wind
     southerly; and there was a sigh of the summer-time in Princess's Place, that turned Miss Tox's
     thoughts upon the country. The pot-boy attached to the Princess's Arms had come out with a can
     and trickled water, in a flowing pattern, all over Princess's Place, and it gave the weedy
     ground a fresh scent—quite a growing scent, Miss Tox said. There was a tiny blink of sun
     peeping in from the great street round the corner, and the smoky sparrows hopped over it and
     back again, brightening as they passed: or bathed in it, like a stream, and became glorified
     sparrows, unconnected with chimneys. Legends in praise of Ginger-Beer, with pictorial
     representations of thirsty customers submerged in the effervescence, or stunned by the flying
     corks, were conspicuous in the window of the Princess's Arms. They were making late hay,
     somewhere out of town; and though the fragrance had a long way to come, and many counter
     fragrances to contend with among the dwellings of the poor (may God reward the worthy gentlemen
     who stickle for the Plague as part and parcel of the wisdom of our ancestors, and who do their
     little best to keep those dwellings miserable!), yet it was wafted faintly into Princess's
     Place, whispering of Nature and her wholesome air, as such things will, even unto prisoners and
     captives, and those who are desolate and oppressed, in very spite of aldermen and knights to
     boot: at whose sage nod—and how they nod!—the rolling world stands still! 
Miss Tox sat down upon the widow-seat, and thought of her good papa deceased—Mr. Tox, of the
     Customs Department of the public service; and of her childhood, passed at a seaport, among a
     considerable quantity of cold tar, and some rusticity. She fell into a softened remembrance of
     meadows, in old time, gleaming with buttercups, like so many inverted firmaments of golden
     stars; and how she had made chains of dandelion-stalks for youthful vowers of eternal
     constancy, dressed chiefly in nankeen; and how soon those fetters had withered and broken. 
Sitting on the window-seat, and looking out upon the sparrows and the blink of sun, Miss Tox
     thought likewise of her good mama deceased—sister to the owner of the powdered head and
     pigtail—of her virtues and her rheumatism. And when a man with bulgy legs, and a rough voice,
     and a heavy basket on his head that crushed his hat into a mere black muffin, came crying
     flowers down Princess's Place, making his timid little roots of daisies shudder in the
     vibration of every yell he gave, as though he had been an ogre, hawking little children, summer
     recollections were so strong upon Miss Tox, that she shook her head, and murmured she would be
     comparatively old before she knew it—which seemed likely. 
In her pensive mood, Miss Tox's thoughts went wandering on Mr. Dombey's track; probably
     because the Major had returned home to his lodgings opposite, and had just bowed to her from
     his window. What other reason could Miss Tox have for connecting Mr. Dombey with her summer
     days and dandelion fetters? Was he more cheerful? thought Miss Tox. Was he reconciled to the
     decrees of fate? Would he ever marry again? and if yes, whom? What sort of person now! 
A flush—it was warm weather—overspread Miss Tox's face, as, while entertaining these
     meditations, she turned her head, and was surprised by the reflection of her thoughtful image
     in the chimney-glass. Another flush succeeded when she saw a little carriage drive into
     Princess's Place, and make straight for her own door. Miss Tox arose, took up her scissors
     hastily, and so coming, at last, to the plants, was very busy with them when Mrs. Chick entered
     the room. 
`How is my sweetest friend!´ exclaimed Miss Tox, with open arms. 
A little stateliness was mingled with Miss Tox's sweetest friend's demeanour, but she kissed
     Miss Tox, and said, `Lucretia, thank you, I am pretty well. I hope you are the same. Hem!´ 
Mrs. Chick was labouring under a peculiar little monosyllabic cough; a sort of primer, or
     easy introduction to the art of coughing. 
`You call very early, and how kind that is, my dear!´ pursued Miss Tox. `Now, have you
     breakfasted?´ 
`Thank you, Lucretia,´ said Mrs. Chick. `I have. I took an early breakfast'—the good lady
     seemed curious on the subject of Princess's Place, and looked all round it as she spoke—`with
     my brother, who has come home.´ 
`He is better, I trust, my love,´ faltered Miss Tox. 
`He is greatly better, thank you. Hem!´ 
`My dear Louisa must be careful of that cough,´ remarked Miss Tox. 
`It's nothing,´ returned Mrs. Chick. `It's merely change of weather. We must expect change.´ 
`Of weather?´ asked Miss Tox, in her simplicity. 
`Of everything,´ returned Mrs. Chick. `Of course we must. It's a world of change. Any one
     would surprise me very much, Lucretia, and would greatly alter my opinion of their
     understanding, if they attempted to contradict or evade what is so perfectly evident. Change!´
     exclaimed Mrs. Chick, with severe philosophy. `Why, my gracious me, what is there that does
      not change! even the silkworm, who I am sure might be supposed not to trouble itself
     about such subjects, changes into all sorts of unexpected things continually.´ 
`My Louisa,´ said the mild Miss Tox, `is ever happy in her illustrations.´ 
`You are so kind, Lucretia,´ returned Mrs. Chick, a little softened, `as to say so, and to
     think so, I believe. I hope neither of us may ever have any cause to lessen our opinion of the
     other, Lucretia.´ 
`I am sure of it,´ returned Miss Tox. 
Mrs. Chick coughed as before, and drew lines on the carpet with the ivory end of her parasol.
     Miss Tox, who had experience of her fair friend, and knew that under the pressure of any slight
     fatigue or vexation she was prone to a discursive kind of irritability, availed herself of the
     pause, to change the subject. 
`Pardon me, my dear Louisa,´ said Miss Tox, `but have I caught sight of the manly form of Mr.
     Chick in the carriage?´ 
`He is there,´ said Mrs. Chick, `but pray leave him there. He has his newspaper, and would be
     quite contented for the next two hours. Go on with your flowers, Lucretia, and allow me to sit
     here and rest.´ 
`My Louisa knows,´ observed Miss Tox, `that between friends like ourselves, any approach to
     ceremony would be out of the question. Therefore—´ Therefore Miss Tox finished the sentence,
     not in words but action; and putting on her gloves again, which she had taken off, and arming
     herself once more with her scissors, began to snip and clip among the leaves with microscopic
     industry. 
`Florence has returned home also,´ said Mrs. Chick, after sitting silent for some time, with
     her head on one side, and her parasol sketching on the floor; `and really Florence is a great
     deal too old now, to continue to lead that solitary life to which she has been accustomed. Of
     course she is. There can be no doubt about it. I should have very little respect, indeed, for
     anybody who could advocate a different opinion. Whatever my wishes might be, I could
      not respect them. We cannot command our feelings to such an extent as that.´ 
Miss Tox assented, without being particular as to the intelligibility of the proposition. 
`If she's a strange girl,´ said Mrs. Chick, `and if my brother Paul cannot feel perfectly
     comfortable in her society, after all the sad things that have happened, and all the terrible
     disappointments that have been undergone, then, what is the reply? That he must make an effort.
     That he is bound to make an effort. We have always been a family remarkable for effort. Paul is
     at the head of the family; almost the only representative of it left—for what am I—I
     am of no consequence—´ 
`My dearest love,´ remonstrated Miss Tox. 
Mrs. Chick dried her eyes, which were, for the moment, overflowing; and proceeded: 
`And consequently he is more than ever bound to make an effort. And though his having done
     so, comes upon me with a sort of shock—for mine is a very weak and foolish nature; which is
     anything but a blessing I am sure; I often wish my heart was a marble slab, or a paving-stone—´ 
`My sweet Louisa,´ remonstrated Miss Tox again. 
`Still, it is a triumph to me to know that he is so true to himself, and to his name of
     Dombey; although, of course, I always knew he would be. I only hope,' said Mrs. Chick, after a
     pause, `that she may be worthy of the name too.´ 
Miss Tox filled a little green watering-pot from a jug, and happening to look up when she had
     done so, was so surprised by the amount of expression Mrs. Chick had conveyed into her face,
     and was bestowing upon her, that she put the little watering-pot on the table for the present,
     and sat down near it. 
`My dear Louisa,´ said Miss Tox, `will it be the least satisfaction to you, if I venture to
     observe in reference to that remark, that I, as a humble individual, think your sweet niece in
     every way most promising?´ 
`What do you mean, Lucretia?´ returned Mrs. Chick, with increased stateliness of manner. `To
     what remark of mine, my dear, do you refer?´ 
`Her being worthy of her name, my love.´ replied Miss Tox. 
`If,´ said Mrs. Chick, with solemn patience, `I have not expressed myself with clearness,
     Lucretia, the fault of course is mine. There is, perhaps, no reason why I should express myself
     at all, except the intimacy that has subsisted between us, and which I very much hope,
     Lucretia—confidently hope—nothing will occur to disturb. Because, why should I do anything
     else? There is no reason; it would be absurd. But I wish to express myself clearly, Lucretia;
     and therefore to go back to that remark, I must beg to say that it was not intended to relate
     to Florence, in any way.´ 
`Indeed!´ returned Miss Tox. 
`No,´ said Mrs. Chick shortly and decisively. 
`Pardon me, my dear,´ rejoined her meek friend; `but I cannot have understood it. I fear I am
     dull.´ 
Mrs. Chick looked round the room and over the way; at the plants, at the bird, at the
     watering-pot, at almost everything within view, except Miss Tox; and finally dropping her
     glance upon Miss Tox, for a moment, on its way to the ground, said, looking meanwhile with
     elevated eyebrows at the carpet: 
`When I speak, Lucretia, of her being worthy of the name, I speak of my brother Paul's second
     wife. I believe I have already said, in effect, if not in the very words I now use, that it is
     his intention to marry a second wife.´ 
Miss Tox left her seat in a hurry, and returned to her plants; clipping among the stems and
     leaves, with as little favour as a barber working at so many pauper heads of hair. 
`Whether she will be fully sensible of the distinction conferred upon her,´ said Mrs. Chick,
     in a lofty tone, `is quite another question. I hope she may be. We are bound to think well of
     one another in this world, and I hope she may be. I have not been advised with myself. If I had
     been advised with, I have no doubt my advice would have been cavalierly received, and therefore
     it is infinitely better as it is. I much prefer it as it is.´ 
Miss Tox, with head bent down, still clipped among the plants. Mrs. Chick, with energetic
     shakings of her own head from time to time, continued to hold forth, as if in defiance of
     somebody. 
`If my brother Paul had consulted with me, which he sometimes does—or rather, sometimes used
     to do; for he will naturally do that no more now, and this is a circumstance which I regard as
     a relief from responsibility,´ said Mrs. Chick, hysterically, `for I thank Heaven I am not
     jealous—´ here Mrs. Chick again shed tears: `if my brother Paul had come to me, and had said,
     “Louisa, what kind of qualities would you advise me to look out for, in a wife?” I should
     certainly have answered, “Paul, you must have family, you must have beauty, you must have
     dignity, you must have connexion.” Those are the words I should have used. You might have led
     me to the block immediately afterwards,´ said Mrs. Chick, as if that consequence were highly
     probable, `but I should have used them. I should have said, “Paul! You to marry a second time
     without family! You to marry without beauty! You to marry without dignity! You to marry without
     connexion!There is nobody in the world, not mad, who could dream of daring to entertain such a
     preposterous idea!”´ 
Miss Tox stopped clipping; and with her head among the plants, listened attentively. Perhaps
     Miss Tox thought there was hope in this exordium, and the warmth of Mrs. Chick. 
`I should have adopted this course of argument,´ pursued the discreet lady, `because I trust
     I am not a fool. I make no claim to be considered a person of superior intellect—though I
     believe some people have been extraordinary enough to consider me so; one so little humoured as
     I am, would very soon be disabused of any such notion; but I trust I am not a downright fool.
     And to tell me,´ said Mrs. Chick with ineffable disdain, `that my brother
     Paul Dombey could ever contemplate the possibility of uniting himself to anybody—I don't care
     who´—she was more sharp and emphatic in that short clause than in any other part of her
     discourse—`not possessing these requisites, would be to insult what understanding I
      have got, as much as if I was to be told that I was born and bred an elephant, which
     I may be told next,´ said Mrs. Chick, with resignation. `It wouldn't surprise me at
     all. I expect it.´ 
In the moment's silence that ensued, Miss Tox's scissors gave a feeble clip or two: but Miss
     Tox's face was still invisible, and Miss Tox's morning gown was agitated. Mrs. Chick looked
     sideways at her, through the intervening plants, and went on to say, in a tone of bland
     conviction, and as one dwelling on a point of fact that hardly required to be stated: 
`Therefore, of course my brother Paul has done what was to be expected of him, and what
     anybody might have foreseen he would do, if he entered the marriage state again. I confess it
     takes me rather by surprise, however gratifying; because when Paul went out of town I had no
     idea at all that he would form any attachment out of town, and he certainly had no attachment
     when he left here. However, it seems to be extremely desirable in every point of view. I have
     no doubt the mother is a most genteel and elegant creature, and I have no right whatever to
     dispute the policy of her living with them: which is Paul's affair, not mine—and as to Paul's
     choice, herself, I have only seen her picture yet, but that is beautiful indeed. Her name is
     beautiful too,´ said Mrs. Chick, shaking her head with energy, and arranging herself in her
     chair;`Edith is at once uncommon, as it strike me, and distinguished. Consequently, Lucretia, I
     have no doubt you will be happy to hear that the marriage is to take place immediately—of
     course, you will:´ great emphasis again: `and that you are delighted with this change in the
     condition of my brother, who has shown you a great deal of pleasant attention at various
     times.´ 
Miss Tox made no verbal answer, but took up the little watering-pot with a trembling hand,
     and looked vacantly round as if considering what article of furniture would be improved by the
     contents. The room door opening at this crisis of Miss Tox's feelings, she started, laughed
     aloud, and fell into the arms of the person entering; happily insensible alike of Mrs. Chick's
     indignant countenance and of the Major at his window over the way, who had his double-barrelled
     eye-glass in full action, and whose face and figure were dilated with Mephistophelean joy. 
Not so the expatriated Native, amazed supporter of Miss Tox's swooning form, who, coming
     straight upstairs, with a polite inquiry touching Miss Tox's health (in exact pursuance of the
     Major's malicious instructions), had accidentally arrived in the very nick of time to catch the
     delicate burden in his arms, and to receive the contents of the little watering-pot in his
     shoe; both of which circumstances, coupled with his consciousness of being closely watched by
     the wrathful Major, who had threatened the usual penalty in regard of every bone in his skin in
     case of any failure, combined to render him a moving spectacle of mental and bodily distress. 
For some moments, this afflicted foreigner remained clasping Miss Tox to his heart, with an
     energy of action in remarkable opposition to his disconcerted face, while that poor lady
     trickled slowly down upon him the very last sprinklings of the little watering-pot, as if he
     were a delicate exotic (which indeed he was), and might be almost expected to blow while the
     gentle rain descended. Mrs. Chick, at length recovering sufficient presence of mind to
     interpose, commanded him to drop Miss Tox upon the sofa and withdraw; and the exile promptly
     obeying, she applied herself to promote Miss Tox's recovery. 
But none of that gentle concern which usually characterises the daughters of Eve in their
     tending of each other; none of that freemasonry in fainting, by which they are generally bound
     together in a mysterious bond of sisterhood; was visible in Mrs. Chick's demeanour. Rather like
     the executioner who restores the victim to sensation previous to proceeding with the torture
     (or was wont to do so, in the good old times for which all true men wear perpetual mourning),
     did Mrs. Chick administer the smelling-bottle, the slapping on the hands, the dashing of cold
     water on the face, and the other proved remedies. And when, at length, Miss Tox opened her
     eyes, and gradually became restored to animation and consciousness, Mrs. Chick drew off as form
     a criminal, and reversing the precedent of the murdered king of Denmark, regarded her more in
     anger than in sorrow. 
`Lucretia!´ said Mrs. Chick. `I will not attempt to disguise what I feel. My eyes are opened,
     all at once. I wouldn't have believed this, if a Saint had told it to me.´ 
`I am foolish to give way to faintness,´ Miss Tox faltered. `I shall be better presently.´ 
`You will be better presently, Lucretia!´ repeated Mrs. Chick, with exceeding scorn. `Do you
     suppose I am blind? Do you imagine I am in my second childhood? No, Lucretia!I am obliged to
     you!´ 
Miss Tox directed an imploring, helpless kind of look towards her friend, and put her
     handkerchief before her face. 
`If any one had told me this yesterday,´ said Mrs. Chick, with majesty, `or even half-an-hour
     ago, I should have been tempted, I almost believe, to strike them to the earth, Lucretia Tox,
     my eyes are opened to you all at once. The scales:' here Mrs. Chick cast down an imaginary
     pair, such as are commonly used in grocers´ shops: `have fallen from my sight. The blindness of
     my confidence is past, Lucretia. It has been abused and played upon, and evasion is quite out
     of the question now, I assure you.´ 
`Oh! to what do you allude so cruelly, my love?´ asked Miss Tox, through her tears. 
`Lucretia,´ said Mrs. Chick, `ask your own heart. I must entreat you not to address me by any
     such familiar term as you have just used, if you please. I have some self-respect left, though
     you may think otherwise.´ 
`Oh, Louisa!´ cried Miss Tox. `How can you speak to me like that?´ 
`How can I speak to you like that?´ retorted Mrs. Chick, who, in default of having any
     particular argument to sustain herself upon, relied principally on such repetitions for her
     most withering effects. `Like that! You may well say like that, indeed!´ 
Miss Tox sobbed pitifully. 
`The idea!´ said Mrs. Chick, `of your having basked at my brother's fireside, like a serpent,
     and would yourself, through me, almost into his confidence, Lucretia, that you might, in
     secret, entertain designs upon him, and dare to aspire to contemplate the possibility of his
     uniting himself to you! Why, it is and idea,´ said Mrs. Chick, with sarcastic dignity,
     `the absurdity of which almost relieves its treachery.´ 
`Pray, Louisa,´ urged Miss Tox, `do not say such dreadful things.´ 
`Dreadful things!´ repeated Mrs. Chick. `Dreadful things!Is it not a fact, Lucretia, that you
     have just now been unable to command your feelings even before me, whose eyes you had so
     completely closed?´ 
`I have made no complaint,´ sobbed Miss Tox. `I have said nothing. If I have been a little
     overpowered by your news, Louisa, and have ever had any lingering thought that Mr. Dombey was
     inclined to be particular towards me, surely you will not condemn me.´ 
`She is going to say.´ said Mrs. Chick, addressing herself to the whole of the furniture, in
     a comprehensive glance of resignation and appeal, `She is going to say—I know it—that I have
     encouraged her!´ 
`I don't wish to exchange reproaches, dear Louisa,´ sobbed Miss Tox. `Nor do I wish to
     complain. But, in my own defence—´ 
`Yes,´ cried Mrs. Chick, looking round the room with a prophetic smile, `that's what she's
     going to say. I knew it. You had better say it. Say it openly! Be open, Lucretia Tox,´ said
     Mrs. Chick, with desperate sternness, `whatever you are.´ 
`In my own defence,´ faltered Miss Tox, `and only in my own defence against your unkind
     words, my dear Louisa, I would merely ask you if you haven't often favoured such a fancy, and
     even said it might happen, for anything we could tell?´ 
`There is a point,´ said Mrs. Chick, rising, not as if she were going to stop at the floor,
     but as if she were about to soar up, high, into her native skies, `beyond which endurance
     becomes ridiculous, if not culpable. I can bear much; but not too much. What spell was on me
     when I came into this house this day, I don't know; but I had a presentiment—a dark
     presentiment,´ said Mrs. Chick, with a shiver, `that something was going to happen. Well may I
     have had that foreboding, Lucretia, when my confidence of many years is destroyed in an
     instant, when my eyes are opened all at once, and when I find you revealed in your true
     colours. Lucretia, I have been mistaken in you. It is better for us both that this subject
     should end here. I wish you well, and I shall ever wish you well. But, as an individual who
     desires to be true to herself in her own poor position, whatever that position may be, or may
     not be—and as the sister of my brother—and as the sister-in-law of my brother's wife—and as a
     connexion by marriage of my brother's wife's mother—may I be permitted to add, as a Dombey?—I
     can wish you nothing else but good morning.´ 
These words, delivered with cutting suavity, tempered and chastened by a lofty air of moral
     rectitude, carried the speaker to the door. There she inclined her head in a ghostly and
     statue-like manner, and so withdrew to her carriage, to seek comfort and consolation in the
     arms of Mr. Chick her lord. 
Figuratively speaking, that is to say: for the arms of Mr. Chick were full of his newspaper.
     Neither did that gentleman address his eyes towards his wife otherwise than by stealth. Neither
     did he offer any consolation whatever. In short, he sat reading, and humming fag ends of tunes,
     and sometimes glancing furtively at her without delivering himself of a word, good, bad, or
     indifferent. 
In the meantime Mrs. Chick sat swelling and bridling, and tossing her head, as if she were
     still repeating that solemn formula of farewell to Lucretia Tox. At length, she said aloud, `Oh
     the extent to which her eyes had been opened that day!´ 
`To which your eyes have been opened,, my dear!´ repeated Mr. Chick. 
`Oh, don't talk to me!´ said Mrs. Chick. `If you can bear to see me in this state, and not
     ask me what the matter is, you had better hold your tongue for ever.´ 
`What is the matter, my dear?´ asked Mr. Chick. 
`To think,´ said Mrs. Chick, in a state of soliloquy, `that she should ever have conceived
     the base idea of connecting herself with our family by a marriage with Paul! To think that when
     she was playing at horses with that dear child who is now in his grave—I never liked it at the
     time—she should have been hiding such a double-faced design! I wonder she was never afraid that
     something would happen to her. She is fortunate if nothing does.´ 
`I really thought, my dear,´ said Mr. Chick slowly, after rubbing the bridge of his nose for
     some time with his newspaper, `that you had gone on the same tack yourself, all along, until
     this morning; and had thought it would be a convenient thing enough, if it could have been
     brought about.´ 
Mrs. Chick instantly burst into tears, and told Mr. Chick that if he wished to trample upon
     her with his boots, he had better do it. 
`But with Lucretia Tox I have done,´ said Mrs. Chick, after abandoning herself to her
     feelings for some minutes, to Mr. Chick's great terror. `I can bear to resign Paul's confidence
     in favour of one who, I hope and trust, may be deserving of it, and with whom he has a perfect
     right to replace poor Fanny if he chooses; I can bear to be informed, in Paul's cool manner, of
     such a change in his plans, and never to be consulted until all is settled and determined; but
     deceit I can not bear, and with Lucretia Tox I have done. It is better as it is,´ said
     Mrs. Chick, piously; `much better. It would have been a long time before I could have
     accommodated myself comfortably with her, after this; and I really don't know, as Paul is going
     to be very grand, and these are people of condition, that she would have been quite
     presentable, and might not have compromised myself. There's a providence in everything;
     everything works for the best; I have been tried to-day, but, upon the whole I don't regret
     it.´ 
In which Christian spirit, Mrs. Chick dried her eyes, and smoothed her lap, and sat as became
     a person calm under a great wrong. Mr. Chick, feeling his unworthiness no doubt, took an early
     opportunity of being set down at a street corner and walking away, whistling, with his
     shoulders very much raised, and his hands in his pockets. 
While poor excommunicated Miss Tox, who, if she were a fawner and toad-eater, was at least an
     honest and a constant one, and had ever borne a faithful friendship towards her impeacher, and
     had been truly absorbed and swallowed up in devotion to the magnificence of Mr. Dombey—while
     poor excommunicated Miss Tox watered her plants with her tears, and felt that it was winter in
     Princess's Place. 
