
CHAPTER XX
Mr. Dombey goes upon a Journey
`MR. DOMBEY, Sir,´ said Major Bagstock, `Joey B. is not in general a man of sentiment, for
     Joseph is tough. But Joe has his feelings, Sir, and when they are awakened—Damme, Mr.
     Dombey,´ cried the Major with sudden ferocity, `this is weakness, and I won't submit to it!´ 
Major Bagstock delivered himself of these expressions on receiving Mr. Dombey as his guest at
     the head of his own staircase in Princess's Place. Mr. Dombey has come to breakfast with the
     Major, previous to their setting forth on their trip; and the ill-starred Native had already
     undergone a world of misery arising out of the muffins, while, in connexion with the general
     question of boiled eggs, life was a burden to him. 
`It is not for an old soldier of the Bagstock breed,´ observed the Major, relapsing into a
     mild state, `to deliver himself up, a prey to his own emotions; but—damme, Sir,´ cried the
     Major, in another spasm of ferocity, `I condole with you!´ 
The Major's purple visage deepened in its hue, and the Major's lobster eyes stood out in
     bolder relief, as he shook Mr. Dombey by the hand, imparting to that peaceful action as defiant
     a character as if it had been the prelude to his immediately boxing Mr. Dombey for a thousand
     pounds a side and the championship of England. With a rotatory motion of his head, and a wheeze
     very like the cough of a horse, the Major then conducted his visitor to the sitting-room, and
     there welcomed him (having now composed his feelings) with the freedom and frankness of a
     travelling companion. 
`Dombey,´ said the Major, `I'm glad to see you. I'm proud to see you. There are not many men
     in Europe to whom J. Bagstock would say that—for Josh is blunt. Sir: it's his nature—but Joey
     B. is proud to see you, Dombey.´ 
`Major,´ returned Mr. Dombey, `you are very obliging.´ 
`No, Sir,´ said the Major, `Devil a bit! That's not my character. If that had been Joe's
     character. Joe might have been, by this time, Lieutenant-General Sir Joseph Bagstock, K.C.B.,
     and might have received you in very different quarters. You don't know old Joe yet, I find. But
     this occasion, being special, is a source of pride to me. By the Lord, Sir,´ said the Major
     resolutely, `it's an honour to me!´ 
Mr. Dombey, in his estimation of himself and his money, felt that this was very true, and
     therefore did not dispute the point. But the instinctive recognition of such a truth by the
     Major, and his plain avowal of it, were very agreeable. It was a confirmation to Mr. Dombey, if
     he has required any, of his not being mistaken in the Major. It was an assurance to him that
     his power extended beyond his own immediate sphere; and that the Major, as an officer and a
     gentleman, had a no less becoming sense of it, than the beadle of the Royal Exchange. 
And if it were ever consolatory to know this, or the like of this, it was consolatory then,
     when the impotence of his will, the instability of his hopes, the feebleness of wealth, had
     been so direfully impressed upon him. What could it do, his boy had asked him. Sometimes,
     thinking of the baby question, he could hardly forbear inquiring, himself, what could
     it do indeed: what had it done? 
But these were lonely thoughts, bred late at night in the sullen despondency and gloom of his
     retirement, and pride easily found its reassurance in many testimonies to the truth, as
     unimpeachable and precious as the Major's. Mr. Dombey, in his friendlessness, inclined to the
     Major. It cannot be said that he warmed towards him, but he thawed a little. The Major had had
     some part—and not too much—in the days by the seaside. He was a man of the world, and knew some
     great people. He talked much, and told stories; and Mr. Dombey was disposed to regard him as a
     choice spirit who shone in society, and who had not that poisonous ingredient of poverty with
     which choice spirits in general are too much adulterated. His station was undeniable.
     Altogether the Major was a creditable companion, well accustomed to a life of leisure, and to
     such places as that they were about to visit, and having an air of gentlemanly ease about him
     that mixed well enough with his own City character, and did not compete with it at all. If Mr.
     Dombey had any lingering idea that the Major, as a man accustomed, in the way of his calling,
     to make light of the ruthless had that hand lately crushed his hopes, might unconsciously
     impart some useful philosophy to him, and scare away his weak regrets, he hid it from himself,
     and left it lying at the bottom of his pride, unexamined. 
`Where is my scoundrel?´ said the Major, looking wrathfully round the room. 
The Native, who had no particular name, but answered to any vituperative epithet, presented
     himself instantly at the door and ventured to come no nearer. 
`You villain!´ said the choleric Major, `where's the breakfast?´ 
The dark servant disappeared in search of it, and was quickly heard reascending the stairs in
     such a tremulous state, that the plates and dishes on the tray he carried, trembling
     sympathetically as he came, rattled again, all the way up. 
`Dombey,´ said the Major, glancing at the Native as he arranged the table, and encouraging
     him with an awful shake of his fist when he upset a spoon, `here is a devilled grill, a savoury
     pie, a dish of kidneys, and so forth. Pray sit down. Old Joe can give you nothing but camp
     fare, you see.´ 
`Very excellent fare, Major,´ replied his guest; and not in mere politeness either; for the
     Major always took the best possible care of himself, and indeed ate rather more of rich meats
     than was good for him, insomuch that his Imperial complexion was mainly referred by the faculty
     to that circumstance. 
`You have been looking over the way, Sir,´ observed the Major. `Have you seen our friend?´ 
`You mean Miss Tox,´ retorted Mr. Dombey. `No.´ 
`Charming woman, Sir,´ said the Major, with a fat laugh rising in his short throat, and
     nearly suffocating him. 
`Miss Tox is a very good sort of person, I believe,´ replied Mr. Dombey. 
The haughty coldness of the reply seemed to afford Major Bagstock infinite delight. He
     swelled and swelled, exceedingly: and even laid down his knife and fork for a moment, to rub
     his hands. 
`Old Joe, Sir,´ said the Major, `was a bit of a favourite in that quarter once. But Joe has
     had his day. J. Bagstock is extinguished—outrivalled—floored, Sir. I tell you what, Dombey.´
     The Major paused in his eating, and looked mysteriously indignant. `That's a de-vilish
     ambitious woman, Sir.´ 
Mr. Dombey said `Indeed?´ with frigid indifference: mingled perhaps with some contemptuous
     incredulity as to Miss Tox having the presumption to harbour such a superior quality. 
`That woman, Sir,´ said the Major, `is, in her way, a Lucifer. Joey B. has had his day, Sir,
     but he keeps his eyes. He sees, does Joe. His Royal Highness the late Duke of York observed of
     Joey, at a levee, that he saw.´ 
The Major accompanied this with such a look, and, between eating, drinking, hot tea, devilled
     grill, muffins, and meaning, was altogether so swollen and inflamed about the head, that even
     Mr. Dombey showed some anxiety for him. 
`That ridiculous old spectacle, Sir,´ pursued the Major, `aspires. She aspires sky-high, Sir.
     Matrimonially, Dombey.´ 
`I am sorry for her,´ said Mr. Dombey. 
`Don't say that, Dombey,´ returned the Major in a warning voice. 
`Why should I not, Major?´ said Mr. Dombey. 
The Major gave no answer but the horse's cough, and went on eating vigorously. 
`She has taken an interest in your household,´ said the Major, stopping short again, `and has
     been a frequent visitor at your house for some time now.´ 
`Yes,´ replied Mr. Dombey with great stateliness, `Miss Tox was originally received there, at
     the time of Mrs. Dombey's death, as a friend of my sister's; and being a well-behaved person,
     and showing a liking for the poor infant, she was permitted—I may say encouraged—to repeat her
     visits with my sister, and gradually to occupy a kind of footing of familiarity in the family.
     I have,' said Mr. Dombey, in the tone of a man who was making a great and valuable concession,
     `I have a respect for Miss Tox. She has been so obliging as to render many little services in
     my house: trifling and insignificant services perhaps, Major, but not to be disparaged on that
     account: and I hope I have had the good fortune to be enabled to acknowledge them by such
     attention and notice as it has been in my power to bestow. I hold myself indebted to Miss Tox,
     Major,´ added Mr. Dombey, with a slight wave of his hand, `for the pleasure of your
     acquaintance.´ 
`Dombey,´ said the Major, warmly: `no! No, Sir! Joseph Bagstock can never permit that
     assertion to pass uncontradicted. Your knowledge of old Joe, Sir, such as he is, and old Joe's
     knowledge of you, Sir, had its origin in a noble fellow, Sir—in a great creature, Sir. Dombey!´
     said the Major, with a struggle which it was not very difficult to parade, his whole life being
     a struggle against all kinds of apoplectic symptoms, `we knew each other through your boy.´ 
Mr. Dombey seemed touched, as it is not improbable the Major designed he should be, by this
     allusion. He looked down and sighed: and the Major, rousing himself fiercely, again said, in
     reference to the state of mind into which he felt himself in danger of falling, that this was
     weakness, and nothing should induce him to submit to it. 
`Our friend has a remote connexion with that event,´ said the Major, `and all the credit that
     belongs to her, J. B. is willing to give her, Sir. Notwithstanding which, Ma'am,´ he added,
     raising his eyes from his plate, and casting them across Princess's Place, to where Miss Tox
     was at that moment visible at her window watering her flowers, `you're a scheming jade, Ma'am,
     and your ambition is a piece of monstrous impudence. If it only made yourself ridiculous,
     Ma'am,' said the Major, rolling his head at the unconscious Miss Tox, while his starting eyes
     appeared to make a leap towards her, `you might do that to your heart's content, Ma'am, without
     any objection, I assure you, on the part of Bagstock.' Here the Major laughed frightfully up in
     the tips of his ears and in the veins of his head. `But when, Ma'am,´ said the Major, `you
     compromise other people, and generous, unsuspicious people too, as a repayment for their
     condescension, you stir the blood of old Joe in his body.´ 
`Major,´ said Mr. Dombey, reddening, `I hope you do not hint at anything so absurd on the
     part of Miss Tox as—´ 
`Dombey,´ returned the Major, `I hint at nothing. But Joey B. has lived in the world, Sir:
     lived in the world with his eyes open, Sir, and his ears cocked: and Joe tells you, Dombey,
     that there's a de-vilish artful and ambitious woman over the way.´ 
Mr. Dombey involuntarily glanced over the way; and an angry glance he sent in that direction,
     too. 
`That's all on such a subject that shall pass the lips of Joseph Bagstock,´ said the Major
     firmly. `Joe is not a talebearer, but there are times when he must speak, when he will
     speak!—confound your arts, Ma'am,´ cried the Major, again apostrophising his fair neighbour,
     with great ire,—`when the provocation is too strong to admit of his remaining silent.´ 
The emotion of this outbreak threw the Major into a paroxysm of horse's coughs, which held
     him for a long time. On recovering he added: 
`And now, Dombey, as you have invited Joe—old Joe, who has no other merit, Sir, but that he
     is tough and hearty—to be your guest and guide at Leamington, command him in any way you
     please, and he is wholly yours. I don't know, Sir,' said the Major, wagging his double chin
     with a jocose air, `what it is you people see in Joe to make you hold him in such great
     request, all of you; but this I know, Sir, that if he wasn't pretty tough, and obstinate in his
     refusals, you'd kill him among you with your invitations and so forth, in double-quick time.´ 
Mr. Dombey, in a few words, expressed his sense of the preference he received over those
     other distinguished members of society who were clamouring for the possession of Major
     Bagstock. But the Major cut him short by giving him to understand that he followed his own
     inclinations, and that they had risen up in a body and said with one accord, `J. B., Dombey is
     the man for you to choose as a friend.´ 
The Major being by this time in a state of repletion, with essence of savoury pie oozing out
     at the corners of his eyes, and devilled grill and kidneys tightening his cravat: and the time
     moreover approaching for the departure of the railway train to Birmingham, by which they were
     to leave town: the Native got him into his great-coat with immense difficulty, and buttoned him
     up until his face looked staring and gasping, over the top of that garment, as if he were in a
     barrel. The Native then handed him separately, and with a decent interval between each supply,
     his wash-leather gloves, his thick stick, and his hat; which latter article the Major wore with
     a rakish air on one side of his head, by way of toning down his remarkable visage. The Native
     had previously packed, in all possible and impossible parts of Mr. Dombey's chariot, which was
     in waiting, an unusual quantity of carpet-bags and small portmanteaus, no less apoplectic in
     appearance than the Major himself: and having filled his own pockets with Seltzer water, East
     India sherry, sandwiches, shawls, telescopes, maps, and newspapers, any or all of which light
     baggage the Major might require at any instant of the journey, he announced that everything was
     ready. To complete the equipment of this unfortunate foreigner (currently believed to be a
     prince in his own country), when he took his seat in the rumble by the side of Mr. Towlinson, a
     pile of the Major's cloaks and great-coats was hurled upon him by the landlord, who aimed at
     him from the pavement with those great missiles like a Titan, and so covered him up, that he
     proceeded, in a living tomb, to the railroad station. 
But before the carriage moved away, and while the Native was in the act of sepulture, Miss
     Tox appearing at her window, waved a lily-white handkerchief. Mr. Dombey received this parting
     salutation very coldly—very coldly even for him—and honouring her with the slightest possible
     inclination of his head, leaned back in the carriage with a very discontented look. His marked
     behaviour seemed to afford the Major (who was all politeness in his recognition of Miss Tox)
     unbounded satisfaction; and he sat for a long time afterwards, leering, and choking, like an
     over-fed Mephistopheles. 
During the bustle of preparation at the railway, Mr. Dombey and the major walked up and down
     the platform side by side; the former taciturn and gloomy, and the latter entertaining him, or
     entertaining himself, with a variety of anecdotes and reminiscences, in most of which Joe
     Bagstock was the principal performer. Neither of the two observed that in the course of these
     walks, they attracted the attention of a working man who was standing near the engine, and who
     touched his hat every time they passed; for Mr. Dombey habitually looked over the vulgar herd,
     not at them; and the Major was looking, at the time, into the core of one of his stories. At
     length, however, this man stepped before them as they turned round, and pulling his hat off,
     and keeping it off, ducked his head to Mr. Dombey. 
`Beg your pardon, Sir,´ said the man, `but I hope you're a doin´ pretty well, Sir.´ 
He was dressed in a canvass suit abundantly besmeared with coal-dust and oil, and cinders in
     his whiskers, and a smell of half-slaked ashes all over him. He was not a bad-looking fellow,
     nor even what could be fairly called a dirty-looking fellow, in spite of this; and, in short,
     he was Mr. Toodle, professionally clothed. 
`I shall have the honour of stokin´ of you down, Sir,´ said Mr. Toodle. `Beg your pardon,
     Sir. I hope you find yourself a coming round?´ 
Mr. Dombey looked at him, in return for his tone of interest, as if a man like that would
     make his very eyesight dirty. 
`'Scuse the liberty, Sir,´ said Toodle, seeing he was not clearly remembered, `but my wife
     Polly, as was called Richards in your family—´ 
A change in Mr. Dombey's face, which seemed to express recollection of him, and so it did,
     but it expressed in a much stronger degree and angry sense of humiliation, stopped Mr. Toodle
     short. 
`Your wife wants money, I suppose,´ said Mr. Dombey, putting his hand in his pocket, and
     speaking (but that he always did) haughtily. 
`No thank'ee, Sir,´ returned Toodle, `I can't say she does. I don't.´ 
Mr. Dombey was stopped short now in his turn: and awkwardly: with his hand in his pocket. 
`No, Sir,´ said Toodle, turning his oilskin cap round and round; `we're a doin' pretty well,
     Sir; we haven't no cause to complain in the worldly way, Sir. We've had four more since then,
     Sir, but we rubs on.´ 
Mr. Dombey would have rubbed on to his own carriage, though in so doing he had rubbed the
     stoker underneath the wheels; but his attention was arrested by something in connexion with the
     cap still going slowly round and round in the man's hand. 
`We lost one babby,´ observed Toodle, `there's no denyin.´ 
`Lately,´ added Mr. Dombey, looking at the cap. 
`No, Sir, up'ard of three years ago, but all the rest is hearty. And in the matter o´
     readin', Sir,´ said Toodle, ducking again, as if to remind Mr. Dombey of what had passed
     between them on that subject long ago, `them boys o´ mine, they learned me, among 'em, arter
     all. They've made a wery tolerable scholar of me, Sir, them boys.´ 
`Come, Major!´ said Mr. Dombey. 
`Beg your pardon, Sir,´ resumed Toodle, taking a step before them and deferentially stopping
     them again, still cap in hand: `I wouldn't have troubled you with such a pint except as a way
     of gettin´ in the name of my son Biler—christened Robin—him as you was so good as to make a
     Charitable Grinder on.´ 
`Well, man,´ said Mr. Dombey in his severest manner. `What about him?´ 
`Why, Sir,´ returned Toodle, shaking his head with a face of great anxiety and distress, `I'm
     forced to say, Sir, that he's gone wrong.´ 
`He has gone wrong, has he?´ said Mr. Dombey, with a hard kind of satisfaction. 
`He has fell into bad company, you see, gentlemen,´ pursued the father, looking wistfully at
     both, and evidently taking the Major into the conversation with the hope of having his
     sympathy. `He has got into bad ways. God send he may come to again, gentlemen, but he's on the
     wrong track now! You could hardly be off hearing of it somehow, Sir,´ said Toodle, again
     addressing Mr. Dombey individually; `and it's better I should out and say my boy's gone rather
     wrong. Polly's dreadful down about it, genelmen,´ said Toodle with the same dejected look, and
     another appeal to the Major. 
`A son of this man's whom I caused to be educated, Major,´ said Mr. Dombey, giving him his
     arm. `The usual return!´ 
`Take advice from plain old Joe, and never educate that sort of people, Sir,' returned the
     Major. `Damme, Sir, it never does! I always fails!´ 
The simple father was beginning to submit that he hoped his son, the quondam Grinder, huffed
     and cuffed, and flogged and badged, and taught, as parrots are, by a brute jobbed into his
     place of schoolmaster with as much fitness for it as a hound, might not have been educated on
     quite a right plan in some undiscovered respect, when Mr. Dombey angrily repeating `The usual
     return!´ led the Major away. And the Major being heavy to hoist into Mr. Dombey's carriage
     elevated in midair, and having to stop and swear that he would flay the Native alive, and break
     very bone in his skin, and visit other physical torments upon him, every time he couldn't get
     his foot on the step, and fell back on that dark exile, had barely time before they started to
     repeat hoarsely that it would never do: that it always failed: and that if he were to educate
     `his own vagabond,´ he would certainly be hanged. 
Mr. Dombey assented bitterly; but there was something more in his bitterness, and in his
     moody way of falling back in the carriage, and looking with knitted brows at the changing
     objects without, that the failure of that noble educational system administered by the
     Grinders´ Company. He had seen upon the man's rough cap a piece of new crape, and he had
     assured himself, from his manner and his answers, that he wore it for his son. 
So! from high to low, at home or abroad, from Florence in his great house to the coarse churl
     who was feeding the fire then smoking before them, every one set up some claim or other to a
     share in his dead boy, and was a bidder against him!Could he ever forget how that woman had
     wept over his pillow, and called him her own child! or how he, waking from his sleep, had asked
     for her, and had raised himself in his bed and brightened when she came in! 
To think of this presumptuous raker among coals and ashes going on before there, with his
     sign of mourning! To think that he dared to enter, even by a common show like that, into the
     trial and disappointment of a proud gentleman's secret heart! To think that this lost child,
     who was to have divided with him his riches, and his projects, and his power, and allied with
     whom he was to have shut out all the world as with a double door of gold, should have let in
     such a herd to insult him with their knowledge of his defeated hopes, and their boasts of
     claiming community of feeling with himself, so far removed: if not of having crept into the
     place wherein he would have lorded it, alone! 
He found no pleasure or of relief in the journey. Tortured by these thoughts he carried
     monotony with him, through the rushing landscape, and hurried headlong, not through a rich and
     varied country, but a wilderness of blighted plans and gnawing jealousies. The very speed at
     which the train was whirled along mocked the swift course of the young life that had been borne
     away so steadily and so inexorably to its foredoomed end. The power that forced itself upon its
     iron way—its own—defiant of all paths and roads, piercing through the heart of every obstacle,
     and dragging living creatures of all classes, ages, and degrees behind it, was a type of the
     triumphant monster, Death. 
Away, with a shriek, and a roar, and a rattle, from the town, burrowing among the dwellings
     of men and making the streets hum, flashing out into the meadows for a moment, mining in
     through the damp earth, booming on in darkness and heavy air, bursting out again into the sunny
     day so bright and wide; away, with a shriek, and a roar, and a rattle, through the fields,
     through the woods, through the corn, through the hay, through the chalk, through the mould,
     through the clay, through the rock, among objects close at hand and almost in the grasp, ever
     flying from the traveller, and a deceitful distance ever moving slowly within him: like as in
     the track of the remorseless monster, Death! 
Through the hallow, on the height, by the heath, by the orchard, by the park, by the garden,
     over the canal, across the river, where the sheep are feeding, where the mill is going, where
     the barge is floating, where the dead are lying, where the factory is smoking, where the stream
     is running, where the village clusters, where the great cathedral rises, where the bleak moor
     lies, and the wild breeze smooths or ruffles it at its inconstant will; away, with a shriek,
     and a roar, and a rattle, and no trace to leave behind but dust and vapour: like as in the
     track of the remorseless monster, Death! 
Breasting the wind and light, the shower and sunshine, away, and still away, it rolls and
     roars, fierce and rapid, smooth and certain, and great works and massive bridges, crossing up
     above, fall like a beam of shadow an inch broad, upon the eye, and then are lost. Away, and
     still away, onward and onward ever: glimpses of cottage-homes, of houses, mansions, rich
     estates, of husbandry and handicraft, of people, of old roads and paths that look deserted,
     small, and insignificant as they are left behind: and so they do, and what else is there but
     such glimpses, in the track of the indomitable monster, Death! 
Away, with a shriek, and a roar, and a rattle, plunging down into the earth again, and
     working on in such a storm of energy and perseverance, that amidst the darkness and whirlwind
     the motion seems reversed, and to tend furiously backward, until a ray of light upon the wet
     wall shows its surface flying past like a fierce stream. Away once more into the day, and
     through the day, with a shrill yell of exultation, roaring, rattling, tearing on, spurning
     everything with its dark breath, sometimes pausing for a minute where a crowd of faces are,
     that in a minute more are not; sometimes lapping water greedily, and before the spout at which
     it drinks has ceased to drip upon the ground, shrieking, roaring, rattling through the purple
     distance! 
Louder and louder yet, it shrieks and cries as it comes tearing on resistless to the goal:
     and now its way, still like the way of Death, is strewn with ashes thickly. Everything around
     is blackened. There are dark pools of water, muddy lanes, and miserable habitations far below.
     There are jagged walls and falling houses close at hand, and through the battered roofs and
     broken windows, wretched rooms are seen, where want and fever hide themselves in many wretched
     shapes, while smoke and crowded gables, and distorted chimneys, and deformity of brick and
     mortar penning up deformity of mind and body, choke the murky distance. As Mr. Dombey looks out
     of his carriage window, it is never in his thoughts that the monster who has brought him there
     has let the light of day in on these things: not made or caused them. It was the journey's
     fitting end, and might have been the end of everything; it was so ruinous and dreary. 
So, pursuing the one course of thought, he had the one relentless monster still before him.
     All things looked black, and cold, and deadly upon him, and he on them. He found a likeness to
     his misfortune everywhere. There was a remorseless triumph going on about him, and it galled
     and stung him in his pride and jealousy, whatever form it took: though most of all when it
     divided with him the love and memory of his lost boy. 
There was a face—he had looked upon it, on the previous night, and it on him with eyes that
     read his soul, though they were dim with tears, and hidden soon behind two quivering hands—that
     often had attended him in fancy, on this ride. He had seen it, with the expression of last
     night, timidly pleading to him. It was not reproachful, but there was something of doubt,
     almost of hopeful incredulity in it, which, as he once more saw that fade away into a desolate
     certainty of his dislike, was like reproach. It was a trouble to him to think of this face of
     Florence. 
Because he felt any new compunction towards it? No. Because the feeling it awakened in him—of
     which he had had some old foreshadowing in older times—was full-formed now, and spoke out
     plainly, moving him too much, and threatening to grow too strong for his composure. Because the
     face was abroad, in the expression of defeat and persecution that seemed to encircle him like
     the air. Because it barbed the arrow of that cruel and remorseless enemy on which his thoughts
     so ran, and put into its grasp a double-handed sword. Because he knew full well, in his own
     breast, as he stood there, tinging the scene of transition before him with the morbid colours
     of his own mind, and making it a ruin and a picture of decay, instead of hopeful change, and
     promise of better things, that life had quite as much to do with his complainings as death. One
     child was gone, and one child left. Why was the object of his hope removed instead of her? 
The sweet, calm, gentle presence in his fancy, moved him to no reflection but that. She had
     been unwelcome to him from the first; she was an aggravation of his bitterness now. If his son
     had been his only child, and the same blow had fallen on him, it would have been heavy to bear;
     but infinitely lighter than now, when it might have fallen on her (whom he could have lost, or
     he believed it, without a pang), and had not. Her loving and innocent face rising before him,
     and had no softening or winning influence. He rejected the angel, and took up with the
     tormenting spirit crouching in his bosom. Her patience, goodness, youth, devotion, love, were
     as so many atoms in the ashes upon which he set his heel. He saw her image in the blight and
     blackness all around him, not irradiating but deepening the gloom. More than once upon this
     journey, and how again as he stood pondering at this journey's end, tracing figures in the dust
     with his stick, the thought came into his mind, what was there he could interpose between
     himself and it? 
The Major, who had been blowing and panting all the way down, like another engine, and whose
     eye had often wandered from his newspaper to leer at the prospect, as if there were a
     procession of discomfited Miss Toxes pouring out in the smoke of the train, and flying away
     over the fields to hide themselves in any place of refuge, aroused his friend by informing him
     that the post-horses were harnessed and the carriage ready. 
`Dombey,´ said the Major, rapping him on the arm with his cane, `don't be thoughtful. It's a
     bad habit. Old Joe, Sir, wouldn't be as tough as you see him, if he had ever encouraged it. You
     are too great a man, Dombey, to be thoughtful. In your position, Sir, you're far above that
     kind of thing.´ 
The Major even in his friendly remonstrances, thus consulting the dignity and honour of Mr.
     Dombey, and showing a lively sense of their importance, Mr. Dombey felt more than ever disposed
     to defer to a gentleman possessing so much good sense and such a well-regulated mind;
     accordingly he made an effort to listen to the Major's stories, as they trotted along the
     turnpike road; and the Major, finding both the pace and the road a great deal better adapted to
     his conversational powers than the mode of travelling they had just relinquished, came out for
     his entertainment. 
In this flow of spirits and conversation, only interrupted by his usual plethoric symptoms,
     and by intervals of lunch, and from time to time by some violent assault upon the Native, who
     wore a pair of ear-rings in his dark-brown ears, and on whom his European clothes sat with an
     outlandish impossibility of adjustment—being, of their own accord, and without any reference to
     the tailor's art, long where they ought to be short, short where they ought to be long, tight
     where they ought to be loose, and loose where they ought to be tight—and to which he imparted a
     new grace, whenever the Major attacked him, by shrinking into them like a shrivelled nut, or a
     cold monkey—in this flow of spirits and conversation, the Major continued all day: so that when
     evening came on, and found them trotting through the green and leafy road near Leamington, the
     Major's voice, what with talking and eating and chuckling and choking, appeared to be in the
     box under the rumble, or in some neighbouring hay-stack. Nor did the Major improve it at the
     Royal Hotel, where rooms and dinner had been ordered, and where he so oppressed his organs of
     speech by eating and drinking, that when he retired to bed he had no voice at all, except to
     cough with, and could only make himself intelligible to the dark servant by gasping at him. 
He not only rose next morning, however, like a giant refreshed, but conducted himself, at
     breakfast, like a giant refreshing. At this meal they arranged their daily habits. The Major
     was to take the responsibility or ordering everything to eat and drink; and they were to have a
     late breakfast together every morning, and a late dinner together every day. Mr. Dombey would
     prefer remaining in his own room, or walking in the country by himself, on that first day of
     their sojourn at Leamington; but next morning he would be happy to accompany the Major to the
     Pump-room, and about the town. So they parted until dinner-time. Mr. Dombey retired to nurse
     his wholesome thoughts in his own way. The Major, attended by the Native carrying a camp-stool,
     a great-coast, and an umbrella, swaggered up and down through all the public places: looking
     into subscription books to find out who was there, looking up old ladies by whom he was much
     admired, reporting J.B. tougher than ever, and puffing his rich friend Dombey wherever he went.
     There never was a man who stood by a friend more staunchly than the Major, when in puffing him,
     he puffed himself. 
It was surprising how much new conversation the Major had to let off at dinner-time, and what
     occasion he gave Mr. Dombey to admire his social qualities. At breakfast next morning, he knew
     the contents of the latest newspapers received; and mentioned several subjects in connexion
     with them, on which his opinion had recently been sought by persons of such power and might,
     that they were only to be obscurely hinted at. Mr. Dombey, who had been so long shut up within
     himself, and who had rarely, at any time, overstepped the enchanted circle within which the
     operations of Dombey and Son were conducted, began to think this an improvement on his solitary
     life; and in place of excusing himself for another day, as he had thought of doing when alone,
     walked out with the Major arm-in-arm. 
