
CHAPTER V
Paul's Progress and Christening
LITTLE Paul, suffering no contamination, from the blood of the Toodles, grew stouter and
     stronger every day. Every day, too, he was more and more ardently cherished by Miss Tox, whose
     devotion was so far appreciated by Mr. Dombey that he began to regard her as a woman of great
     natural good sense, whose feelings did her credit and deserved encouragement. He was so lavish
     of this condescension, that he not only bowed to her, in a particular manner, on several
     occasions, but even entrusted such stately recognitions of her to his sister as `pray tell your
     friend, Louisa, that she is very good,´ or `mention to Miss Tox, Louisa, that I am obliged to
     her;´ specialities which made a deep impression on the lady thus distinguished. 
Miss Tox was often in the habit of assuring Mrs. Chick, that `nothing could exceed her
     interest in all connected with the development of that sweet child;' and an observer of Miss
     Tox's proceedings might have inferred so much without declaratory confirmation. She would
     preside over the innocent repasts of the young heir, with ineffable satisfaction, almost with
     an air of joint proprietorship with Richards in the entertainment. At the little ceremonies of
     the bath and toilette, she assisted with enthusiasm. The administration of infantine doses of
     physic awakened all the active sympathy of her character; and being on one occasion secreted in
     a cupboard (whither she had fled in modesty), when Mr. Dombey was introduced into the nursery
     by his sister, to behold his son, in the course of preparation for bed, taking a short walk
     uphill over Richards's gown, in a short and airy linen jacket, Miss Tox was so transported
     beyond the ignorant present as to be unable to refrain from crying out, `Is he not beautiful
     Mr. Dombey!Is he not a Cupid, Sir!´ and then almost sinking behind the closet door with
     confusion and blushes. 
`Louisa,´ said Mr. Dombey, one day, to his sister, `I really think I must present your friend
     with some little token, on the occasion of Paul's christening. She has exerted herself so
     warmly in the child's behalf from the first, and seems to understand her position so thoroughly
     (a very rare merit in this world, I am sorry to say), that it would really be agreeable to me
     to notice her.´ 
Let it be no detraction from the merits of Miss Tox, to hint that in Mr. Dombey's eyes, as in
     some others that occasionally see the light, they only achieved that mighty piece of knowledge,
     the understanding of their own position, who showed a fitting reverence for his. It was not so
     much their merit that they knew themselves, as that they knew him, and bowed low before him. 
`My dear Paul,´ returned his sister, `you do Miss Tox but justice, as a man of your
     penetration was sure, I knew, to do. I believe if there are three words in the English language
     for which she has a respect amounting almost to veneration, those words are, Dombey and Son.´ 
`Well,´ said Mr. Dombey, `I believe it. It does Miss Tox credit.´ 
`And as to anything in the shape of a token, my dear Paul,´ pursued his sister, `all I can
     say is that anything you give Miss Tox will be hoarded and prized, I am sure, like a relic. But
     there is a way, my dear Paul, of showing your sense of Miss Tox's friendliness in a
     still more flattering and acceptable manner, if you should be so inclined.´ 
`How is that?´ asked Mr. Dombey. 
`Godfathers, of course,´ continued Mrs. Chick, `are important in point of connexion and
     influence.´ 
`I don't know why they should be, to my son,´ said Mr. Dombey, coldly. 
`Very true, my dear Paul,´ retorted Mrs. Chick, with an extraordinary show of animation, to
     cover the suddenness of her conversion; `and spoken like yourself. I might have expected
     nothing else from you. I might have known that such would have been your opinion. Perhaps;´
     here Mrs. Chick flattered again, as not quite comfortably feeling her way; `perhaps that is a
     reason why you might have the less objection to allowing Miss Tox to be godmother to the dear
     thing, if it were only as deputy and proxy for some one else. That it would be received as a
     great honour and distinction, Paul, I need not say.´ 
`Louisa,´ said Mr. Dombey, after a short pause, `it is not to be supposed—´ 
`Certainly not,´ cried Mrs. Chick, hastening to anticipate a refusal, `I never thought it
     was.´ 
Mr. Dombey looked at her impatiently. 
`Don't flurry me, my dear Paul,´ said his sister; `for that destroys me. I am far from
     strong. I have not been quite myself, since poor dear Fanny departed.´ 
Mr. Dombey glanced at the pocket-handkerchief which his sister applied to her eyes, and
     resumed: 
`It is not to be supposed, I say—´ 
`And I say,´ murmured Mrs. Chick, `that I never thought it was.´ 
`Good Heaven, Louisa!´ said Mr. Dombey. 
`No, my dear Paul,´ she remonstrated with tearful dignity, `I must really be allowed to
     speak. I am not so clever, or so reasoning, or so eloquent, or so anything, as you are. I know
     that very well. So much the worse for me. But if they were the last words. I had to utter—and
     last words should be very solemn to you and me, Paul, after poor dear Fanny—I should still say
     I never thought it was. And what is more,´ added Mrs. Chick with increased dignity, as if she
     had withheld her crushing argument until now, `I never did think it was.´ 
Mr. Dombey walked to the window and back again. 
`It is not to be supposed, Louisa,´ he said (Mrs. Chick had nailed her colours to the mast,
     and repeated `I know it isn't,´ but he took no notice of it), `but that there are many persons
     who, supposing that I recognised any claim at all in such a case, have a claim upon me superior
     to Miss Tox's. But I do not. I recognise no such thing. Paul and myself will be able, when the
     time comes, to hold our own—the house, in other words, will be able to hold its own, and
     maintain its own, and hand down its own of itself, and without any such common-place aids. The
     kind of foreign help which people usually seek for their children, I can afford to despise;
     being above it, I hope. So that Paul's infancy and childhood pass away well, and I see him
     becoming qualified without waste of time for the career on which he is destined to enter, I am
     satisfied. He will make what powerful friends he pleases in after-life, when he is actively
     maintaining—and extending, if that is possible—the dignity and credit of the Firm. Until then,
     I am enough for him, perhaps, and all in all. I have no wish that people should step in between
     us. I would much rather show my sense of the obliging conduct of a deserving person like your
     friend. Therefore let it be so; and your husband and myself will do well enough for the other
     sponsors, I dare say.´ 
In the course of these remarks, delivered with great majesty and grandeur, Mr. Dombey had
     truly revealed the secret feelings of his breast. An indescribable distrust of anybody stepping
     in between himself and his son; a haughty dread of having any rival or partner in the boy's
     respect and deference; a sharp misgiving, recently acquired, that he was not infallible in his
     power of bending and binding human wills; as sharp a jealousy of any second check or cross;
     these were, at that time, the master keys of his soul. In all his life, he had never made a
     friend. His cold and distant nature had neither sought one nor found one. And now when that
     nature concentrated its whole force so strongly on a partial scheme of parental interest and
     ambition, it seemed as if its icy current, instead of being released by this influence, and
     running clear and free, had thawed for but an instant to admit its burden, and then frozen with
     it into one unyielding block. 
Elevated thus to the godmothership of little Paul, in virtue of her insignificance, Miss Tox
     was from that hour chosen and appointed to office; and Mr. Dombey further signified his
     pleasure that the ceremony, already long delayed, should take place without further
     postponement. His sister, who had been far from anticipating so signal a success, withdrew as
     soon as she could, to communicate it to her best of friends; and Mr. Dombey was left alone in
     his library. 
There was anything but solitude in the nursery; for there, Mrs. Chick and Miss Tox were
     enjoying a social evening, so much to the disgust of Miss Susan Nipper, that that young lady
     embraced every opportunity of making wry faces behind the door. Her feelings were so much
     excited on the occasion, that she found it indispensable to afford them this relief, even
     without having the comfort of any audience or sympathy whatever. As the knight-errants of old
     relieved their minds by carving their mistress's names in deserts, and wildernesses, and other
     savage places where there was no probability of there ever being anybody to red them, so did
     Miss Susan Nipper curl her snub nose into drawers and wardrobes, put away winks of
     disparagement in cupboards, shed derisive squints into stone pitchers, and contradict and call
     names out in the passage. 
The two interlopers, however, blissfully unconscious of the young lady's sentiments, saw
     little Paul safe through all the stages of undressing, airy exercise, supper and bed; and then
     sat down to tea before the fire. The two children now lay, through the good offices of Polly,
     in one room; and it was not until the ladies were established at their tea-table that happening
     to look towards the little beds, they thought of Florence. 
`How sound she sleeps!´ said Miss Tox. 
`Why, you know, my dear, she takes a great deal of exercise in the course of the day,´
     returned Mrs. Chicks, `playing about little Paul so much.´ 
`She is a curious child,´ said Miss Tox. 
`My dear,´ retorted Mrs. Chick, in a low voice: `Her mama, all over!´ 
`Indeed!´ said Miss Tox. `Ah dear me!´ 
A tone of most extraordinary compassion Miss Tox said it in, though she had no distinct idea
     why, except that it was expected of her. 
`Florence will never, never, never, be a Dombey,´ said Mrs. Chick, `not if she lives to be a
     thousand years old.´ 
Miss Tox elevated her eyebrows, and was again full of commiseration. 
`I quite fret and worry myself about her,´ said Mrs. Chick, with a sigh of modest merit. `I
     really don't see what is to become of her when she grows older, or what position she is to
     take. She don't gain on her papa in the least. How can one expect she should, when she is so
     very unlike a Dombey?´ 
Miss Tox looked as if she saw no way out of such a cogent argument as that, at all. 
`And the child, you see,´ said Mrs. Chick, in deep confidence, `has poor Fanny's nature.
     She'll never make an effort in after-life I'll venture to say. Never! she'll never wind and
     twine herself about her papa's heart like—´ 
`Like the ivy?´ suggested Miss Tox. 
`Like the ivy,´ Mrs. Chick assented. `Never! she'll never glide and nestle into the bosom of
     her papa's affections like—the—´ 
`Startled fawn?´ suggested Miss Tox. 
`Like the startled fawn,´ said Mrs. Chick. `Never! Poor Fanny! Yet, how I loved her!´ 
`You must not distress yourself, my dear,´ said Miss Tox, in a soothing voice. `Now really!
     You have too much feeling.´ 
`We have all our faults,´ said Mrs. Chick, weeping and shaking her head. `I dare say we have.
     I never was blind to hers. I never said I was. Far from it. Yet how I loved her!´ 
What a satisfaction it was to Mrs. Chick—a common-place piece of folly enough, compared with
     whom her sister-in-law had been a very angel of whomanly intelligence and gentleness—to
     patronise and be tender to the memory of that lady: in exact pursuance of her conduct to her in
     her lifetime: and to thoroughly believe herself, and take herself in and make herself
     uncommonly comfortable on the strength of her toleration!What a mighty pleasant virtue
     toleration should be when we are right, to be so very pleasant when we are wrong, and quite
     unable to demonstrate how we come to be invested with the privilege of exercising it! 
Mrs. Chick was yet drying her eyes and shaking her head, when Richards made bold to caution
     her that Miss Florence was awake and sitting in her bed. She had risen, as the nurse said, and
     the lashes of her eyes were wet with tears. But no one saw them glistening save Polly. No one
     else leant over her, and whispered soothing words to her, or was near enough to hear the
     flutter of her beating heart. 
`Oh! dear nurse!´ said the child, looking earnestly up in her face, `let me lie by my
     brother!´ 
`Why, my pet?´ said Richards. 
`Oh! I think he loves me,´ cried the child wildly. `Let me lie by him. Pray do!´ 
Mrs. Chick interposed with some motherly words about going to sleep like a dear, but Florence
     repeated her supplication, with a frightened look, and in a voice broken by sobs and tears. 
`I'll not wake him,´ she said, covering her face and hanging down her head. `I'll only touch
     him with my hand, and go to sleep. Oh, pray, pray, let me lie by my brother to-night, for I
     believe he's fond of me!´ 
Richards took her without a word, and carrying her to the little bed in which the infant was
     sleeping, laid her down by his side. She crept as near him as she could without disturbing his
     rest; and stretching out one arm so that it timidly embraced his neck, and hiding her face on
     the other, over which her damp and scattered hair fell loose, lay motionless. 
`Poor little thing,´ said Miss Tox; `she has been dreaming, I dare say.´ 
This trivial incident had so interrupted the current of conversation, that it was difficult
     of resumption; and Mrs. Chick moreover had been so affected by the contemplation of her own
     tolerant nature, that she was not in spirits. The two friends accordingly soon made an end of
     their tea, and a servant was despatched to fetch a hackney cabriolet for Miss Tox. Miss Tox had
     great experience in hackney cabs, and her starting in one was generally work of time, as she
     was systematic in the preparatory arrangements. 
`Have the goodness, if you please, Towlinson,´ said Miss Tox, `first of all, to carry out a
     pen and ink and take his number legibly.´ 
`Yes, Miss,´ said Towlinson. 
`Then, if you please, Towlinson,´ said Miss Tox, `have the goodness to turn the cushion.
     Which,´ said Miss Tox apart to Mrs. Chick, `is generally damp, my dear.´ 
`Yes, Miss,´ said Towlinson. 
`I'll trouble you also, if you please,´ said Miss Tox, `with this card and this shilling.
     He's to drive to the card, and is to understand that he will not on any account have more than
     the shilling.´ 
`No, Miss,'said Towlinson. 
`And—I'm sorry to give you so much trouble, Towlinson,'—said Miss Tox, looking at him
     pensively. 
`Not at all, Miss,´ said Towlinson. 
`Mention to the man, then, if you please, Towlinson,´ said Miss Tox, `That the lady's uncle
     is a magistrate, and that if he gives her any of his impertinence he will be punished terribly.
     You can pretend to say that, if you please, Towlinson, in a friendly way, and because you know
     it was done to another man, who died.´ 
`Certainly, Miss,´ said Towlinson. 
`And now good night to my sweet, sweet, sweet, godson,´ said Miss Tox, with a soft shower of
     kisses at each repetition of the adjective; `and Louisa, my dear friend, promise me to take a
     little something warm before you go to bed, and not to distress yourself!´ 
It was with extreme difficulty that Nipper, the black-eyed, who looked on steadfastly,
     contained herself at this crisis, and, until the subsequent departure of Mrs. Chick. But the
     nursery being at length free of visitors, she made herself some recompense for her late
     restraint. 
`You might keep me in a strait-waistcoat for six weeks,´ said Nipper, `and when I got it off
     I'd only be more aggravated, who ever heard the like of them two Griffins, Mrs. Richards?´ 
`And then to talk of having been dreaming, poor dear!´ said Polly. 
`Oh you beauties!´ cried Susan Nipper, affecting to salute the door by which the ladies had
     departed. `Never be a Dombey won't she? It's to be hoped she won't, we don't want any more
     such, one's enough.´ 
`Don't wake the children, Susan dear,´ Susan dear,´ said Polly. 
`I'm very much beholden to you, Mrs. Richards,´ said Susan, who was not by any means
     discriminating in her wrath, `and really feel it as a honour to receive your commands, being a
     black slave and a mulotter. Mrs. Richards, if there's any other orders, you can give me, pray
     mention 'em.´ 
`Nonsense; orders,´ said Polly. 
`Oh! bless your heart, Mrs. Richards,´ cried Susan, `temporaries always orders permanencies
     here, didn't you know that, why wherever was you born, Mrs. Richards? But wherever you was
     born, Mrs. Richards,´ pursue Spitfire, shaking her head resolutely, `and whenever, and however
     (which is best known to yourself), you may bear in mind, please, that it's one thing to give
     orders, and quite another thing to take 'em. A person may tell a person to dive off a bridge
     head foremost into five-and-forty feet of water, Mrs. Richards, but a person may be very far
     from diving.´ 
`There now,´ said Polly, `you're angry because you're a good little thing, and fond of Miss
     Florence; and yet you turn round on me, because there's nobody else.´ 
`It's very easy for some to keep their tempers, and be soft-spoken, Mrs. Richards,´ returned
     Susan, slightly mollified, ` When their child's made as much of as a prince, and is petted and
     patted till it wishes its friends further, but when a sweet young pretty innocent, that never
     ought to have a cross word spoken to or of it, is run down, the case is very different indeed.
     My goodness gracious me, Miss Floy, you naughty, sinful child if you don't shut your eyes this
     minute, I'll call in them hobgoblins that lives in the cock-loft to come and eat you up alive!´ 
Here Miss Nipper made a horrible lowing, supposed to issue from a conscientious goblin of the
     bull species, impatient to discharge the severe duty of his position. Having further composed
     her young charge by covering her head with the bed-clothes, and making three or four angry dabs
     at the pillow, she folded her arms, and screwed up her mouth, and sat looking at the fire for
     the rest of the evening. 
Though little Paul was said, in nursery phrase, `to take a deal of notice for his age,´ he
     took as little notice of all this as of the preparations for his christening on the next day
     but one; which nevertheless went on about him, as to his personal apparel, and that of his
     sister and the two nurses, with great activity. Neither did he, on the arrival of the appointed
     morning, show any sense of its importance; being, on the contrary, unusually inclined to sleep,
     and unusually inclined to take it ill in his attendants that they dressed him to go out. 
It happened to be an iron-grey autumnal day, with a shrewd east wind blowing—a day in keeping
     with the proceedings. Mr. Dombey represented in himself the wind, the shade, and the autumn of
     the christening. He stood in his library to receive the company, as hard land cold as the
     weather; and when he looked out through the glass room, at came fluttering down, as if he
     blighted them. 
Ugh! They were black, cold rooms; and seemed to be in mourning, like the inmates of the
     house. The books precisely matched as to size, and drawn up in line, like soldiers, looked in
     their cold, hard, slippery uniforms, as if they had but one idea among them, and that was a
     freezer. The bookcase, glazed and locked, repudiated all familiarities. Mr. Pitt, in bronze on
     the top with no trace of his celestial origin about him, guarded the unattainable treasure like
     an enchanted Moor. A dusty urn at each high corner, dug up from an ancient tomb, preached
     desolation and decay, as from two pulpits; and the chimmey-glass, reflecting Mr. Dombey and his
     portrait at one blow, seemed fraught with melancholy meditations. 
The stiff and stark fire-irons appeared to claim a nearer relationship than anything else
     there to Mr. Dombey, with his buttoned coat, his white cravat, is heavy gold watch-chain, and
     his creaking boots. But this was before the arrival of Mr. and Mrs. Chick, his lawful
     relatives, who soon presented themselves. 
`My dear Paul,´ Mrs. Chick murmured, as she embraced him, `the beginning, I hope, of many
     joyful days!´ 
`Thank you, Louisa,´ said Mr. Dombey, grimly. `How do you do, Mr. John?´ 
`How do you do, Sir?´ said Chick. 
He gave Mr. Dombey his hand, as if he feared it might electrify him. Mr. Dombey took it as if
     it were a fish, or seaweed, or some such clammy substance, and immediately returned it to him
     with exalted politeness. 
`Perhaps, Louisa,´ said Mr. Dombey, slightly turning his head in his cravat, as if it were a
     socket, `you would have preferred a fire?´ 
`Oh, my dear Paul, no,´ said Mrs. chick, who had much ado to keep her teeth from chattering;
     `not for me.´ 
`Mr. John,´ said Mr. Dombey, `you are not sensible of any chill?´ 
Mr. John, who had already got both his hands in his pockets over the wrists, and was on the
     very threshold of that same canine chorus which had given Mrs. Chick so much offence on a
     former occasion, protested that he was perfectly comfortable. 
He added in a low voice, `With my tiddle tol toor rul'—when he was providentially stopped by
     Towlinson, who announced: 
`Miss Tox!´ 
And enter that fair enslaver, with a blue nose and indescribably frosty face, referable to
     her being very thinly clad in a maze of fluttering odds and ends, to do honour to the ceremony. 
`How do you do, Miss Tox?´ said Mr. Dombey. 
Miss Tox, in the midst of her spreading gauzes, went down altogether like an opera-glass
     shutting-up; she curtseyed so low, in acknowledgment of Mr. Dombey's advancing a step or two to
     meet her. 
`I can never forget this occasion, Sir,´ said Miss Tox, softly. `'Tis impossible. My dear
     Louisa, I can hardly believe the evidence of my senses.´ 
If Miss Tox could believe the evidence of one of her senses, it was a very cold day. That was
     quite clear. She took an early opportunity of promoting the circulation in the tip of her nose
     by secretly chafing it with her pocket-handkerchief, lest, by its very low temperature, it
     should disagreeably astonish the baby when she came to kiss it. 
The baby soon appeared, carried in great glory by Richards; while Florence, in custody of
     that active young constable, Susan Nipper, brought up the rear. Though the whole nursery party
     were dressed by this time in lighter mourning than at first, there was enough in the appearance
     of the bereaved children to make the day no brighter. The baby too—it might have been Miss
     Tox's nose—began to cry. Thereby, as it happened, preventing Mr. chick from the awkward
     fulfilment of a very honest purpose he had; which was, to make much of Florence. For this
     gentleman, insensible to the superior claims of a perfect Dombey (perhaps on account of having
     the honour to be united to a Dombey himself, and being familiar with excellence), really liked
     her, and showed that he liked her, and was about to show it in his own way now, when Paul
     cried, and his helpmate stopped him short. 
`Now Florence, child!´ said her aunt, briskly, `what are you doing, love? Show yourself to
     him. Engage his attention, my dear!´ 
The atmosphere became or might have become colder and colder, when Mr. Dombey stood frigidly
     watching his little daughter, who, clapping her hands, and standing on tip-toe before the
     throne of his son and heir, lured him to bend down from his high estate, and look at her. Some
     honest act of Richards's may have aided the effect, but he did look down, and held his peace.
     As his sister hid behind her nurse, he followed her with his eyes; and when she peeped out with
     a merry cry to him, he sprang up and crowed lustily—laughing outright when she ran in upon him;
     and seeming to fondle her curls with his tiny hands, while she smothered him with kisses. 
Was Mr. Dombey pleased to see this? He testified no pleasure by the relaxation of a nerve;
     but outward tokens of any king of feeling were unusual with him. If any sunbeam stole into the
     room to light the children at their play, it never reached his face. He looked on so fixedly
     and coldly, that the warm light vanished even from the laughing eyes of little Florence, when,
     at last, they happened to meet his. 
It was a dull, grey, autumn day indeed, and in a minute's pause and silence that took place,
     the leaves fell sorrowfully. 
`Mr. John,´ said Mr. Dombey, referring to his watch, and assuming his hat and gloves. `Take
     my sister, if you please: my arm to-day is Miss Tox's. You had better go first with Master
     Paul, Richards. Be very careful.´ 
In Mr. Dombey's carriage, Dombey and Son, Miss Tox, Mrs. Chick, Richards, and Florence. In a
     little carriage following it, Susan Nipper and the owner Mr. Chick. Susan looking out of
     window, without intermission, as a relief from the embarrassment of confronting the large face
     of that he gentleman, and thinking whenever anything rattled that he was putting up in paper an
     appropriate pecuniary compliment for herself. 
Once upon the road to church, Mr. Dombey clapped his hands for the amusement of his son. At
     which instance of parental enthusiasm Miss Tox was enchanted. But exclusive of this incident,
     the chief difference between the christening party and a party in a mourning coach, consisted
     in the colours of the carriage and horses. 
Arrived at the church steps, they were received by a portentous beadle. Mr. Dombey
     dismounting first to help the ladies out, and standing near him at the church door, looked like
     another beadle. A beadle less gorgeous but more dreadful; the beadle of private life; the
     beadle of our business and our bosoms. 
Miss Tox's hand trembled as she slipped it through Mr. Dombey's arm, and felt herself
     escorted up the steps, preceded by a cocked hat and a Babylonian collar. It seemed for a moment
     like that other solemn institution, `Wilt thou have this man, Lucretia?´ `Yes, I will.´ 
`Please to bring the child in quick out of the air there,´ whispered the beadle, holding open
     the inner door of the church. 
Little Paul might have asked with Hamlet `into my grave?´ so chill and earthy was the place.
     The tall shrouded pulpit and reading desk; the dreary perspective of empty pews stretching away
     under the galleries, and empty benches mounting to the roof and lost in the shadow of the great
     grim organ; the dusty matting and cold stone slabs; the grisly free seats in the aisles; and
     the damp corner by the bell-rope, where the black trestles used for funerals were stowed away,
     along with some shovels and baskets, and a coil or two of deadly-looking rope; the strange,
     unusual, uncomfortable smell, and the cadaverous light; were all in unison. It was a cold and
     dismal scene. 
`There's a wedding just on, Sir,´ said the beadle, `but it'll be over directly, if you'll
     walk into the westry here.´ 
Before he turned again to lead the way, he gave Mr. Dombey a bow and a half smile of
     recognition, importing that he (the beadle) remembered to have had the pleasure of attending on
     him when he buried his wife, and hoped he had enjoyed himself since. 
The very wedding looking dismal as they passed in front of the altar. The bride was too old
     and the bridegroom too young, and a superannuated beau with one eye and an eye-glass stuck in
     its blank companion, was giving away the lady, while the friends were shivering. In the vestry
     the fire was smoking; and an over-aged and over-worked and under-paid attorney's clerk, `making
     a search,´ was running his forefinger down the parchment pages of an immense register (one of a
     long series of similar volumes) gorged with burials. Over the fireplace was a ground-plan of
     the vaults underneath the church; and Mr. Chick, skimming the literary portion of it aloud, by
     way of enlivening the company, read the reference to Mrs. Dombey's tomb in full, before he
     could stop himself. 
After another cold interval, a wheezy little pew-opener afflicted with an asthma, appropriate
     to the churchyard, if not to the church, summoned them to the font. Here they waited some
     little time while the marriage party enrolled themselves; and meanwhile the wheezy little
     pew-opener—partly in consequence of her infirmity, and partly that the marriage party might not
     forget her—went about the building coughing like a grampus. 
Presently the clerk (the only cheerful-looking object there, and he was an
     undertaker) came up with a jug of warm water, and said something, as he poured it into the
     font, about taking the chill off; which millions of gallons boiling hot could not have done for
     the occasion. Then the clergyman, an amiable and mild-looking young curate, but obviously
     afraid of the baby, appeared like the principal character in a ghost-story, `a tall figure all
     in white;´ at sight of whom Paul rent the air with his cries, and never left again till he was
     taken out black in the face. 
Even when that event had happened, to the great relief of everybody, he was heard under the
     portico, during the rest of the ceremony, now fainter, now louder, now hushed, now bursting
     forth again with an irrepressible sense of his wrongs. This so distracted the attention of the
     two ladies, that Mrs. Chick was constantly deploying into the centre aisle, to send out
     messages by the pew-opener, while Miss Tox kept her Prayer-book open at the Gunpowder Plot, and
     occasionally read responses from that service. 
During the whole of these proceedings, Mr. Dombey remained as impassive and gentlemanly as
     ever, and perhaps assisted in making it so cold, that the young curate smoked at the mouth as
     he read. The only time that he unbent his visage in the least, was when the clergyman, in
     delivering (very unaffectedly and simply) the closing exhortation, relative to the future
     examination of the child by the sponsors, happened to rest his eye on Mr. Chick; and then Mr.
     Dombey might have been seen to express by a majestic look, that he would like to catch him at
     it. 
It might have been well for Mr. Dombey, if he had thought of his own dignity a little less;
     and had thought of the great origin and purpose of the ceremony in which he took so formal and
     so stiff a part, a little more. His arrogance contrasted strangely with its history. 
When it was all over, he again gave his arm to Miss Tox, and conducted her to the vestry,
     where he informed the clergyman how much pleasure it would have given him to have solicited the
     honour of his company at dinner, but for the unfortunate state of his household affairs. The
     register signed, and the fees paid, and the pew-opener (whose cough was very bad again)
     remembered, and the beadle gratified, and the sexton (who was accidentally on the door-steps,
     looking with great interest at the weather) not forgotten, they got into the carriage again,
     and drove home in the same bleak fellowship. 
There they found Mr. Pitt turning up his nose at a cold collation, set forth in a cold pomp
     of glass and silver, and looking more like a dead dinner lying in state than a social
     refreshment. On their arrival Miss Tox produced a mug for her godson, and Mr. Chick a knife and
     fork and spoon in a case. Mr. Dombey also produced a bracelet for Miss Tox; and, on the receipt
     of this token, Miss Tox was tenderly affected. 
`Mr. John,´ said Mr. Dombey, `will you take the bottom of the table, if you please? What have
     you got there, Mr. John?´ 
`I have got a cold fillet of veal here, Sir,´ replied Mr. Chick, rubbing his numbed hands
     hard together. `What have you got there, Sir?´ 
`This,´ returned Mr. Dombey, `is some cold preparation of calf's head, I think. I see cold
     fowls—ham—patties—salad—lobster. Miss Tox will do me the honour of taking some wine? Champagne
     to Miss Tox.´ 
There was a toothache in everything. The wine was so bitter cold that it forced a little
     scream from Miss Tox, which she had great difficulty in turning into a `Hem!´ The veal had come
     from such an airy pantry, that the first taste of it had struck a sensation as of cold lead to
     Mr. Chick's extremities. Mr. Dombey alone remained unmoved. He might have been hung up for sale
     at a Russian fair as a specimen of a frozen gentleman. 
The prevailing influence was too much even for his sister. She made no effort at flattery or
     small talk, and directed all her efforts to looking as warm as she could. 
`Well, Sir,´ said Mr. Chick, making a desperate plunge, after a long silence, and filling a
     glass of sherry; `I shall drink this, if you'll allow me, Sir, to little Paul.´ 
`Bless him!´ murmured Miss Tox, taking a sip of wine. 
`Dear little Dombey!´ murmured Mrs. Chick. 
`Mr. John,´ said Mr. Dombey, with severe gravity, `my son would feel and express himself
     obliged to you, I have no doubt, if he could appreciate the favour you have done him. He will
     prove, in time to come, I trust, equal to any responsibility that the obliging disposition of
     his relations and friends, in private, or the onerous nature of our position, in public, may
     impose upon him.´ 
The tone in which this was said admitting of nothing more, Mr. Chick relapsed into low
     spirits and silence. Not so Miss Tox, who, having listened to Mr. Dombey with even a more
     emphatic attention than usual, and with a more expressive tendency of her head to one side, now
     leant across the table, and said to Mrs. Chick softly: 
`Louisa!´ 
`My dear,´ said Mrs. Chick. 
`Onerous nature of our position in public may—I have forgotten the exact term.´ 
`Expose him to,´ said Mrs. Chick. 
`Pardon me, my dear,´ returned Miss Tox, `I think not. It was more rounded and flowing.
     Obliging disposition of relations and friends in private, or onerous nature of position in
     public—may—impose upon him!´ 
`Impose upon him, to be sure,´ said Mrs. Chick. 
Miss tox struck her delicate hands together lightly, in triumph; and added, casting up her
     eyes, `eloquence indeed!´ 
Mr. Dombey, in the meanwhile, had issued orders for the attendance of Richards, who now
     entered curtseying, but without the baby; Paul being asleep after the fatigues of the morning.
     Mr. Dombey, having delivered a glass of wine to this vassal, addressed her in the following
     words: Miss Tox previously settling her head on one side, and making other little arrangements
     for engraving them on her heart. 
`During the six months or so, Richards, which have seen you an inmate of this house, you have
     done your duty. Desiring to connect some little service to you with this occasion, I considered
     how I could best effect that object, and I also advised with my sister, Mrs.—´ 
`Chick,´ interposed the gentleman of that name. 
`Oh, hush if you please!´ said Miss Tox. 
`I was about to say to you, Richards,´ resumed Mr. Dombey, with an appalling glance at Mr.
     John, `that I was further assisted in my decision, by the recollection of a conversation I held
     with your husband in this room, on the occasion of your being hired, when he disclosed to me
     the melancholy fact that your family, himself at the head, were sunk and steeped in ignorance.´ 
Richards quailed under the magnificence of the reproof. 
`I am far from being friendly,´ pursued Mr. Dombey, `to what is called by persons of
     levelling sentiments, general education. But it is necessary that the inferior classes should
     continue to be taught to know their position, and to conduct themselves properly. So far I
     approve of schools. Having the power of nominating a child on the foundation of an ancient
     establishment, called (from a worshipful company) the Charitable Grinders; where not only is a
     wholesome education bestowed upon the scholars, but where a dress and badge is likewise
     provided for them; I have (first communicating, through Mrs. chick, with your family) nominated
     your eldest son to an existing vacancy; and he has this day, I am informed, assumed the habit.
     The number of her son, I believe,´ said Mr. Dombey, turning to his sister and speaking of the
     child as if he were a hackney-coach, `is one hundred and forty-seven. Louisa, you can tell
     her.´ 
`One hundred and forty-seven,´ said Mrs. Chick. `The dress, Richards, is a nice, warm, blue
     baize tailed coat and cap, turned up with orange-coloured binding; red worsted stockings; and
     very strong leather small-clothes. One might wear the articles one's-self,´ said Mrs. Chick,
     with enthusiasm, `and be grateful.´ 
`There, Richards!´ said Miss Tox. `Now, indeed, you may be proud. The Charitable
     Grinders!´ 
`I am sure I am very much obliged, Sir,´ returned Richards faintly, `and take it very kind
     that you should remember my little ones.´ At the same time a vision of Biler as a charitable
     Grinder, with his very small legs encased in the serviceable clothing described by Mrs. Chick,
     swam before Richards's eyes, and made them water. 
`I am very glad to see you have so much feeling, Richards,´ said Miss Tox. 
`It makes one almost hope, it really does,´ said Mrs. Chick, who prided herself on taking
     trustful views of human nature, `that there may yet be some faint spark of gratitude and right
     feeling in the world.´ 
Richards deferred to these compliments by curtseying and murmuring her thanks; but finding it
     quite impossible to recover her spirits from the disorder into which they had been thrown by
     the image of her son in his precocious nether garments, she gradually approached the door and
     was heartily relieved to escape by it. 
Such temporary indications of a partial thaw that had appeared with her, vanished with her;
     and the frost set in again, as cold and hard as ever. Mr. Chick was twice heard to hum a tune
     at the bottom of the table, but on both occasions it was a fragment of the Dead March in Saul.
     The party seemed to get colder and colder, and to be gradually resolving itself into a
     congealed and solid state, like the collation round which it was assembled. At length Mrs.
     Chick looked at Miss Tox, and Miss Tox returned the look, and they both rose and said it was
     really time to go. Mr. Dombey receiving this announcement with perfect equanimity, they took
     leave of that gentleman, and presently departed under the protection of Mr. Chick; who, when
     they had turned their backs upon the house and left its master in his usual solitary state, put
     his hands in his pockets, threw himself back in the carriage, and whistled `With a hey ho
     chevy!´ all through; conveying into his face as he did so, an expression of such gloomy and
     terrible defiance, that Mrs. Chick dared not protest, or in any way molest him. 
Richards, though she had little Paul on her lap, could not forget her own first-born. She
     felt it was ungrateful; but the influence of the day fell even on the Charitable Grinders, and
     she could hardly help regarding his pewter badge, number one hundred and forty-seven, as,
     somehow, a part of its formality and sternness. She spoke, too, in the nursery, of his `blessed
     legs,´ and was again troubled by his spectre in uniform. 
`I don't know what I wouldn't give,´ said Polly, `to see the poor little dear before he gets
     used to 'em.´ 
`Why, then, I tell you what, Mrs. Richards,´ retorted Nipper, who had been admitted to her
     confidence, `see him and make your mind easy.´ 
`Mr. Dombey wouldn't like it,´ said Polly. 
`Oh, wouldn't he, Mrs. Richards!´ retorted Nipper, `he'd like it very much, I think, when he
     was asked.´ 
`You wouldn't ask him, I suppose, at all?´ said Polly. 
`No, Mrs. Richards, quite contrairy,'returned Susan, `and them tow inspectors Tox and Chick,
     not intending to be on duty to-morrow, as I heard 'em say, me and Miss Floy will go along with
     you to-morrow morning, and welcome, Mrs. Richards, if you like, for we may as well walk there,
     as up and down a street, and better too.´ 
Polly rejected the idea pretty stoutly at first; but by little and little she began to
     entertain it, as she entertained more and more distinctly the forbidden pictures of her
     children, and her own home. At length, arguing that there could be no great harm in calling for
     a moment at the door, she yielded to the Nipper proposition. 
The matter being settled thus, little Paul began to cry most piteously, as if he had a
     foreboding that no good would come of it. 
`What's the matter with the child?´ asked Susan. 
`He's cold, I think,´ said Polly, walking with him to and fro, and hushing him. 
It was a bleak autumnal afternoon indeed; and as she walked, and hushed, and, glancing
     through the dreary windown, pressed the little fellow closer to her breast, the withered leaves
     came showering down. 
