
CHAPTER LX
Chiefly Matrimonial
THE grand half-yearly festival holden by Doctor and Mrs. Blimber, on which occasion they
     requested the pleasure of the company of every young gentleman pursuing his studies in that
     genteel establishment, at an early party, when the hour was half-past seven o'clock, and when
     the object was quadrilles, had duly taken place, about this time; and the young gentleman, with
     no unbecoming demonstrations of levity, had betaken themselves, in a state of scholastic
     repletion, to their own homes. Mr. Skettles had repaired abroad, permanently to grace the
     establishment of his father Sir Barnet Skettles, whose popular manners had obtained him a
     diplomatic appointment, the honours of which were discharged by himself and Lady Skettles, to
     the satisfaction even of their own countrymen and countrywomen: which was considered almost
     miraculous. Mr. Tozer, now a young man of lofty stature, in Wellington boots, was so extremely
     full of antiquity as to be nearly on a par with a genuine ancient Roman in his knowledge of
     English: a triumph that affected his good parents with the tenderest emotions, and caused the
     father and mother of Mr. Briggs (whose learning, like ill-arranged luggage, was so tightly
     packed that he couldn't get at anything he wanted) to hide their diminished heads. The fruit
     laboriously gathered from the tree of knowledge by this latter young gentleman, in fact, had
     been subjected to so much pressure, that it had become a kind of intellectual Norfolk Biffin,
     and had nothing of its original form or flavour remaining. Master Bitherstone now, on whom the
     forcing system had the happier and not uncommon effect of leaving no impression whatever, when
     the forcing apparatus ceased to work, was in a much more comfortable plight; and being then on
     shipboard, bound for Bengal, found himself forgetting, with such admirable rapidity, that it
     was doubtful whether his declensions of noun-substantives would hold out to the end of the
     voyage. 
When Doctor Blimber, in pursuance of the usual course, would have said to the young
     gentleman, on the morning of the party, `Gentlemen, we will resume our studies on the
     twenty-fifth of next month,´ he departed from the usual course, and said, `Gentlemen, when our
     friend Cincinnatus retired to his farm, he did not present to the senate any Roman whom he
     sought to nominate as his successor. But there is a Roman here,´ said Doctor Blimber, laying
     his hand on the shoulder of Mr. Feeder, B.A., `adolescens imprimis gravis et doctus,
     gentlemen, whom I, a retiring Cincinnatus, wish to present to my little senate, as
     their future Dictator. Gentleman, we will resume our studies on the twenty-fifth of next month,
     under the auspices of Mr. Feeder, B.A.´ At this (which Doctor Blimber had previously called
     upon all the parents, and urbanely explained), the young gentlemen cheered; and Mr. Tozer, on
     behalf of the rest, instantly presented the Doctor with a silver inkstand, in a speech
     containing very little of the mother-tongue, but fifteen quotations from the Latin, and seven
     from the Greek, which moved the younger of the young gentlemen to discontent and envy: they
     remarking, `Oh, ah!It was all very well for old Tozer, but they didn't subscribe money for old
     Tozer to show off with, they supposed; did they? What business was it of old Tozer's more than
     anybody else's? It wasn't his inkstand. Why couldn't he leave the boys´ property
     alone?´ and murmuring other expressions of their dissatisfaction, which seemed to find a
     greater relief in calling him old Tozer, than in any other available vent. 
Not a word had been said to the young gentlemen, nor a hint dropped, of anything like a
     contemplated marriage between Mr. Feeder, B.A., and the fair Cornelia Blimber. Doctor Blimber,
     especially, seemed to take pains to look as if nothing would surprise him more; but it was
     perfectly well known to all the young gentlemen nevertheless, and when they departed for the
     society of their relations and friends, they took leave of Mr. Feeder with awe. 
Mr. Feeder's most romantic visions were fulfilled. The Doctor had determined to paint the
     house outside, and put it in thorough repair; and to give up the business, and to give up
     Cornelia. The painting and repairing began upon the very day of the young gentlemen's
     departure, and now behold! the wedding morning was come, and Cornelia, in a new pair of
     spectacles, was waiting to be led to the hymeneal altar. 
The Doctor with his learned legs, and Mrs. Blimber in a lilac bonnet, and Mr. Feeder, B.A.,
     with his long knuckles and his bristly head of hair, and Mr. Feeder's brother, the Reverend
     Alfred Feeder, M.A., who was to perform the ceremony, were all assembled in the drawing-room,
     and Cornelia with her orange-flowers and bridesmaids had just come down, and looked, as of old,
     a little squeezed in appearance, but very charming, when the door opened, and the weak-eyed
     young man, in a loud voice, made the following proclamation: 
`mr. and mrs. toots!´ 
Upon which there entered Mr. Toots, grown extremely stout, and on his arm a lady very
     handsomely and becomingly dressed, with very bright black eyes. 
`Mrs. Blimber,´ said Mr. Toots, `allow me to present my wife.´ 
Mrs. Blimber was delighted to receive her. Mrs. Blimber was a little condescending, but
     extremely kind. 
`And as you've known me for a long time, you know,´ said Mr. Toots, `let me assure you that
     she is one of the most remarkable women that ever lived.´ 
`My dear!´ remonstrated Mrs. Toots. 
`Upon my word and honour she is,´ said Mr. Toots. `I—I assure you, Mrs. Blimber, she's a most
     extraordinary woman.´ 
Mrs. Toots laughed merrily, and Mrs. Blimber led her to Cornelia. Mr. Toots having paid his
     respects in that direction, and having saluted his old preceptor, who said, in allusion to his
     conjugal state, `Well, Toots, well, Toots! So you are one of us, are you, Toots?'—retired with
     Mr. Feeder, B.A., into a window. 
Mr. Feeder, B.A., being in great spirits, made a spar at Mr. Toots, and tapped him skilfully
     with the back of his hand on the breast-bone. 
`Well, old Buck!´ said Mr. Feeder with a laugh. `Well!Here we are! Taken in and done for.
     Eh?´ 
`Feeder,´ returned Mr. Toots. `I give you joy. If you're as—as—as perfectly blissful in a
     matrimonial life, as I am myself, you'll have nothing to desire.´ 
`I don't forget my old friends, you see,´ said Mr. Feeder. `I ask 'em to my
     wedding, Toots.´ 
`Feeder,´ replied Mr. Toots gravely, `the fact is, that there were several circumstances
     which prevented me from communicating with you until after my marriage had been solemnised. In
     the first place, I had made a perfect Brute of myself to you, on the subject of Miss Dombey;
     and I felt that if you were asked to any wedding of mine, you would naturally expect that it
     was with Miss Dombey, which involved explanations, that upon my word and honour, at
     that crisis, would have knocked me completely over. In the second place, our wedding was
     strictly private; there being nobody present but one friend of myself and Mrs. Toots's, who is
     a Captain in—I don't exactly know in what,´ said Mr. Toots, `but it's of no consequence. I
     hope, Feeder, that in writing a statement of what had occurred before Mrs. Toots and myself
     went abroad upon our foreign tour, I fully discharged the offices of friendship.´ 
`Toots, my boy,´ said Mr. Feeder, shaking his hands, `I was joking.´ 
`And now, Feeder,´ said Mr. Toots, `I should be glad to know what you think of my union.´ 
`Capital!´ returned Mr. Feeder. 
`You think it's capital, do you, Feeder?´ said Mr. Toots solemnly. `Then how capital must it
     be to Me! For you can never know what an extraordinary woman that is.´ 
Mr. Feeder was willing to take it for granted. But Mr. Toots shook his head, and wouldn't
     hear of that being possible. 
`You see,´ said Mr. Toots, `what I wanted in a wife was—in short, was sense. Money,
     Feeder, I had. Sense I—I had not, particularly.´ 
Mr. Feeder murmured, `Oh, yes, you had, Toots!´ But Mr. Toots said: 
`No, Feeder, I had not. Why should I disguise it? I had not I knew that
     sense was There,´ said Mr. Toots, stretching out his hand towards his wife, `in perfect heaps.
     I had no relation to object or be offended, on the score of station; for I had no relation. I
     have never had anybody belonging to me but my guardian, and him, Feeder, I have always
     considered as a Pirate and a Corsair. Therefore, you know it was not likely,´ said Mr. Toots,
     `that I should take his opinion.´ 
`No,´ said Mr. Feeder. 
`Accordingly,´ resumed Mr. Toots, `I acted on my own. Bright was the day on which I did so!
     Feeder! Nobody but myself can tell what the capacity of that woman's mind is. If ever the
     Rights of Women, and all that kind of thing, are properly attended to, it will be through her
     powerful intellect.—Susan, my dear!´ said Mr. Toots, looking abruptly out of the
     window-curtains, `pray do not exert yourself!´ 
`My dear,´ said Mrs. Toots, `I was only talking.´ 
`But, my love,´ said Mr. Toots, `pray do not exert yourself. You really must be careful. Do
     not, my dear Susan, exert yourself. She's so easily excited,´ said Mr. Toots, apart to Mrs.
     Blimber, `and then she forgets the medical man altogether.´ 
Mrs. Blimber was impressing on Mrs. Toots the necessity of caution, when Mr. Feeder, B.A.,
     offered her his arm, and led her down to the carriages that were in waiting to go to church.
     Doctor Blimber escorted Mrs. Toots. Mr. Toots escorted the fair bride, around whose lambent
     spectacles two gauzy little bridesmaids fluttered like moths. Mr. Feeder's brother, Mr. Alfred
     Feeder, M.A., had already gone on, in advance, to assume his official functions. 
The ceremony was performed in an admirable manner. Cornelia, with her crisp little curls,
     `went in,´ as the Chicken might have said, with great composure; and Doctor Blimber gave her
     away, like a man who had quite made up his mind to it. The gauzy little bridesmaids appeared to
     suffer most. Mrs. Blimber was affected, but gently so; and told the Reverend Mr. Alfred Feeder,
     M.A., on the way home, that if she could only have seen Cicero in his retirement at Tusculum,
     she would not have had a wish, now, ungratified. 
There was a breakfast afterwards, limited to the same small party; at which the spirits of
     Mr. Feeder, B.A., were tremendous, and so communicated themselves to Mrs. Toots that Mr. Toots
     was several times heard to observe, across the table, `My dear Susan, don't exert
     yourself!´ The best of it was, that Mr. Toots felt it incumbent on him to make a speech; and in
     spite of a whole code of telegraphic dissuasions from Mrs. Toots, appeared on his legs for the
     first time in his life. 
`I really,´ said Mr. Toots, `in this house, where whatever was done to me in the way of—of
     any mental confusion sometimes—which is of no consequence and I impute to nobody—I was always
     treated like one of Doctor Blimber's family, and had a desk to myself for a considerable
     period—can—not—allow—my friend Feeder to be—´ 
Mrs. Toots suggested `married.´ 
`It may not be inappropriate to the occasion, or altogether uninteresting,´ said Mr. Toots
     with a delighted face, `to observe that my wife is a most extraordinary woman, and would do
     this much better than myself—allow my friend Feeder to be married—especially to—´ 
Mrs. Toots suggested `to Miss Blimber.´ 
`To Mrs. Feeder, my love!´ said Mr. Toots, in a subdued tone of private discussion: `”whom
     God hath joined,” you know, “let no man”—don't you know? I cannot allow my friend Feeder to be
     married—especially to Mrs. Feeder—without proposing their—their—Toasts; and may,´ said Mr.
     Toots, fixing his eyes on his wife, as if for inspiration in a high flight, `may the torch of
     Hymen be the beacon of joy, and may the flowers we have this day strewed in their path, be
     the—the banishers of—of gloom!´ 
Doctor Blimber, who had a taste of metaphor, was pleased with this, and said, `Very good,
     Toots! Very well said, indeed, Toots!´ and nodded his head and patted his hands. Mr. Feeder
     made in reply, a comic speech chequered with sentiment. Mr. Alfred Feeder, M.A., was afterwards
     very happy on Doctor and Mrs. Blimber; Mr. Feeder, B.A., scarcely less so, on the gauzy little
     bridesmaids. Doctor Blimber then, in a sonorous voice, delivered a few thoughts in the pastoral
     style, relative to the rushes among which it was the intention of himself and Mrs. Blimber to
     dwell, and the bee that would hum around their cot. Shortly after which, as the Doctor's eyes
     were twinkling in a remarkable manner, and his son-in-law had already observed that time was
     made for slaves, and had inquired whether Mrs. Toots sang, the discreet Mrs. Blimber dissolved
     the sitting, and sent Cornelia away, very cool and comfortable, in a postchaise, with the man
     of her heart. 
Mr. and Mrs. Toots withdrew to the Bedford (Mrs. Toots had been there before in old times,
     under her maiden name of Nipper), and there found a letter, which it took Mr. Toots such an
     enormous time to read, that Mrs. Toots was frightened. 
`My dear Susan,´ said Mr. Toots, `fright is worse than exertion. Pray be calm!´ 
`Who is it from?´ asked Mrs. Toots. 
`Why, my love,´ said Mr. Toots, `it's from Captain Gills. Do not excite yourself. Walters and
     Miss Dombey are expected home!´ 
`My dear,´ said Mrs. Toots, raising herself quickly from the sofa, very pale, `don't try to
     deceive me, for it's no use, they're come home—I see it plainly in your face!´ 
`She's a most extraordinary woman!´ exclaimed Mr. Toots, in rapturous admiration. `You're
     perfectly right, my love, they have come home. Miss Dombey has seen her father, and they are
     reconciled!´ 
`Reconciled!´ cried Mrs. Toots, clapping her hands. 
`My dear,´ said Mr. Toots; `pray do not exert yourself. Do remember the medical man! Captain
     Gills says—at least he don't say, but I imagine, from what I can make out, he means—that Miss
     Dombey has brought her unfortunate father away from his old house, to one where she and Walters
     are living; that he is lying very ill there—supposed to be dying; and that she attends upon him
     night and day.´ 
Mrs. Toots began to cry quite bitterly. 
`My dearest Susan,´ replied Mr. Toots, `do, do, if you possibly can, remember the medical
     man! If you can't, it's of no consequence—but do endeavour to!´ 
His wife, with her old manner suddenly resorted, so pathetically entreated him to take her to
     her precious pet, her little mistress, her own darling, and the like, that Mr. Toots, whose
     sympathy and admiration were of the strongest kind, consented from his very heart of hearts;
     and they agreed to depart immediately, and present themselves in answer to the Captain's
     letter. 
Now some hidden sympathies of things, or some coincidences, had that day brought the Captain
     himself (toward whom Mr. and Mrs. Toots were soon journeying) into the flowery train of
     wedlock; not as a principal, but as an accessory. It happened accidentally, and thus: 
The Captain, having seen Florence and her baby for a moment, to his unbounded content, and
     having had a long talk with Walter, turned out for a walk; feeling it necessary to have some
     solitary meditation on the changes of human affairs, and to shake his glazed hat profoundly
     over the fall of Mr. Dombey, for whom the generosity and simplicity of his nature were awakened
     in a lively manner. The Captain would have been very low, indeed, on the unhappy gentleman's
     account, but for the recollection of the baby; which afforded him such intense satisfaction
     whenever it arose, that he laughed aloud as he went along the street, and, indeed, more than
     once, in a sudden impulse of joy, threw up his glazed hat and caught it again; much to the
     amazement of the spectators. The rapid alternations of light and shade to which these two
     conflicting subjects of reflection exposed the Captain, were so very trying to his spirits,
     that he felt a long walk necessary to his composure; and as there is a great deal in the
     influence of harmonious associations, he chose, for the scene of this walk, his old
     neighbourhood, down among the mast, oar, and block makers, ship-biscuit bakers, coal-whippers,
     pitch-kettles, sailors, canals, docks, swing-bridges, and other soothing objects. 
These peaceful scenes, and particularly the region of Lime-house Hole and thereabouts, were
     so influential in calming the Captain, that he walked on with restored tranquillity, and was,
     in fact, regaling himself, under his breath, with the ballad of Lovely Peg, when, on turning a
     corner, he was suddenly transfixed and rendered speechless by a triumphant procession that he
     beheld advancing towards him. 
This awful demonstration was headed by that determined woman, Mrs. MacStinger, who,
     preserving a countenance of inexorable resolution, and wearing conspicuously attached to her
     obdurate bosom a stupendous watch and appendages, which the Captain recognised at a glance as
     the property of Bunsby, conducted under her arm no other than that sagacious mariner; he, with
     the distraught and melancholy visage of a captive borne into a foreign land, meekly resigning
     himself to her will. Behind them appeared the young MacStingers, in a body, exulting. Behind
     them, two ladies of a terrible and steadfast aspect, leading between them a short gentleman in
     a tall hat, who likewise exulted. In the wake, appeared Bunsby's boy, bearing umbrellas. The
     whole were in good marching order; and a dreadful smartness that pervaded the party would have
     sufficiently announced, if the intrepid countenances of the ladies had been wanting, that it
     was a procession of sacrifice, and that the victim was Bunsby. 
The first impulse of the Captain was to run away. This also appeared to be the first impulse
     of Bunsby, hopeless as its execution must have proved. But a cry of recognition proceeding from
     the party, and Alexander MacStinger running up to the Captain with open arms, the Captain
     struck. 
`Well, Cap'en Cuttle!´ said Mrs. MacStinger. `This is indeed a meeting! I bear no malice now.
     Cap'en Cuttle—you needn't fear that I'm a going to cast any reflections. I hope to go to the
     altar in another spirit.´ Here Mrs. MacStinger paused, and drawing herself up, and inflating
     her bosom with a long breath, said, in allusion to the victim, `My 'usband, Cap'en Cuttle!´ 
The abject Bunsby looked neither to the right nor to the left, nor at his bride, nor at his
     friend, but straight before him at nothing. The Captain putting out his hand, Bunsby put out
     his; but, in answer to the Captain's greeting, spake no word. 
`Cap'en Cuttle,´ said Mrs. MacStinger, `if you would wish to heal up past animosities, and to
     see the last of your friend, my 'usband, as a single person, we should be 'appy of your company
     to chapel. Here is a lady here,´ said Mrs. MacStinger, turning round to the more intrepid of
     the two, `my bridesmaid, that will be glad of your protection, Cap'en Cuttle.´ 
The short gentleman in the tall hat, who it appeared was the husband of the other lady, and
     who evidently exulted at the reduction of a fellow-creature to his own condition, gave place at
     this, and resigned the lady to Captain Cuttle. The lady immediately seized him, and, observing
     that there was no tome to lose, gave the word, in a strong voice, to advance. 
The Captain's concern for his friend, not unmingled, at first, with some concern for
     himself—for a shadowy terror that he might be married by violence, possessed him, until his
     knowledge of the service came to his relief, and remembering the legal obligation of saying, `I
     will,´ he felt himself personally safe so long as he resolved, if asked any question,
     distinctly to reply `I won't'—threw him into a profuse perspiration; and rendered him, for a
     time, insensible to the movements of the procession, of which he now formed a feature, and to
     the conversation of his fair companion. But as he became less agitated, he learnt from this
     lady that she was the widow of a Mr. Bokum, who had held and employment in the Custom House;
     that she was the dearest friend of Mrs. MacStinger, whom she considered a pattern for her sex;
     that she had often heard of the Captain, and now hoped he had repented of his past life; that
     she trusted Mr. Bunsby knew what a blessing he had gained, but that she feared men seldom did
     know what such blessings were, until they had lost them; with more to the same purpose. 
All this time, the Captain could not but observe that Mrs. Bokum kept her eyes steadily on
     the bridegroom, and that whenever they came near a court or other narrow turning which appeared
     favourable for flight, she was on the alert to cut him off if he attempted escape. The other
     lady, too, as well as her husband, the short gentleman with the tall hat, were plainly on
     guard, according to a preconcerted plan; and the wretched man was so secured by Mrs.
     MacStinger, that any effort at self-preservation by flight was rendered futile. This, indeed,
     was apparent to the mere populace, who expressed their perception of the fact by jeers and
     cries; to all of which, the dread MacStinger was inflexibly indifferent, while Bunsby himself
     appeared in a state of unconsciousness. 
The Captain made many attempts to accost the philosopher, if only in a monosyllable or a
     signal; but always failed, in consequence of the vigilance of the guard, and the difficulty, at
     all times peculiar to Bunsby's constitution, of having his attention aroused by any outward any
     visible sign whatever. Thus they approached the chapel, a neat whitewashed edifice, recently
     engaged by the Reverend Melchisedech Howler, who had consented, on very urgent solicitation, to
     give the world another two years of existence, but had informed his followers that, then, it
     must positively go. 
While the Reverend Melchisedech was offering up some extemporary orisons, the Captain found
     an opportunity of growling in the bridegroom's ear: 
`What cheer, my lad, what cheer?´ 
To which Bunsby replied, with a forgetfulness of the Reverend Melchisedech, which nothing but
     his desperate circumstances could have excused: 
`D—d bad.´ 
`Jack Bunsby,´ whispered the Captain, `do you do this here, o´ your own free will?´ 
Mr. Bunsby answered `No.´ 
`Why do you do it, then, my lad?´ inquired the Captain, not unnaturally. 
Bunsby, still looking, and always looking with an immovable countenance, at the opposite side
     of the world, made no reply. 
`Why not sheer off?´ said the Captain. 
`Eh?´ whispered Bunsby, with a momentary gleam of hope. 
`Sheer off,´ said the Captain. 
`Where's the good?´ retorted the forlorn sage. `She'd capter me agen.´ 
`Try!´ replied the Captain. `Cheer up! Come! Now's your time. Sheer off, Jack Bunsby!´ 
Jack Bunsby, however, instead of profiting by the advice, said in a doleful whisper: 
`It all began in that there chest o´ yourn. Why did I ever conwoy her into port that night?´ 
`My lad,´ faltered the Captain, `I thought as you had come over her; nor as she had come over
     you. A man as has got such opinions as you have!´ 
Mr. Bunsby merely uttered a suppressed groan. 
`Come!´ said the Captain, nudging him with his elbow, `now's your time! Sheer off! I'll cover
     your retreat. The time's a flying. Bunsby! It's for liberty. Will you once?´ 
Bunsby was immovable. 
`Bunsby!´ whispered the Captain, `will you twice?´ 
Bunsby wouldn't twice. 
`Bunsby!´ urged the Captain, `it's for liberty; will you three times? Now or never!´ 
Bunsby didn't then, and didn't ever; for Mrs. MacStinger immediately afterwards married him. 
One of the most frightful circumstances of the ceremony to the Captain, was the deadly
     interest exhibited therein by Juliana MacStinger; and the fatal concentration of her faculties,
     with which that promising child, already the image of her parent, observed the whole
     proceedings. The Captain saw in this a succession of man-traps stretching out infinitely; a
     series of ages of oppression and coercion, through which the seafaring line was doomed. It was
     a more memorable sight than the unflinching steadiness of Mrs. Bokum and the other lady, the
     exultation of the short gentleman in the tall hat, or even the fell inflexibility of Mrs.
     MacStinger. The Master MacStingers understood little of what was going on, and cared less;
     being chiefly engaged, during the ceremony, in treading on one another's half-boots; but the
     contrast afforded by those wretched infants only set off and adorned the precocious woman in
     Juliana. Another year or two, the Captain thought, and to lodge where that child was, would be
     destruction. 
The ceremony was concluded by a general spring of the young family on Mr. Bunsby, whom they
     hailed by the endearing name of father, and from whom they solicited half-pence. These gushes
     of affection over, the procession was about to issue forth again, when it was delayed for some
     little time by an unexpected transport on the part of Alexander MacStinger. That dear child, it
     seemed, connecting a chapel with tombstones, when it was entered for any purpose apart from the
     ordinary religious exercises, could not be persuaded but that his mother was now to be decently
     interred, and lost to him for ever. In the anguish of this conviction, he screamed with
     astonishing force, and turned black in the face. However touching these marks of a tender
     disposition were to his mother, it was not in the character of that remarkable woman to permit
     her recognition of them to degenerate into weakness. Therefore, after vainly endeavouring to
     convince his reason by shakes, pokes, bawlings-out, and similar applications to his head, she
     led him into the air, and tried another method; which was manifested to the marriage party by a
     quick succession of sharp sounds, resembling applause, and subsequently, by their seeing
     Alexander in contact with the coolest paving-stone in the court, greatly flushed, and loudly
     lamenting. 
The procession being then in a condition to from itself once more, and repair to Brig Place,
     where a marriage feast was in readiness, returned as it had come; not without the receipt, by
     Bunsby, of many humorous congratulations from the populace on his recently-acquired happiness.
     The Captain accompanied it as far as the house-door, but, being made uneasy by the gentler
     manner of Mrs. Bokum, who, now that she was relieved from her engrossing duty—for the
     watchfulness and alacrity of the ladies sensibly diminished when the bridegroom was safely
     married—had greater leisure to show an interest in his behalf, there left it and the captive;
     faintly pleading an appointment, and promising to return presently. The Captain had another
     cause for uneasiness, in remorsefully reflecting that he had been the first means of Bunsby's
     entrapment, though certainly without intending it, and through his unbounded faith in the
     resources of that philosopher. 
To go back to old Sol Gills at the Wooden Midshipman's, and not first go round to ask how Mr.
     Dombey fared—albeit the house where he lay was out of London, and away on the borders of a
     fresh heath—was quite out of the Captain's course. So he got a lift when he was tired, and made
     out the journey gaily. 
The blinds were pulled down, and the house so quiet, that the Captain was almost afraid to
     knock; but listening at the door, he heard low voices within, very near it, and knocking
     softly, was admitted by Mr. Toots. Mr. Toots and his wife had, in fact, just arrived there;
     having been at the Midshipman's to seek him, and having there obtained the address. 
They were not so recently arrived, but that Mrs. Toots had caught the baby from somebody,
     taken it in her arms, and sat down on the stairs, hugging and fondling it. Florence was
     stooping down beside her; and no one could have said which Mrs. Toots was hugging and fondling
     most, the mother or the child, or which was the tenderer, Florence of Mrs. Toots, or Mrs. Toots
     of her, or both of the baby; it was such a little group of love and agitation. 
`And is your Pa very ill, my darling dear Miss Floy?´ asked Susan. 
`He is very, very ill,´ said Florence. `But, Susan, dear, you must not speak to me as you
     used to speak. And what's this?´ said Florence, touching her clothes, in amazement. `Your old
     dress, dear? Your old cap, curls, and all?´ 
Susan burst into tears, and showered kisses on the little hand that had touched her so
     wonderingly. 
`My dear Miss Dombey,´ said Mr. Toots, stepping forward, `I'll explain. She's the most
     extraordinary woman. There are not many to equal her! She has always said—she said before we
     were married, and has said to this day—that whenever you came home, she'd come to you in no
     dress but the dress she used to serve you in, for fear she might seem strange to you, and you
     might like her less. I admire the dress myself,´ said Mr. Toots, `of all things. I adore her in
     it! My dear Miss Dombey, she'll be your maid again, your nurse, all that she ever was, and
     more. There's no change in her. But, Susan, my dear,´ said Mr. Toots, who had spoken with great
     feeling and high admiration, `all I ask is, that you'll remember the medical man, and not exert
     yourself too much.´ 
