
 CHAPTER XVI. 
MISS BROTHERTON VISITS THE WIDOW ARMSTRONG, AND LAYS THE FOUNDATION OF A VERY LASTING
				FRIENDSHIP — SHE THEN CALLS AT DOWLING LODGE, BUT FAILS OF OBTAINING WHAT SHE WENT
				FOR.

				As soon as Miss Brotherton and Mrs. Tremlett had finished their
				breakfast on the morning after the interview with Sophy Drake in the drawing-room at
				Milford Park, they set off together on foot to visit the widow Armstrong in
				Hoxley-lane.
 "Nothing can happen to us worse than our adventure in the carriage the day before
				yesterday," observed the young lady; "you will confess, dear friend, will you not,
				that Sir Matthew's walking into the  carriage was more terrible than
				any thing likely to befall us on the high-road without one?" 
"Why, I suppose I must, my dear," answered the old lady; "for to tell you the truth,
				I don't think you could look more put out if a constable were to come up and arrest
				you."
"Decidedly not, Mrs. Tremlett; and listen to the birds, and sniff the sweet air, and
				then tell me if we are not wise to walk?"
The old woman confessed that she really did enjoy it, and on they went with the
				gardener's boy for a guide, till in less than an hour they found themselves before
				the door of No. 12, in Hoxley-lane. Probably their little pioneer was not one of the
				widow's visiters, for the pass through the hedge, leading to the back-kitchen door
				appeared unknown to him, and in answer to Miss Brotherton's knock for admittance,
				the principal entrance to No. 12 was opened by the ragged mistress of the
				tenement.
"Does the widow Armstrong live here?" inquired Mary. "Yes, ma'am," observed the woman
				gloomily; continuing as she made way for the ladies to enter, "The widow Armstrong
				is a lucky woman — she has got but one child left to provide for, and yet the
				gentlefolks keeps coming to help her, but nobody thinks of me and my ten young
				ones."
The ready hand of Miss Brotherton was immediately in her purse. "That is a large
				family indeed, my good woman. Are they none of them old enough to help
				themselves?"
"The seven oldest have all been in the factory from a'most the time they could stand,
				ma'am," replied Mrs. Sykes, "and if they hadn't, they must have been dead and buried
				long ago for want of bread. But though they have worked poor creturs, early and
				late, there's no more come of it, than that their bones be here instead of in the
				churchyard."
"But with so large a number, all receiving wages," said Miss Brotherton, gently, "I
				should have hoped that you might have found yourselves better off than you seem to
				be."
"And that's what we are told, ma'am, from year's end to year's end, and we must bear
				it, for there is no help. But 'tis a'most as bitter as the work that grinds us."
 Neither the person or manner of Mrs. Sykes were in any degree prepossessing; she was
				dirty, and in every way untidy in the extreme. She had on her feet the fragments of
				a pair of men's shoes, but no stockings, the rest of her clothing being barely
				sufficient to cover her. Her eye, voice, and complexion, furnished strong
				indications of her being accustomed to take spirits, while her frightfully thin
				limbs gave her the appearance of being half starved. In short, it was impossible to
				look at her without feeling that she was a degraded, as well as a suffering being.
				Mary Brotherton did feel this, and her heart sunk within her as she thought of Sophy
				Drake, of her drunken father, and of all Mrs. Tremlett had told her respecting the
				vice, which like a wide-spreading and hideous epidemic, seemed to ravage in all
				directions the miserable neighbourhood in which fate had placed her. She shuddered
				as she contemplated the wretched being that stood before  her, and till
				she had spoken the words given above, a deep feeling of the woman's unworthiness
				chilled the ready pity of her warm young heart. But both in these words themselves,
				and in the tone of quiet settled despair in which they were spoken, there was a
				frightful and mysterious allusion to some species of injustice and cruelty, under
				which accusation she seemed herself to be included. 
The distaste and reprobation that were a moment before making hasty inroads upon her
				benevolence, seemed suddenly arrested as she listened; and she was about to repeat
				again the questions she had already so uselessly asked, as to whence this universal
				severity of judgment against the factory labourers arose; and wherefore, beyond all
				others, submitted to the sentence which dooms human beings to toil, these people
				should appear to loath their employment, and execrate, as it should seem, the very
				means by which they lived. But ere her lips opened to demand the explanation to
				which she so eagerly desired to listen, a glance at the hard features of the
				wretched woman checked her. "It cannot be from such as these," thought she, "that
				truth and instruction can be reasonably looked for" — and as she silently gave her
				alms, and moved onwards towards the door which had been pointed to, as that of the
				widow Armstrong, something like a systematic project for making herself mistress of
				the knowledge she wanted, for the first time suggested itself to her
				imagination.
Mrs. Sykes eyed the silver largesse, as it fell into her hand, with a glance that
				seemed to devour it, and the words of thanks she uttered were almost hysterical in
				their eager vehemence. After delaying a moment for the contemplation of this
				precious "drudge 'twixt man and man," she opened the door of communication, and Miss
				Brotherton and her friend passed into the dwelling-room of the widow Armstrong.
Contrary to custom, her lame boy, Edward, was sitting on the side of her bed, and
				when Mary entered, he was holding her hand, and gazing in her face with an
				expression of countenance which appeared to both the intruders to be the most
				piteous they had ever looked upon. The poor child was looking, too, most wretchedly
				ill, and the first idea which suggested itself was, that he felt himself to be
				dying.
Notwithstanding the extreme poverty of the widow Armstrong, there was an air of
				decency and decorum about her, that might in any situation have commanded respect;
				but when contrasted with the appearance of her neighbour, seemed to indicate a claim
				to more observance than her visiters were showing by this sudden and uninvited
				entrance.
"I beg your pardon, Mrs. Armstrong," said Mary, gently, "for breaking in upon you so
				abruptly; and I fear our doing so may have startled your sick child. — This little
				fellow is very ill, I fear."
"It is long since he has known health, ma'am," replied the widow; "but it is not that
				which makes him look so white and trembling now. We have lost what was dearer to us
				both than all the world beside — and though I don't think as this one will ever look
				up again, I can't find a word in my heart to comfort him!"
"What, then, has happened to you?" said Mary, with much interest — "Nothing bad to
				your son Michael, I hope?"

"You know Michael, ma'am?" said the poor woman, anxiously.
"I have seen him at Sir Matthew Dowling's," she replied.
"I wish you never had, ma'am!" rejoined the widow, bitterly — "We were only starving
				before, but now we are worse than that."
"Do explain to me what you mean, Mrs. Armstrong," said Mary.
"I ought to do it, ma'am, for you speak kindly; and that's a claim poor folks can
				seldom withstand. — But how can I tell you the matter, ma'am? I know nothing — and
				that's the reason why poor Edward and I are so miserable."
"But that is a bad way to get into, my good Mrs. Armstrong," said Mary, cheerfully.
				"Don't fret yourself about fancied evils, which perhaps do not exist. Little Edward
				here should know better than that."
The pale, brokenhearted boy looked at her with lack-lustre eyes, but said
				nothing.
"Are you uneasy because Michael has not been down to see you lately?" resumed Miss
				Brotherton.
"He never failed to come, ma'am, till he was carried away from us!" replied the
				widow, with a sob, that seemed the result of strength exhausted, and weakness that
				could struggle no longer.
"Carried away from you!" cried Mary, changing colour. "What do you mean, Mrs.
				Armstrong? who has carried away Michael from you?"
"Sir Matthew Dowling, ma'am, has had him taken away," and another sob followed the
				words.
"Do not think I torment you thus from idle curiosity," pursued Mary, bending over
				her; "but I entreat you to explain to me fully what you mean. I am greatly
				interested for your little boy."
"I thank you for it, ma'am," returned the poor mother, mournfully; "but I can tell
				little that you, or any grand lady, the friend of Sir Matthew, would think to the
				purpose. Yet the parting with him without one blessing, or one kiss, is hard to
				bear, though we don't justly know that any harm's to come to him."
"I am no particular friend of Sir Matthew Dowling's," replied Mary, with an accent
				which perhaps spoke more than her words.
"Then I will tell you about Michael!" exclaimed the lame boy, coming round
				the bed to the place where she was standing, and looking into her face as if he
				thought he could read all her thoughts there. "You have seen poor Mike when he was
				living there, ma'am?"
"Yes, I have, my dear boy," she replied, gazing with deep feeling at his pale, but
				beautiful countenance; "I have seen him there more than once, Edward, and I am quite
				sure he was not happy, though he was dressed so fine."
"He was more unhappy ten times over," replied Edward, "than when he was as ragged as
				me."
"Was he unkindly treated?" demanded Mary.
"He was beaten, kicked, and spit upon!" cried Edward, bursting into tears; "and then
				he was told to laugh, and look merry."

"A wretched, wretched, sort of cruelty!" she replied, "of which I can well believe
				Sir Matthew capable. But you surely do not suppose that he has run away from it
				without telling you or his mother that he had such an intention?"
"If you knew Mike better, ma'am, you wouldn't think that he could do such
				wickedness," said the mother. "He has stood beating with strap and stick for years,
				ma'am, young as he is; and never asked to stop from the mill a day, though he has
				been bruised almost to a jelly; — and worse than that, too, poor lamb! a hundred
				fold, with such a heart as his, he has seen his lame brother there, that was always
				dearer, a great deal, to him than himself — he has seen the cruel stripes fall on
				his poor shoulders, too; and though he has come home with his little face washed
				with tears from it, he didn't think of running away."
Mary saw that she had given pain, and hastened to atone for it by expressing her
				sorrow for supposing such a thing possible; and then repeated her request, that she
				might be told what it was that had happened.
The widow then related more succinctly than might have been expected, all that had
				passed between herself, her boy, and Miss Martha Dowling, on the morning which
				followed the theatrical representation at Dowling Lodge. And before she proceeded
				further, Edward bore testimony to the spirited and courageous willingness with which
				his brother had adopted the proposed scheme. He had, it seemed, as usual, watched
				Teddy's return from the factory — told him what Sir Matthew proposed doing for him,
				and declared, that hard as it would be to part with him and "mother," he was ready
				and willing to start, and was quite determined to be the best boy that ever was
				'prenticed, and to be workman enough to maintain them both as soon as his time was
				out.
Here the widow again resumed her narrative, and related very accurately the scene of
				the following morning; dwelling much on the young lady's kind manner, and on her own
				putting it to her whether she advised that the child should go, or not.
"And Martha Dowling counselled you to let him go?" demanded Miss Brotherton.
"Yes, again and again, she did," replied the poor mother.
"You are quite sure it was Miss Martha?"
"Oh, yes! ma'am; my Mike took care to make me understand that, the day they came
				together."
"Then be quite easy in your mind, Mrs. Armstrong," said Mary, eagerly. "I have no
				great liking for Sir Matthew Dowling. I do not think well of him, nor have I much to
				say in favour of any of his family. They seem to me to be cold-hearted, selfish
				people. But for this one, this Miss Martha that you speak of, I will undertake to
				answer for it that she has never deceived you, and that if she advised you to let
				Michael go, it was because she thought the doing so would be advantageous for
				him."
 "Bless you for ever and for ever, ma'am!" cried Mrs. Armstrong, seizing the hand of
				Mary, and pressing it to her lips. "There is  truth, ma'am, in your
				voice, and in your eyes. Do as I do, Edward, dear! look at the kind face of this
				young lady, and see if you can't find comfort from what she says? I did think,
				myself, ignorant as I am, that the young lady had an honest face. But, oh! ma'am,
				let it be as it will, and make the very best of it, 'tis cruel to have our darling
				taken away in this fashion, without one word of take-leave and blessing!" 
"Indeed it is!" replied Mary; "and your being ignorant of the place of his
				destination increases this anxiety. But on this point, at least, I think I shall be
				able to set your mind at rest. Before this time to-morrow, I will take care to see
				some part of the family at the Lodge, and shall certainly not scruple to inquire
				every particular respecting your boy. Keep up your spirits therefore, both of you;
				and for the future, let this little fellow here look to me for his wages. I won't
				have him go to the factory any more. What sum has he been receiving for his
				work?"
Astonishment very literally rendered the widow Armstrong dumb, on hearing this most
				extraordinary proposal. Poor soul! a few short days ago it would have been
				sufficient to make her forget her weakness and her want, and have put her in a state
				of mind that queens might envy; for she would hardly have been able to remember that
				it was possible to have another wish; but now the first use she made on recovering
				her speech, was to exclaim, "Oh! Michael! Michael! why beant you by to hear
				this?"
"He shall hear it, Mrs. Armstrong," said Mary, in a voice of such cheerful
				confidence, that the terrors of both mother and son seemed to vanish before it. Mrs.
				Tremlett, too, ventured to add an encouraging commentary upon Mary's promised visit
				of inquiry at the Lodge, observing, that it was altogether out of probability that
				they should want to make any mystery as to where the little fellow was gone.
Mrs. Armstrong, as she listened, seemed almost too happy to credit the evidence of
				her own senses; but in the deep-set melancholy eye of Edward, there was still an
				expression of suffering and of fear that looked as if misery had taken a hold upon
				him that could not be relinquished.
"Now I must go!" said the young lady, rising, "or I shall hardly have time to keep my
				promise. But I must settle with you first, my dear boy. What was the amount of your
				wages by the month?"
 "Six shillings, ma'am," replied Edward, looking at her, as she drew out her purse,
				with an eye that seemed to doubt what it beheld. "Six shillings!" cried Miss
				Brotherton, as she put the pitiful wages of a long month's agony into the little
				trembling hand. "And have you lost your health and liberty for this?" Tears started
				to her eyes, as she contemplated the look of wonder and delight expressed by the
				countenance of the poor widow; yet that look was not turned upon her. Stretching out
				her arms to the boy, she caught him to her bosom, and held him there, much as if she
				had suddenly beheld him snatched from the fangs of some devouring monster. The face
				of the  child himself, she could not see, but his whole frame trembled,
				and they fancied he was shedding tears. 
"God bless you both!" she said, "to-morrow you shall see me again." And so saying she
				took the arm of her friend, and again passed through the dwelling-room of Mrs.
				Sykes. The woman had now three little dirty creatures round her, to whom she was
				giving bread.
"Heaven keep you, ma'am! This is your treat!" she said, as Mary and her friend passed
				through, "It is the first time for many a week that I have fed 'em so freely, poor
				creturs."
Miss Brotherton's heart was too full to answer — she nodded her head and passed on.
				Their homeward walk, up Hoxley-lane, across the London road, and along a pretty
				shaded bridle-road that led to a gate in her own park-paling, was performed almost
				entirely in silence. There is a state of mind in which ideas come with too much
				violence and rapidity to be told off in words. When this happens from an excess of
				happy imaginings, no condition can be more delightful: but when, as in the present
				case, it arises from the remembrance of painful realities, it is greatly the
				reverse. The misery around her was no longer a matter of doubtful speculation, but
				of most frightful certainty. Neither was it any vice in little Edward Armstrong,
				which drove him to offer up his sickly suffering frame to ceaseless labour at the
				rate of threepence for each long, painful day. She felt oppressed, overwhelmed, and
				almost hopeless. Yet at that time Mary Brotherton knew not, guessed not, dreamed
				not, of the hundredth part of what the unhappy class who had thus roused her human
				sympathies, were daily and hourly suffering around her.
The first words she spoke on entering her house were to order her carriage, and
				having gone so far in the performance of the task she had undertaken, she turned
				with tender kindness to her old friend, and gave as much care to her comfort and
				refreshment, as if the relative situation which they had borne to each other in days
				of yore was just reversed, and that Mary was the nurse, and Mrs. Tremlett the
				nursling.
"You shall do nothing more before dinner, my dear good soul, but lie down upon the
				sofa, and get cool. Not even Mrs. Gabberly, I suppose, could see any thing
				particularly dangerous and improper, in my going alone to pay a visit to Martha
				Dowling."
And alone to Dowling Lodge the heiress went, pretty steadfastly determined not to
				leave it, till she had learnt exactly at what point of the earth's surface Michael
				Armstrong might be found.
She inquired for Martha, and was shown as usual into my lady's morning drawing-room,
				where to her extreme annoyance she found her ladyship, Sir Matthew, Lady Clarissa
				Shrimpton, and Miss Mogg.
 If Lady Dowling could have been glad to see any pretty young lady, it would have
				been Miss Brotherton, and she did exert herself, more than usual, to be civil;
				while, on the contrary, Sir Matthew both felt and evinced considerably less
				satisfaction at the sight of her, than he had ever done since the fact of her
				heiress-ship had become matter  of unquestionable notoriety to the
				whole neighbourhood. But if his reception was cold, that of Lady Clarissa was warm,
				for she actually threw her arms round the young lady, reproaching her at the same
				time very tenderly for not having sent to say she was going to drive to Dowling
				Lodge. "I should have liked your carriage, my dear, so much better than my broiling
				little phaeton!" 
It was hardly possible at that moment, that either one of the four persons present
				could have said any thing to her sufficiently interesting to fully awaken her sense
				of hearing; unless, indeed, Sir Matthew had led the conversation to Michael
				Armstrong. But this he did not do; and, therefore, having endured Lady Clarissa's
				embrace, and answered her mechanically, she knew not what, Miss Brotherton walked up
				to the sofa where the lady of the mansion as usual sat enthroned, and said, "Will
				you be so good, ma'am, as to let Miss Martha be told that I am come to call upon
				her?"
The surprised eyebrows with which her ladyship listened to this speech would,
				probably, under other circumstances, have given birth to an exceedingly comical
				caricature, but at this moment Mary Brotherton had no fun in her thoughts, and not
				immediately receiving an answer, she said, loud enough for Sir Matthew to hear,
				"Will you give me leave to ring the bell, and ask for the pleasure of seeing Miss
				Martha?"
Lady Dowling still remained silently staring at her; but not so Sir Matthew. He
				reached the bell almost as soon as the young lady herself, and fully persuaded that
				this most unaccountable request could only proceed from some little manoeuvring
				project at that moment labouring in the fair Brotherton's head, which had, somehow
				or other, his son Augustus for its object, his countenance resumed all its former
				affectionate urbanity towards her, and taking her hand too suddenly for any
				contrivance to prevent it, he said — "Martha? ... Do you want to see Martha, my
				dear? — To be sure you shall. She is a Dowling, Miss Brotherton, though not quite
				like the rest of us. But where is the Dowling, young or old, male or female, who
				would not fly from the farthest corner of the world to see you?"
"I only want to see Miss Martha just now, sir," replied Mary, half smiling.
"And Martha you shall see, my dear, without a moment's delay. Desire Miss Martha
				Dowling to come here instantly!" he continued, as the door opened, and a servant
				appeared at it — adding, when the door closed again, "You do her an honour, my dear
				Miss Brotherton, in thus asking for her, that more than one of her family, perhaps,
				might feel inclined to envy." But as Miss Brotherton made no answer at all, and Lady
				Clarissa began to hem, and fidget, and walk towards the window, all which the
				observant knight well knew were pretty lures, meant to recal him, he contented
				himself with gallantly drawing forward an arm-chair for the heiress, at no great
				distance from Lady Dowling, and then strode across the apartment to sooth the
				irritation of his noble friend.
 Martha never suffered a summons from her father to remain a moment 
				unanswered. The message had been delivered to her in his name, and she entered
				almost immediately. Miss Brotherton, who was in no humour to make small talk for her
				ladyship, instantly rose, and went forward to meet her. "I took the liberty of
				sending for you, my dear Miss Martha," she said, "to request you would let me speak
				to you alone, for five minutes. — Will you take a parasol, and let us walk into the
				shrubbery together?" 
Martha, who certainly liked Miss Brotherton, notwithstanding the late painful scene,
				produced by her indiscretion, and who, moreover, at this moment, joyfully
				recollected how charming an anecdote she had now to relate concerning her father,
				acquiesced in this proposal with a ready smile, and saying that her parasol was
				always in the hall, the two young ladies left the room together.
No sooner did she find herself beneath the sheltering trees of the extensive
				shrubbery, and ascertained, by looking round, that they were really alone, than Miss
				Brotherton, passing her arm through that of her companion, said, "My dear Miss
				Martha, I cannot help feeling great interest in the welfare of the little boy whom
				we saw performing the other night — little Michael Armstrong, I mean. Will you have
				the kindness to tell me where he is now?"
Instead of giving a direct answer, Martha eagerly exclaimed, "I am so glad, Miss
				Brotherton, that you asked to see me, for I have quite longed to tell you all
				particulars about that little fellow — and all that papa has been doing for him. I
				do assure you, Miss Brotherton, that notwithstanding what you saw the other night,
				papa has been, and still is, most excessively kind to him. Only he was very
				troublesome about the acting, and papa's temper is hasty. That , as you
				must be aware, Miss Brotherton, is the case with many people; but there are very few
				who have courage and candour to own it, as my father does. In justice to him, I must
				tell you what happened the morning after the unfortunate play. My father sent for
				me, and said, that he was perfectly miserable in his mind on account of the anger he
				had shown towards Michael. He told me, as frankly as possible, that he had beat him,
				and that in consequence of this, the boy was evidently so afraid of him that he had
				no enjoyment when in his presence. And he went on to say that such being the case,
				he was determined to apprentice the child to a good trade, where he might learn to
				maintain himself comfortably, and assist his family besides. So you see, Miss
				Brotherton," concluded Martha, in an eager voice, and with heightened colour, "you
				see that if papa loses his temper, he knows how to atone for it."
 Miss Brotherton listened to this statement with the most unbroken attention; and had
				she not been previously aware of the kind and excellent nature of Martha Dowling,
				she would have become so then. Her hopes, too, that all was fair and right
				concerning the disposal of the little boy, were strengthened; and in full confidence
				of receiving a satisfactory answer, she said, "I am very much obliged to you,
				Martha, for telling me all this, because I truly feel an interest in the  little fellow. And now I hope you will tell me also to what part of the country
				he has been sent." 
"I would tell you in a moment, if I knew, my dear Miss Brotherton, but I do not. His
				departure at last was very sudden; owing, I believe, to papa's having found some
				particularly good opportunity of sending him."
"I wonder you should never have asked where he was sent to, Miss Martha," said Mary,
				gravely.
"I did ask, Miss Brotherton," replied Martha; "but papa said he could not recollect
				the name of the place."
Mary changed colour, as she remembered the promise she had given to the child's
				mother; but after a moment's reflection, said, "Perhaps he may have recollected it,
				since, my dear — I wish you would run in, and ask him to come to me for a
				moment."
Martha seemed to hesitate. "I am sure," said she, after a little hesitation, "that
				papa would be delighted to come here to talk with you, Miss Brotherton — only Lady
				Clarissa might — "
"Nay, then, I'll go to him myself," said Mary, rather abruptly. "There is no
				particular objection, I suppose, to Lady Clarissa's being let into the secret of
				little Michael's abode." And immediately turning her steps towards the house, she
				re-entered the drawing-room, followed by Martha.
They found Sir Matthew engaged in exhibiting a portfolio of splendid engravings to
				her ladyship, who was descanting upon them with rapture; though the application of a
				near-sighted glass to one long-sighted eye, while the other was effectually closed,
				rendered them pretty nearly invisible to her.
"I beg ten thousand pardons, Sir Matthew," said the heiress, placing herself at the
				opposite side of the loo-table, and thereby commanding a perfect view of his
				countenance; "but you are too goodnatured, I am sure, to be angry with me, even
				though I do interrupt you. Will you have the kindness to tell me, sir, while Lady
				Clarissa is lost in admiration of that enchanting Venus, where little Michael
				Armstrong has been sent to?"
The question was too unexpected for even Sir Matthew's sturdy self-possession, to
				receive it as he would have wished to do. His bold eye, which had been gaily fixed
				on the young lady, as she spoke to him, fell before her keen, inquiring glance, and
				he turned the page of Lady Clarissa's adoration with rather unseemly rapidity, as he
				replied, "To a tradesman — that is, to a manufacturer, some miles further north,
				Miss Brotherton. I have just been telling Lady Clarissa," continued the knight,
				recovering his audacity, "I have just been telling her all the little fellow's
				adventures. The love of novelty seemed to have superseded all other love in his
				young heart, for he was delighted to go."
"But he could not have liked going without taking leave of his mother and brother,
				Sir Matthew. I have just seen them, and they are in a perfect agony about him — in
				fact, I am come here on purpose to ask where he has been sent."

"Fairest of messengers!" exclaimed the knight, with a tender smile, "how utterly
				miserable shall I be if I cannot answer you! — I think it is to Halifax, I am almost
				sure that it is either to Halifax or Wakefield that he is gone."
"You have bound the little fellow apprentice, you do not know where?" said Miss
				Brotherton, with undisguised astonishment.
"I do not say that, my dear young lady, I know he is apprenticed to an excellent good
				man, who is a stocking-weaver; but her has two or three large concerns belonging to
				him, and I protest to you that at this moment I really cannot say to which this
				little fellow has been sent."
"I am quite shocked to give you so much trouble, Sir Matthew," returned Mary, "but I
				should be exceedingly obliged if you would learn the name of the place, and let me
				know it. I ventured, sir, to promise the boy's mother that I would learn this for
				her, and I am quite sure that you will not let me disappoint her."
"Most assuredly not! I will call or send to-morrow at the latest, my charming Miss
				Brotherton! How I adore your benevolence! No wonder you are such friends, Lady
				Clarissa! Your hearts are made upon the same model!"
To this satisfactory assurance Miss Brotherton made no answer; but telling Sir
				Matthew that she should remain at home on the morrow for the purpose of receiving
				his promised information, took her leave.
With increased dislike of Sir Matthew, perhaps, yet with no very serious fears about
				the fate of little Michael, Miss Brotherton boldly determined to brave all the
				wonder which the act might occasion, and ordered her carriage to stop at No. 12,
				Hoxley-lane, Ashleigh.
As it happened, however, she escaped all her military admirers, and reached the widow
				Armstrong without interruption; the absorbing mills were in full activity, and few
				of the inhabitants of the miserable region through which she passed were left to
				gaze on the unwonted spectacle. The answer she brought was received by the widow and
				her boy with breathless attention; but it was quite evident that it did not
				altogether remove the sort of vague terror which seemed to have taken possession of
				them. Mary's cheerful assurance, however, that she should soon bring them more
				satisfactory intelligence, could not be listened to without good effect; and she
				left them at last so infinitely happier than she had found them, that spite of Sir
				Matthew's unsatisfactory reply, and more unsatisfactory manner, she still blessed
				her morning's work.

