
 CHAPTER XX. 
TRADE IN A FLOURISHING STATE — THE BENEFITS CONFERRED THEREBY TO THOSE EMPLOYED IN IT
				— THE NATURAL LOGIC OF RELIGION — ITS FALLIBILITY WHEN PUT TO THE TEST.

				The moment at which Michael Armstrong entered the cotton mill at
				Deep Valley, was a critical one. The summer had been more than commonly sultry, and
				a large order had kept all hands very sharply at work. Even at dead of night the
				machinery was never stopped, and when one set of fainting children were dragged from
				the mules another set were dragged from the reeking beds they were about to occupy,
				in order to take their places. The ventilation throughout the whole fabric was
				exceedingly imperfect; the heat, particularly in the rooms immediately beneath the
				roof, frightfully intense; cleanliness as to the beds, the floors, and the walls,
				utterly neglected; and even the persons of the children permitted to be filthy to
				excess, from having no soap allowed to assist their ablutions — though from the
				greasy nature of their employment it was peculiarly required, while the coarse meal
				occassionally given out to supply its place was invariably swallowed, being far too
				precious in the eyes of the hungry children to be applied to the purpose for which
				it was designed. In addition to all this, the food was miserably scanty, and of a
				nature so totally unfit to sustain the strength of growing children thus severely
				worked, that within a fortnight after Michael's arrival, an epidemic fever of a very
				alarming description began to shew itself. But it had made considerable progress,
				before the presence of this new horror was revealed to him.
Notwithstanding all the hardships of Brookford factory, no infectious disease had
				ever appeared there, which it is possible might have been owing to the fact that the
				majority of the labourers in it lived at a considerable distance, thus insuring to
				them a walk morning and night, through the fresh air. This, though it added to their
				daily fatigue, probably lessened the danger of it, while the wretched hovels to
				which they returned for their short night's rest, miserable shelters as they were,
				reeked not with the congregated effluvia of fifty uncleansed sleepers in one
				chamber! Michael, therefore, had never before witnessed the hideous approach of
				contagion. The general appearance too of the Deep Valley troop was so far from
				healthy, that the sickly aspect of those first seized upon was less remarkable than
				it would have been elsewhere. Thus another week wore away, during which, though
				several of those who had been working when it began were withdrawn, and known to be
				in the sick-ward ere it closed, the fact that an infectious fever was among them had
				not yet got wing.
"Poor dear Betsy Price!" whispered Fanny Fletcher to her friend Michael, as they sat
				side by side at their miserable dinner one day. "I heard missis tell master that she
				was dead. But I am trying to be glad for it Michael."
 "Glad, Fanny?" replied the boy, "you told me once that you  liked her
				more than any other girl in the mill, and now you are glad she is dead!" 
"I am not so glad as I think I ought to be," returned Fanny gently. "She will not be
				hungry in Heaven, Michael, nor will she work till she is ready to fall: and surely
				God will give us green fields and sweet fresh air in Heaven, and there must be
				flowers, Michael. Oh! I am quite sure of that, and Betsy Price will have it all!
				Ought I not to be very, very, glad?"
Michael looked in her sweet, innocent face, as she said this, and tears filled his
				eyes.
"And if you die, Fanny, must I be glad too?"
"If you thought about Heaven as I do, and if you loved me very much indeed," replied
				the little girl, "I can't tell how you could help being glad."
"But I do love you very much indeed," said Michael, almost choked by his efforts not
				to cry, "and I do think of Heaven, too, Fanny, but I could'nt be glad if you was to
				die!"
"Not when you hear that, Michael!" said Fanny, starting up as the lash of the
				governor's whip resounded through the room as a signal that their numbered moments
				of rest were over. "I suppose then I love you better than you love me, for I could
				not help being glad if I knew that you would never hear nor feel that lash
				again!"
When they met again at supper, Michael, though still unsuspicious of the cause,
				missed three more children from their places. He fancied, too, that there was
				something new and strange in the aspect of their hard-featured female tyrant; she
				was paler than usual, scolded not at all, and when she spoke to her husband, it was
				in a voice that hardly exceeded a whisper. Yet, notwithstanding this, some young
				ears again caught words that told of death. Yet still the mill worked on, and
				nothing seemed to mark that any calamity more than usual had got among them.
By degrees, however, the growing pestilence burst forth, as it were, before the eyes
				of the terrified children, and they knew that the grave yawned before them all. Then
				it was that the ghastly countenances of each doomed victim struck dismay into the
				hearts of their companions even before they were permitted to leave their labour,
				and sink down to the rest that should be disturbed no more. But still the mill went
				on, for Mr. Elgood Sharpton had just received a glorious order from Russia, and it
				would have been perfect madness, as this gentlemen was heard to remark to his eldest
				son, if a death or two among the apprentice children was to check the mill at such a
				time as that.
So the mill went on, and death went on too. But as it is considered by all parties
				concerned to be extremely important that the cry of epidemic contagion should not be
				raised in the neighbourhood of a factory under these circumstances, it was deemed
				best by Mr. Elgood Sharpton, and his confidential managers, not to call in medical
				assistance.
 "For first and foremost, Poulet," said the experienced proprietor to the governor of
				the apprentice house, "first and foremost, it is of  no manner of use.
				I never knew any proper, regular contagious fever in my life, that could be stopped
				short by a doctor. You must take care of yourself and your wife, of course, and I
				will see that you have a hamper of good old port sent in, and mind that you both of
				you take two glasses a day each, Poulet — one before you go into the rooms in the
				morning, and the other, after you have seen them all down for the night, and we must
				order in a cask of vinegar to sprinkle the chambers. Trust me that this will do more
				good than all the doctors that ever were hatched. Besides the vinegar cask will
				never sing out you know, Poulet, and the doctor might." 
To this reasoning, and to these arrangements, no objection whatever was made by the
				governor of the apprentice-house. Of athletic frame, and iron nerves, he grinned
				defiance at any danger that threatened his own person, rightly enough thinking,
				perhaps, that any disease to which his water-porridge-fed troop appeared peculiarly
				liable, would be little likely to attack himself.
It was, however, not the least part of his wisdom upon this occasion, that he
				systematically paid as little attention to what was going on round him as possible.
				Had he made it a habit to look into the haggard faces of the drooping children, as
				one after another they pined, languished, and sunk, first into the horrible abyss of
				wretchedness called the sick-ward, and then into the grave, it is possible that he
				too might in some degree have been shaken. As it was, however, he went on so
				cleverly supplying the missing hands by recommending to the manager that one healthy
				child should do the work of two, and so cleverly, also, getting all that died by day
				buried by night, without making, as he said, any fuss or fidget about it whatever,
				that Mr. Elgood Sharpton felt him to be eminently deserving of an especial reward,
				and when fifteen children had been noiselessly buried, in Tugswell churchyard, he
				presented him with a Bank of England note for ten pounds, as a testimony of his
				esteem and gratitude for his very exemplary and praiseworthy behaviour. It fared not
				quite so well, however, with his wife. Whether it were that the poco-curante system
				was less within reach of her position than of his; or that her frame was less
				stoutly proof against the malaria with which she was surrounded, a visible change
				came over her about three weeks after this visitation had been first felt at the
				Deep Valley mills. Strong in constitution, and athletic in form, it seemed, however,
				no easy matter for disease itself to conquer her. The large dark eye grew dim, and
				sunk back behind her high cheek-bones by degrees. Her coarse firm-set features
				appeared to relax, and her active limbs to languish, for two whole days before she
				yielded herself to the invincible power that had seized upon her.
 It happened during this interval that Fanny Fletcher and Michael, in their eagerness
				to communicate to each other their observations on the rapidly-increasing sickness
				of their fellow-labourers, hung back together, as the frightened train swept on
				before the lifted lash of the governor, and permitted nearly all their companions to
				reach the mill ere they had left the supper-room. They were perhaps themselves
				unconscious  how much they were emboldened to this hardy defiance of a
				standing law by the unwonted stillness of tongue, and tameness of aspect observable
				in Mrs. Poulet. But if they fancied they were to escape entirely they were mistaken,
				for whilst the little girl was telling Michael that they ought always, at work, or
				not at work, to be thinking of God, who was perhaps thinking of them, and meaning to
				take them both up together to his own happy Heaven, just as she had laid her hand on
				his to enforce her words, and looking wistfully in his face pronounced aloud, "Do
				Michael, do!" the sick dragon stepped back on hearing them, from the passage that
				led into the kitchen, and turning her ghastly face full upon them, exclaimed, while
				her languid fist strove in vain to clench and raise itself, as in days of yore, to
				threaten castigation. 
"Do! you devil's imps! I'll do ye! Off to your mules or by — ." But ere she could
				finish the sentence, her fever-laden sinews relaxed, and seizing upon the long table
				for support she sank almost insensible upon a bench.
Greatly terrified, both Michael and Fanny screamed together, but they screamed in
				vain. There was no longer any one within hearing save in the closely packed chamber
				above, where more than twenty sick children lay two and two together, in their
				miserable beds, but totally without nurses or attendants of any kind, so that their
				loud cries, though heard by many brought assistance from none.
"Oh! Michael! Michael! she'll die too!" said Fanny shuddering. "I would make her live
				longer if I could. She is not fit to die. Go to the pump, Michael, and fetch water!
				Go, go, dear boy. We must not leave her this way!"
The little girl endeavoured to raise the woman's head, which had sunk upon the table,
				but the effort was beyond her strength, and feeling after a moment's reflection that
				the best manner of assisting her would be to call others, she cried, "No, no! don't
				go Michael! Don't go for the water. It is no use my trying to hold her up, and
				besides we don't know if it is good for her or not. Oh dear! how dreadful bad she
				looks. Let us run away to the mill, Michael, and tell the master."
 The seizure of Mrs. Poulet, unlike every other, became, within an hour, from the
				time it was known, the theme of every tongue throughout the whole establishment. Had
				it been Mr. Elgood Sharpton himself it could not well have occasioned a greater
				sensation. The effect this produced throughout the sickly troop might have served as
				a proof of the wisdom of a government when it conceals the mischief it has brought
				upon an empire, from those who are likely to discuss it. The total silence which
				till now had been preserved among the managers and overlookers respecting the
				contagious nature of the malady which had got among the children, the absence of all
				medical attendance, and of all precautionary or medical measures in any way
				calculated to excite attention, had hitherto very successfully prevented rumour from
				doing her usual work on such occasions; and it is probable that this partial
				ignorance of their own danger considerably lessened its consequences; for it was  only one or two such thougthful, meditative little things, as Fanny
				Fletcher, who had began to remember having heard of infectious fevers, and to think
				that maybe it was something of that sort that had made Nos. 9, 16, 18, 19. &c.,
				&c., stay away so long, and that too, when the mill was so very busy. 
But when it became generally known that the awful strength of Mrs. Poulet was laid
				low, and when the words, "the fever have cautched her!" had once been pronounced
				aloud, the palpable image of the pale tyrant seemed to stand frowning in the midst
				of them, substituting his grisley hour-glass and scythe for the fist, and the frown
				he had conquered.
The scene which followed this was very frightful. — Those upon whom infection had
				seized, sunk from their work at once, despite the goading thong which had hitherto
				kept them from dropping — as the spur and the lash sustain the failing post-horse.
				While those who were yet untouched looked in each other's faces as if to watch who
				next should fall. When the children from all the different floors of the fabric met
				together at their midday meal, the first thought of each seemed to be the finding
				out who was missing since last they assembled, and the shudder that followed the
				perceiving another and another, and another gone, ran along the shortening lines
				with an agony which grew more and more intense as their numbers lessened.
When things had reached this state, Mr. Elgood Sharpton agreed with Mr. Poulet that
				it might perhaps be as well to let an apothecary from Tugswell visit the factory, to
				which reluctant decision two reasons strongly contributed. The first was, that
				though with his usual fore-thought he had divided his nocturnal burying between the
				churchyards of Tugswell and Meddington, the clergymen of both had declared that
				their frequency rendered it necessary that some inquiry should be made into the
				cause of so great a mortality — and the second was that the fact of the mistress of
				the apprentice house, being herself at the point of death from the same malady, must
				infallibly prove to the medical visitant that it was no treatment peculiar to the
				children which had occasioned it, but that it had come beyond all possibility of
				contradiction by the visitation of God.
Nevertheless the medical gentleman ventured to declare that nothing would be so
				likely to stop the contagion as nourishing food; upon which the terrified
				manufacturer astonished all the butchers within his reach, by commanding a large
				supply of beef and mutton " good enough to make wholesome soup ," and
				before another ghastly week had passed away, the wisdom of this prescription became
				so evident that when settling accounts together at the end of it, Mr. Poulet hinted
				to his employer that he did not feel quite sure whether upon the whole a
					little better living for the apprentices might not pay.
For all answer Mr. Elgood Sharpton put his finger to the sum total for provisions
				during the last week, and then turning back a page or two of the huge volume, did
				the same by the sum total of a former week.
 "True, sir, true enough," said Mr. Poulet, "but howsomever it  can't be
				denied, that if we go on this fashion we shall have no hands left to work with — and
				there would be but small profit in that sir." 
"My dear Poulet, you do not study the population returns as attentively as I do,"
				replied his enlightened master. "Just at this moment it may be very right to cram
				them for several reasons — the best being, observe, that by so doing we stop more
				mouths than their own. But as to going on in the same style of expense when this fit
				of dying and gossiping is over, it is quite out of the question, and I do beg that
				you will never mention the subject to me again. You can know little my good Poulet
				of the rate at which pauper children are multiplied, if you think it necessary to
				preserve them at this ruinous rate of expence. If there were all of them to die off
				before the end of the month, I would undertake to have their place supplied before
				the end of the next. You may take my word for it that no man ever succeeded in
				business who did not know how to make out an accurate balance between profit and
				loss. I know to a fraction what each of these 'prentice brats are worth, Poulet, and
				I can tell you that such weekly bills as these would speedily turn the tables
				against us."
"In that case, sir, there is surely no more to be said," replied Poulet; and then
				changing the subject, he added, "In course, sir, you won't object to my missis being
				buried by day, instead of by night? Besides respect to her, sir, I think it would be
				quite as well, shewing all the country, you see, as how flesh is but grass for the
				high, as for the low, and making it manifest to all the country that it can't be no
				want of good nursing and comfort as causes the deaths at our mill."
"Quite right, quite right, Poulet," replied the rapid-minded Mr. Sharpton, promptly;
				"I should not object even to stopping the mills for a couple of hours or so, and
				making all the hands follow as mourners, if you thought it would answer."
"Why, as to that, sir," said the faithful servant, "I would not undertake to say that
				we should be able to get up much of a procession if we turned out the whole lot to
				choose from. They couldn't stand I should think, sir, without the mules to hold by,
				for so long together. They totter frightful, I can tell you, when they starts first
				to move to and fro, from factory to 'prentice-house, and back again, and I don't
				think there would be either credit or profit in making a show of them."
"Well, well! do as you will, Poulet. I dont care a brass farthing whether they walk
				or stand; and I can't say when I built this factory, it was with any view to make a
				show, as you call it, of the young ladies and gentlemen to be employed in it."
With a light laugh which challenged an answering laugh from the governor, widower as
				he was, Mr. Elgood Sharpton rose to depart. Poulet attended him to the outer gate,
				and held his stirrup while he mounted, reiterating his promises to do the best he
				could, and only stipulating for plenty of vinegar, and leave to use soap till the
				cold weather came in.
 Meanwhile, though a less proportion died of those who were seized with the malady,
				than before the improvement in the diet was introduced, the plague was as yet very
				far from being stayed. No day  passed without many fresh victims
				sinking under its influence, and it was no uncommon thing to see two or three
				wheelbarrows at a time, towards the evening of every day, conveying children from
				the factory to the apprentice-house who had fallen while following the machinery. 
For a whole week after the death of Mrs. Poulet, Michael and his friend Fanny, both
				continued as it seemed, unscathed, and many were the grave discussions between them,
				as to whether they ought to be sorry or glad that they were so — Fanny very steadily
				adhering to her first opinion, that if they had a great deal of love for each other,
				they would not let themselves be sorry, if one saw the other go away, and Michael as
				steadily persisting that right or wrong he must be so very sorry if Fanny went, as
				not to care at all how soon he followed after.
The disinterested reasonings of the little girl were soon put to the proof. Michael
				looked so very ill one morning at breakfast, that even the iron-hearted Poulet told
				him he had best mount to the sick ward before it was needful to carry him; but
				Michael looked at poor Fanny, and saw such an expression of terror and misery in her
				countenance, that he could not help thinking she would change her mind about being
				glad, if he did not go into work along with her. So he told the governor that he
				wasn't bad at all, and had rather work than not; an assurance, which it could not,
				under any circumstances, be Mr. Poulet's duty to combat; and accordingly Michael got
				to his place in the mill, and spoke cheeringly to Fanny as he went along. But before
				the hour of dinner he was on the floor, and when the overlooker called to a
				stretcher to have him wheelbarrowed back to the 'Prenticehouse, Fanny Fletcher
				thought that she certainly did not love poor Michael Armstrong so much as she
				fancied she did, for that if the choice had been given her, she would a great deal
				rather have been taken ill herself. And spite of a strap that she saw coming towards
				her, and flourishing ready for duty in the air, she helped to drag the unresisting
				body of her poor companion from before the mules, and thoughtless and reckless of
				the consequences, sat down and held his head on her knee, till he was raised in the
				arms of the stretcher and carried off. It was then, and not till then, that her
				tears began to flow, and they flowed so fast, that she could no longer see the
				uplifted strap, nor was it till the blow had descended sharply on her arm that she
				was sufficiently mistress of her thoughts to remember, that there was at any rate a
				hope that it might be her turn next, and with this to comfort her, she yielded
				meekly to the arm that pushed her to her usual place, and resumed her occupation
				with more stedfast courage, than at that moment any other hope could have given
				her.
But even this sad hope proved vain. Fanny Fletcher still continued one of the very
				few upon whom the contagion had no effect. For the first day or two after the
				removal of her friend, her mind, was almost wholly occupied by the expectation of
				feeling the same symptoms that she had witnessed in him; and when these came not,
				her thoughts reverted to the possibility of his recovering and coming again to work
				near her.

It was an established custom among those who alone could give information on the
				subject, never to permit any questionings concerning the sick, or if they were
				boldly hazarded, to give no other reply than a rebuke. So that day after day, and
				week after week elapsed, without her being at all able to guess, whether Michael
				were dead or alive. By degrees, however, all hope of seeing him return, faded from
				her mind, and then, poor little girl, she found out that people can't always wish
				truly and really for what they know to be best either for themselves or others. And
				day by day, though still the fever touched her not, she grew more pale, more thin,
				more melancholy. Now and then, indeed, it still occurred to her as possible that
				Michael might reappear again, as many had done after many days of sickness; but,
				alas! none had ever staid away so long as he had done! She had questioned many who
				had been ill concerning him, but none seemed to know or care any thing about those
				who had shared the sick chamber with them; till at length, a boy to whom she had
				often addressed these questions, because she happened to know that he had been taken
				to the sick ward on the same day as Michael, replied as if by a sudden effort of
				recollection,
"Oh! that chap? Him what was one of the last as come? Ay, ay, I mind all about him.
				He was dead and buried before he had been down three days."
Fanny Fletcher asked no more questions, nor had she any longer hope of following
				where so many of her happier companions were gone. The fever was pronounced to be
				over, the Factory and Apprentice-house were whitewashed, and a number of new inmates
				arrived. All things in short at the Deep-Valley Mills appeared to be going on as
				prosperously as usual; a statement which could be hardly impeached by the fact that
				one little girl there was growing paler and more shadow-like every day.
