
 CHAPTER VIII. 
A VERY INNOCENT TÉTE-À-TÊTE, BUT IN WHICH MISS MARTHA DOWLING COMES TO A WRONG
				CONCLUSION — AN UNFORTUNATE EMBASSY — AN AGREEABLE EXCURSION — A PHILOSOPHICAL
				DISQUISITION — A VISIT TO THE FACTORY.

				While these things were going on in my Lady Dowling's morning
				drawing-room, the forgotten Martha — forgotten at least by all but little Michael —
				employed herself in seeking such a basket, as might answer the purpose of a viaticum
				between the object of her father's charity, and the mother and brother of whom he
				had so fondly spoken. Having at length succeeded in her quest, she returned to the
				dining-room, and was almost as much disappointed at finding the object of her
				good-natured exertions flown, as the poor child himself had been, when obliged to
				quite the room to which this kind friend had promised to return. But Martha, though
				not a person very highly favoured by circumstances, was nevertheless better off than
				Michael, inasmuch as by keeping out of sight she could pretty generally contrive to
				remain where she chose, and do what she liked. These enviable privileges enabled her
				now to sit down at one of the large open windows of the diningroom, and to draw from
				her unseemly-sized pocket, a volume of Shakspeare, with which she determined to
				beguile the time till the boy should return, or till by some means or other, she
				might be able to discover what had become of him.
When therefore, impelled by the playful, but very effectual impulse of Sir Matthew's
				shove, Michael once more entered the dining-parlour, he had the satisfaction of
				being again greeted by the friendly eye and friendly voice, which had already so
				greatly cheered him.
"So, here you are again, my little man," said Martha, repocketing her book, and
				rising; "I thought you would hardly forget the basket: see, here it is, and now you
				shall help me pack it."
The help thus asked for, was afforded by the happy child's holding the basket in his
				hand, as he followed her round the table, while with a smile that spoke as much
				pleasure as his own, she selected all sorts of good things to put into it.
"There! now I don't think we can put in any more, Michael; so set off, and carry it
				to your mother."
With eyes beaming rapture, and little hands that trembled with delight, Michael
				closed the lid of the basket, and proceeded towards the door; but ere he had fully
				reached it, he stopped short, and addressing Martha, in a tone as fearless and
				confidential as if she had been his sister, he said,
"But what d'ye think about Teddy? Mightn't I change into my old clothes again, and
				just step into the factory for one minute? Teddy can't almost never eat the dinner
				as we takes to the factory, and a bit of this would do him so much good! — May
				I?"

"Upon my word, Michael, I am rather puzzled what to say," replied his friend; "as
				papa has ordered you to have these clothes, he might not be pleased at your taking
				them off again, and it would be a great pity to make him angry with you when he is
				so very good and kind, wouldn't it?"
Michael hung his head, and said nothing.
"But why need you change your clothes, my dear boy? — I dare say Teddy would be very
				proud to see you look so nice."
Still Michael answered not, but began assiduously picking to pieces the handle of
				Martha's delicate basket.
"Don't do that, dear," said Martha, approaching, and taking the offending hand in
				hers; "but tell me what you are thinking about?"
"I am thinking," said Michael, "that if I walked into the midst of 'em this way, and
				up to poor Teddy, in his dirty ragged clothes, it would look" — and here he stopped
				without finishing the sentence.
"It would look, how? — as if you were proud, perhaps?" said Martha.
The child shook his head.
"No, not that. Teddy would not think that," he replied.
"What would he think, then? — Tell me all that is passing in your little head, and
				then I shall be able to advise you."
"Why, he'd think," said Michael, and tears started as he spoke — "he'd think that he
				and I could never be right down brothers any more."
Martha involuntarily kissed the little face that was turned up to hers, but replied,
				laughingly,
"Oh! that's foolish, Michael; do you think that a fine jacket could separate two
				little brothers that love each other? — I think I could love you quite as well in a
				shabby coat, as in a fine one."
Michael looked at her very earnestly for a minute or two, and then said, almost in a
				whisper, "Is Sir Matthew Dowling, as owns our factory, your father?"
"Yes, Michael," replied Martha, colouring from some painful feeling which the
				expression of the boy's speaking features had given rise to. The child coloured too,
				but said, with good courage,
"Please, ma'am, I should love Teddy just as well, and Teddy would love me, only the
				others may-be would mock at him and me too — and I know Teddy could not bear
				it."
"Then they would not be as good children as I think you are. But tell me, Michael,
				something about the mill: papa has never let us see it yet, but I believe it is only
				because mamma thinks it is a dirty place. Is it very dirty, Michael?"
"Yes, please ma'am."
 "And what makes it so, my dear? The cotton that goes into it looks as white as snow.
				I never can get any body to tell me any thing about a mill, but I think it must be
				very curious — and I want to know, Michael, what good such very little creatures as
				you can do there; yet I have heard papa say, that he pays a vast quantity of money
				to quite little children, and that's the reason, he says, that  the
				factories are such a blessing to the country. You get wages, don't you, my little
				fellow?" 
"Yes, ma'am; I gets two shilling a week, and Teddy eighteen-pence, 'cause he's
				weaker."
"That is not much, to be sure; but it's better than nothing, isn't it?"
"Yes, ma'am."
"Do the children in general like it?"
"Like what, ma'am?"
"Working in the factory, my dear, and getting money for their poor parents."
"The children likes to have the wages," replied Michael.
"But perhaps they do not like to do any work for them, Michael?" said Martha,
				laughing. "That's what papa says. But it is not right, my dear, for little boys and
				girls to be always at play, you know. Don't you think, Michael that it is proper for
				poor people's children to do something to help themselves if they can?"
"Yes, ma'am," said Michael, but in so low a tone, that it was as much as Martha could
				do to hear it; and so melancholy a look accompanied the words, that she could not
				help thinking there was a great deal of truth in what she had constantly heard
				repeated by most of her father's friends and neighbours, as well as himself —
				namely, that the factory children were a race of very idle, ungrateful little
				creatures; spoilt by the high wages and indulgence they received, and quite
				unconscious of the inestimable advantages they possessed over all the other children
				in the British dominions.
But, nevertheless, though this disagreeable conviction pressed very painfully upon
				her, Martha could not help feeling very kindly disposed towards little Michael; and
				upon his presently saying, "Shall I go to mother and Teddy, if you please, ma'am?"
				she almost forgot all the naughtiness she attributed to him and his fraternity, and
				only remembering the disadvantage that any disobedience to her father's wishes might
				bring upon him, said, "Wait one moment, Michael, and I will find papa, and ask if
				you may change your dress, in order to visit your brother in the factory."
So saying, she left the room, and having ascertained that the visiters were gone,
				ventured to seek her father in the drawing-room; where she found him deep in
				consultation with Dr. Crockley, his two eldest daughters, and his son, as to the
				possibility of converting the school-room into a theatre: all being of opinion that
				the great drawing-room must be reserved for the ball, and the dining-room for the
				supper, which it was agreed on all sides must follow the representation.
"May I speak to you, papa?" said Martha, timidly, on perceiving that the whole party
				were exceedingly earnest upon some theme or other.
"Oh! goodness, Martha, don't come to plague us now!" exclaimed Arabella.
"It is very odd, but Martha always does come in the way of every thing," said
				Harriet.

"I wish you were married or buried, child!" cried the lively Augustus; "for you make
				a monstrous bad had at playing the young lady of fashion. Upon my life you grow
				fatter every day. Doesn't she, doctor? I wish you would dose her a little."
"That Miss Martha is a little opaque, I will not deny," replied Dr. Crockley,
				familiarly coming behind her, and measuring the expanse of her waist with his two
				hands.
"May I speak to you, papa?" repeated the patient Martha, quietly retreating from the
				jocose hands of Dr. Crockley, but apparently quite insensible to all the other
				attacks.
"What do you want to say, Martha?" demanded Sir Matthew.
Thus much encouraged, she drew near and whispered to him, "The little boy that you
				have taken in, papa, wants to know if he may put on his old clothes again, and go to
				speak to his brother in the factory?"
"Do you hear this, doctor?" exclaimed Sir Matthew; "the boy wants to go back to the
				factory again. Isn't that an answer to all the trash that people have been trying to
				get up about their being over-worked? It is just like 'em — that's the very model of
				a factory child — do what you will, you can never content 'em."
"The chap want's to get back to the factory?" said Dr. Crockley, addressing himself
				to Martha, with an accent that indicated surprise. "That's curious enough, any
				how."
"No, sir, I do not believe he wants to do any more than speak to his brother, who is
				at work there — he wanted to take him something that was left at luncheon,
				papa."
"And to show off his own good living to the factory? That's it, I suspect, doctor;
				one can understand that — and what do you say to it? I should have no objection, I
				think; what's your opinion? only I don't see the fun of his going in his old rags,
				if he went as you saw him just now, it would make some fun, wouldn't it?"
"Capital, by Jove!" replied the doctor. "How quick you are, Sir Matthew! you seize
				every thing in a moment. What do you say to our going along with him? Mightn't we
				catch a hint or two, as to how things were going on?"
"If I'm quick, Crockley, upon my soul you are not slow," replied the knight. "You've
				got your horse here, of course?" The doctor nodded assent. "Then I will order mine,
				and we'll ride down to the mill together. So get along, Martha, and tell the boy
				that I will take him to the factory with me, but that he is not to change his
				clothes."
Martha felt quite aware that she had not executed her commission successfully. But
				there was no help for it, and therefore with the best grace she could, she told her
				little client the result of it.
The whole aspect of the boy changed as he heard it, and, as if instinctively, he
				placed the precious basket, that till now he had continued to hold firmly in his
				hand, upon a table near him.
"But take your basket, Michael," said the kind-hearted Martha, in a voice that was
				intended to cheer him; "I am sure papa won't be angry at your doing that, for I told
				him about it."
"No, please ma'am, I'd rather not," said Michael.

"Well, then, go into the hall, by that door, and wait till Sir Matthew comes through.
				Perhaps he will speak to you about it, and at any rate you had better carry it as
				far as that."
The child obeyed her, and taking up again the treasure he no longer valued, passed
				out into the hall; but before Sir Matthew and his friend entered it, Michael had put
				the worthless basket out of sight.
Hardly had he done so, when he heard the coarse laugh of Sir Matthew and the
				respondent titter of the doctor approaching. The little fellow started, and jumped
				aside, in order to place himself out of their way; but the knight, striding to the
				place where he stood, seized him by the shoulder with his hand, while with a
				vigorous action of his enormous foot, he sent him forward towards the house-door.
				This feat, which was performed with considerable dexterity, met its reward, in the
				shout of laughter with which Dr. Crockley welcomed it. "By Jove, Sir Matthew!" he
				exclaimed, as soon as he had recovered his breath; "there is nothing like you on the
				face of God's earth. — It is a confounded monopoly though, let me tell you. No man
				has a right to be the deepest reasoner, the best jester, and the most finished man
				of taste of his age. It's monstrous, Sir knight, and a conspiracy against you would
				be a very honest plot."
And as he spoke he held his sides, as if still suffering from the effects of his
				excessive merriment.
A servant who followed the facetious pair now opened the door, and on the broad
				esplanade of gravel before it a couple of grooms were holding the gentlemen's
				horses. As soon as they were seated in their saddles, with a mounted attendant
				behind them, the great manufacturer turned round his head to seek the object of his
				charity. Michael stood doubting and trembling on the lowest step of the portico,
				while a faint hope fluttered at his heart, that the grand gentlemen would ride away
				and forget him; but it was quickly chased by the voice of Sir Matthew, who, bringing
				his horse's head so close upon the child, as to touch him, while he seemed almost to
				shrink into the pillar by which he stood, to escape it, said in a voice, the jeering
				tone of which again almost convulsed Dr. Crockley with laughter,
"Pray, young gentleman, may you happen to know the way to Brookford factory?"
The boy looked out upon the wide-spreading park; and though, despite the
				carefully-chosen position of the mansion, many towering grim-looking chimney cones
				were seen to rise amidst their own lurid smoke in the distance (for in that
				direction lay the town of Ashleigh), he could catch no glimpse of the hated walls
				that for years past had formed his daily prison-house. He, therefore, answered, but
				not very audibly, "No, sir, if you please."
"Speak up, my hero!" vociferated Sir Matthew, advancing upon him, — "Yes, or no?"
"No;" replied the boy, distinctly.
"Then be pleased to have the kindness to do me the favour of following my horse, and
				I will have the honour of showing you the way."

So saying, sir Matthew gave a merry look of intelligence to his friend, and they set
				off together at a brisk trot.
Michael, for a piecer, [1] was a tall child for his age; and, though his limbs were
				wretchedly thin and attenuated, they had sufficient elasticity to enable him for
				some time to keep at no great distance, though it was a constantly increasing one,
				from the two gentleman; but, by degrees, his breath and strength failed, and
				perforce his speed relaxed into a panting, shuffling, walk.
Sir Matthew, who from time to time turned round a laughing face to look at him, now
				reined up his horse and awaited his approach; upon which Michael redoubled his
				efforts, and in a few minutes stood beside his benefactor.
"Step on, young gentleman; step a little quicker, if you please; or, perhaps, I may
				find a way to mend your pace: I am not very fond of such lazy company." And, suiting
				his action to his words, he gave the quivering child several sharp cuts across the
				shoulders with his riding-whip.
"He trots out in style now, doesn't he, doctor?" said Sir Matthew gaily, making his
				well-bitted horse cross and recross the road in such a manner, that, at each
				manoeuvre, the goaded child fancied himself already trampled beneath his feet.
				"Don't you think I should make a good dancing-master, Crockley?"
"Capital, by Jove! — Egad, the youngster has learned some vastly pretty steps
				already. By the way, Sir Matthew," continued the philosophical physician, "when one
				watches that pale-faced young scamp making such active caprioles for no reason on
				the earth, but because he hears your pretty gentle jennet snuffing at his shoulder,
				— when one watches that, it is impossible not to see that nothing in God's world but
				sheer wilful laziness makes those obstinate little brutes, at the factory, pretend
				to totter, and stumble, and faint, and the devil knows what; when all their work is
				to walk backwards and forwards as leisurely as if they were parading for pleasure.
				Nothing shall ever make me believe but that all the grunting and grumbling we hear
				about overworked children, proceeds from a regular conspiracy among the worst of the
				parents. And, upon my soul, if you yield to it, you'll soon have to look after the
				wheels yourself."
"Get on with ye, to the lodge there, you lazy cur," said the knight, addressing his
				panting protégé, "and wait till we come up." Then reining up his horse, Sir Matthew
				drew close to his highly-valued intellectual companion, and falling into a gentle
				foot-pace, continued the scientific discussion with deep interest, and a wonderful
				clearness of perception.
 "It is quite curious to me, Crockley," he said, "to observe how common sense and
				observation will often make a man of tolerable ability hit upon the very same facts,
				and come exactly to the very same conclusions as the man of science, who has passed
					 his whole life in study. What you have mentioned now, is precisely
				what has occurred to me over and over again, a thousand times, I am sure, at the
				very least, since I have been working Brookford factory. For just watch, my dear
				Crockley, any little village vagabond that you may chance to see as you ride about
				the country — just watch him at play; and tell me where you'll find a grown man that
				can keep moving as he does?" 
"Nowhere, Sir Matthew, nowhere upon the face of the earth; and it stands to reason,
				in spite of all that the confounded canters can say to the contrary, that nature
				made them so on purpose. Why, what's steam? — Let them answer me that. Is steam
				man's making? Isn't it sent by Providence? And what for, I should like to know?
				Isn't it for the good of mankind? And how is that good to be had, if the nimbleness
				of children is not brought to bear upon it? It is neither more nor less than a most
				shocking impiety, Sir Matthew; and, upon my soul, if I were you I would build a
				meeting-house of my own, and hire a preacher too, at a pretty good salary, to preach
				against it. But no Church of England parson remember; because, if they don't preach
				the doctrine you like, you would have no power to turn 'em out."
"You're right, Crockley. That's a devilish good idea; I'll turn it over in my head,
				and I shall like to hear some more of your notions about it. By the way, Crockley,
				you must not think of going home to dinner to-day. We'll have a cool bottle of
				claret, and talk the matter comfortably over. And there's another thing, too, I want
				to speak to you about. There's a devilish deal of talk about the health of the
				factory brats; and I have a notion of appointing a regular medical practitioner upon
				my establishment, who might always be ready, if called upon, to answer any questions
				that might be asked. Now, I hear you are a man, Crockley, capable of obliging a
				friend that deserves it; and, if it's agreeable to you, instead of looking in now
				and then to give us an opinion as you do now, you shall have a regular appointment,
				with a couple of hundred a year, just to look after the health of the children."
"I should like such an arrangement exceedingly well, Sir Matthew. You know my love of
				science; and this would give me a capital opportunity for speculating upon different
				constitutions. Egad, Sir Matthew, I should like to write a book upon the subject. I
				think a monstrous deal of good might be done that way."
"No doubt about it, Crockley: a clever fellow, like you, may throw an amazing deal of
				light upon a subject that is really becoming exceedingly important; especially when
				one recollects that the national wealth and prosperity depends upon it altogether.
				You must come and dine with me often, Crockley, without any ceremony; and we may be
				able to hit out many a good thing over the bottle."
 The two gentlemen now reached the lodge-gates, where little Michael stood waiting
				for them; and as the high-road soon turned in such a direction as to make Brookford
				factory visible, he was ordered to run on, and wait at the gates without minding
				them. They accordingly proceeded in their conversation without interruption; and in
				the course of it, some very excellent hints were thrown out  relative to
				the manufacturing interests in general, and to that of Brookford factory in
				particular. 
Having reached the gates of what was generally termed his "Magnificent
				establishment," and waited till the stylish groom in attendance upon him came up,
				Sir Matthew, and his estimable friend, left their horses with him, and entered the
				court, which, protected by a very lofty wall, surrounded the buildings on all
				sides.
Those persons who have, once in their lives, seen a large cotton-factory, need no
				description of it; for it has features which, once looked upon, can never be
				forgotten; but, for the information of those who have not, a slight sketch of Sir
				Matthew Dowling's establishment shall be given.
It consisted of very extensive buildings constructed in the centre of the enclosed
				court, and forming three sides of a vast square; the fourth being open on the side
				fronting the principal gates of entrance. When it is stated that the edifice
				consisted of six stories, and that each side of it presented six lines of windows,
				containing forty windows in each line, some idea of its magnitude may be
				conceived.
Michael was already at the gates, and, on the approach of Sir Matthew, rang the bell;
				a ceremony necessary to obtain admittance both for masters and labourers; no means
				of entrance or exit being ever left unsecured for a single instant.
The summons was answered by a lame boy, stationed within to perform the office of
				porter. He bent low before the great man, and low too before his jeering friend;
				though the jocose visits of the latter to the factory were dreaded as much as the
				lash itself.
Neither the one nor the other seemed to see him, but passed on. Then followed poor
				little Michael, hating most cordially the bravery of the attire, which made him
				expect to meet the ridicule, rather than the sympathy, of his late companions.
On seeing a young stranger, the lame porter looked up; but from him, at least,
				Michael had nothing to fear; for the boy's languid eye surveyed his altered person,
				without the slightest suspicion of ever having seen it before. Sir Matthew, like
				most others of his craft, was not in the habit of indulging his family by exhibiting
				to them the secret arcana of that hideous mystery by which the delicate forms of
				young children are made to mix and mingle with the machinery, from whence flows the
				manufacturer's wealth. This divine portion of the vast engine being considered,
				however, as a very inferior, though necessary, part of it. But, although they had
				never honoured the premises with a visit, it was, of course, well known to all that
				Sir Matthew Dowling was the father of a numerous progeny; and Michael passed on
				amidst such blessings as human nature, under such circumstances, was likely to
				bestow on one of them.
 The party entered the building, whence — as all know who have done the like — every
				sight, every sound, every scent that kind nature has fitted to the organs of her
				children, so as to render the  mere unfettered use of them a delight,
				are banished for ever and for ever. The ceaseless whirring of a million hissing
				wheels, seizes on the tortured ear; and while threatening to destroy the delicate
				sense, seems bent on proving first, with a sort of mocking mercy, of how much
				suffering it can be the cause. The scents that reek around, from oil, tainted water,
				and human filth, with that last worst nausea, arising from the hot refuse of
				atmospheric air, left by some hundred pairs of labouring lungs, render the act of
				breathing a process of difficulty, disgust, and pain. All this is terrible. But what
				the eye brings home to the heart of those, who look round upon the horrid earthly
				hell, is enough to make it all forgotten; for who can think of villanous smells, or
				heed the suffering of the earracking sounds, while they look upon hundreds of
				helpless children, divested of every trace of health of joyousness, and even of
				youth! Assuredly there is no exaggeration in this; for except only in their
				diminutive size, these suffering infants have no trace of it. Lean and distorted
				limbs — sallow and sunken cheeks — dim hollow eyes, that speak unrest and most
				unnatural carefulness, give to each tiny, trembling, unelastic form, a look of
				hideous premature old age. 
But in the room they entered, the dirty, ragged, miserable crew, were all in active
				performance of their various tasks; the overlookers, strap in hand, on the alert;
				the whirling spindles urging the little slaves who waited on them, to movements as
				unceasing as their own; and the whole monstrous chamber, redolent of all the various
				impurities that "by the perfection of our manufacturing system," are converted into
				"gales of Araby" for the rich, after passing in the shape of certain poison, through
				the lungs of the poor. So Sir Matthew proudly looked about him, and approved; and
				though it was athwart that species of haughty frown, in which such dignity as his is
				apt to clothe itself, Dr. Crockley failed not to perceive, that his friend and
				patron was in good humour, and likely to be pleased by any light and lively jestings
				in which he might indulge. Perceiving, therefore, that little Michael passed on with
				downcast eyes, unrecognised by any, he wrote upon a slip of paper, for he knew his
				voice could not be heard "Make the boy take that bare-legged scavenger wench round
				the neck, and give her a kiss while she is next lying down, and let us see them
				sprawling together."
Sir Matthew read the scroll, and grinned applause.
 The miserable creature to whom the facetious doctor pointed, was a little girl about
				seven years old, whose office as " scavenger ," was to collect incessantly
				from the machinery and from the floor, the flying fragments of cotton that might
				impede the work. In the performance of this duty, the child was obliged, from time
				to time, to stretch itself with sudden quickness on the ground, while the hissing
				machinery passed over her; and when this is skilfully done, and the head, body, and
				outstretched limbs carefully glued to the floor, the steady-moving, but threatening
				mass, may pass and repass over the dizzy head and trembling body without touching
				it.  But accidents frequently occur; and many are the flaxen locks,
				rudely torn from infant heads, in the process. 
It was a sort of vague hope that something comical of this kind might occur, which
				induced Dr. Crockley to propose this frolic to his friend, and probably the same
				idea suggested itself to Sir Matthew likewise.
"I say, Master Michael!" vociferated the knight in a scream, which successfully
				struggled with the din, "show your old acquaintance that pride has not got the upper
				hand of you in your fine clothes. Take scavenger, No. 3, there, round the neck; now
				— now — now, as she lies sprawling, and let us see you give her a hearty kiss."
The stern and steady machinery moved onward, passing over the body of the little
				girl, who owed her safety to the miserable leanness of her shrunken frame; but
				Michael moved not.
"Are you deaf, you little vermin?" roared Sir Matthew. "Now she's down again. — Do
				what I bid you, or by the living God you shall smart for it!"
Still Michael did not stir, neither did he speak; or if he did, his young voice was
				wholly inaudible, and the anger of Sir Matthew was demonstrated by a clenched fist
				and threatening brow. "Where the devil is Parsons?" he demanded in accents that poor
				Michael both heard and understood. "Fine as he is, the strap will do him good."
In saying this, the great man turned to reconnoitre the space he had traversed, and
				by which his confidential servant must approach, and found that he was already
				within a good yard of him.
"That's good — I want you Parsons. Do you see this little rebel here, that I have
				dressed and treated like one of my own children? What d'ye think of his refusing to
				kiss Miss No. 3, scavenger, when I bid him?"
"The devil he does?" said the manager grinning; "we must see if we can't mend that.
				Mind your hits, Master Piecer, and salute the young lady when the mules go back,
				like a gentleman."
Sir Matthew perceived that his favourite agent feared to enforce his first brutal
				command, and was forced, therefore, to content himself with seeing the oiled and
				grimy face of the filthy little girl in contact with that of the now clean and
				delicate-looking Michael. But he felt he had been foiled, and cast a glance upon his
					protégé , which seemed to promise that he would not forget it.
Having made known to the superintendent, that it was his pleasure to enter the room
				where the brother of Michael was at work, Mr. Parsons led the way to the fifth floor
				of the building; Sir Matthew, however, ordering the door of each chamber, as he
				passed up, to be opened for him, that he might look in upon his stifling slaves, and
				satisfy himself that neither wheels nor sinews were loitering in unthrifty
				repose.
 The air that issued from each, was nauseous; and on entering the room, at the
				farther end of which Edward Armstrong was employed,  Dr. Crockley
				secretly resolved, that when making the final arrangements for his promised
				appointment, it should be specified that he should never enter the working portion
				of the establishment. For though by no means a particularly scientific practitioner,
				the little doctor knew quite enough of the business he followed, to be aware that,
				in his own case at least, the air which filled it, could not be breathed with
				impunity. 
"Now then, sir," said Sir Matthew, addressing himself to Michael, while Parsons
				opened the door on the fifth floor, and announced that this was the room that
				contained Edward. "Now, sir, walk on, and find your brother; and, if your pride does
				not stand in your way, let him be made to understand all the extraordinary kindness
				I have shown you. Take care that you let him and all his companions know that I have
				adopted you as one of my own family; and that henceforward, they will always see you
				dressed as well as you are at present."
All that Michael clearly understood from this harangue was, that he had permission to
				go forward and speak to his brother; and though not venturing quite to run, he moved
				onward at a pace that speedily brought him within sight of Edward. The little fellow
				who, despite his gay disguise, immediately recognised him, uttered a cry of joy.
				"Love conquered fear;" and dropping the reel he had just taken between his fingers,
				he rushed from the place he occupied before the mules, and the next moment was
				fondly clasped in his brother's arms.
Every labourer in the factory, within sight of the spot where this meeting took
				place, forgot all standing orders in their astonishment, and stood with gaping
				mouths and eyes fixed upon the astounding spectacle. Sir Matthew, too, forgot for an
				instant, that every movement made within that crowded chamber, not having for its
				object the transmutation of human life into gold, was a positive loss to him; for
				the display of his extraordinary benevolence was, he conceived, of high importance,
				and he looked round with great contentment on the multitude of wondering faces which
				he saw peering over the machinery in all directions, to gaze on the sight he had
				prepared for them.
"This will be talked of, or the devil is in it," thought he. "I should like to know
				who would dare to mention night work and hard usage now. A capital scheme this, as
				ever was hit upon."
And from the gazers, he now turned his eyes upon the object that fixed their
				attention, when, to his inconceivable astonishment and rage, he perceived that the
				two boys, who still stood locked in each other's arms, were both weeping
				bitterly."
 "Not loud, but deep," were the curses that he breathed against the unfortunate
				object of his affected bounty; and faithfully did he pledge a promise to his own
				heart, that he should pay for the vexation he thus occasioned him. But for the
				present, he condescended  to veil the feeling by a smile more bland than
				any one ever before witnessed from him within those walls; and striding forwards to
				the sobbing children, he laid a hand on the shoulder of each, while he said in a
				voice that seemed endowed by nature with an especial power of competing with the
				thunder of a cotton-mill — 
"Come, come, my dears! I know you are crying for joy; but you must not go on so, or
				it will look as if little Michael was ungrateful for all I have done for him! Have
				you told your brother, dear, how I ordered you to take some nice things home to your
				mother? That will make him look up, I'll answer for it! There, now I'll leave you
				here that you may tell all your friends that you have been made a gentleman of, on
				account of your good behaviour, and because you was faithful to your master. Let
				them have ten minutes, Parsons, with the mules standing still, that they may all
				hear the story."
Sir Matthew then turned about, and hastened out of the factory, followed by Dr.
				Crockley; and as they slowly rode homewards by some round-about lanes that were
				shaded from the sun, they discussed high thoughts, — "Such as Lycurgus loved, When
				he bade flog the little Spartans." And ere they reached the luxurious abode of the
				knight, had between them sketched such a scheme of political, moral, and religious
				defence for the factory system in all its branches, and in all its bearings, that
				the doctor as he descended from his horse, snapped his fingers triumphantly,
				exclaiming, "A fig for them all, Sir Matthew thew! If they mine, egad we'll
				countermine, and we start with a pretty tolerable advantage. You are a man of
				science, Sir Matthew Dowling; and I need not tell you, that a powerful movement once
				in action, is devilish hard to stop. The vis inertiæ will work for us, my
				friend — not to mention that when the animals find out their only alternative is
				labour or starvation — labour, such and so much as you in your bounty will be
				pleased to bestow — they will all grow as patient as so many sucking doves."
These words were spoken as they slowly mounted together the steps of the stately
				portico; Sir Matthew, as a reply, shook his friend cordially by the hand, and
				leading the way to the cool and lofty library, ordered iced water and claret, to
				wash away the effect of their half-hour's visit to the factory.

