
CHAPTER II.
THE DYING FATHER.
Stephen stepped over the threshold into a low, dark room, which was filled
                         with smoke, from a sudden gust of the wind as it swept over the roof of the
                         hut. On one side of the grate, which was made of some half-hoops of iron
                         fastened into the rock, there was a very aged man, childish and blind with
                         years, who was crouching towards the fire, and talking and chuckling to
                         himself. A girl, about a year older than Stephen, sat in a rocking-chair,
                         and swung to and fro as she knitted away fast and diligently at a thick
                         grey stocking. In the corner nearest to the fireplace there stood a
                         pallet-bed, hardly raised above the earthen floor, to which Stephen
                         hastened immediately, with an anxious look at the thin, white face of his
                         father lying upon the pillow. Beside the sick man there lay a little child
                         fast asleep, with her hand clasping one of her father's fingers; and though
                         James Fern was shaking and trembling with a violent fit of coughing from
                         the sudden gust of smoke, he took care not to loose the hold of those tiny
                         fingers.
'Poor little Nan!' he whispered to Stephen, as soon as he could speak. 'I've
                         been thinking all day of her and thee, lad, till I'm nigh
                         heart-broken.'
'Do you feel worse, father?' asked Stephen anxiously.
'I'm drawing nearer the end,' answered James Fern,—'nearer the end every
                         hour; and I don't know for certain what the end will be. I'm repenting; but
                         I can't undo the mischief I've done; I must leave that behind me. If I'd
                         been anything like a decent father, I should have left you comfortable,
                         instead of poor beggars. And what is to become of my poor lass here? See
                         how fast she clips my hand, as if she was afeared I was going to leave her!
                         Oh, Stephen, my lad, what will you all do?'
'Father,' said Stephen, in a quiet and firm voice, 'I'm getting six shillings
                         a week wages, and we can live on very little. We haven't got any rent to
                         pay, and only ourselves and grandfather to keep, and Martha is as good as a
                         woman grown. We'll manage, father, and take care of little Nan.'
'Stephen and I are not bad, father,' added Martha, speaking up proudly; 'I am
                         not like Black Bess of Botfield. Mother always told me I was to do my duty;
                         and I always do it. I can wash, and sew, and iron, and bake, and knit. Why,
                         often and often we've had no more than Stephen's earnings, when you've been
                         to the Red Lion on reckoning nights.'
'Hush, hush, Martha!' whispered Stephen.
'No, it's true,' groaned the dying father; 'God Almighty, have mercy on me!
                         Stephen, hearken to me, and thee too, Martha, while I tell you about this
                         place, and what you are to do when I'm gone.'
He paused for a minute or two, looking earnestly at the crouching old man in
                         the chimney-corner.
'Grandfather's quite simple,' he said, 'and he's dark, too, and doesn't know
                         what any one is saying. But I know thee'lt be good to him, Stephen.
                         Hearken, children: your poor old grandfather was once in jail, and was sent
                         across the seas, for a thief.'
'Father!' cried Stephen, in a tone of deep distress; and he turned quickly to
                         the old man, remembering how often he had sat upon his knees by the winter
                         fire, and how many summer days he had rambled with him over the uplands
                         after the sheep. His grandfather had been far kinder to him than his own
                         father; and his heart swelled with anger as he went and laid his arm round
                         the bending neck of the old man, who looked up in his face and laughed
                         heartily.
'Come back, Stephen; it's true,' gasped James Fern. 'Poor mother and me came
                         here, where nobody knew us, while he was away for more than twenty years;
                         and she built a hut for-us to live in till he came back. I was a little lad
                         then, but as soon as I was big enough she made me learn to read and write,
                         that I might send letters to him beyond the seas and none of the neighbours
                         know. She'd often make me read to her about a poor fellow who had left home
                         and gone to a far country, and when he came home again, how his father saw
                         him a long way off. Well, she was just like that when she'd heard that he
                         was landed in England; she did nought but sit over the bent of the hill
                         yonder, peering along the road to Botfield; and one evening at sundown she
                         saw something, little more than a speck upon the turf, and she'd a feeling
                         come over her that it was he, and she fainted for real joy. After all, we
                         weren't much happier when we were settled down like. Grandfather had
                         learned to tend sheep out yonder, and I worked at Botfield; but we never
                         laid by money to build a brick house, as poor mother always wanted us. She
                         died a month or so afore I was married to your mother.'
James Fern was silent again for some minutes, leaning back upon his pillow,
                         with his eyes closed, and his thoughts gone back to the old times.
'If I'd only been like mother, you'd have been a hill-farmer now, Steve,' he
                         continued, in a tone of regret; 'she plotted out in her own mind to take in
                         the green before us, for rearing young lambs, and ducks, and goslings. But
                         I was like that poor lad that wasted all his substance in riotous living;
                         and I've let thee and thy sister grow up without even the learning I could
                         have given thee; and learning is light carriage. But, lad, remember this
                         house is thy own, and never part with it; never give it up, for it is thy
                         right. Maybe they'll want to turn thee out, because thee art a boy; but
                         I've lived in it nigh upon forty years, and I've written it all down upon
                         this piece of paper, and that the place is thine, Stephen.'
'I'll never give it up, father,' said Stephen, in his steady voice.
'Stephen,' continued his father, 'the master has set his heart upon it to
                         make it a hill-farm; and thou'lt have hard work to hold thy own against
                         him. Thou must frame thy words well when he speaks to thee about it, for
                         he's a cunning man. And there's another paper, which the parson at
                         Danesford has in his keeping, to certify that mother built this house and
                         dwelt in it all the days of her life, more than thirty years; if there's
                         any mischief worked against thee, go to him for it. And now, Stephen, wash
                         thyself, and get thy supper, and then let's hear thee read thy
                         chapter.'
Stephen carried his basin of potatoes to the door-sill and sat there, with
                         his back turned to the dismal hut and his dying father, and his face
                         looking out upon the green hills. He had always been a grave and thoughtful
                         boy; and he had much to think of now. The deep sense of new duties and
                         obligations that had come upon him with his father's words, made him feel
                         that his boyhood had passed away. He looked round upon the garden, and the
                         field, and the hut, with the keen eye of an owner; and he wondered at the
                         neglected state into which they had fallen since his father's illness.
                         There could be no more play-time for him; no bird's-nesting among the
                         gorse-bushes; no rabbit-bunting with Snip, the little white terrier that
                         was sharing his supper. If little Nan and his grandfather were to be
                         provided for, he must be a man, with a man's thoughtfulness, doing man's
                         work. There seemed enough work for him to do in the field and garden alone,
                         without his twelve hours' toil in the coal-pit; but his weekly wages would
                         now be more necessary than ever. He must get up early, and go to bed late,
                         and labour without a moment's rest, doing his utmost from one day to
                         another, with no one to help him, or stand for a little while in his place.
                         For a few minutes his brave spirit sank within him, and all the landscape
                         swam before his eyes; while Snip took advantage of his master's inattention
                         to put his nose into the basin, and help himself to the largest share of
                         the potatoes.
'I mean to be like grandmother,' said Martha's clear, sharp voice, close
                         beside him, and he saw his sister looking eagerly round her. 'I shall fence
                         the green in, and have lambs and sheep to turn out on the hillside, and
                         I'll rear young goslings and ducks for market; and we'll have a brick
                         house, with two rooms in it, as well as a shed for the coal. And nobody
                         shall put upon us, or touch our rights, Stephen, or they shall have the
                         length of my tongue.'
'Martha,' said Stephen earnestly, 'do you see how a shower is raining down on
                         the master's fields at Botfield; and they've been scorched up for want of
                         water?'
'Yes, surely,' answered Martha; 'and what of that?'
'I'm thinking,' continued Stephen, rather shyly, 'of that verse in my
                         chapter: "He maketh the sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth
                         rain on the just and the unjust." What sort of a man is the master,
                         Martha?'
'He's a bad, unjust, niggardly old miser,' replied Martha.
'And if God sends him rain, and takes care of him,' Stephen said, 'how much
                         more care will He take of us, if we are good, and try to do His
                         commandments!'
'I should think,' said Martha, but in a softer tone, 'I should really think
                         He would give us the green, and the lambs, and the new house, and
                         everything; for both of us are good, Stephen.'
'I don't know,' replied Stephen; 'if I could read all the Bible, perhaps it
                         would tell us. But now I must go in and read my chapter to father.'
Martha went back to her rocking-chair and knitting, while Stephen reached
                         down from a shelf an old Bible, covered with green baize, and, having
                         carefully looked that his hard hands were quite clean, he opened it with
                         the greatest reverence. James Fern had only begun to teach the boy to read
                         a few months before, when he felt the first fatal symptoms of his illness;
                         and Stephen, with his few opportunities for learning, had only mastered one
                         chapter, the fifth chapter of St. Matthew's Gospel, which his father had
                         chosen for him to begin with. The sick man lay still with closed eyes, but
                         listening attentively to every word, and correcting his son whenever he
                         made any mistake. When it was finished, James Fern read a few verses aloud
                         himself, with low voice and frequent pauses to regain his strength; and
                         very soon afterwards the whole family were in a deep sleep, except
                         himself.
