
CHAPTER XI.
STEPHEN AND THE RECTOR.
The report of the expulsion of the family from Fern's Hollow spread through
                         Botfield before morning; and Stephen found an eager cluster of men, as well
                         as boys and girls, awaiting his appearance on the pit-bank. There was the
                         steady step and glance of a man about him when he came—a grave, reserved
                         air, which had an effect upon even the rough colliers. Black Thompson came
                         forward to shake hands with him, and his example was followed by many of
                         the others, with hearty expressions of sympathy and attempts at
                         consolation.
'It'll be put right some day,' said Stephen; and that was all they could
                         provoke him to utter. He went down to his work; and, though now and then
                         the recollection thrilled through him that there was no pleasant Fern's
                         Hollow for him to return to in the evening, none of his comrades could
                         betray him into any expression of resentment against his oppressor.
In the meantime Miss Anne did not forget to visit the cabin, and cheer, as
                         well as she could, the trouble of poor Martha, whose good and proud
                         housewifery had kept Fern's Hollow cleaner and tidier than any of the
                         cottages at Botfield. It was no easy matter to rouse Martha to take any
                         interest in the miserable cabin where the household furniture had been
                         hastily heaped in the night before; but when her heart warmed to the work,
                         in which Miss Anne was taking an active part, she began to feel something
                         like pleasure in making the new home like the old one, as far as the
                         interior went. Out of doors, no improvement could be made until soil could
                         be carried up the barren and steep bank, to make a little plot of garden
                         ground. But within, the work went on so heartily that, when Stephen
                         returned from the pit, half an hour earlier than usual,—for he had no long
                         walk of two miles now,—he found his grandfather settled in the chimney
                         corner, apparently unconscious of any removal, while both Martha and little
                         Nan seemed in some measure reconciled to their change of dwelling.
                         Moreover, Miss Anne was waiting to greet him kindly.
'Stephen,' she said, 'Martha has found the three notes in your grandfather's
                         pocket all safe. You had better take them with you to the clergyman at
                         Danesford, and do what he advises you with them. And now you are come to
                         live at Botfield, you can manage to go to church every Sunday; even little
                         Nan can go; and there is a night-school at Longville, where you can learn
                         to write as well as read. It will not be all loss, my boy.'
The opportunity for going to Danesford was not long in coming, for Black
                         Thompson and Cole, who were the chief colliers in the pit, chose to take a
                         'play-day' with the rest of their comrades; and the boys and girls employed
                         at the works were obliged to play also, though it involved the forfeiture
                         of their day's wages—always a serious loss to Stephen. This time, however,
                         he heard the news gladly; and, carefully securing the three notes by
                         pinning them inside his pocket, he set out for his ten miles walk across
                         the tableland to the other side of the mountains, where Danesford lay. His
                         nearest way led straight by Fern's Hollow, and he saw that already upon the
                         old site the foundation was laid for a new house containing three rooms. In
                         everything else the aspect of the place remained unchanged; there still
                         hung the creaking wicket, where little Nan had been wont to look for his
                         coming home, until she could run with outstretched arms to meet him. The
                         beehives stood yet beneath the hedge, and the bees were flying to and fro,
                         seeking out the few flowers of the autumn upon the hillside. The fern upon
                         the uplands, just behind the hollow, was beginning to die, and its rich
                         red-brown hue showed that it was ready to be cut and carried away for
                         fodder; but a squatter from some other hill-hut had trespassed upon
                         Stephen's old domain. Except this one man, the whole tableland was
                         deserted; and so silent was it that the rustle of his own feet through the
                         fading ferns sounded like other footsteps following him closely. The sheep
                         were not yet driven down into the valleys, and they and the wild ponies
                         stood and stared boldly at the solitary boy, without fleeing from his path,
                         as if they had long since forgotten how the bilberry gatherers had
                         delighted in frightening them. Stephen was too grave and manlike to startle
                         them into memory of it, and he plodded on mile after mile with the three
                         notes in his pocket and his hand closed upon them, pondering deeply with
                         what words he should speak to the unknown clergyman at Danesford.
When he reached Danesford, he found it a very quiet, sleepy little village,
                         with a gleaming river flowing through it placidly, and such respectable
                         houses and small clean cottages as put to shame the dwellings at Botfield.
                         So early was it yet, that the village children were only just going to
                         school; and the biggest boy turned back with Stephen to the gate of the
                         Rectory. Stephen had never seen so large and grand a mansion, standing far
                         back from the road, in a park, through which ran a carriage drive up to a
                         magnificent portico. He stole shyly along a narrow side path to the back
                         door, and even there was afraid of knocking; but when his low single rap
                         was answered by a good-tempered-looking girl, not much older than Martha,
                         his courage revived, and he asked, in a straightforward and steady manner,
                         if he could see the parson. At which the servant laughed a little, and,
                         after inquiring his name, said she would see if Mr. Lockwood could spare
                         time to speak to him.
Before long the girl returned, and led Stephen through many winding and
                         twisting passages, more puzzling than the roads in the pit, to a large,
                         grand room, with windows down to the ground, and looking out upon a
                         beautiful flower-garden. It was like the palace Miss Anne had spoken of,
                         for he could not understand half the things that were in the room; only he
                         saw a fire burning in a low grate, the bars of which shone like silver, and
                         upon the carpeted hearth beside it was a sofa, where a young lady was
                         lying, and near to it was a breakfast-table, at which an elderly gentleman
                         was seated alone. He was a very keen, shrewd-looking man, and very pleasant
                         to look at when he smiled; and he smiled upon Stephen, as he stood
                         awe-struck and speechless at his own daring in coming to speak to such a
                         gentleman, and in such a place as this.
'So you are Stephen Fern, of Fern's Hollow,' said Mr. Lockwood; 'I remember
                         christening you, and giving you my own name, thirteen or fourteen years
                         since, isn't it? Your mother had been my faithful servant for several
                         years; and she brought you all across the hills to Danesford to be
                         christened. Is she well—my good Sarah Moore?'
'Mother died four years ago, sir,' murmured Stephen, unable to say any
                         more.
'Poor boy!' said the young lady on the sofa. 'Father, is there anything we
                         can do for him?'
'That is what I am going to hear, my child,' replied Mr. Lockwood. 'Stephen
                         has not come over the hills without some errand. Now, my boy, speak out
                         plainly and boldly, and let me hear what has brought you to your mother's
                         old master.'
Thus encouraged, Stephen, with the utmost simplicity and frankness, though
                         with fewer words than Martha would have put into the narrative, told Mr.
                         Lockwood the whole history of his life; to which the clergyman listened
                         with ever-increasing interest, as he noticed how the boy was telling all
                         the truth, and nothing but the truth, even to his joining Black Thompson in
                         poaching. When he had finished, Mr. Lockwood went to a large cabinet in the
                         room, and, bringing out a bundle of old yellow documents, soon found among
                         them the paper James Fern had spoken of on his death-bed. It was written by
                         the clergyman living in Longville at the time of old Martha Fern's death,
                         to certify that she had settled, and maintained her settlement on the
                         hillside, without paying rent, or having her fences destroyed, for upwards
                         of twenty years, and that the land was her own by the usages of the
                         common.
'I don't know what use it will be,' said Mr. Lockwood, 'but I will take legal
                         advice upon it; that is, I will tell my lawyer all about it, and see what
                         we had best do. You may leave the case in my hands, Stephen. But to-morrow
                         morning we start for the south of France, where my daughter must live all
                         the winter for the benefit of the warm climate; and I must go with her, for
                         she is my only treasure now. Can you live in your cabin till we come home?
                         Will you trust yourself to me, Stephen? I will not see a son of my old
                         servant wronged.'
'Please, sir,' said Stephen, 'the cabin is good enough for us, and we are
                         nearer church and the night-school; only I didn't like to break my word to
                         father, besides losing the old home: we can stay all winter well. I'll
                         trust you, sir; but my work is dangersome, and please God I should get
                         killed, will you do the same for Martha and little Nan?'
'Ay!' answered Mr. Lockwood, coughing down his emotion at the young boy's
                         forethought and care for his sisters. 'If it pleases God, my boy, you will
                         live to make a right good, true-hearted Christian man; but if He should
                         take you home before me, I'll befriend your sisters as long as I live. I
                         like your Miss Anne, Stephen; but your master is a terrible rascal, I
                         fear.'
'Yes, sir,' said Stephen quietly.
'You don't say much about him, however,' replied Mr. Lockwood, smiling at his
                         few words.
'Please, sir, I am trying to love my enemies,' he answered, with a feeling of
                         shyness; 'if I was to call him a rascal, or any other bad word, it 'ud
                         throw me back like, and it's very hard work anyhow. I feel as if I'd like
                         to do it sometimes.'
'You are right, Stephen,' said Mr. Lockwood; 'you are wise in keeping your
                         tongue from evil speaking: for "therewith bless we God, even the Father;
                         and therewith curse we men, which are made after the similitude of God. Out
                         of the same mouth proceedeth blessing and cursing." You have taught an old
                         parson a lesson, my boy. You had better leave your money with me until my
                         lawyer gives us his opinion. Now go home in peace, and serve your master
                         faithfully; but if you should need a friend before I return, come here and
                         ask for the clergyman who is going to take my duty. I will tell him about
                         you, and he will help you until I come home.'
That afternoon Stephen retraced his lonely path across the hills in great
                         gladness of heart; and when he came to Fern's Hollow, he leaped lightly
                         down the bank against which the old stove-pipe had been reared as a
                         chimney, and stood again on the site of the old hearth, in the midst of the
                         new walls of red bricks that were being built up. How the master could
                         remove the new house and restore the old hut was a question of some
                         perplexity to him; but his confidence in the parson at Danesford was so
                         perfect, that he did not doubt for a moment that he could call Fern's
                         Hollow his own again next spring.
