
CHAPTER IV.
THREATENING CLOUDS.
Little Nan would be waiting for him, as well as his supper, and Stephen
                         forgot his weariness as he bounded along the soft turf, to the great
                         discomfiture of the brown-faced sheep, quite as anxious for their supper as
                         he was for his.
Stephen heard far off Snip's sharp, impatient bark, and it made him quicken
                         his steps still more, until, coming within sight of his own Hollow, he
                         stopped suddenly, and his heart beat even more vehemently than when he was
                         running up the hillside.
There was, however, nothing very terrible in the scene. The hut was safe, and
                         the sun was shining brightly upon the garden, and little Nan was standing
                         as usual at the wicket. Only in the oat-field, with their faces looking
                         across the green, stood two men in close conversation. These men were both
                         of them old, and rather thin and shrivelled in figure; their features bore
                         great resemblance to each other, the eyes being small and sunken, with many
                         wrinkles round them, and both mouths much fallen in. You would have said at
                         once they were brothers; and if you drew near enough to hear their
                         conversation, you would have found your guess was right.
'Brother Thomas,' said the thinnest and sharpest-looking, 'I intend to
                         enclose as far as we can see from this point. That southern bank will be a
                         first-rate place for young animals. I shall build a house, with three rooms
                         above and below, besides a small dairy; and I shall plant a fir-wood behind
                         it to keep off the east winds. The lime and bricks from my own works will
                         not cost me much more than the expense of bringing them up here.'
'And a very pretty little hill-farm you'll make of it, James,' replied Thomas
                         Wyley admiringly. 'I should not wonder now if you got £20 a year rent for
                         it.'
'I shall get £25 in a few years,' said the other one: 'just think of the run
                         for ponies on the hill, to say nothing of sheep. A young, hard-working man
                         could make a very tidy living up here; and we shall have a respectable
                         house, instead of a pauper's family.'
'It will be a benefit to the neighbourhood,' observed Thomas Wyley.
The latter speaker, who was a degree pleasanter-looking than his brother, was
                         the relieving officer of the large union to which Botfield belonged; and,
                         in consequence, all poor persons who had grown too old, or were in any way
                         unable to work, were compelled to apply to him for the help which the laws
                         of our country provide for such cases. James Wyley, the elder brother, was
                         the owner of Botfield works, and the master of all the people employed in
                         them, besides being the agent of the lord of the manor. So both these men
                         possessed great authority over the poor; and they used the power to oppress
                         them and grind them down to the utmost. It was therefore no wonder that
                         Stephen stopped instantly when he saw their well-known figures standing at
                         the corner of his oat-field; nor that he should come on slowly after he had
                         recovered his courage, pondering in his own mind what they were come up to
                         Fern's Hollow for, and how he should answer them if they should want him to
                         give up the old hut.
'Good evening, my lad,' said James Wyley, smiling a slow, reluctant smile, as
                         Stephen drew near to them with his cap in his hand. 'So you buried your
                         father yesterday, I hear. Poor fellow! there was not a better collier at
                         Botfield than James Fern.'
'Never troubled his parish for a sixpence,' added Thomas Wyley.
'Thank you, master,' said Stephen, the tears starting to his eyes, so
                         unexpected was this gentle greeting to him; 'I'll try to be like
                         father.'
'Well, my boy,' said Thomas Wyley, 'we are come up here on purpose to give
                         you our advice, as you are such a mere lad. I've been thinking what can be
                         done for you. There's your grandfather, a poor, simple, helpless old man,
                         and the little girl—why, of course we shall have to receive them into the
                         House; and I'll see there is no difficulty made about it. Then we intend to
                         get your sister into some right good service.'
'I should not mind taking her into my own house,' said the master, Mr. James
                         Wyley; 'she would soon learn under my niece Anne. So you will be set free
                         to get your own living without encumbrance; you are earning your six
                         shillings now, and that will keep you well.'
'Please, sir,' answered Stephen, 'we mean to live all together as we've been
                         used; and I couldn't let grandfather and little Nan come upon the parish.
                         Martha must stay at home to mind them; and I'll work my fingers to the bone
                         for them all, sir. Many thanks all the same to you for coming up here to
                         see after us.'
'Very fine indeed, my little fellow,' said Thomas Wyley; 'but you don't
                         understand what you are talking about. It is my place to see after the
                         poor, and I cannot leave you in charge of such a very old man and such a
                         child as this, No, no; they must be taken care of; and they'll be made
                         right comfortable in the House.'
'Father said,' replied Stephen, 'that I was never to let grandfather and
                         little Nan come upon the parish. I get my wages, and we've no rent to pay;
                         and the potatoes and oats will help us; and Martha can pick bilberries on
                         the hill, and carry bundles of firing to the village; and we'll do well
                         enough without the parish. Many thanks all the same to you, sir.'
'Hark ye, my lad,' said the master impatiently. 'I want to buy your old hut
                         and field from you. I'll give ye a ten-pound note for it; a whole ten
                         pounds. Why, a fortune for you!'
'Father said,' repeated Stephen, 'I was never to give up Fern's Hollow; and I
                         gave him a sure promise for that, and to take care of little Nan as long as
                         ever I lived.'
'Fern's Hollow is none of yours,' cried the master, in a rage; 'you've just
                         been a family of paupers and squatters, living up here by poaching and
                         thieving. I'll unearth you, I promise ye; you have been a disgrace to the
                         manor long enough. So it is ten pounds or nothing for your old hole; and
                         you may take your choice.'
'Please, sir,' said Stephen firmly, 'the place is ours, and I'm never to part
                         with it. I'll never poach, and I'll never trespass on the manor; but I
                         can't sell the old house, sir.'
'Now, just listen to me, young Fern,' said Thomas Wyley; 'you'll be compelled
                         to give up Fern's Hollow in right of the lord of the manor; and then if you
                         come to the House for relief, mark my words, I'll send your grandfather off
                         to Bristol, for that's his parish, and you'll never see him again; and I'll
                         give orders for you never to see little Nan; and I'll apprentice you and
                         your other sister in different places. So you had better be reasonable, and
                         take our advice while you can be made comfortable.'
'Please, sir, I can't go against my promise,' answered Stephen, with a
                         sob.
'What's the use of wasting one's breath?' said the master; 'this place I
                         want, and this place I'll have; and we'll see if this young jail-bird will
                         stand in my way. Ah, my fine fellow, it's no such secret where your
                         grandfather spent twenty-one years of his life; and you'll have a sup of
                         the same broth some day. You don't keep a dog like that yelping cur for
                         nothing; and I'll tell the gamekeeper to have his eye upon you.'
Stephen stood motionless, watching them down the narrow path which led to
                         Botfield, until a rabbit started from beneath the hedge, and Snip, with a
                         sharp, short bark of excitement, gave it chase in the direction of the two
                         men. The master paused, and, looking back, shook his stick threateningly at
                         the motionless figure of the boy; while Thomas Wyley threw a stone at the
                         dog, which sent him back, yelping piteously, to his young master's feet.
                         Stephen clenched his hands, and bit his lips till the blood started, but he
                         did not move till the last glimpse of his foes had passed away from the
                         hillside. Martha had hidden herself in the hut while they were present, for
                         she had never spoken to the dreaded master; but she could overhear their
                         loud and angry speeches, and now she came out and joined Stephen.
'Well, I'd have more spirit than to cry,' she said, as Stephen brushed his
                         eyes with his sleeve; 'I'd never have spoken so gingerly to them, the
                         wizen-faced old rascals. The place is ours, and they can't turn us out.
                         It's no use to be cowed by them, Stephen.'
'They can turn me off the works,' answered Stephen sadly.
'And whatever shall we do then?' asked Martha, in alarm. 'Still I reckon
                         you'll say we are to love those old wretches.'
'The Book says so,' replied Stephen.
'Well, I won't set up to try to do it for one,' continued Martha decisively;
                         'it's not nature; it's being over good by half. I'm willing to do my duty
                         by you and grandfather and little Nan; but that goes beyond me. If you'd
                         just give way, Stevie, and give them a good rating, you'd feel better after
                         it.'
'I don't know that,' he answered, walking gloomily towards the door. He felt
                         so much passion and anger within him, that it did seem as if it would be a
                         relief to utter some of the terrible oaths which he heard frequently in the
                         pit, and which had been familiar enough in his own mouth a few months ago.
                         But now other words, familiar from daily reading, the words that he had
                         repeated to Tim so short a time before, were being whispered, as it seemed,
                         close by his ear: 'Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to
                         them that hate you; pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute
                         you.' There was a deadly conflict going on in the boy's soul; and Martha's
                         angry words were helping the tempter. He sat down despondently on the
                         door-sill, and hid his face in his hands, while he listened to his sister's
                         taunts against his want of spirit, and her fears that he would give up
                         their home for his new notions.
He was about to answer her at last with the passion she was trying to
                         provoke, when a soft little cheek was pressed against his downcast head,
                         and little Nan lisped in her broken words, 'Me sleepy, Stevie; me say "Our
                         Father," and go to bed.'
The child knelt down before him, and laid her folded hands upon his knee, as
                         she had done every evening since his father died, while he said the prayer,
                         and she repeated it slowly after him. He felt as though he was praying for
                         himself. A feeling of deep earnestness came over him; and, though his voice
                         faltered as he said softly, 'Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
                         that trespass against us,' it seemed as if there was a spirit in his heart
                         agreeing to the words, and giving him power to say them. He did not know
                         then that 'the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with groanings
                         which cannot be uttered;' but while he prayed with little Nan, he received
                         great comfort and strength, though he was ignorant of the source from
                         whence they came. When the child's prayers were ended, he roused himself
                         cheerfully to action; and as long as the lingering twilight lasted, both
                         Stephen and Martha were busily at work in the garden.
