
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE PANTRY WINDOW.
Stephen had been engaged in his new calling for about a fortnight, and was
                         coming home, after a long and toilsome day among the flocks, two hours
                         after sunset, with a keen east wind bringing the tears into his eyes, when
                         a few paces from his cabin door a tall dark figure sprang up from a hollow
                         in the cinder-hill, and laid a heavy hand upon his shoulder. It was just
                         light enough to discern the gloomy features of Black Thompson; and Stephen
                         inquired fearlessly what he wanted with him.
'I thought thee'd never be coming,' said Black Thompson impatiently. 'Lad,
                         hast thee forgotten thy rights and thy wrongs, that thou comes to yonder
                         wretched kennel whistling as if all the land belonged to thee? Where's thy
                         promise to thy father, that thee'd never give up thy rights? Jackson the
                         butcher has taken Fern's Hollow, and it's to be finished up in a week or
                         two; and thee'lt see thy own place go into the hands of strangers.'
'It'll all be put right some day, Thompson, thank you,' said Stephen.
'Right!' repeated Thompson; 'who's to put wrong things right if we won't take
                         the trouble ourselves? Is it right for the master to grind us down in our
                         wages, and raise the rents over our heads, till we can scarcely get enough
                         to keep us in victuals, just that he may add money to money to count over
                         of nights? Was it right of him to leave the pit yonder open, till little
                         Nan was killed in it? Thee has a heavy reckoning to settle with him, and
                         I'd be wiping off some of the score. If I was in thy place, I should have
                         little Nan's voice calling me day and night from the pit, to ask when I was
                         going to revenge her.'
Black Thompson felt that Stephen trembled under his grasp, and he went on
                         with greater earnestness.
'Thee could revenge thyself this very night. Thee could get the worth of
                         Fern's Hollow without a risk, if thee'd listen to me. It's thy own, lad,
                         and thy wrongs are heavy—Fern's Hollow stolen from thee, and the little
                         lass murdered! How canst thee rest, Stephen?'
'God will repay,' said Stephen in a tremulous tone.
'Dost think that God sees?' asked Black Thompson scoffingly; 'if He sees, He
                         doesn't care. What does it matter to Him that poor folks like us are
                         trodden down and robbed? If He cared, He could strike the master dead in a
                         moment, and He doesn't. He lets him prosper and prosper, till nobody can
                         stand afore him. I'd take my own matter in my own hands, and make sure of
                         vengeance. God doesn't take any notice.'
'I'm sure God sees,' answered Stephen; 'He is everywhere; and He isn't blind,
                         or deaf, only we don't understand what He is going to do yet. If He didn't
                         take any notice of us, He wouldn't make me feel so happy, spite of
                         everything. Oh, Thompson thee and the men were so kind to me when I
                         couldn't work, and I've never seen thee to thank thee. I can do nothing for
                         thee, except I could persuade thee to repent, and be as happy as I am.'
'Oh, I'll repent some day,' said Black Thompson, loosing Stephen's arm; 'but
                         I've lots of things to do aforehand, and I reckon they can all be repented
                         of together. So, lad, it's true what everybody is saying of thee—thee has
                         forgotten poor little Nan, and thy promise to thy father!'
'No, I've never forgotten,' replied Stephen, 'but I'll never try to revenge
                         myself now. I couldn't if I did try. Besides, I've forgiven the master; so
                         don't speak to me again about it, Thompson.'
'Well, lad, be sure I'll never waste my time thinking of thee again,' said
                         Black Thompson, with an oath; 'thy religion has made a poor, spiritless,
                         cowardly chap of thee, and I've done with thee altogether.'
Black Thompson strode away into the darkness, and was quickly out of hearing,
                         while Stephen stood still and listened to his rapid footsteps, turning over
                         in his mind what mischief he wished to tempt him to now. The open shaft was
                         only a few feet from him; but it had been safely encircled by a high iron
                         railing, instead of being bricked over, as it had been found of use in the
                         proper ventilation of the pit. From Thompson and his temptation, Stephen's
                         thoughts went swiftly to little Nan, and how he had heard her calling to
                         him upon that dreadful night when he went away with the poachers. Was it
                         possible that he could forget her for a single day? Was she not still one
                         of his most constant and most painful thoughts? Yes, he could remember
                         every pretty look of her face, and every sweet sound of her voice; yet they
                         were saying he had forgotten her, while the pit was there for him to pass
                         night and morning—a sorrowful reminder of her dreadful death! A sharp
                         thrill ran through Stephen's frame as his outstretched hand caught one of
                         the iron railings, which rattled in its socket; but his very heart stood
                         still when up from the dark, narrow depths there came a low and stifled cry
                         of 'Stephen! Stephen!'
He was no coward, though Black Thompson had called him one; but this voice
                         from the dreaded pit, at that dark and lonely hour, made him tremble so
                         greatly that he could neither move nor shout aloud for very fear. He leaned
                         there, holding fast by the railing, with his hearing made wonderfully
                         acute, and his eyes staring blindly into the dense blackness beneath him.
                         In another second he detected a faint glimmer, like a glow-worm deep down
                         in the earth, and the voice, still muffled and low, came up to him
                         again.
'It's only me—Tim!' it cried. 'Hush! don't speak, Stephen; don't make any
                         noise. I'm left down in the pit. They're going to break into the master's
                         house to-night. They're going to get thee to creep through the pantry
                         window. If thee won't, Jack Davies is to go. They'll fire the thatch, if
                         they can't get the door open. Thee go and take care of Miss Anne, and send
                         Martha to Longville for help. Don't trust anybody at Botfield.'
These sentences sounded up into Stephen's ears, one by one, slowly, as Tim
                         could give his voice its due tone and strength. He recollected instantly
                         all the long oppression the men had suffered from their master. In that
                         distant part of the county, where there were extensive works, the colliers
                         had been striking for larger wages; and some of them had strolled down to
                         Botfield, bringing with them an increase of discontent and inquietude,
                         which had taken deep root in the minds of all the workpeople. It was well
                         known that the master kept large sums of money in his house, which, as I
                         have told you, was situated among lonely fields, nearly a mile from
                         Botfield; and no one lived with him, except Miss Anne, and one
                         maid-servant. It was a very secure building, with stone casements and
                         strongly barred doors; but if a boy could get through the pantry window, he
                         could admit the others readily. How long it would be before the attempt was
                         made Stephen could not tell, but it was already late, and Black Thompson
                         had left him hurriedly. But at least it must be an hour or two nearer
                         midnight, and all hopes of rescue and defence rested upon him and Martha
                         only.
Martha was sitting by the fire knitting, and Bess Thompson was pinning on her
                         shawl to go home. Poor Bess! Even in his excitement Stephen felt for her;
                         but he dared not utter a word till she was gone. But then Martha could not
                         credit his hurried tidings and directions, until she had been herself to
                         the shaft to see the feeble gleam of Tim's lamp, and hear the sound of his
                         voice; for as soon as she rattled the railings he spoke again.
'Be sharp!' he cried. 'I'm not afeared; but I can't stay here where little
                         Nan died. I'll go back to the pit, and wait till morning. Be sharp!'
There was no need after that to urge Martha to hasten. After throwing a shawl
                         over her head, she started off for Longville with the swiftness of a hare;
                         and was soon past the engine-house, and threading her way cautiously
                         through Botfield, where she dreaded to be discovered as she passed the
                         lighted windows, or across the gleam of some open door. Many of the houses
                         were quite closed up and dark, but in some there was a voice of talking;
                         and here and there Martha saw a figure stealing like herself along the
                         deepest shadows. But she escaped without being noticed; and, once through
                         the village, her path lay along the silent high-roads straight on to
                         Longville.
Nor did Stephen linger in the cinder-hill cabin. He ran swiftly over the
                         pit-banks, and stole along by the limekilns and the blacksmith's shop, for
                         under the heavy door he could see a little fringe of light. How loudly the
                         dry cinders cranched under his careful footsteps! Yet, quiet as the
                         blacksmith's shop was, and soundless as the night without, the noise did
                         not reach the ears of those who were lurking within, and Stephen went on in
                         safety. There stood the master's house at last, black and massive-looking
                         against the dark sky; not a gleam from fire or candle to be seen below, for
                         every window was closely shuttered; but on the second storey there shone a
                         lighted casement, which Stephen knew belonged to the master's chamber. The
                         dog, which came often with Miss Anne to the cinder-hill cabin, gave one
                         loud bay, and then sprang playfully upon Stephen, as if to apologize for
                         his mistake in barking at him. For some minutes the boy stood in deep
                         deliberation, scarcely daring to knock at the door, lest some of the
                         housebreakers should be already concealed near the spot, and rush upon him
                         before it was opened, or else enter with him into the defenceless dwelling.
                         But at length he gave one very quiet rap with his fingers, and after a
                         minute's pause his heart bounded with joy as he heard Miss Anne herself
                         asking who was there.
'Stephen Fern,' he answered, with his lips close to the keyhole, and speaking
                         in his lowest tones.
'What is the matter, Stephen?' she asked. 'I cannot open the door, for my
                         uncle always takes the keys with him into his own room.'
'Please to take the light into the pantry for one minute,' he whispered
                         cautiously, with a fervent hope that Miss Anne would do so without
                         requiring any further explanations; for he was lost if Black Thompson or
                         Davies were lying in wait near at hand. Very thankfully he heard Miss
                         Anne's step across the quarried floor, and in a moment afterwards the light
                         shone through a low window close by. It was unglazed, with a screen of open
                         lattice-work over it so as to allow of free ventilation. It had one thick
                         stone upright in the middle, leaving such a narrow space as only a boy
                         could creep through. He examined the opening quickly and carefully while
                         the light remained, and when Miss Anne returned to the door he whispered
                         again through the keyhole, 'Don't be afraid. It's me—Stephen; I'm coming in
                         through the pantry window.'
He knew his danger. He knew if any of the robbers came up they must hear him
                         removing the wooden lattice which was laid over the opening; and unless
                         they supposed it to be one of their accomplices at work, he would be at
                         once in their power, exposed to their ill-treatment, or perhaps suffer
                         death at their hands. And would Miss Anne within trust to him instead of
                         alarming the master? If he came down and opened the door, all the designs
                         of the evil men would be hastened and finished before Martha could return
                         from Longville. But Stephen did not listen, nor did his fingers tremble
                         over their work, though there was a rush of thoughts and fears through his
                         brain. He tore away the lattice as quickly and quietly as he could, and,
                         with one keen glance round at the dark night, he thrust his head through
                         the narrow frame. He found it was just possible to crush through; and,
                         after a minute's struggle, his feet rested upon the pantry floor.
