<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mary Barton, by Elizabeth
      Cleghorn Gaskell</title><author>Gaskell, Elizabeth Cleghorn (1810-1865)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1848</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III.
JOHN BARTON'S GREAT TROUBLE.

But when the morn came dim and sad,
And chill with early showers,
 Her quiet eyelids closed—she had
Another morn than ours!
Hood.
In the middle of that same night a neighbour of the Bartons was roused from her sound,
     well-earned sleep, by a knocking, which had at first made part of her dream; but starting up,
     as soon as she became convinced of its reality, she opened the window, and asked who was
     there?
"Me, John Barton," answered he, in a voice tremulous with agitation. "My missis is in labour,
     and, for the love of God, step in while I run for th' doctor, for she's fearful bad."
While the woman hastily dressed herself, leaving the window still open, she heard cries of
     agony, which resounded in the little court in the stillness of the night. In less than five
     minutes she was standing by Mrs. Barton's bed-side, relieving the terrified Mary, who went
     about, where she was told, like an automaton; her eyes tearless, her face calm, though deadly
     pale, and uttering no sound, except when her teeth chattered for very nervousness.
The cries grew worse.
The doctor was very long in hearing the repeated rings at his night-bell, and still longer in
     understanding who it was that made this sudden call upon his services; and then he begged
     Barton just to wait while he dressed himself, in order that no time might be lost in finding
     the court and house. Barton absolutely stamped with impatience, outside the doctor's door,
     before he came down; and walked so fast homewards, that the medical man several times asked him
     to go slower.
"Is she so very bad?" asked he.
"Worse, much worser than ever I saw her before," replied John.
No! she was not—she was at peace. The cries were still for ever. John had no time for
     listening. He opened the latched door, stayed not to light a candle for the mere ceremony of
     showing his companion up the stairs, so well known to himself; but, in two minutes was in the
     room, where lay the dead wife, whom he had loved with all the power of his strong heart. The
     doctor stumbled up stairs by the fire-light, and met the awe-struck look of the neighbour,
     which at once told him the state of things. The room was still, as he, with habitual tip-toe
     step, approached the poor frail body, whom nothing now could more disturb. Her daughter knelt
     by the bed-side, her face buried in the clothes, which were almost crammed into her mouth, to
     keep down the choking sobs. The husband stood like one stupified. The doctor questioned the
     neighbour in whispers, and then approaching Barton, said, "You must go down stairs. This is a
     great shock, but bear it like a man. Go down."
He went mechanically and sat down on the first chair. He had no hope. The look of death was
     too clear upon her face. Still, when he heard one or two unusual noises, the thought burst on
     him that it might only be a trance, a fit, a—he did not well know what,—but not death! Oh, not
     death! And he was starting up to go up stairs again, when the doctor's heavy cautious creaking
     footstep was heard on the stairs. Then he knew what it really was in the chamber above.
"Nothing could have saved her—there has been some shock to the system—" and so he went on;
     but, to unheeding ears, which yet retained his words to ponder on; words not for immediate use
     in conveying sense, but to be laid by, in the store-house of memory, for a more convenient
     season. The doctor seeing the state of the case, grieved for the man; and, very sleepy, thought
     it best to go, and accordingly wished him good-night—but there was no answer, so he let himself
     out; and Barton sat on, like a stock or a stone, so rigid, so still. He heard the sounds above
     too, and knew what they meant. He heard the stiff, unseasoned drawer, in which his wife kept
     her clothes, pulled open. He saw the neighbour come down, and blunder about in search of soap
     and water. He knew well what she wanted, and why she wanted them, but he did not
     speak, nor offer to help. At last she went, with some kindly-meant words (a text of comfort,
     which fell upon a deafened ear), and something about "Mary," but which Mary, in his bewildered
     state, he could not tell.
He tried to realise it, to think it possible. And then his mind wandered off to other days,
     to far different times. He thought of their courtship; of his first seeing her, an awkward,
     beautiful rustic, far too shiftless for the delicate factory work to which she was apprenticed;
     of his first gift to her, a bead necklace, which had long ago been put by, in one of the deep
     drawers of the dresser, to be kept for Mary. He wondered if it was there yet, and with a
     strange curiosity he got up to feel for it; for the fire by this time was well-nigh out, and
     candle he had none. His groping hand fell on the piled-up tea things, which at his desire she
     had left unwashed till morning—they were all so tired. He was reminded of one of the daily
     little actions, which acquire such power when they have been performed for the last time, by
     one we love. He began to think over his wife's daily round of duties; and something in the
     remembrance that these would never more be done by her, touched the source of tears, and he
     cried aloud. Poor Mary, meanwhile, had mechanically helped the neighbour in all the last
     attentions to the dead; and when she was kissed, and spoken to soothingly, tears stole quietly
     down her cheeks: but she reserved the luxury of a full burst of grief till she should be alone.
     She shut the chamber-door softly, after the neighbour had gone, and then shook the bed by which
     she knelt, with her agony of sorrow. She repeated, over and over again, the same words; the
     same vain, unanswered address to her who was no more. "Oh, mother! mother, are you really dead!
     Oh, mother, mother!"
At last she stopped, because it flashed across her mind that her violence of grief might
     disturb her father. All was still below. She looked on the face so changed, and yet so
     strangely like. She bent down to kiss it. The cold, unyielding flesh struck a shudder to her
     heart, and, hastily obeying her impulse, she grasped the candle, and opened the door. Then she
     heard the sobs of her father's grief; and quickly, quietly, stealing down the steps, she knelt
     by him, and kissed his hand. He took no notice at first, for his burst of grief would not be
     controlled. But when her shriller sobs, her terrified cries (which she could not repress), rose
     upon his ear, he checked himself.
"Child, we must be all to one another, now she is gone," whispered he.
"Oh, father, what can I do for you? Do tell me! I'll do any thing."
"I know thou wilt. Thou must not fret thyself ill, that's the first thing I ask. Thou must
     leave me, and go to bed now, like a good girl as thou art."
"Leave you, father! oh, don't say so."
"Ay, but thou must! thou must go to bed, and try and sleep; thou'lt have enough to do and to
     bear, poor wench, to-morrow."
Mary got up, kissed her father, and sadly went up stairs to the little closet, where she
     slept. She thought it was of no use undressing, for that she could never, never sleep, so threw
     herself on her bed in her clothes, and before ten minutes had passed away, the passionate grief
     of youth had subsided into sleep.
Barton had been roused by his daughter's entrance, both from his stupor and from his
     uncontrollable sorrow. He could think on what was to be done, could plan for the funeral, could
     calculate the necessity of soon returning to his work, as the extravagance of the past night
     would leave them short of money, if he long remained away from the mill. He was in a club, so
     that money was provided for the burial. These things settled in his own mind, he recalled the
     doctor's words, and bitterly thought of the shock his poor wife had so recently had, in the
     mysterious disappearance of her cherished sister. His feelings towards Esther almost amounted
     to curses. It was she who had brought on all this sorrow. Her giddiness, her lightness of
     conduct, had wrought this woe. His previous thoughts about her had been tinged with wonder and
     pity, but now he hardened his heart against her for ever.
One of the good influences over John Barton's life had departed that night. One of the ties
     which bound him down to the gentle humanities of earth was loosened, and henceforward the
     neighbours all remarked he was a changed man. His gloom and his sternness became habitual
     instead of occasional. He was more obstinate. But never to Mary. Between the father and the
     daughter there existed in full force that mysterious bond which unites those who have been
     loved by one who is now dead and gone. While he was harsh and silent to others, he humoured
     Mary with tender love; she had more of her own way than is common in any rank with girls of her
     age. Part of this was the necessity of the case; for, of course, all the money went through her
     hands, and the household arrangements were guided by her will and pleasure. But part was her
     father's indulgence, for he left her, with full trust in her unusual sense and spirit, to
     choose her own associates, and her own times for seeing them.
With all this, Mary had not her father's confidence in the matters which now began to occupy
     him, heart and soul; she was aware that he had joined clubs, and become an active member of a
     trades' union, but it was hardly likely that a girl of Mary's age (even when two or three years
     had elapsed since her mother's death) should care much for the differences between the
     employers and the employed,—an eternal subject for agitation in the manufacturing districts,
     which, however it may be lulled for a time, is sure to break forth again with fresh violence at
     any depression of trade, showing that in its apparent quiet, the ashes had still smouldered in
     the breasts of a few.
Among these few was John Barton. At all times it is a bewildering thing to the poor weaver to
     see his employer removing from house to house, each one grander than the last, till he ends in
     building one more magnificent than all, or withdraws his money from the concern, or sells his
     mill to buy an estate in the country, while all the time the weaver, who thinks he and his
     fellows are the real makers of this wealth, is struggling on for bread for their children,
     through the vicissitudes of lowered wages, short hours, fewer hands employed, etc. And when
     he knows trade is bad, and could understand (at least partially) that there are not buyers
     enough in the market to purchase the goods already made, and consequently that there is no
     demand for more; when he would bear and endure much without complaining, could he also see that
     his employers were bearing their share; he is, I say, bewildered and (to use his own word)
     "aggravated" to see that all goes on just as usual with the mill-owners. Large houses are still
     occupied, while spinners' and weavers' cottages stand empty, because the families that once
     occupied them are obliged to live in rooms or cellars. Carriages still roll along the streets,
     concerts are still crowded by subscribers, the shops for expensive luxuries still find daily
     customers, while the workman loiters away his unemployed time in watching these things, and
     thinking of the pale, uncomplaining wife at home, and the wailing children asking in vain for
     enough of food, of the sinking health, of the dying life of those near and dear to him. The
     contrast is too great. Why should he alone suffer from bad times?
I know that this is not really the case; and I know what is the truth in such matters: but
     what I wish to impress is what the workman feels and thinks. True, that with child-like
     improvidence, good times will often dissipate his grumbling, and make him forget all prudence
     and foresight.
But there are earnest men among these people, men who have endured wrongs without
     complaining, but without ever forgetting or forgiving those whom (they believe) have caused all
     this woe.
Among these was John Barton. His parents had suffered, his mother had died from absolute want
     of the necessaries of life. He himself was a good, steady workman, and, as such, pretty certain
     of steady employment. But he spent all he got with the confidence (you may also call it
     improvidence) of one who was willing, and believed himself able, to supply all his wants by his
     own exertions. And when his master suddenly failed, and all hands in that mill were turned
     back, one Tuesday morning, with the news that Mr. Hunter had stopped, Barton had only a few
     shillings to rely on; but he had good heart of being employed at some other mill, and
     accordingly, before returning home, he spent some hours in going from factory to factory,
     asking for work. But at every mill was some sign of depression of trade; some were working
     short hours, some were turning off hands, and for weeks Barton was out of work, living on
     credit. It was during this time his little son, the apple of his eye, the cynosure of all his
     strong power of love, fell ill of the scarlet fever. They dragged him through the crisis, but
     his life hung on a gossamer thread. Every thing, the doctor said, depended on good nourishment,
     on generous living, to keep up the little fellow's strength, in the prostration in which the
     fever had left him. Mocking words! when the commonest food in the house would not furnish one
     little meal. Barton tried credit; but it was worn out at the little provision shops, which were
     now suffering in their turn. He thought it would be no sin to steal, and would have stolen; but
     he could not get the opportunity in the few days the child lingered. Hungry himself, almost to
     an animal pitch of ravenousness, but with the bodily pain swallowed up in anxiety for his
     little sinking lad, he stood at one of the shop windows where all edible luxuries are
     displayed; haunches of venison, Stilton cheeses, moulds of jelly—all appetising sights to the
     common passer by. And out of this shop came Mrs. Hunter! She crossed to her carriage, followed
     by the shopman loaded with purchases for a party. The door was quickly slammed to, and she
     drove away; and Barton returned home with a bitter spirit of wrath in his heart, to see his
     only boy a corpse!
You can fancy, now, the hoards of vengeance in his heart against the employers. For there are
     never wanting those who, either in speech or in print, find it their interest to cherish such
     feelings in the working classes; who know how and when to rouse the dangerous power at their
     command; and who use their knowledge with unrelenting purpose to either party.
So while Mary took her own way, growing more spirited every day, and growing in her beauty
     too, her father was chairman at many a trades' union meeting; a friend of delegates, and
     ambitious of being a delegate himself; a Chartist, and ready to do any thing for his order.
But now times were good; and all these feelings were theoretical, not practical. His most
     practical thought was getting Mary apprenticed to a dressmaker; for he had never left off
     disliking a factory life for a girl, on more accounts than one.
Mary must do something. The factories being, as I said, out of the question, there were two
     things open—going out to service, and the dressmaking business; and against the first of these,
     Mary set herself with all the force of her strong will. What that will might have been able to
     achieve had her father been against her, I cannot tell; but he disliked the idea of parting
     with her, who was the light of his hearth, the voice of his otherwise silent home. Besides,
     with his ideas and feelings towards the higher classes, he considered domestic servitude as a
     species of slavery; a pampering of artificial wants on the one side, a giving-up of every right
     of leisure by day and quiet rest by night on the other. How far his strong exaggerated feelings
     had any foundation in truth, it is for you to judge. I am afraid that Mary's determination not
     to go to service arose from far less sensible thoughts on the subject than her father's. Three
     years of independence of action (since her mother's death such a time had now elapsed) had
     little inclined her to submit to rules as to hours and associates, to regulate her dress by a
     mistress's ideas of propriety, to lose the dear feminine privileges of gossiping with a merry
     neighbour, and working night and day to help one who was sorrowful. Besides all this, the
     sayings of her absent, her mysterious aunt, Esther, had an unacknowledged influence over Mary.
     She knew she was very pretty; the factory people as they poured from the mills, and in their
     freedom told the truth (whatever it might be) to every passer-by, had early let Mary into the
     secret of her beauty. If their remarks had fallen on an unheeding ear, there were always young
     men enough, in a different rank from her own, who were willing to compliment the pretty
     weaver's daughter as they met her in the streets. Besides, trust a girl of sixteen for knowing
     well if she is pretty; concerning her plainness she may be ignorant. So with this consciousness
     she had early determined that her beauty should make her a lady; the rank she coveted the more
     for her father's abuse; the rank to which she firmly believed her lost aunt Esther had arrived.
     Now, while a servant must often drudge and be dirty, must be known as a servant by all who
     visited at her master's house, a dressmaker's apprentice must (or so Mary thought) be always
     dressed with a certain regard to appearance; must never soil her hands, and need never redden
     or dirty her face with hard labour. Before my telling you so truly what folly Mary felt or
     thought, injures her without redemption in your opinion, think what are the silly fancies of
     sixteen years of age in every class, and under all circumstances. The end of all the thoughts
     of father and daughter was, as I said before, Mary was to be a dressmaker; and her ambition
     prompted her unwilling father to apply at all the first establishments, to know on what terms
     of painstaking and zeal his daughter might be admitted into ever so humble a workwoman's
     situation. But high premiums were asked at all; poor man! he might have known that without
     giving up a day's work to ascertain the fact. He would have been indignant, indeed, had he
     known that if Mary had accompanied him, the case might have been rather different, as her
     beauty would have made her desirable as a show-woman. Then he tried second-rate places; at all
     the payment of a sum of money was necessary, and money he had none. Disheartened and angry he
     went home at night, declaring it was time lost; that dressmaking was at all events a toilsome
     business, and not worth learning. Mary saw that the grapes were sour, and the next day set out
     herself, as her father could not afford to lose another day's work; and before night (as
     yesterday's experience had considerably lowered her ideas) she had engaged herself as
     apprentice (so called, though there were no deeds or indentures to the bond) to a certain Miss
     Simmonds, milliner and dressmaker, in a respectable little street leading off Ardwick Green,
     where her business was duly announced in gold letters on a black ground, enclosed in a
     bird's-eye maple frame, and stuck in the front parlour window; where the workwomen were called
     "her young ladies;" and where Mary was to work for two years without any remuneration, on
     consideration of being taught the business; and where afterwards she was to dine and have tea,
     with a small quarterly salary (paid quarterly, because so much more genteel than by the week),
     a very small one, divisible into a minute weekly pittance. In summer she was to be
     there by six, bringing her day's meals during the first two years; in winter she was not to
     come till after breakfast. Her time for returning home at night must always depend upon the
     quantity of work Miss Simmonds had to do.
And Mary was satisfied; and seeing this, her father was contented too, although his words
     were grumbling and morose; but Mary knew his ways, and coaxed and planned for the future so
     cheerily, that both went to bed with easy if not happy hearts.
 
 
</div></body></text></TEI>