
BOOK III.
CHAPTER I.
 ‘YES,’ said Mr. Luke still more solemnly, ‘if we only follow this out—this
                        idea of the exclusion from our society of all vulgar and extraneous
                        elements, we shall find we have done a great deal more than we may at first
                        think. We shall have at once a free, and liberal, and untainted social and
                        intellectual atmosphere, in which our thoughts, and feelings, and
                        refinements, and ways of living, may develop themselves to the utmost,
                        unimpeded. Lady Ambrose has certainly begun with hitting the right nail on
                        the head.’ 
 Could Lady Ambrose have been told, when she left London the afternoon
                        before, that in another twenty-four hours she would be taking the lead in
                        the construction of a Utopia, or ideal state of society, suggested by the
                        writings of a Greek philosopher, she would have been utterly at a loss to
                        know what the prophecy meant; and had she known what it meant, she would
                        certainly not have believed it. Indeed, as it was, she could hardly imagine
                        that Mr. Luke was serious, and that he was not laughing at her; so she said
                        quickly and in a tone of self-defence, 
 ‘Of course I know that there must be something more than the mere exclusion
                        of vulgar people, Mr. Luke. We must have religion, and all that, and—’ 
 ‘Ah!’ exclaimed Mr. Luke, interrupting her with a grand wave of the hand;
                        ‘my dear Lady Ambrose, let us leave all that till by-and-by. Let us be
                        content to begin with simpler matters first.’ 
 ‘Let us begin with the flowers of life,’ said Leslie, ‘and when we have
                        chosen these, let us trace them back to their roots.’ 
 ‘I quite think,’ said Miss Merton, ‘that in a really good society—one that
                        was perfectly good even in the superficial sense of the word—we should find,
                        if we only had eyes enough, religion lurking somewhere, and everything else
                        we want.’ 
 ‘And so that’s your view, my dear, is it?’ said Lady Ambrose.
                        ‘Oh, then, I suppose since you, a Roman Catholic, think so, I may also.’ 
 ‘Surely, too,’ said Miss Merton, ‘we must all know that nothing can be so
                        bad, either for the pushers or the pushed, as the struggle of people to get
                        into what they think is good society, not in the least because they care to
                        be there, but merely because they care to be known to be there.’ 
 Lady Ambrose, who perhaps felt unconsciously some small pricks of conscience
                        here, again looked doubtful, and said, ‘Still, if we really want to make a
                        perfect state, this does not seem a very serious thing to begin with.’ 
 ‘Listen,’ exclaimed Laurence; ‘let me read you something I have
                        here—something of my uncle’s, which I have just thought of. It is a short
                        adaptation of Aristotle’s Ethics.’ 
 Lady Ambrose started. Hearing two words, the one as long as
                            Aristotle, and the other as unfamiliar as
                            Ethics, she began to think that she had made the
                        conversation serious with a vengeance. Indeed, the whole party, as well as
                        herself, showed some signs of surprise. 
 ‘It is very short,’ said Laurence, ‘and I will only read a page or two. It
                        is called “A system of Ethics, adapted from Aristotle, for the use of the
                        English Nation.” It was suggested to him—’ (and this bewildered Lady Ambrose
                        still more, though at the same time it gave her some gleam of hope), ‘by a
                        very rich vulgar family, who bought a place near here, and who much annoyed
                        and amazed him by the great court they paid to him. This is the first
                        chapter; it treats of “The Summum Bonum, or The Moral
                            End of Action.” Listen— 
 ‘Ethics being the art and science of human action, as directed towards the
                        chief good of life—that highest and final end, to which, if we think a
                        little, we shall see all other ends are subordinate; it is evident that our
                        first task must be, as our master Aristotle well says, to form a clear
                        conception of what this end, the chief good, is. 
 ‘Now on this point Aristotle would seem to err. For he, following the common
                        opinion of men, affirms the chief good to be happiness, holding the only
                        question to be, in what does true happiness lie? And if he had been
                        philosophising for savages, he would indeed have been in the right. But
                        because savages and men in a state of nature have all one end of action,
                        which is happiness, it by no means follows that the same is true of
                        civilised nations, and that these may not have ends that are far higher. It
                        is indeed evident tliat they have. And not this only, but that of such ends
                        there is a very great variety. To describe and number these with anything
                        like absolute accuracy is neither required nor admitted by the nature of the
                        subject. But we shall be sufficiently near the truth if we say that there is
                        a separate and characteristic chief good for each civilised nation—(quot
                        gentes tot summa bona)—and that it is by this in each case that the national
                        character is determined. A glance at the continent of Europe will at once
                        illustrate this, and suggest examples to us of these national chief goods.
                        We shall see the Germans, for instance, following what is called Thought to
                        its inmost recesses, the French what is called Life. We shall find
                        accordingly that the chief good of the former nation, which is perhaps the
                        highest of all, is the knowledge of the unknowable; whilst that of the
                        latter, which is next to it in dignity, is the practice of the
                        unmentionable. And so on with all the other nations; each will be found to
                        have its separate chief good; and none of these to have the least connection
                        with happiness. For us, however, who are English, and writing for English
                        readers, it will be enough to concern ourselves simply with the chief good
                        of the English. 
 ‘We shall discover this, in the same way as we did that of the French and
                        Germans, in an examination of our own special national characteristic.
                        First, however, we must be clear what this characteristic is; and here it
                        will be well to take our neighbours’ opinions of us as well as our own. If
                        we inquire then in what light we present ourselves to the other European
                        nations, we shall find that just as the Germans are known mainly as a
                        profound nation, and the French as a prurient nation, so are we, in like
                        manner, now known as a vulgar nation. And as this view of us exactly tallies
                        with our own, it appears evident that the special national characteristic of
                        the English is vulgarity, and that the chief good of the English is the
                        final end that is aimed at by the English vulgar classes. 
 ‘This we affirm to be social distinction, to their admiration and pursuit of
                        which is due that cardinal moral quality which they call worldliness in
                        themselves, and snobbishness in their friends and enemies. And if any object
                        that to a great part of the nation social distinction in its true sense is a
                        thing unknown, and that to another part it is a thing that comes without
                        being struggled for, and so in neither case can be the end of moral action,
                        we shall answer them that to object this, is much the same as to argue that
                        a peach-tree does not bear peaches because none are to be seen growing out
                        of the roots; or that there is no meaning in the Athanasian Creed because
                        none is attached to it by the only people who use it; or that there is no
                        meaning in the dogma of the Pope's infallibility because its only possible
                        meaning is repudiated by all those who defend it. For nothing will be found
                        unless we seek it in its right place. And for the ethics of a nation we must
                        look only in that part of the nation which is their proper sphere; and that
                        part is, as we have already shown, the vulgar part. And should any still
                        imagine that if we thus limit the scope of our observation, we shall not be
                        able to treat the subject exhaustively, we shall remind him that the vulgar
                        classes, though not yet co-extensive with the nation, are still rapidly
                        becoming so, vulgarity ascending and descending with equal certainty; since
                        on the one hand it ruins all society into which it contrives to enter;
                        whilst it thrives itself, on the other hand, on all society that contrives
                        to enter into it. To it therefore our whole study may be confined. Nor
                        lastly (for it is well to anticipate every possible objection), is there any
                        need that even thus we should study those classes that naturally possess
                        social distinction, that we may so learn in what its real essence consists;
                        since, if we do but observe facts, we shall see that ignorance of the whole
                        inner nature of good society is the chief characteristic of those who with
                        most single-heartedness direct their lives towards getting into it. It will
                        be enough then, without any further explanation, to lay it down that social
                        distinction is the chief good, and the end of all moral action; nor can the
                        Aristotelians say that this is in reality a mediate end, and sought for only
                        because it leads to happiness; since so far are men from seeking social
                        distinction for the sake of happiness, that they are perpetually renouncing
                        happiness for the sake of social distinction.’ 
 ‘Capital, Mr. Laurence!’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose, breaking into a low silvery
                        laugh, as soon as Laurence had ended. ‘And how true that is about those
                        people who really ruin the society into which they contrive to push
                        themselves!’ 
 Lord Allen, who caught Miss Merton’s eye at this moment, gave a very faint
                        smile. 
 ‘So you see,’ said Laurence, ‘that you were quite right, Lady Ambrose, by
                        instinctively beginning with exclusion.’ 
 ‘Still,’ said Allen, ‘I’m afraid that all this is rather selfish. These
                        people who want to to be so smart, are, I dare say, not much the worse
                        because of it. Indeed, myself, I rather like a good snob now and then.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence, ‘let me read a few more paragraphs, and you will see.
                        ‘Such being the end,’ he goes on, ‘of all moral action, virtue or morality
                        is that state of mind which desires this end; and virtuous or moral acts are
                        those which help us on towards it, provided only that they are done with
                        purpose. For acts done not with purpose, but by chance, are not to be held
                        moral. Now the nature of purpose is well explained by Aristotle, when he
                        says that its object is all such voluntary action as is the result of
                        deliberation. And what then is the object of deliberation? Let us consider
                        that: for men, it is evident, do not deliberate about all matters alike;
                        since in addition to their continually not deliberating in cases when they
                        ought, there are many matters about which deliberation is out of the
                        question. Thus no one deliberates about what is in its nature immutable, as
                        how to alter vulgarity of a people’s member of Parliament; nor about
                        necessary things, as how to alleviate the misery of the starving poor; nor
                        about things of chance, as how to prevent the dissemination of cholera; nor,
                        again, about remote things which do not concern us, as, to use a former
                        instance, how to alleviate the misery of the starving poor; nor does anyone
                        deliberate about impossible things, as how to check the poisonous
                        adulteration of food; nor about things that are past and lost, as how to do
                        anything for the glory of England; nor, lastly, do we deliberate about
                        things we do not care about, as how to get that lost glory back again.
                        Deliberation, then, only takes place about such matters as our own agency
                        can effect, and which we wish it should effect. Virtue, therefore, being
                        thus based on deliberation, is manifestly not one of those things that come
                        to us by nature whether we will or no; but it is acquired by habit. The
                        genus of moral virtue is a habit. But what special sort of habit? and how
                        does it differ from all other habits? Let us consider this. 
 ‘We must remember, first, that it is the office of every virtue to perfect
                        that of which it is the virtue. Thus it is the virtue of a modern London
                        house to be as badly built as possible and not be seen to be so; it is the
                        virtue of an insured ship not to appear unseaworthy before she does so to
                        the crew as she is foundering; and it is the virtue of butcher’s meat,
                        groceries and so forth, not to appear unfit for human consumption. In the
                        same way moral virtue, or the virtue of a man, is that which makes him
                        appear to be one thing to the world, whilst in reality he is another. Such
                        being the case, it is plain that in trying to be virtuous, we may, as in
                        most other things, do too much, or too little; and what is right will be a
                        mean lying between these two extremes. Now of means there are two kinds, the
                        absolute and the relative, either of which we can find in anything that is
                        continuous; the former, as when we take the bisecting point in a straight
                        line, which is for all men one and the same; the latter, as when we take the
                        mean point or thing with reference to ourselves, in which case it will
                        differ with our different requirements. Thus, if three be too small a
                        number, and seventy-five too great, simply as an arithmetical problem, we
                        take thirty-nine to be the mean, which exceeds three by as much as it is
                        exceeded by seventy-five; but with reference to ourselves we cannot so
                        decide. For thirty-nine articles of religion may be too few for the present
                        Archbishop of Westminster, and three may be too many for the Dean. Or again
                        between 100l. and 20l., the mean with regard to the matter itself would be
                        60l., but with regard to ourselves, not so. For 60l. would be too little to
                        offer to a cook, and too much to offer to a curate. So in like manner that
                        equality which constitutes moral virtue is not the absolute, but the
                        relative mean. Moral virtue, then, we shall define to be a certain state, or
                        habit of purpose, conforming in action to the relative mean, and adjusted to
                        that mean as the worldly or snobbish man would adjust it. At this point we
                        shall pause a moment to make a very slight change in the accepted
                        terminology of the subject. We have hitherto spoken of the virtue of the
                        vulgar classes as being a mean. We consider, however, that our language will
                        be less ambiguous, if we take another form of the same word, and agree to
                        call it a meanness. Moral virtue, then, is a meanness lying between two
                        vices, its extremes; the one vice being that of excess, the other that of
                        defect. Thus it is possible for a habit of mind to be so unrestrained and
                        vehement, that the acts it produces at once betray their motives and obtrude
                        them on the observer; it is possible for it, also, on the other hand, to be
                        so weak and nerveless as never to produce any acts at all. For instance, the
                        habit of thought in a clergyman may be so strong and unrestrained as to lead
                        him to speak his whole conclusions out, and so get deprived of his living;
                        or on the other hand it may be so weak and undeveloped, that he comes to no
                        conclusions at all, and so dies in a curacy; the meanness between these two
                        extremes being what is called vagueness, or the absence of any defined
                        opinions, which is a great merit, and leads, in the Established Church, to
                        high preferment. So also with habits of action, the general name given to
                        the true meanness is worldliness, whereof the excess is snobbishness, and
                        the defect independence: worldliness being in its essence the former of
                        these, and in its aspect the latter. Whence it follows that we may yet
                        further generally define the moral meanness, as that which is inwardly one
                        extreme, and which is outwardly the other.’ 
 ‘Now,’ said Laurence, ‘though I don’t suppose the writer of this really
                        cared two straws whether the majority of people were mean and vulgar or no,
                        there is a great deal of truth in what he says: and I think in our ideally
                        good society one of the first things we want is that it shall be unmixed and
                        genuine; I mean, all its members must be of it, as well as in it. They must
                        give it its prestige. We must have none that merely get their
                            prestige from it.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Allen, ‘no doubt this exclusion is better, if it could be only
                        managed.’ 
 ‘Don’t let us think yet,’ said Laurence, ‘about how to manage it. Let us see
                        what we want first, and see what it costs afterwards.’ 
 ‘I certainly believe,’ said Miss Merton, ‘that what I consider the extremely
                        bad manners of a great many very fine ladies would all go, if a stop were
                        put to this jostling and scrambling that goes on about them, as Mr. Laurence
                        proposes.’ 
 ‘See,’ said Laurence, ‘here is one good fruit of exclusion at once—the
                        redemption of our manners; and a most important fruit too, I think; for I
                        hope we all start with the understanding that our society, ideally good as
                        it is, is above none of those outward graces and refinements of behaviour
                        and ways of living that give us such pleasure now, when we find them.’ 
 ‘And manner too, Mr. Laurence,’ broke in Lady Ambrose, ‘as well as
                        manners—Think what a charm there is in a really charming manner.’ 
 ‘There is indeed,’ exclaimed Mr. Stockton. ‘The dear Duchess of ——— for
                        instance—why, there’s a fascination even in the way in which she says good
                        morning.’ 
 ‘Ah yes,’ said Lady Ambrose. ‘Now, there’s what I call a really
                        perfect manner for you.’ 
 ‘Very well,’ said Laurence, ‘and whatever is a really perfect manner, in our
                        ideal society we must all have it.’ 
 ‘I must confess,’ said Allen, ‘that I get very sick sometimes of our
                        conventional society manners; and I often long to have a good genuine savage
                        to talk to.’ 
 ‘That,’ said Laurence, ‘is because of all the social shams that we have just
                        agreed to get rid of. And to call the manner of society conventional,
                        conveys no greater blame than if you were to call language conventional. For
                        manner is but a second language, of which the best society speaks the purest
                        dialect—the Attic, in fact. And as with language, so with manner, the more
                        uniformity there is in it in some ways, the nicer shades of individuality
                        shall we be able to express by it in others.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Allen, shortly, ‘perhaps it is so. You are very likely right.’ 
 ‘And in manner,’ said Laurence, ‘I include tone too—that
                        special and indescribable way of looking at things, and speaking of things,
                        which characterises good society, and distinguishes it from the rest of the
                        world so completely, and yet by marks so subtle that they would utterly
                        escape the notice of those who don’t know their meaning—that little extra
                        stroke of polishing that brings to light such countless new delicate veins
                        in the marble of life—the little extra stroke of the brush that puts a new
                        refinement, and self-possession, into the face. As Browning says of a very
                        different subject—  Oh, the little more, and how much it
                            is, And this is something quite independent of any special
                        ability or special quality on the part of the individual people themselves;
                        though of course the more gifted and cultivated they are, the greater will
                        its charm be.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Miss Merton thoughtfully, and half to herself, ‘I think all that
                        is quite true.’ 
 ‘Of course,’ said Laurence, ‘I know that tone alone can only make society
                        good in a very narrow sense of the word. I merely mean that no amount of
                        other qualities can make it really good, without tone.’ 
 ‘I don’t in the least object,’ said Allen, ‘to the marble being polished;
                        but what I want first to be sure of is, that it is worth polishing.’ 
 ‘Quite so,’ said Laurence. ‘What we must now consider is, what are all those
                        special qualities and accomplishments, which will make a really perfect
                        society the best among the best—such things as wit, knowledge, experience,
                        humour, and so on—the veins, in fact, in the marble, that can be brought out
                        by the polish.’ 
 ‘Ah, yes, my dear Laurence,’ began Mr. Luke, ‘this is the great thing that
                        we shall have to decide about; and it is this very thing that I am always
                        telling the world is—’ 
 But he was interrupted by the advent of Mr. Herbert, who, with the exception
                        of Mr. Storks and Dr. Jenkinson, was the only member of the party not
                        already there. Mr. Herbert’s whole aspect surprised everyone. At luncheon,
                        as all remembered, he had been melancholy and desponding; but his face now
                        wore a bright smile, and there was something that was almost gaiety in his
                        elastic step. No one, however, ventured to ask him the reason of this
                        pleasing change; but as he held an open newspaper in his hand, which he had
                        apparently just received, it occurred to most that he must have seen in it
                        ‘something to his advantage.’ 
 ‘Well,’ he exclaimed to Laurence, in a manner quite in keeping with his
                        look, ‘and tell me now how are you getting on with your new Republic? You
                        ought to make a very beautiful thing out of it—all of you together, with so
                        many charming ladies.’ 
 ‘Do you think so?’ said Laurence, in great surprise at this cheerful view of
                        things. 
 ‘Yes,’ answered Mr. Herbert, slowly and with decision. ‘Ladies I always
                        think, so long as they are good and honest, have beautiful imaginations. And
                        now, let me ask you how you have set to work.’ 
 Laurence explained to him that they had begun, on Leslie’s suggestion, with
                        considering what society, or the life of the highest classes, would be at
                        its best; and that they were going to see afterwards what was implied in
                        this. 
 ‘Indeed!’ said Mr, Herbert meditatively. ‘Now, that is a really beautiful
                        way of going about the business. And how far, let me ask you, have you got
                        with your picture of these highest classes? I trust at all events that you
                        have made a good beginning.’ 
 ‘A beginning,’ said Laurence, ‘is all that we have made. We have agreed that
                        our society is to have the utmost polish, ease, and grace of manner, and the
                        completest savoir-vivre. It is, in fact, to be a sort of
                        exemplar of human life at its highest conceivable completeness.’ 
 ‘Excuse me,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘but the ways of polite life, and the manners
                        of fine ladies and gentlemen, are beautiful only as the expression of a
                        beautiful spirit! They are altogether hateful as the ornament or the
                        covering of a vile one.’ 
 ‘Yes, Herbert, yes,’ exclaimed Mr. Luke, with a long sigh. ‘And I was just
                        going to say this, when you joined us—that to make society really good—even
                        really brilliant and entertaining—one thing is wanted, and that is true and
                        genuine culture. Then let us have the polish by all means; but
                        let it be a diamond we polish, and not a pebble. Our society must be one
                        that does not merely dance, and hunt, and shoot. It must think, and reason,
                        and read. It must be familiar—the whole of it must be familiar—with the
                        great thoughts of the world, the great facts of the world, and the great
                        books of the world. You want all this, if you would be perfectly brilliant
                        in your salons, as well as really profound in your studies.’ 
 This was assented to by nearly all. Lady Ambrose however looked a little
                        uncomfortable, and not quite satisfied about something. 
 ‘Don’t you think,’ she said at last, ‘that if everyone is to have so much
                        culture, society will tend to become—well—just a little—’ 
 ‘Well, Lady Ambrose?’ said Laurence. 
 ‘Well, just a little bit blue. It will be all too bookish, if
                        you understand what I mean. Don’t you know when anyone comes to see you in
                        London, and will talk of nothing but books, one always fancies it is because
                        he isn’t—it’s very uncharitable to say so, but still it’s true—because he
                        isn’t very much in society and doesn’t know many people to talk about?’ 
 ‘I always think it such a blessing,’ said Lord Allen, ‘to find anyone who
                        will talk about books, and will not be perpetually boring one with vulgar
                        gossip and scandal.’ 
 ‘Oh, so do I,’ said Lady Ambrose eagerly, ‘but that was not what I meant
                        exactly. Mr. Laurence knows what I mean; I’m sure he does. No one can
                        delight in a book more than I; but still—’ she said, pausing to think how
                        much of what she considered culture was to be found in those London
                        drawing-rooms where she felt her own life completest, ‘still—somehow—’ she
                        said with a faint smile, ‘it is possible to be too literary, isn’t it, as
                        well as too anything else?’ 
 ‘Perfectly true, Lady Ambrose,’ said Mr. Luke—Lady Ambrose was
                        delighted—‘people continually are too literary—to my cost I
                        know it; and that is because the world at large—what is called the reading
                        world even more than the non-reading world—are hopelessly at sea as to what
                        books are, and what they really do for us. In other words, if you will
                        forgive my harping as I do upon a single expression, they lack culture.’ 
 ‘Why, I thought culture was books and literariness, and all
                        that,’ Lady Ambrose murmured half aloud, with a look of bewilderment. Mr.
                        Herbert however suddenly came to her rescue. 
 ‘Now, all this,’ he said, ‘is most interesting; but I feel myself, something
                        as I imagine Lady Ambrose does, that I should like to know a little more
                        clearly what culture is, and what you mean by it, when you call it the
                        essence of good society.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘this is just what I like. Come, Mr. Luke, suppose
                        you were to tell us.’ 
 ‘Suppose,’ said Mr. Luke with an august wave of his hand, ‘instead of that
                        we ask Mr. Laurence to tell us. No one can do so better than he. I, Lady
                        Ambrose, have perhaps grown something too much of a specialist to be able to
                        put these things in a sufficiently popular way.’ 
 ‘Ah,’ said Mr. Herbert,’ this is really nice. I shall like to listen to
                        this. But you must allow me to be merely a listener, and not ask me for
                        instruction. I assure you I am here altogether to be instructed.’ 
 Laurence, with some diffidence, assented to what was asked of him; and there
                        was a general rustling on all sides of the party settling themselves down
                        more luxuriously on the grass. Every influence of the summer afternoon
                        conspired to make all take kindly to the topic—the living airy whisper of
                        the leaves overhead, the wandering scents of the flowers that the breeze
                        just made perceptible, the musical splash of the fountain in its quiet
                        restlessness, the luxury of the mossy turf as soft as sleep or rose-leaves,
                        and a far faint murmur of church-bells that now and then invaded the ear
                        gently, like a vague appealing dream. Mr. Saunders even was caressed by his
                        flattered senses into peacefulness; the high and dry light of the intellect
                        ceased to scintillate in his eyes; the spirit of progress condescended to
                        take a temporary doze. 
