
CHAPTER XXX.
VALERIA DU PREL, finding that Miss Temperley proposed a visit of some length,
       returned to town by the early morning train.
“Valeria, do you know anyone in Paris to whom you could give me a letter of introduction?”
       Hadria asked, at the last moment, when there was just time to write the letter, and no
       more.
“Are you going to Paris?” Valeria asked, startled.
“Please write the letter and I will tell you some day what I want it for.”
“Nothing very mad, I hope?”
“No, only a little—judiciously mad.”
“Well, there is Madame Bertaux, in the Avenue Kleber, but her you know already. Let me see.
       Oh yes, Madame Vauchelet, a charming woman; very kind and very fond of young people. She is
       about sixty; a widow; her husband was in the diplomatic service.”
Valeria made these hurried comments while writing the letter.
“She is musical too, and will introduce you, perhaps, to the great Joubert, and others of
       that set. You will like her, I am sure. She is one of the truly good people of this world. If
       you really are going to Paris, I shall feel happier if I know that Madame Vauchlelet is your
       friend.”
Sophia's successor announced that the pony-cart was at the door.
Miss Du Prel looked rather anxiously at Hadria and her sister-in-law, as they stood on the
       steps to bid her good-bye. There was a look of elation mixed with devilry, in Hadria's
        face. The two figures turned and entered the house
       together, as the pony-cart passed through the gate.
Hadria always gave Miss Temperley much opportunity for the employment of tact, finding this
       tact more elucidating than otherwise to the designs that it was intended to conceal; it
       affected them in the manner of a magnifying-glass. About a couple of years ago, the death of
       her mother had thrown Henriette on her own resources, and set free a large amount of energy
       that craved a legitimate outlet. The family with whom she was now living in London, not being
       related to her, offered but limited opportunities.
Henriette's eye was fixed, with increasing fondness, upon the Red House. There
       lay the callow brood marked out by Nature and man, for her ministrations. With infinite
       adroitness, Miss Temperley questioned her sister-in-law, by inference and suggestion, about
       the affairs of the household. Hadria evaded the attempt, but rejoiced, for reasons of her
       own, that it was made. She began to find the occupation diverting, and characteristically did
       not hesitate to allow her critic to form most alarming conclusions as to the state of matters
       at the Red House. She was pensive, and mild, and a little surprised when Miss Temperley, with
       a suppressed gasp, urged that the question was deeply serious. It amused Hadria to reproduce,
       for Henriette's benefit, the theories regarding the treatment and training of children that
       she had found current among the mothers of the district.
Madame Bertaux happened to call during the afternoon, and that outspoken lady scoffed
       openly at these theories, declaring that women made idiots of themselves on behalf of their
       children, whom they preposterously ill-used with unflagging devotion.
“The moral training of young minds is such a problem,” said Henriette, after the visitor
       had left, “it must cause you many an anxious thought.”
Hadria arranged herself comfortably among cushions, and let every muscle relax.

“The boys are so young yet,” she said drowsily. “I have no doubt that will all come, later
       on.”
“But, my dear Hadria, unless they are trained now—”
“Oh, there is plenty of time!”
“Do you mean to say—?”
“Only what other people say. Nothing in the least original, I assure you. I see the folly
       and the inconvenience of that now. I have consulted hoary experience. I have sat reverently
       at the feet of old nurses. I have talked with mothers in the spirit of a disciple, and I have
       learnt, oh, so much!”
“Mothers are most anxious about the moral training of their little ones,” said Henriette,
       in some bewilderment.
“Of course, but they don't worry about it so early. One can't expect accomplished morality
       from poor little dots of five and six. The charm of infancy would be gone.”
Miss Temperley explained, remonstrated. Hadria was limp, docile, unemphatic. Perhaps
       Henriette was right, she didn't know. A sense of honour? (Hadria suppressed a smile.) Could
       one, after all, expect of six what one did not always get at six and twenty? Morals
       altogether seemed a good deal to ask of irresponsible youth. Henriette could not overrate the
       importance of early familiarity with the difference between right and wrong. Certainly it was
       important, but Hadria shrank from an extreme view. One must not rush into it without careful
       thought.
“But meanwhile the children are growing up!” cried Henriette, in despair.
Hadria had not found that experienced mothers laid much stress on that fact. Besides, there
       was considerable difficulty in the matter. Henriette did not see it. The difference between
       right and wrong could easily be taught to a child.
Perhaps so, but it seemed to be thought expedient to defer the lesson till the distant
       future; at least, if one might judge from the literature especially designed for growing
       minds, wherein clever villainy was exalted, and deeds of ferocious
        cruelty and revenge occurred as a daily commonplace among
       heroes. The same policy was indicated by the practice of allowing children to become familiar
       with the sight of slaughter, and of violence of every kind towards animals, from earliest
       infancy. Hadria concluded from all this, that it was thought wise to postpone the moral
       training of the young till a more convenient season.
Henriette looked at her sister-in-law, with a sad and baffled mien. Hadria's expression was
       solemn, and as much like that of Mrs. Walker as she could make it, without descending to
       obvious caricature.
“Do you think it quite wise, Henriette, to run dead against the customs of ages? Do you
       think it safe to ignore the opinion of countless generations of those who were older and
       wiser than ourselves?”
“Dear me, how you have changed!” cried Miss Temperley.
“Advancing years; the sobering effects of experience,” Hadria explained. She was grieved to
       find Henriette at variance with those who had practical knowledge of education. As the child
       grew up, one could easily explain to him that the ideas and impressions that he might have
       acquired, in early years, were mostly wrong, and had to be reversed. That was quite simple.
       Besides, unless he were a born idiot of criminal tendencies, he was bound to find it out for
       himself.
“But, my dear Hadria, it is just the early years that are the impressionable years. Nothing
       can quite erase those first impressions.”
“Oh, do you think so?” said Hadria mildly.
“Yes, indeed, I think so,” cried Henriette, losing her temper.
“Oh, well of course you may be right.”
Hadria had brought out a piece of embroidery (about ten years old), and was working
       peacefully.
On questions of hygiene, she was equally troublesome. She had taken hints, she said, from
       mothers of large families. Henriette laid stress upon fresh air, even in the house.
        Hadria believed in fresh air; but was it not going a
       little far to have it in the house?
Henriette shook her head.
Fresh air was always necessary. In moderation, perhaps, Hadria admitted. But
       the utmost care was called for, to avoid taking cold. She laid great stress upon that.
       Children were naturally so susceptible. In all the nurseries that she had visited, where
       every possible precaution was taken against draughts, the children were incessantly taking
       cold.
“Perhaps the precautions made them delicate,” Henriette suggested. But this paradox Hadria
       could not entertain. “Take care of the colds, and the fresh air will take care of itself,”
       was her general maxim.
“But, my dear Hadria, do you mean to tell me that the people about here are so benighted as
       really not to understand the importance to the system of a constant supply of pure air?”
Hadria puckered up her brow, as if in thought. “Well,” she said, “several mothers
        have mentioned it, but they take more interest in fluid magnesia and
       tonics.”
Henriette looked dispirited.
At any rate, there was no reason why Hadria should not be more enlightened than her
       neighbours, on these points. Hadria shook her head deprecatingly. She hoped Henriette would
       not mind if she quoted the opinion of old Mr. Jordan, whose language was sometimes a little
       strong. He said that he didn't believe all that “damned nonsense about fresh air and drains!”
       Henriette coughed.
“It is certainly not safe to trust entirely to nurses, however devoted and experienced,”
       she insisted. Hadria shrugged her shoulders. If the nurse did constitutionally
       enjoy a certain stuffiness in her nurseries—well the children were out half the day, and it
       couldn't do them much harm. (Hadria bent low over her embroidery.)
The night?
“Oh! then one must, of course, expect to be a little stuffy.”

“But,” cried Miss Temperley, almost hopeless, “impure air breathed, night after night, is
       an incessant drain on the strength, even if each time it only does a little harm.”
Hadria smiled over her silken arabesques. “Oh, nobody ever objects to things that only do a
       little harm.” There was a moment of silence.
Henriette thought that Hadria must indeed have changed very much during the last years.
       Well, of course, when very young, Hadria said, one had extravagant notions: one imagined all
       sorts of wild things about the purposes of the human brain: not till later did one realize
       that the average brain was merely an instrument of adjustment, a sort of spirit-level which
       enabled its owner to keep accurately in line with other people. Henriette ought to rejoice
       that Hadria had thus come to bow to the superiority of the collective wisdom.
But Henriette had her doubts.
Hadria carefully selected a shade of silk, went to the light to reassure herself of its
       correctness, and returned to her easy chair by the fire. Henriette resumed her knitting. She
       was making stockings for her nephews.
“Henriette, don't you think it would be rather a good plan if you were to come and live
       here and manage affairs—morals, manners, hygiene, and everything?”
Henriette's needles stopped abruptly, and a wave of colour came into her face, and a gleam
       of sudden joy to her eyes.
“My dear, what do you mean?”
“Hubert, of course, would be only too delighted to have you here, and I want to go
       away.”
“For heaven's sake—”
“Not exactly for heaven's sake. For my own sake, I suppose: frankly selfish. It is,
       perhaps, the particular form that my selfishness takes—an unfortunately conspicuous form. So
       many of us can have a nice cosy pocket edition that doesn't show. However, that's not the
       point. I know you would be happier doing this than anything else, and that you would do it
       perfectly. You have the kind of talent, if I may say so, that
        makes an admirable ruler. When it has a large political
       field we call it ‘administrative ability’; when it has a small domestic one, we speak of it
       as ‘good housekeeping.’ It is a precious quality, wherever it appears. You have no scope for
       it at present.”
Henriette was bewildered, horrified, yet secretly thrilled with joy on her own account. Was
       there a quarrel? Had any cloud come over the happiness of the home? Hadria laughed and
       assured her to the contrary. But where was she going, and for how long? What did she intend
       to do? Did Hubert approve? And could she bear to be away from her children? Hadria thought
       this was all beside the point, especially as the boys were shortly going to school. The
       question was, whether Henriette would take the charge.
Certainly, if Hadria came to any such mad decision, but that, Henriette hoped, might be
       averted. What would people say? Further discussion was checked by a call from
       Mrs. Walker, whom Hadria had the audacity to consult on questions of education and hygiene,
       leading her, by dexterous generalship, almost over the same ground that she had traversed
       herself, inducing the unconscious lady to repeat, with amazing accuracy, Hadria's own
       reproduction of local views.
“Now am I without authority in my ideas?” she asked, after Mrs. Walker had
       departed. Henriette had to admit that she had at least one supporter.
“But I believe,” she added, “that your practice is better than your preaching.”
“It seems to be an ordinance of Nature,” said Hadria, “that these things shall never
       correspond.”
