
CHAPTER XV.
THE family had reassembled for the New Year's festivities. The change in Algitha
       since her departure from home was striking. She was gentler, more affectionate to her
       parents, than of yore. The tendency to grow hard and fretful had entirely disappeared. The
       sense of self was obviously lessened with the need for self-defence. Hadria discovered that
       an attachment was springing up between her sister and Wilfred Burton, about whom she wrote so
       frequently, and that this development of her emotional nature, united with her work, had
       given a glowing centre to her life which showed itself in a thousand little changes of manner
       and thought. Hadria told her sister that she felt herself unreal and fanciful in her
       presence. “I go twirling things round and round in my head till I grow dizzy. But you compare
       ideas with fact; you even turn ideas into fact; while I can get no hold on fact at all.
       Thoughts rise as mists rise from the river, but nothing happens. I feel them begin to prey
       upon me, working inwards.”
Algitha shook her head. “It is a mad world,” she said. “Week after week goes by, and there
       seems no lifting of the awful darkness in which the lives of these millions are passed. We
       want workers by the thousand. Yet, as if in mockery, the Devil keeps these well-fed thousands
       eating their hearts out in idleness or artificial occupations till they become diseased
       merely for want of something to do. Then,” added Algitha, “His Majesty marries them, and sets
       them to work to create another houseful of idle creatures, who have to be supported by the
       deathly toil of those who labour too much.”
“The devil is full of resources!” said Hadria.
Miss Temperley had been asked to stay at Dunaghee for
        the New Year. Algitha conceived for her a sentiment almost
       vindictive. Hadria and the boys enjoyed nothing better than to watch Miss Temperley giving
       forth her opinions, while Algitha's figure gradually stiffened and her neck drew out, as Fred
       said, in truly telescopic fashion, like that of Alice in Wonderland. The boys constructed a
       figure of cushions, stuffed into one of Algitha's old gowns, the neck being a padded
       broom-handle, made to work up and down at pleasure; and with this counterfeit presentment of
       their sister, they used to act the scene amidst shouts of applause, Miss Temperley entering,
       on one occasion, when the improvised cocoa-nut head had reached its culminating point of high
       disdain, somewhere about the level of the curtain-poles.
On New-Year's-eve, Dunaghee was full of guests. There was to be a children's party, to
       which however most of the grown-up neighbours were also invited.
“What a charming sight!” cried Henriette, standing with her neat foot on the fender in the
       hall, where the children were playing blind man's buff.
Mrs. Fullerton sat watching them with a dreamy smile. The scene recalled many an old
       memory. Mr. Fullerton was playing with the children.
Everyone remarked how well the two girls looked in their new evening gowns. They had made
       them themselves, in consequence of a wager with Fred, who had challenged them to combine pink
       and green satisfactorily.
“The gowns are perfect!” Temperley ventured to remark. “So much distinction!”
“All my doing,” cried Fred. “I chose the colours.”
“Distinction comes from within,” said Temperley. “I should like to see what sort of gown in
       pink and green Mrs. —.” He stopped short abruptly.
Fred gave a chuckle. Indiscreet eyes wandered towards Mrs. Gordon's brocade and silver.
Later in the evening, that lady played dance music in a florid manner, resembling her taste
       in dress. The younger children had gone home, and the hall was filled with spinning
       couples.

“I hope we are to have some national dances,” said Miss Temperley. “My brother and I are
       both looking forward to seeing a true reel danced by natives of the country.”
“Oh, certainly!” said Mr. Fullerton. “My daughters are rather celebrated for their reels,
       especially Hadria.” Mr. Fullerton executed a step or two with great agility.
“The girl gets quite out of herself when she is dancing,” said Mrs. Fullerton. “She won't
       be scolded about it, for she says she takes after her father!”
“That's the time to get round her,” observed Fred. “If we want to set her up to some real
       fun, we always play a reel and wait till she's well into the spirit of the thing, and then,
       I'll wager, she would stick at nothing.”
“It's a fact,” added Ernest. “It really seems to half mesmerise her.”
“How very curious!” cried Miss Temperley.
She and her brother found themselves watching the dancing a little apart from the
       others.
“I would try again to-night, Hubert,” she said in a low voice.
He was silent for a moment, twirling the tassel of the curtain.
“There is nothing to be really alarmed at in her ideas, regretable as they are. She is
       young. That sort of thing will soon wear off after she is married.”
Temperley flung away the tassel.
“She doesn't know what she is talking about. These high-flown lectures and discussions have
       filled all their heads with nonsense. It will have to be rooted out when they come to face
       the world. No use to oppose her now. Nothing but experience will teach her. She must just be
       humoured for the present. They have all run a little wild in their notions. Time
       will cure that.”
“I am sure of it,” said Hubert tolerantly. “They don't know the real import of what they
       say.” He hugged this sentence with satisfaction.
“They are like the young Russians one reads about in Turgenieff's novels,” said
       Henriette—“all ideas, no commonsense.”

“And you really believe—?”
Henriette's hand was laid comfortingly on her brother's arm.
“Dear Hubert, I know something of my sex. After a year of married life, a woman has too
       many cares and responsibilities to trouble about ideas of this kind, or of any other.”
“She strikes me as being somewhat persistent by nature,” said Hubert, choosing a gentler
       word than obstinate to describe the quality in the lady of his affections.
“Let her be as persistent as she may, it is not possible for any woman to resist the laws
       and beliefs of Society. What can she do against all the world? She can't escape from the
       conditions of her epoch. Oh! she may talk boldly now, for she does not understand; she is a
       mere infant as regards knowledge of the world, but once a wife—”
Henriette smiled and shook her head, by way of finish to her sentence. Hubert mused
       silently for some minutes.
“I could not endure that there should be any disturbance—any eccentricity—in our life—”
“My dear boy, if you don't trust to the teaching of experience to cure Hadria of these
       fantastic notions, rely upon the resistless persuasions of our social facts and laws. Nothing
       can stand against them—certainly not the fretful heresies of an inexperienced girl, who,
       remember, is really good and kind at heart.”
“Ah! yes,” cried Hubert; “a fine nature, full of good instincts, and womanly to her
       finger-tips.”
“Oh! if she were not that, I would never encourage you to think of her,” cried
       Henriette with a shudder. “It is on this essential goodness of heart that I rely. She would
       never be able, try as she might, to act in a manner that would really distress those who were
       dear to her. You may count upon that securely.”
“Yes; I am sure of it,” said Hubert, “but unluckily” (he shook his head and sighed) “I am
       not among those who are dear to her.”
He rose abruptly, and Henriette followed him.

“Try to win her to-night,” she murmured, “and be sure to express no opposition to her
       ideas, however wild they may be. Ignore them, humour her, plead your cause once more on this
       auspicious day—the last of the old year. Something tells me that the new year will begin
       joyously for you. Go now, and good luck to you.”
“Ah! here you are,” cried Mr. Fullerton, “we were wondering what had become of you. You
       said you wished to see a reel. Mrs. McPherson is so good as to play for us.”
The kindly old Scottish dame had come, with two nieces, from a distance of ten miles.
A thrill ran through the company when the strange old tune began. Everyone rushed for a
       partner, and two long rows of figures stood facing one another, eager to start. Temperley
       asked Hadria to dance with him. Algitha had Harold Wilkins for a partner. The two long rows
       were soon stepping and twirling with zest and agility. A new and wilder spirit began to
       possess the whole party. The northern blood took fire and transfigured the dancers. The
       Temperleys seemed to be fashioned of different clay; they were able to keep their heads.
       Several elderly people had joined in the dance, performing their steps with a conscientious
       dexterity that put some of their juniors to shame. Mr. Fullerton stood by, looking on and
       applauding.
“How your father seems to enjoy the sight!” said Temperley, as he met his partner for a
       moment.
“He likes nothing so well, and his daughters take after him.”
Hadria's reels were celebrated, not without reason. Some mad spirit seemed to possess her.
       It would appear almost as if she had passed into a different phase of character. She lost
       caution and care and the sense of external events.
When the dance was ended, Hubert led her from the hall. She went as if in a dream. She
       would not allow herself to be taken beyond the sound of the grotesque old dance music that
       was still going on, but otherwise she was unresisting.
He sat down beside her in a corner of the dining-room.
        Now and then he glanced at his companion, and seemed about
       to speak. “You seem fond of your national music,” he at last remarked.
“It fills me with bewildering memories,” she said in a dreamy tone. “It seems to recall—it
       eludes description—some wild, primitive experiences—mountains, mists—I can't express what
       northern mysteries. It seems almost as if I had lived before, among some ancient Celtic
       people, and now, when I hear their music—or sometimes when I hear the sound of wind among the
       pines—whiffs and gusts of something intensely familiar return to me, and I cannot grasp it.
       It is very bewildering.”
“The only thing that happens to me of the kind is that curious sense of having done a thing
       before. Strange to say, I feel it now. This moment is not new to me.”
Hadria gave a startled glance at her companion, and shuddered.
“I suppose it is all pre-ordained,” she said. He was puzzled, but more hopeful than usual.
       Hadria might almost have accepted him in sheer absence of mind. He put the thought in
       different terms. He began to speak more boldly. He gave his view of life and happiness, his
       philosophy and religion. Hadria lazily agreed. She lay under a singular spell. The bizarre
       old music smote still upon the ear. She felt as if she were in the thrall of some dream whose
       events followed one another, as the scenes of a moving panorama unfold themselves before the
       spectators. Temperley began to plead his cause. Hadria, with a startled look in her eyes,
       tried to check him. But her will refused to issue a vigorous command. Even had he been
       hateful to her, which he certainly was not, she felt that she would have been unable to wake
       out of the nightmare, and resume the conduct of affairs. The sense of the importance of
       personal events had entirely disappeared. What did it all matter? “Over us stars and under us
       graves.” The graves would put it all right some day. As for attempting to direct one's fate,
       and struggle out of the highways of the
        world—midsummer madness! It was not only the Mrs. Gordons,
       but the Valeria Du Prel who told one so. Everybody said (but in discreeter terms), “Disguise
       from yourself the solitude by setting up little screens of affections, and little pompous
       affairs about which you must go busily, and with all the solemnity that you can muster.”
The savage builds his mud hut to shelter him from the wind and the rain and the terror of
       the beyond. Outside is the wilderness ready to engulf him. Rather than be left alone at the
       mercy of elemental things, with no little hut, warm and dark and stuffy, to shelter one, a
       woman will sacrifice everything—liberty, ambition, health, power, her very dignity. There was
       a letter in Hadria's pocket at this moment, eloquently protesting in favour of the mud
       hut.
Hadria must have been appearing to listen favourably to Temperley's pleading, for he said
       eagerly, “Then I have not spoken this time quite in vain. I may hope that perhaps some
       day—”
“Some day,” repeated Hadria, passing her hand across her eyes. “It doesn't really matter. I
       mean we make too much fuss about these trifles; don't you think so?” She spoke dreamily. The
       music was jigging on with strange merriment.
“To me it matters very much indeed. I don't consider it a trifle,” said Temperley, in some
       bewilderment.
“Oh, not to ourselves. But of what importance are we?”
“None at all, in a certain sense,” Temperley admitted; “but in another sense we are all
       important. I cannot help being intensely personal at this moment. I can't help grasping at
       the hope of happiness. Hadria, it lies in your hand. Won't you be generous?”
She gave a distressed gesture, and seemed to make some vain effort, as when the victim of a
       nightmare struggles to overcome the paralysis that holds him.
“Then I may hope a little, Hadria—I must hope.”
Still the trance seemed to hold her enthralled. The music was diabolically merry. She could
       fancy evil spirits tripping
        to it in swarms around her. They seemed to point at her,
       and wave their arms around her, and from them came an influence, magnetic in its quality,
       that forbade her to resist. All had been pre-arranged. Nothing could avert it. She seemed to
       be waiting rather than acting. Against her inner judgment, she had allowed those accursed
       practices to go on. Against her instinct, she had permitted Henriette to become intimate at
       Dunaghee; indeed it would have been hard to avoid it, for Miss Temperley was not easy to
       discourage. Why had she assured Hadria so pointedly that Hubert would not misinterpret her
       consent to renew the practices? Was it not a sort of treachery? Had not Henriette, with her
       larger knowledge of the world, been perfectly well aware that whatever might be said, the
       renewal of the meetings would be regarded as encouragement? Did she not know that Hadria
       herself would feel implicated by the concession?
Temperley's long silence had been misleading. The danger had crept up insidiously. And had
       she not been treacherous to herself? She had longed for companionship, for music, for
       something to break the strain of her wild, lonely life. Knowing, or rather half-divining the
       risk, she had allowed herself to accept the chance of relief when it came. Lack of experience
       had played a large part in the making of to-night's dilemma. Hadria's own strange mood was
       another ally to her lover, and for that, old Mrs. McPherson and her reels were chiefly
       responsible. Of such flimsy trifles is the human fate often woven.
“Tell me, did you ask your sister to —?”
“No, no,” Hubert interposed. “My sister knows of my hopes, and is anxious that I should
       succeed.”
“I thought that she was helping you.”
“She would take any legitimate means to help me,” said Hubert. “You cannot resent that. Ah,
       Hadria, why will you not listen to me?” He bent forward, covering his face with his hands in
       deep dejection. His hope had begun to wane.
“You know what I think,” said Hadria. “You know how
        I should act if I married. Surely that ought to cure you
       of all—.”
He seized her hand.
“No, no, nothing that you may think could cure me of the hope of making you my wife. I care
       for what you are, not for what you think. You know how little I
       cling to the popular version of the domestic story. I have told you over and over again that
       it offends me in a thousand ways. I hate the bourgeois
       element in it. What have we really to disagree about?”
He managed to be very convincing. He shewed that for a woman, life in her father's house is
       far less free than in her own home; that existence could be moulded to any shape she pleased.
       If Hadria hesitated only on this account her last reason was gone. It was not fair to him. He
       had been patient. He had kept silence for many months. But he could endure the suspense no
       longer. He took her hand. Then suddenly she rose.
“No, no. I can't, I can't,” she cried desperately.
“I will not listen to denial,” he said following her. “I cannot stand a second
       disappointment. You have allowed me to hope.”
“How? When? Never!” she exclaimed.
“Ah, yes, Hadria. I am older than you and I have more experience. Do you think a man will
       cease to hope while he continues to see the woman he loves?”
Hadria turned very pale.
“You seemed to have forgotten—your sister assured me—Ah, it was treacherous, it was cruel.
       She took advantage of my ignorance, my craving for companionship.”
“No, it is you who are cruel, Hadria, to make such accusations. I do not claim the
       slightest consideration because you permitted those practices. But you cannot suppose that my
       feeling has not been confirmed and strengthened since I have seen you again. Why should you
       turn from me? Why may I not hope to win you? If you have no repugnance to me, why should not
       I have a chance? Hadria, Hadria,
        answer me, for heaven's sake. Oh, if I could only
       understand what is in your mind!”
She would have found it a hard task to enlighten him. He had succeeded, to some extent, in
       lulling her fears, not in banishing them, for a sinister dread still muttered its warning
       beneath the surface thoughts.
The strength of Temperley's emotion had stirred her. The magic of personal influence had
       begun to tell upon her. It was so hard not to believe when some one insisted with such
       certainty, with such obvious sincerity, that everything would be right. He seemed so
       confident that she could make him happy, strange as it appeared. Perhaps after all—? And what
       a release from the present difficulties. But could one trust? A confused mass of feeling
       struggled together. A temptation to give the answer that would cause pleasure was very
       strong, and beneath all lurked a trembling hope that perhaps this was the way of escape. In
       apparent contradiction to this, or to any other hope, lay a sense of fatality, a sad
       indifference, interrupted at moments by flashes of very desperate caring, when suddenly the
       love of life, the desire for happiness and experience, for the exercise of her power, for its
       use in the service of her generation, became intense, and then faded away again, as obstacles
       presented their formidable array before the mind. In the midst of the confusion the thought
       of the Professor hovered vaguely, with a dim distressing sense of something wrong, of
       something within her lost and wretched and forlorn.
Mrs. Fullerton passed through the room on the arm of Mr. Gordon. How delighted her mother
       would be if she were to give up this desperate attempt to hold out against her appointed
       fate. What if her mother and Mrs. Gordon and all the world were perfectly right and
       far-seeing and wise? Did it not seem more likely, on the face of it, that they
        should be right, considering the enormous majority of those who would agree
       with them, than that she, Hadria, a solitary girl, unsupported by knowledge of life or by
       fellow-believers, should
        have chanced upon the truth? Had only Valeria been on her
       side, she would have felt secure, but Valeria was dead against her.
“We are not really at variance, believe me,” Temperley pleaded. “You state things rather
       more strongly than I do—a man used to knocking about the world—but I don't believe there is
       any radical difference between us.” He worked himself up into the belief that there never
       were two human beings so essentially at one, on all points, as he and Hadria.
“Do you remember the debate that evening in the garret? Do you remember the sentiments that
       scared your sister so much?” she asked.
Temperley remembered.
“Well, I don't hold those sentiments merely for amusement and recreation. I mean them. I
       should not hesitate a moment to act upon them. If things grew intolerable, according to my
       view of things, I should simply go away, though twenty marriage-services had been read over
       my head. Neither Algitha nor I have any of the notions that restrain women in these matters.
       We would brook no such bonds. The usual claims and demands we would neither make nor submit
       to. You heard Algitha speak very plainly on the matter. So you see, we are entirely
       unsuitable as wives, except to the impossible men who might share our rebellion. Please let
       us go back to the hall. They are just beginning to dance another reel.”
“I cannot let you go back. Oh, Hadria, you can't be so unjust as to force me to break off
       in this state of uncertainty. Just give me a word of hope, however slight, and I will be
       satisfied.”
Hadria looked astonished. “Have you really taken in what I have just said?”
“Every word of it.”
“And you realise that I mean it, mean it, with every fibre of me.”
“I understand; and I repeat that I shall not be happy until
        you are my wife. Have what ideas you please, only be my
       wife.”
She gazed at him in puzzled scrutiny. “You don't think I am really in earnest. Let us
       go.”
“I know you are in earnest,” he cried, eagerly following her, “and still I —”
At that moment Harold Wilkins came up to claim Hadria for a promised dance. Temperley gave
       a gesture of impatience. But Harold insisted, and Hadria walked with her partner into the
       hall where Mrs. Gordon was now playing a sentimental waltz, with considerable poetic license
       as to time. As everyone said: Mrs. Gordon played with so much expression.
Temperley stood about in corners watching Hadria. She was flushed and silent, dancing with
       a still gliding movement under the skilful guidance of her partner.
Temperley tried to win a glance as she passed round, but her eyes were resolutely fixed on
       the floor.
Algitha followed her sister's movements uneasily. She had noticed her absence during the
       last reel, and observed that Temperley also was not to be seen. She felt anxious. She knew
       Hadria's emotional susceptibility. She knew Temperley's convincing faculty, and also Hadria's
       uneasy feeling that she had done wrong in allowing the practices to be resumed.
Henriette had not failed to notice the signs of the times, and she annoyed Algitha beyond
       endurance by her obviously sisterly manner of addressing the family. She had taken to calling
       the boys by their first names.
Fred shared his sister's dislike to Henriette. “Tact!” he cried with a snort, “why a
       Temperley rushes in where a bull in a china-shop would fear to tread!”
Algitha saw that Hubert was again by Hadria's side before the evening was out. The latter
       looked white, and she avoided her sister's glance. This last symptom seemed to Algitha the
       worst.
“What's the matter with Hadria?” asked Fred, “she will scarcely speak to me. I was just
       telling her the best joke I've heard this year, and, will you believe me, she didn't see
        the point! Yes, you may well stare! I tried again and she
       gave a nervous giggle I am relating to you the exact truth. Do any of the epidemics come on
       like that?”
“Yes, one of the worst,” said Algitha gloomily. Fred glared enquiry.
“I am afraid she has been led into accepting Hubert Temperley.”
Fred opened his mouth and breathed deep. “Stuff! Hadria would as soon think of selling her
       soul to the devil.”
“Oh, she is quite capable of that too,” said Algitha, shaking her head.
“Well, I'm blowed,” cried Fred.
Not long after this, the guests began to disperse. Mrs. Gordon and her party were among the
       last to leave, having a shorter distance to go.
Hubert Temperley was quiet and self-possessed, but Algitha felt sure that she detected a
       look of suppressed exultation in his demeanour, and something odiously brotherly in his mode
       of bidding them all good night.
When everyone had left, and the family were alone, they gathered round the hall fire for a
       final chat, before dispersing for the night.
“What a delightful evening we have had, Mrs. Fullerton,” said Miss Temperley. “It was most
       picturesque and characteristic. I shall always remember the charm and kindliness of Scottish
       hospitality.”
“And I,” said Ernest, sotto voce to Algitha, “shall
       always remember the calm and thoroughness of English cheek!”
“Why, we had almost forgotten that the New Year is just upon us,” exclaimed Mr. Fullerton.
       The first stroke of twelve began to sound almost as he spoke. He threw up the window and
       disclosed a night brilliant with stars. (“And under us graves,” said Hadria to herself.)
They all crowded up, keeping silence as the slow strokes of the clock told the hour.
“A Happy New Year to all!” cried Mr. Fullerton heartily.
