
CHAPTER XXVI.
“A SINGULAR character!” said Professor Theobald.
“There is a lot of good in her,” Lady Engleton asserted.
Lord Engleton observed that people were always speaking ill of Mrs. Temperley, but he never
       could see that she was worse than her neighbours. She was cleverer; that might be her
       offence.
Madame Bertaux observed in her short, decisive way that Craddock Dene might have settled
       down with Mrs. Temperley peaceably enough, if it hadn't been for her action about the
       schoolmistress's child.
“Yes; that has offended everybody,” said Lady Engleton.
“What action was that?” asked Theobald, turning slowly towards his hostess.
“Oh, haven't you heard? That really speaks well for this house. You can't accuse us of
       gossip.”
Lady Engleton related the incident. “By the way, you must remember that poor woman,
       Professor. Don't you know you were here at the school-feast that we gave one summer in the
       park, when all the children came and had tea and games, and you helped us so amiably to look
       after them?”
The Professor remembered the occasion perfectly.
“And don't you recollect a very pretty, rather timid, fair-haired woman who brought the
       children? We all used to admire her. She was a particularly graceful, refined-looking
       creature. She had read a great deal and was quite cultivated. I often used to think she must
       feel very solitary at Craddock,
        with not a soul to sympathize with her tastes. Mr. and
       Mrs. Walker used to preach to her, poor soul, reproving her love of reading, which took her
       thoughts away from her duties and her sphere.”
Madame Bertaux snorted significantly. Lady Engleton had remarked a strange, sad look in
       Ellen Jervis's eyes, and owned to having done her best to circumvent the respected pastor and
       his wife, by lending her books occasionally, and encouraging her to think her own thoughts,
       and get what happiness she could out of her communings with larger spirits than she was
       likely to find in Craddock. Of course Mrs. Walker now gave Lady Engleton to understand that
       she was partly responsible for the poor woman's misfortune. She attributed it to Ellen's
       having had “all sorts of ideas in her head!”
“I admit that if not having all sorts of ideas in one's head is a safeguard,
       the unimpeachable virtue of a district is amply accounted for.”
Professor Theobald chuckled. He enquired if Lady Engleton knew Mrs. Temperley's motive in
       adopting the child.
“Oh, partly real kindness; but I think, between ourselves, that Mrs. Temperley likes to be
       a little eccentric. Most people have the instinct to go with the crowd. Hadria Temperley has
       the opposite fault. She loves to run counter to it, even when it is pursuing a harmless
       course.”
Some weeks had now passed since the arrival of the two Professors. The meetings in the
       Priory garden had been frequent. They had affected for the better Professor Theobald's
       manner. Valeria's laws had curbed the worst side of him, or prevented it from shewing itself
       so freely. He felt the atmosphere of the little society, and acknowledged that it was “taming
       the savage beast.” As for his intellect it took to blazing, as if, he said, without false
       modesty, a torch had been placed in pure oxygen.
“My brain takes fire here and flames. I should make a
        very creditable beacon if the burning of brains and the
       burning of faggots were only of equal value.”
The little feud between him and Mrs. Temperley had been patched up. She felt that she had
       been rude to him, on one occasion at any rate, and desired to make amends. He had become more
       cautious in his conduct towards her.
During this period of the Renaissance, as Hadria afterwards called the short-lived epoch,
       little Martha was visited frequently. Her protectress had expected to have to do battle with
       hereditary weakness on account of her mother's sufferings, but the child shewed no signs of
       this. Either the common belief that mental trouble in the mother is reflected in the child,
       was unfounded, or the evil could be overcome by the simple beneficence of pure air, good
       food, and warm clothing.
Hadria had begun to feel a more personal interest in her charge. She had taken it under her
       care of her own choice, without the pressure of any social law or sentiment, and in these
       circumstances of freedom, its helplessness appealed to her protective instincts. She felt the
       relationship to be a true one, in contradistinction to the more usual form of protectorate of
       woman to child.
“There is nothing in it that gives offence to one's dignity as a human being,” she
       asserted, “which is more than can be said of the ordinary relation, especially if it be
       legal.”
She was issuing from little Martha's cottage on one splendid morning, when she saw
       Professor Theobald coming up the road from Craddock Dene. He caught sight of Hadria,
       hesitated, coloured, glanced furtively up the road, and then, seeing he was observed, came
       forward, raising his cap.
“You can't imagine what a charming picture you make; the English cottage creeper-covered
       and smiling; the nurse and child at the threshold equally smiling, yourself a very emblem of
       spring in your fresh gown, and a domestic tabby to complete the scene.”
“I wish I could come and see it,” said Hadria. She was waving a twig of lavender, and
       little Martha was making grabs
        at it, and laughing her gurgling laugh of babyish glee.
       Professor Theobald stood in the road facing up hill towards Craddock, whose church tower was
       visible from here, just peeping through the spring foliage of the vicarage garden. He only
       now and again looked round at the picture that he professed to admire.
“Do you want to see a really pretty child, Professor Theobald? Because if so, come
       here.”
He hesitated, and a wave of dark colour flooded his face up to the roots of his
       close-clipped hair.
He paused a moment, and then bent down to open the little gate. His stalwart figure, in the
       diminutive enclosure, reduced it to the appearance of a doll's garden.
“Step carefully or you will crush the young ménage,”
       Hadria advised. The rosy-cheeked nurse looked with proud expectancy at the face of the
       strange gentleman, to note the admiration that he could not but feel.
His lips were set.
The Professor evidently knew his duty and proceeded to admire with due energy. Little
       Martha shrank away a little from the bearded face, and her lower lip worked threateningly,
       but the perilous moment was staved over by means of the Professor's watch, hastily claimed by
       Hannah, who dispensed with ceremony in the emergency.
Martha's eyes opened wide, and the little hands came out to grasp the treasure. Hadria
       stood and laughed at the sight of the gigantic Professor, helplessly tethered by his own
       chain to the imperious baby, in whose fingers the watch was tightly clasped. The child was in
       high delight at the loquacious new toy—so superior to foolish fluffy rabbits that could not
       tick to save their skins. Martha had no notion of relinquishing her hold, so they need not
       tug in that feeble way; if they pulled too hard, she would yell!
She evidently meant business, said her captive. So long as they left her the watch, they
       might do as they pleased; she was perfectly indifferent to the accidental human
       accompaniments
        of the new treasure, but on that one point she was firm.
       She proceeded to stuff the watch into her mouth as far as it would go. The Professor was
       dismayed.
“It's all right,” Hadria reassured him. “You have hold of the chain.”
“Did you entice me into this truly ridiculous position in order to laugh at me?” enquired
       the prisoner.
“I would not laugh at you for the world.”
“Really this young person has the most astonishing grip! How long does her fancy generally
       remain faithful to a new toy?”
“Well—I hope you are not pressed for time,” said Hadria maliciously.
The Professor groaned, and struggled in the toils.
“Come, little one, open the fingers. Oh no, no, we mustn't cry.” Martha kept her features
       ready for that purpose at a moment's notice, should any nonsense be attempted.
The victim looked round miserably.
“Is there nothing that will set me free from these tender moorings?”
Hadria shook her head and laughed. “You are chained by the most inflexible of all chains,”
       she said: “your own compunction.”
“Oh, you little tyrant!” exclaimed the Professor, shaking his fist in the baby's face, at
       which she laughed a taunting and triumphant laugh. Then, once more, the object of dispute
       went into her mouth. Martha gurgled with joy.
“What am I to do?” cried her victim helplessly.
“Nothing. She has you securely because you fear to hurt her.”
“Little imp! Come now, let me go please. Oh, please, Miss Baby—your Majesty:
       will nothing soften you? She is beginning early to take advantage of the chivalry of the
       stronger sex, and I doubt not she will know how to pursue her opportunity later on.”
“Oh! is that your parable? Into my head came quite a
        different one—à propos
       of what we were talking of yesterday in Griffin-land.”
“Ah, the eternal feminine!” cried the Professor. “Yes, you were very brilliant, Mrs.
       Temperley.”
“You now stand for an excellent type of woman, Professor: strong, but chained.”
“Oh, thank you! (Infant, I implore!)”
“The baby ably impersonates Society with all its sentiments and laws, written and
       unwritten.”
“Ah!—and my impounded property?”
“Woman's life and freedom.”
“Ingenious! And the chain? (Oh, inexorable babe, have mercy on the sufferings of imprisoned
       vigour!)”
“Her affections, her pity, her compunction, which forbid her to wrench away her rightful
       property, because ignorant and tender hands are grasping it. The analogy is a little mixed,
       but no matter.”
“I should enjoy the intellectual treat that is spread before me better, in happier
       circumstances, Mrs. Temperley.”
“Apply your remark to your prototype—intelligently,” she added.
“My intelligence is rapidly waning; I am benumbed. I fail to follow the intricacies of
       analogy, in this constrained position.”
“Ah, so does she!”
“Oh, pitiless cherub, my muscles ache with this monotony.”
“And hers,” said Hadria.
“Come, come, life is passing; I have but one; relax these fetters, or I die.”
Martha frowned and fretted. She even looked shocked, according to Hadria, who stood by
       laughing. The baby, she pointed out, failed to understand how her captive could so far forget
       himself as to desire to regain his liberty.
“She reminds you, sternly, that this is your proper sphere.”
“Perdition!” he exclaimed.
“As a general rule,” she assented.

The Professor laughed, and said he was tired of being a Type.
At length a little gentle force had to be used, in spite of furious resentment on the part
       of the baby. A more injured and ill-treated mortal could not have been imagined. She set up a
       heaven-piercing wail, evidently overcome with indignation and surprise at the cruel treatment
       that she had received. What horrid selfishness to take oneself and one's property away, when
       an engaging innocent enjoys grasping it and stuffing it into its mouth!
“Don't you feel a guilty monster?” Hadria enquired, as the lament of the offended infant
       followed them up the road.
“I feel as if I were slinking off after a murder!” he exclaimed ruefully. “I wonder if we
       oughtn't to go back and try again to soothe the child.” He paused irresolutely.
Hadria laughed. “You do make a lovely allegory!” she exclaimed. “This sense of
       guilt, this disposition to go back—this attitude of apology—it is speaking, inimitable!”
“But meanwhile that wretched child is shrieking itself into a fit!” cried the allegory,
       with the air of a repentant criminal.
“Whenever you open your mouth, out falls a symbol,” exclaimed Hadria. “Be calm; Hannah will
       soon comfort her, and it is truer kindness not to remind her again of her grievance, poor
       little soul. But we will go back if you like (you are indeed a true woman!), and you can say
       you are sorry you made so free with your own possessions, and you wish you had done your duty
       better, and are eager to return and let Her Majesty hold you captive. Your prototype always
       does, you know, and she is nearly always pardoned, on condition that she never does anything
       of that kind again.”
Professor Theobald seemed too much concerned about the child, who was still wailing, to pay
       much attention to any other topic. He turned to retrace his steps.
“I think you make a mistake,” said Hadria. “As soon as she sees you she will want the
       watch, and then you will be placed between the awful alternatives of voluntarily surrending
        ing your freedom, and heartlessly refusing to present
       yourself to her as a big plaything. In one respect you have not yet achieved a thorough
       fidelity to your model; you don't seem to enjoy sacrifice for its own sake. That will come
       with practice.”
“I wish that child would leave off crying.”
Hadria stopped in the road to laugh at the perturbed Professor.
“She will presently. That is only a cry of anger, not of distress. I would not leave her,
       if it were. Yes; your vocation is clearly allegorical. Feminine to your finger-tips, in this
       truly feminine predicament. We are all—nous autres
       femmes—like the hero of the White Ship, who is described by some
       delightful boy in an examination paper as being ‘melted by the shrieks of a near
       relation.’”
The Professor stumbled over a stone in the road, and looked back at it vindictively.
“The near relation does so want to hold one's watch and to stuff it into his mouth, and he
       shrieks so movingly if one brutally removes one's property and person!”
“Alas! I am still a little bewildered by my late captivity. I can't see the bearings of
       things.”
“As allegory, you are as perfect as ever.”
“I seem to be a sort of involuntary Pilgrim's Progress!” he exclaimed.
“Ah, indeed” cried Hadria, “and how the symbolism of that old allegory would fit this
       subject!”
“With me for wretched hero, I suppose!”
“Your archetype;—with a little adaptation—yes, and wonderfully little—the Slough of
       Despond, Doubting Castle, the Valley of the Shadow of Death—they all fall into place. Ah! the
       modern Pilgrim's Progress would read strangely and significantly with woman as
       the pilgrim! But the end—that would be a difficulty.”
“One for your sex to solve,” said the Professor.
When they arrived at the cottage the wails were dying
        away, and Hadria advised that they should leave well
       alone. So the baby's victim somewhat reluctantly retired.
“After all, you see, if one has strength of purpose, one can achieve freedom,”
       he observed.
“At the expense of the affections, it would seem,” said Hadria.
The walk was pursued towards Craddock. Hadria said she had to ask Dodge, the old
       gravedigger, if he could give a few days' work in the garden at the Red House.
The Professor was walking for walking's sake.
“She is a pretty child, isn't she?” said Hadria.
“Very; an attractive mite; but she has a will of her own.”
“Yes; I confess I have a moment of exultation when that child sets up one of her passionate
       screams—the thrilling shriek of a near relation!”
“Really, why?”
“She has to make her way in the world. She must not be too meek. Her mother was a victim to
       the general selfishness and stupidity. She was too gentle and obedient; too apt to defer to
       others, to be able to protect herself. I want her child to be strengthened for the battle by
       a good long draught of happiness, and to be armed with that stoutest of all weapons—perfect
       health.”
“You are very wise, Mrs. Temperley,” murmured the Professor.
“Mon Dieu! if one had always to judge for others and
       never for oneself, what Solons we should all be!”
“I hear that you have taken the child under your protection. She may think herself
       fortunate. It is an act of real charity.”
Hadria winced. “I fear not. I have grown very much attached to Martha now, poor little
       soul; but when I decided to adopt her, I was in a state of red-hot fury.”
“Against whom, may I ask?”
“Against the child's father,” Hadria replied shortly.
