
CHAPTER XLIII.
THE need for vigilance over that hidden distrust was more peremptory now than
       ever. The confession once made, the die once cast, anything but complete faith and respect
       became intolerable. Outwardly, affairs seemed to run on very much as before. But Hadria could
       scarcely believe that she was living in the same world. The new fact walked before her,
       everywhere. She did not dare to examine it closely. She told herself that a great joy had
       come to her, or rather that she had taken the joy in spite of everything and everybody. She
       would order her affections exactly as she chose. If only she could leave Craddock Dene!
       Hubert and her parents considered the opinion of the public as of more importance than
       anything else in life; for her mother's sake she was forced to acquiesce; otherwise there was
       absolutely no reason why she and Hubert should live under the same roof. It was a mere
       ceremony kept up on account of others. That had been acknowledged by him in so many words.
       And a wretched, ridiculous, irksome ceremony it was for them both.
Hadria refused now to meet Professor Theobald at the Cottage. His visits there, which had
       been timed to meet her, must be paid at a different hour. He remonstrated in vain. She shewed
       various other inconsistencies, as he called them. He used to laugh affectionately at her
       “glimpses of conscience,” but said he cared nothing for these trifles, since he had her
       assurance that she loved him. How he had waited and longed for that! How hopeless, how
       impossible it had seemed. He professed to have fallen in love at first
        sight. He even declared that Hadria had done the same,
       though in a different way, without knowing it. Her mind had resisted and, for the time, kept
       her feelings in abeyance. He had watched the struggle. Her heart, he rejoiced to believe, had
       responded to him from the beginning. By dint of repeating this very often, he had half
       convinced Hadria that it was so. She preferred to think that her feeling was of the
       long-standing and resistless kind.
Sometimes she had intervals of reckless happiness, when all doubts were kept at bay, and
       the condition of belief that she assiduously cultivated, remained with her freely. She felt
       no secret tug at the tether. Professor Theobald would then be at his best; grave, thoughtful,
       gentle, considerate, responsive to every mood.
When they met at Craddock Place and elsewhere, Hadria suffered miseries of anxiety. She was
       terrified lest he should do or say something in bad taste, and that she would see her own
       impression confirmed on the faces of others. She put it to herself that she was afraid people
       would not understand him as she did. The history of his past life, as he had related it to
       her, appealed overpoweringly to all that was womanly and protective in her nature. He was
       emotional by temperament, but circumstance had doomed him to repression and solitude. This
       call on her sympathy did more than anything to set Hadria's mind at rest. She gave a vast
       sigh when that feeling of confidence became confirmed. Life, then, need no longer be
       ridiculous! Hard and cruel it might be, full of lost dreams, but at least there would be
       something in it that was perfect. This new emotional centre offered the human summun bonum: release from oneself.
Hadria and the Professor met, one morning, in the gardens of the Priory. Hadria had been
       strolling down the yew avenue, her thoughts full of him, as usual. She reached the seat at
       the end where once Professor Fortescue had found her—centuries ago, it seemed to her now. How
       different was this meeting! Professor Theobald came by the path through the
       thick
        shrubberies, behind the seat. There was a small space of
       grass at the back. Here he stood, bending over the seat, and though he was usually prudent,
       he did not even assure himself that no one was in sight, before drawing Hadria's head gently
       back, and stooping to kiss her on the cheek, while he imprisoned a hand in each of his. She
       flushed, and looked hastily down the avenue.
“I wonder what our fate would be, if anyone had been there?” she said, with a little
       shudder.
“No one was there, darling.” He stood leaning over the high back of the seat, looking down
       at his companion, with a smile.
“Do you know,” he said, “I fear I shall have to go up to town to-morrow, for the day.”
Hadria's face fell. She hated him to go away, even for a short time she could not endure
       her own thoughts when his influence was withdrawn. His presence wrapped her in a state of
       dream, a false peace which she courted.
“Oh no, no,” she cried, with a childish eagerness that was entirely unlike her, “don't
       go.”
“Do you really care so very much?” he asked, with a deep flush of pleasure.
“Of course I do, of course.” Her thoughts wandered off through strange by-ways. At times,
       they would pass some black cavernous entrance to unknown labyrinths, and the frightened
       thoughts would hurry by. Sometimes they would be led decorously along a smooth highway,
       pacing quietly; sometimes they would rise to the sunlight and spread their wings, and then
       perhaps take sudden flight, like a flock of startled birds.
Yes, he needed sympathy, and faith, and love. He had never had anyone to believe in him
       before. He had met with hardness and distrust all his life. She would trust him. He had
       conquered, step by step, his inimical conditions. He was lonely, unused to real affection.
       Let her try to make up for what he had lost. Let her forget herself and her own little woes,
       in the effort to fill his life with all that he had
        been forced to forego. (An impish thought danced before
       her for a second—“Fine talk, but you know you love to be loved.”) If her love were worth
       anything, that must be her impulse. Let her beware of considering her own feelings, her own
       wishes and fears. If she loved, let it be fully and freely, generously and without reserve.
       That or nothing. (“Probably it will be nothing,” jeered the imp.) “Then what, in heaven's
       name, is it that I feel?” the other self seemed to cry in desperation.
“An idea has struck me,” said the Professor, taking her hand and holding it closely in his,
       “Why should you not come up to town, say on Friday—don't start, dearest—it would be quite
       simple, and then for once in our lives we should stand, as it were, alone in the world, you
       and I, without this everlasting dread of curious eyes upon us. Alone among strangers—what
       bliss! We could have a day on the river, or I could take you to see—well, anything you
       liked—we should be free and happy. Think of it, Hadria! to be rid of this incessant need for
       caution, for hypocrisy. We have but one life to live; why not live it?”
“Why not live it, why not live it?” The words danced in her head, like circles of little
       sprites carrying alluring wreaths of roses.
“Ah, we must be careful; there is much at stake,” she said.
He began to plead, eloquently and skilfully. He knew exactly what arguments would tell best
       with her. The imps and the other selves engaged in a free fight.
“No; I must not listen; it is too dangerous. If it were not for my mother, I should not
       care for anything, but as it is, I must risk nothing. I have already risked too much.”
“There would be no danger,” he argued. “Trust to me. I have something to lose too. It is of
       no use to bring the whole dead stupid weight of the world on our heads. There is no sense in
       lying down under a heap of rubbish, to be crushed. Let us go our way and leave other people
       to go theirs.”

“Easier said than done.”
“Oh no; the world must be treated as one would treat a maniac who brandished a razor in
       one's face. Direct defiance argues folly worse than his.”
“Of course, but all this subterfuge and deceit is hateful.”
“Not if one considers the facts of the case. The maniac-world insists upon uniformity and
       obedience, especially in that department of life where uniformity is impossible. You don't
       suppose that it is ever really attained by any human being who deserves the
       name? Never! We all wear the livery of our master and live our own lives not the less.”
“Ah, I doubt that,” said Hadria. “I think the livery affects us all, right through to the
       bones and marrow. What young clergyman was it who told me that as soon as he put on his
       canonicals, he felt a different man, mind, heart, and personality?”
“Well, your livery has never made you, Hadria, and that is all I care
       for.”
“Indeed, I am not so sure.”
“It has not turned you out a Mrs. Jordan or a Mrs. Walker, for instance.”
“To the great regret of my well-wishers.”
“To the great regret of your inferiors. There is nothing that people regret so bitterly as
       superiority to themselves.”
Hadria laughed.
“I am always afraid of the gratifying argument based on the assumption of superiority; one
       is apt to be brought down a peg, if ever one indulges in it.”
“I can't see that much vanity is implied in claiming superiority to the common idiot of
       commerce,” said the Professor, with a shrug.
“He is in the family,” Hadria reminded him.
“The human family; yes, confound him!” They laughed, and the Professor, after a pause,
       continued his pleading.
“It only needs a little courage, Hadria. My love, my dear one, don't shake your head.”

He came forward and sat down on the seat beside her, bending towards her persuasively.
“Promise me to come to town on Friday, Hadria—promise me, dearest.”
“But if—oh, how I hate all the duplicity that this involves! It creates wretched
       situations, whichever way one turns. I never realized into what a labyrinth it would lead
       one. I should like to speak out and be honest about it.”
“And your mother?”
“Oh, I know of course—” Hadria set her teeth. “It drives me mad, all this!”
“Oh, Hadria! And you don't count me then?”
“Obviously I count you. But one's whole life becomes a lie.”
“That is surely schoolgirl's reasoning. Strange that you should be guilty of it! Is one's
       life a lie because one makes so bold as to keep one's own counsel? Must one take the world
       into one's confidence, or stand condemned as a liar? Oh, Hadria, this is childish!”
“Yes, I am getting weak-minded, I know,” she said feverishly. “I resent being forced to
       resort to this sort of thing when I am doing nothing wrong, according to my own belief. Why
       should I be forced to behave as if I were sinning against my conscience?”
“So you may say; that is your grievance, not your fault. But, after all, compromise is
       necessary in everything, and the best way is to make the compromise lightly and
       with a shrug of the shoulders, and then you find that life becomes fairly manageable and
       often extremely pleasant.”
“Yes, I suppose you are right.” Hadria was picking the petals off a buttercup one by one,
       and when she had destroyed one golden corolla, she attacked another.
“Fate is ironical!” she exclaimed. “Never in my life did I feel more
       essentially frank and open-hearted than I feel now.”
The Professor laughed.
“My impulse is to indulge in that sort of bluff, boisterous
        honesty which forms so charming a feature of our national
       character. Is it not disastrous?”
“It is a little inopportune,” Theobald admitted with a chuckle.
“Oh, it is no laughing matter! It amounts to a monomania. I long to take Mrs. Walker aside
       and say ‘Hi! look here, Mrs. Walker, I just want to mention to you—’ and so on; and Mrs.
       Jordan inspires me with a still more fatal impulse of frankness. If only for the fun of the
       thing, I long to do it.”
“You are quite mad, Hadria!” exclaimed the Professor, laughing.
“Oh; no,” she said, “only bewildered. I want desperately to be bluff and outspoken, but I
       suppose I must dissemble. I long painfully to be like ‘truthful James,’ but I must follow in
       the footsteps of the sneaky little boy who came to a bad end because he told a lie. The
       question is: Shall my mother be sacrificed to this passionate love of truth?”
“Or shall I?” asked the Professor. “You seem to forget me. You frighten me, Hadria. To
       indulge in frankness just now, means to throw me over, and if you did that, I don't know how
       I should be able to stand it. I should cut my throat.”
Hadria buried her face in her hands, as if to shut out distracting sights and sounds, so
       that she might think more clearly.
It seemed, at that moment, as if cutting one's throat would be the only way out of the
       growing difficulty.
How could it go on? And yet, how could she give him up? (The imp gave a
       fiendish chuckle.) It would be so unfair, so cruel, and what would life be without him?
       (“Moral development impossible!” cried the imp, with a yell of laughter.) It would be so mean
       to go back now—(“Shocking!” exclaimed the imp.) Assuming that she ought never to have allowed
       this thing to happen (“Oh, fie!”) because she bore another man's name (not being permitted to
       retain her own), ought
        she to throw this man over, on second and (per assumption)
       better thoughts, or did the false step oblige her to continue in the path she had
       entered?
“I seem to have got myself into one of those situations where there is no
       right,” she exclaimed.
“You forget your own words: A woman in relation to society is in the position of a captive;
       she may justly evade the prison rules, if she can.”
“So she may; only I want so desperately to wrench away the bars instead of evading the
       rules.”
“Try to remember that you—” The Professor stopped abruptly and stood listening. They looked
       at one another. Hadria was deadly white. A step was advancing along the winding path through
       the bushes behind them: a half over-grown path, that led from a small door in the wall that
       ran round the park. It was the nearest route from the station to the house, and a short cut
       could be taken this way through the garden, to Craddock Place.
“It's all right,” the Professor said in a low voice; “we were saying nothing
       compromising.”
The step drew nearer.
“Some visitor to Craddock Place probably, who has come down by the 4.20 from town.”
“Professor Fortescue!”
Hadria had sprung up, and was standing, with flushed cheeks, beside her calmer
       companion.
Professor Fortescue's voice broke the momentary silence. He gave a warm smile of pleasure
       and came forward with out-stretched hand.
“The hoped-for instant has come sooner than I thought,” he cried genially.
Hadria was shocked to see him looking very ill. He said that his doctor had bullied him, at
       last, into deciding to go south. His arrangements for departure had been rather hastily made,
       and he had telegraphed this morning, to Craddock Place, to announce his coming. His luggage
       was
        following in a hand-cart, and he was taking the short cut
       through the Priory gardens. He had come to say good-bye to them all. Miss Du Prel, he added,
       had already made up her mind to go abroad, and he hoped to come across her somewhere in
       Italy. She had given him all news. He looked anxiously at Hadria. The flush had left her face
       now, and the altered lines were but too obvious.
“You ought to have change too,” he said, “you are not looking well.”
She laughed nervously. “Oh, I am all right.”
“Let's sit down a moment, if you were not discussing anything very important—”
“Indeed, we were, my dear Fortescue,” said Professor Theobald, drawing his colleague on to
       the seat, “and your clear head would throw much light on the philosophy of the question.”
“Oh, a question of abstract philosophy,” said Professor Fortescue. “Are you
        disagreeing?”
“Not exactly. The question that turned up, in the course of discussion, was this: If a man
       stands in a position which is itself the result of an aggression upon his liberty and his
       human rights, is he in honour bound to abide by the laws which are laid down to coerce
       him?”
“Obviously not,” replied Professor Fortescue.
“Is he morally justified in using every means he can lay hold of to overcome the peculiar
       difficulties under which he has been tyrannously placed?”
“Not merely justified, but I should say he was a poor fool if he refrained from doing
       so.”
“That is exactly what I say.”
“Surely Mrs. Temperley does not demur?”
“No; I quite agree as to the right. I only say that the means which the
       situation may make necessary are sometimes very hateful.”
“Ah, that is among the cruelest of the victim's wrongs,” said Professor Fortescue. “He is
       reduced to employ artifices
        that he would despise, were he a free agent. Take a crude
       instance: a man is overpowered by a band of brigands. Surely he is justified in deceiving
       those gentlemen of the road, and in telling and acting lies without scruple.”
“The parallel is exact,” said Theobald, with a triumphant glance at Hadria.
“Honour departs where force comes in. No man is bound in honour to his captor, though his
       captor will naturally try to persuade his prisoner to regard himself as so bound. And few
       would be our oppressions, if that persuasion did not generally succeed!”
“The relations of women to society for instance—” began Theobald.
“Ah, exactly. The success of that device may be said to constitute the history of
       womanhood. Take my brigand instance and write it large, and you have the whole case in a
       nutshell.”
“Then you would recommend rank rebellion, either by force or artifice, according as
       circumstances might require?” asked Hadria.
Professor Fortescue looked round at her, half anxiously, half enquiringly.
“There are perils, remember,” he warned. “The woman is, by our assumption, the brigand's
       captive. If she offends her brigand, he has hideous punishments to inflict. He can subject
       her to pain and indignity at his good pleasure. Torture and mutilation, metaphorically
       speaking, are possible to him. How could one deliberately counsel her to risk all that?”
There was a long silence.
Hadria had been growing more and more restless since the arrival of the new-comer. She took
       no further part in the conversation. She was struggling to avoid making comparisons between
       her two companions. The contrast was startling. Every cadence of their voices, every gesture,
       proclaimed the radical difference of nature and calibre.
Hadria rose abruptly. She looked pale and perturbed.

“Don't you think we have sat here long enough?” she asked.
They both looked a little surprised, but they acquiesced at once. The three walked together
       down the yew avenue, and out across the lawn. Professor Fortescue recalled their past
       meetings among these serene retreats, and wished they could come over again.
“Nothing ever does come over again,” said Hadria.
Theobald glanced at her, meaningly.
“Look here, my dear fellow,” he said, grasping Professor Fortescue by the arm, and bending
       confidentially towards him, “I should like those meetings to repeat themselves ad infinitum. I have made up my mind at last. I want to take the
       Priory.”
Hadria turned deadly pale, and stumbled slightly.
“Well, take it by all means. I should be only too glad to let it to a tenant who would look
       after the old place.”
“We must talk it over,” said Theobald.
“That won't take long, I fancy. We talked it over once before, you remember, and then you
       suddenly changed your mind.”
“Yes; but my mind is steady now. The Priory is the place of all others that I should like
       to pass my days in.”
“Well, I think you are wise, Theobald. The place has great charm, and you have friends
       here.”
“Yes, indeed!” exclaimed Theobald.
Professor Fortescue looked vaguely round, as if expecting Hadria to express some
       neighbourly sentiment, but she said nothing. He noticed how very ill she was looking.
“Are you feeling the heat too severe?” he asked in concern. “Shall we take a rest under
       these trees?”
But Hadria preferred to go on and rest at home. She asked when Professor Fortescue was
       coming to see them at the Red House, but her tone was less open and warm than usual, in
       addressing him. He said that to-morrow he would walk over in the afternoon, if he might.
       Hadria would not allow her companions to come out of their way to accompany
        her home. At the Priory gate—where the griffins were
       grinning as derisively as ever at the ridiculous ways of men—they took their respective
       roads.
Some domestic catastrophe had happened at the Red House. The cook had called Mary “names,”
       and Mary declared she must leave. Hadria shrugged her shoulders.
“Oh, well then, I suppose you must,” she said wearily, and retired to her room, in a mood
       to be cynically amused at the tragedies that the human being manufactures for himself, lest
       he should not find the tragedies of birth and death and parting, and the solitude of the
       spirit, sufficient to occupy him during his little pilgrimage. She sat by the open window
       that looked out over the familiar fields, and the garden that was gay with summer flowers.
       The red roof of the Priory could just be caught through the trees of the park. She wished the
       little pilgrimage were over. A common enough wish, she commented, but surely not
       unreasonable.
The picture of those two men came back to her, in spite of every effort to banish it.
       Professor Fortescue had affected her as if he had brought with him a new atmosphere, and
       disastrous was the result. It seemed as if Professor Theobald had suddenly become a stranger
       to her, whom she criticised, whose commonness of fibre, ah me! whose coarseness, she saw as
       she might have seen it in some casual acquaintance. And yet she had loved this man, she had
       allowed him to passionately profess love for her. His companionship, in the deepest sense,
       had been chosen by her for life. To sit by and listen to that conversation, feeling every
       moment how utterly he and she were, after all, strangers to one another, how completely
       unbroken was the solitude that she had craved to dispel—that had been horrible. What had lain
       at the root of her conduct? How had she deceived herself? Was it not for the sake of mere
       excitement, distraction? Was it not the sensuous side of her nature that had been touched,
       while the rest had been posing in the foreground? But no, that was only partly true. There
       had been more in it than that; very
        much more, or she could not have deceived herself so
       completely. It was this craving to fill the place of her lost art,—but oh, what morbid
       nonsense it had all been! Why, for the first time in her life, did she feel ashamed to meet
       Professor Fortescue? Obviously, it was not because she thought he would disapprove of her
       breaking the social law. It was because she had fallen below her own standard, because she
       had been hypocritical with herself, played herself false, and acted contemptibly, hatefully!
       Professor Fortescue's mere presence had hunted out the truth from its hiding-place. He had
       made further self-sophistication impossible. She buried her face in her hands, in an agony of
       shame. She had known all along, that this had not been a profound and whole-hearted
       sentiment. She had known all along, of what a poor feverish nature it was; yet she had chosen
       to persuade herself that it was all, or nearly all, that she had dreamed of a perfect human
       relationship. She had tried to arrange facts in such a light as to simulate that idea. It was
       so paltry, so contemptible. Why could she not at least have been honest with herself, and
       owned to the nature of the infatuation? That, at any rate, would have been straightforward.
       Her self-scorn made the colour surge into her cheeks and burn painfully over neck and brow.
       “How little one knows oneself. Here am I, who rebel against the beliefs of others, sinning
       against my own. Here am I, who turn up my nose at the popular gods, deriding my own private
       and particular gods in their very temples! That I have done, and heaven alone knows where I
       should have stopped in the wild work, if this had not happened. Professor Fortescue has no
       need to speak. His gentleness, his charity, are as rods to scourge one!”
