
CHAPTER XX.
HENRIETTE had secured Mrs. Fullerton for an ally, from the beginning. When
       Hadria's parents visited the Red House, Miss Temperley was asked to meet them, by special
       request. Henriette employed tact on a grand scale, and achieved results in proportion. She
       was sorry that dear Hadria did not more quickly recover her strength. Her health was not what
       it ought to be. Mrs. Fullerton sighed. She vas ready to play into Miss Temperley's hands on
       every occasion.
The latter had less success in her dealings with Miss Du Prel. She tried to discover
       Hadria's more intimate feelings by talking her over with Valeria, ignoring the snubs that
       were copiously administered by that indignant lady. Valeria spoke with sublime scorn of this
       attempt.
“To try and pump information out of a friend! Why not listen at the key-hole, and be done
       with it!”
Henriette's neat hair would have stood on end, had she heard Miss Du Prel fit adjectives to
       her conduct.
“I have learnt not to expect a nice sense of honour from superior persons with
       unimpeachable sentiments,” said Hadria.
“You are certainly a good hater!” cried Valeria, with a laugh.
“Oh, I don't hate Henriette; I only hate unimpeachable sentiments.”
The sentiments that Henriette represented had become, to Hadria, as the walls of a prison
       from which she could see no means of escape.
She had found that life took no heed either of her ambitions or of her revolts. “And so I
       growl,” she said. She might hate and chafe in secret to her heart's content; external
       conformity was the one thing needful.

“Hadria will be so different when she has children,” everyone had said. And so she was; but
       the difference was alarmingly in the wrong direction. Throughout history, she reflected,
       children had been the unfailing means of bringing women into line with tradition. Who could
       stand against them? They had been able to force the most rebellious to their knees. An appeal
       to the maternal instinct had quenched the hardiest spirit of revolt. No wonder the instinct
       had been so trumpeted and exalted! Women might harbour dreams and plan insurrections; but
       their children—little ambassadors of the established and expected—were argument enough to
       convince the most hardened sceptics. Their helplessness was more powerful to suppress revolt
       than regiments of armed soldiers.
Such were the thoughts that wandered through Hadria's mind as she bent her steps towards
       the cottage near Craddock Church, where, according to the gravedigger's account, the baby of
       the unhappy schoolmistress was being looked after by Mrs. Gullick.
It would have puzzled the keenest observer to detect the unorthodox nature of Mrs.
       Temperley's reflections, as she leant over the child, and made enquiries as to its health and
       temperament.
Mrs. Gullick seemed more disposed to indulge in remarks on its mother's conduct than to
       give the desired information; but she finally admitted that Ellen Jervis had an aunt at
       Southampton who was sending a little money for the support of the child. Ellen Jervis had
       stayed with the aunt during the summer holidays. Mrs. Gullick did not know what was to be
       done. She had a large family of her own, and the cottage was small.
Mrs. Temperley asked for the address of the aunt.
“I suppose no one knows who the father is? He has not acknowledged the child!”
No; that was a mystery still.
About a week later, Craddock Dene was amazed by the news that Mrs. Temperley had taken the
       child of Ellen Jervis
        under her protection. A cottage had been secured on the
       road to Craddock, a trustworthy nurse engaged, and here the babe was established, with the
       consent and blessing of the aunt.
“You are the most inconsistent woman I ever met!” exclaimed Miss Du Prel.
“Why inconsistent?”
“You say that children have been the means, from time immemorial, of enslaving women, and
       here you go and adopt one of your enslavers!”
“But this child is not legitimate.”
Valeria stared.
“Whatever the wrongs of Ellen Jervis, at least there were no laws written, and unwritten,
       which demanded of her as a duty that she should become the mother of this child. In that
       respect she escapes the ignominy reserved for the married mother who produces children that
       are not even hers.”
“You do manage to ferret out the unpleasant aspects of our position!” Miss Du Prel
       exclaimed. “But I want to know why you do this, Hadria. It is good of you, but totally unlike
       you.”
“You are very polite!” cried Hadria. “Why should I not lay up store for myself in heaven,
       as well as Mrs. Walker and the rest?”
“You were not thinking of heaven when you did this deed, Hadria.”
“No; I was thinking of the other place.”
“And do you hope to get any satisfaction out of your protégée?”
Hadria shrugged her shoulders.
“I don't know. The child is the result of great sorrow and suffering; it is the price of a
       woman's life; a woman who offended the world, having lived for nearly forty weary obedient
       years, in circumstances dreary enough to have turned twenty saints into as many sinners. No;
       I am no Lady Bountiful. I feel in defending this child—a sorry defence I know—that I am, in
       so far, opposing the world and the system of things that I hate—. Ah! how I hate
       it!”

“Is it then hatred that prompts the deed?”
Hadria looked thoughtfully towards the church tower, in whose shadow the mother of the babe
       lay sleeping.
“Can you ever quite unravel your own motives, Valeria? Hatred? Yes; there is a large
       ingredient of hatred. Without it, probably this poor infant would have been left to struggle
       through life alone, with a mill-stone round its neck, and a miserable constitution into the
       bargain. I hope to rescue its constitution. But that poor woman's story touched me closely.
       It is so hard, so outrageous! The emptiness of her existence; the lack of outlet for her
       affections; the endless monotony; and then the sudden new interest and food for the starved
       emotions; the hero-worship that is latent in us all; and then—good heavens!—for a touch of
       poetry, of romance in her life, she would have been ready to believe in the professions of
       the devil himself—and this man was a very good understudy for the devil! Ah! If ever I should
       meet him!”
“What would you do?” Valeria asked curiously.
“Avenge her,” said Hadria with set lips.
“Easier said than done, my dear!”
Gossip asserted that the father of the child was a man of some standing, the bolder spirits
       even accusing Lord Engleton himself. But this was conjecture run wild, and nobody seriously
       listened to it.
Mrs. Walker was particularly scandalized with Mrs. Temperley's ill-advised charity. Hadria
       had the habit of regarding the clergyman's wife as another of society's victims. She placed
       side by side the schoolmistress in her sorrow and disgrace, and the careworn woman at the
       Vicarage, with her eleven children, and her shrivelled nature, poor and dead as an autumn
       leaf that shivers before the wind. They had both suffered—so Mrs. Temperley dared to
       assert—in the same cause. They were both victims of the same creed. It was a terrible cultus,
       a savage idol that had devoured them both, as cruel and insatiable as the brazen god of old,
       with his internal fires, which the faithful fed devoutly, with shrinking girls and screaming
       children.

“I still fail to understand why you adopt this child,” said Valeria. “My
        Caterina would never have done it.”
“The little creature interests me,” said Hadria. “It is a tiny field for the exercise of
       the creative forces. Every one has some form of active amusement. Some like golf, others
       flirtation. I prefer this sort of diversion.”
“But you have your own children to interest you, surely far more than this one.”
Hadria's face grew set and defiant.
“They represent to me the insult of society—my own private and particular insult, the
       tribute exacted of my womanhood. It is through them that I am to be subdued and humbled. Just
       once in a way, however, the thing does not quite ‘come off.’”
“What has set you on edge so, I wonder.”
“People, traditions, unimpeachable sentiments.”
“Yours are not unimpeachable at any rate!” Valeria cried laughing.
        “Caterina is an angel compared with you, and yet my publisher has his doubts
       about her.”
“Caterina would do as I do, I know,” said Hadria. “Those who are looked at
       askance by the world appeal to my instincts. I shall be able to teach this child, perhaps, to
       strike a blow at the system which sent her mother to a dishonoured grave, while it leaves the
       man for whose sake she risked all this, in peace and the odour of sanctity.”
Time seemed to be marked, in the sleepy village, by the baby's growth. Valeria, who thought
       she was fond of babies, used to accompany Hadria on her visits to the cottage, but she
       treated the infant so much as if it had been a guinea-pig or a rabbit that the nurse was
       indignant.
The weeks passed in rapid monotony, filled with detail and leaving no mark behind them, no
       sign of movement or progress. The cares of the house, the children, left only limited time
       for walking, reading, correspondence, and such music as could be wrung out of a crowded day.
       An effort on Hadria's part, to make serious use of her musical talent had been frustrated.
       But a pathetic, unquenchable hope always survived that
        presently, when this or that corner had been turned, this
       or that difficulty overcome, conditions would be conquered and opportunity arrive. Not yet
       had she resigned her belief that the most harassing and wearying and unceasing business that
       a human being can undertake, is compatible with the stupendous labour and the unbounded
       claims of an artist's career. The details of practical life and petty duties sprouted up at
       every step. If they were put aside, even for a moment, the wheels of daily existence became
       clogged and then all opportunity was over. Hope had begun to alternate with a fear lest that
       evasive corner should never be turned, that little crop of interruptions never cease to turn
       up. And yet it was so foolish. Each obstacle in itself was paltry. It was their number that
       overcame one, as the tiny arrows of the Lilliputs overcame Gulliver.
One of Hadria's best friends in Craddock Dene was Joseph Fleming, who had become very
       intimate at the Red House during the last year or two. Hadria used to tire of the necessity
       to be apparently rational (such was her own version), and found it a relief to talk nonsense,
       just as she pleased, to Joseph Fleming, who never objected or took offence, if he
       occasionally looked surprised. Other men might have thought she was laughing at them, but
       Joseph made no such mistake when Mrs. Temperley broke out, as she did now and then, in
       fantastic fashion.
She was standing, one morning, on the little bridge over the stream that ran at a distance
       of a few hundred yards from the Red House. The two boys were bespattering themselves in the
       meadow below, by the water's verge. They called up at intervals to their mother the
       announcement of some new discovery of flower or insect.
Watching the stream sweeping through the bridge, she seemed the centre of a charming
       domestic scene to Joseph Fleming, who chanced to pass by with his dogs. He addressed himself
       to her maternal feelings by remarking what handsome and clever boys they were.

“Handsome and clever?” she repeated. “Is that all you can say, Mr. Fleming?
       When you set about it, I think you might provide a little better food for one's parental
       sentiment. I suppose you will go and tell Mrs. Walker that her dozen and a half
       are all handsome and clever too!”
“Not so handsome and clever as yours,” replied Mr. Fleming, a little aghast at this
       ravenous maternal vanity.
“What wretched poverty of expression!” Hadria complained. “I ask for bread, and truly you
       give me a stone.”
Joseph Fleming eyed his companion askance. “I—I admire your boys immensely, as you know,”
       he said.
“Not enough, not enough.”
“What can I say more?”
“A mother has to find in her children all that she can hope to find in life, and she
       naturally desires to make the most of them, don't you see?”
“Ah! yes, quite so,” said Joseph dubiously.
“Nobody, I suppose, likes to be commonplace all round; one must have some poetry
       somewhere—so most women idealize their children, and if other people won't help them in the
       effort, don't you see? it is most discouraging.”
“Are you chaffing, or what?” Joseph enquired.
“No, indeed; I am perilously serious.”
“I can well understand how a mother must get absorbed in her children,” said Joseph. “I
       suppose it's a sort of natural provision.”
“Think of Mrs. Allan with her outrageous eight—all making mud-pies!” cried Hadria; “a
       magnificent ‘natural provision!’ A small income, a small house, with those pervasive eight.
       You know the stampede when one goes to call; the aroma of bread and butter (there are few
       things more inspiring); the cook always about to leave; Mrs. Allan with a racking headache.
       It is indeed not difficult to understand how a mother would get absorbed in her children.
       Why, their pinafores alone would become absorbing.”
“Quite so,” said Mr. Fleming. Then a little anxious to change the subject: “Oh, by the way,
       have you heard that
        the Priory is really to be inhabited at last? Professor
       Theobald has almost decided to take it.”
“Really? that will be exciting for Craddock Dene. We shall have another household to
       dissect and denounce. Providence watches over us all, I verily believe.”
“I hope so,” Joseph replied gravely.
“Truly I hope so too,” Hadria said, no less seriously, “for indeed we need it.”
Joseph was too simple to be greatly surprised at anything that Mrs. Temperley might say. He
       had decided that she was a little eccentric, and that explained everything; just as he
       explained instances of extraordinary reasoning power in a dog by calling it “instinct.”
       Whatever Mrs. Temperley might do was slightly eccentric, and had she suddenly taken it into
       her head to dance a fandango on the public road, it would have merely put a little extra
       strain on that word.
By dint of not understanding her, Joseph Fleming had grown to feel towards Mrs. Temperley a
       genuine liking, conscious, in his vague way, that she was kind at heart, however bitter or
       strange she might sometimes be in her speech. Moreover, she was not always eccentric or
       unexpected. There would come periods when she would say and do very much as her neighbours
       said and did; looking then pale and lifeless, but absolutely beyond the reach of hostile
       criticism, as her champion would suggest to carping neighbours.
Not the most respected of the ladies who turned up their disapproving noses, was more dull
       or more depressing than Hadria could be, on occasion, as she had herself pointed out; and
       would not this soften stony hearts?
When she discovered that her kindly neighbour had been fighting her battles for her, she
       was touched; but she asked him not to expend his strength on her behalf. She tried in vain to
       convince him that she did not care to be invited too often to submit to the devitalizing
       processes of social intercourse, to which the families of the district shrank not from
       subjecting themselves. If Joseph Fleming chanced to call at the Red House after her return
       from one of these
        entertainments, he was sure to find Mrs. Temperley in one
       of her least comprehensible moods. But whatever she might say, he stood up for her among the
       neighbours with persistent loyalty. He decked her with virtues that she did not possess, and
       represented her to the sceptical district, radiant in domestic glory. Hadria thus found
       herself in an awkwardly uncertain position; either she was looked at askance, as eccentric,
       or she found herself called upon to make good expectations of saintliness, such as never were
       on land or sea.
Saintly? Hadria shook her head. She could imagine no one further from such a condition than
       she was at present, and she felt it in her, to swing down and down to the very opposite pole
       from that serene altitude. She admitted that, from a utilitarian point of view, she was
       making a vast mistake. As things were, Mrs. Walker and Mrs. Allan, laboriously spinning their
       ponderous families on their own axes, in a reverent spirit, had chosen the better part. But
       Hadria did not care. She would not settle down to make the best of things, as
       even Algitha now recommended, “since there she was, and there was no helping it.”
“I will never make the best of things,” she said. “I know nothing that gives
       such opportunities to the Devil.”
Hadria had characteristically left the paradox unjustified.
“What do you mean?” asked Algitha. “Surely the enemy of good has most hold over the
       discontented spirit.”
Hadria likened the contented to stagnant pools, wherein corruptions grow apace. “It is only
       the discontented ocean that remains, for all its storms, fresh and sane to the end.”
But though she said this, for opposition's sake perhaps, she had her doubts about her own
       theory. Discontent was certainly the initiator of all movement; but there was a kind of
       sullen discontent that stagnated and ate inwards, like a disease. Better a cheerful sin or
       two than allow that to take hold!
“But then there is this sickly feminine conscience to deal with!” she exclaimed. “It clings
       to the worst of us still, and prevents the wholesome big catastrophes that might bring
       salvation.”
