<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The New Republic by W.H. Mallock : HTML
                        version</title><author>Mallock, William Hurrell (1849-1923)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1877</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.
 NO proposal could have been happier than Lady Grace’s, of the garden banquet
                        in the pavilion. It seemed to the guests, when they were all assembled
                        there, that the lovely summer’s day was going to close with a scene from
                        fairyland. The table itself, with its flowers, and glowing fruit, and its
                        many-coloured Venetian glass, shone and gleamed and sparkled, in the evening
                        light, that was turning outside to a cool mellow amber; and above, from the
                        roof, in which the dusk was already darkness, hung china lamps, in the shape
                        of green and purple grape-clusters, looking like luminous fruits stolen from
                        Aladdin’s garden. The pavilion, open on all sides, was supported on marble
                        pillars, that were almost hidden in red and white roses. Behind, the eye
                        rested on great tree-trunks, and glades of rich foliage; and before, it
                        would pass over turf and flowers, till it reached the sea beyond, on which,
                        in another hour, the faint silver of the moonlight would begin to tremble. 
 There was something in the whole scene that was at once calming and
                        exhilarating; and nearly all present seemed to feel in some measure this
                        double effect of it. Dr. Jenkinson had been quite restored by an afternoon’s
                        nap; and his face was now all a-twinkle with a fresh benignity, that had
                        however, like an early spring morning, just a faint suspicion of frost in
                        it. Mr. Storks even was less severe than usual; and as he raised his
                        champagne to his lips, he would at times look very nearly conversational. 
 ‘My dear Laurence,’ exclaimed Mr. Herbert, ‘it really almost seems as if
                        your visions of the afternoon had come true, and that we actually were in
                        your new Republic already. I can only say that, if it is at all like this,
                        it will be an entirely charming place—too charming, perhaps. But now,
                        remember this—you have but half got through the business to which you first
                        addressed yourselves—that of forming a picture of a perfect aristocracy—an
                        aristocracy in the true and genuine sense of the word. You are all to have
                        culture, or taste. Very good, you have talked a great deal about that, and
                        you have seen what you mean by it; and you have recognised, above all, that
                        it includes a discrimination between right and wrong. But now, you with all
                        this taste and culture—you gifted men and women of the nineteenth
                        century,—what sort of things does your taste teach you to reach out towards?
                        In what actions and aims, in what affections and emotions, would you place
                        your happiness? That is what I want to hear—the practical manifestations of
                        this culture.’ 
 ‘Ah,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘I have at this moment a series of essays in the press,
                        which would go far towards answering these questions of yours. They do,
                        indeed, deal with just this—the effect of the choicer culture of this
                        century on the soul of man—the ways in which it endows him with new
                        perceptions—how it has made him, in fact, a being altogether more highly
                        organised. All I regret is, that these choicer souls, these χαρίεντες, are
                        as yet like flowers that have not found a climate in which they can thrive
                        properly. That mental climate will doubtless come with time. What we have
                        been trying to do this afternoon is, I imagine, nothing more than to
                        anticipate it in imagination.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Mr. Herbert, with a little the tone of an inquisitor, ‘that is
                        just what I have been asking. What will this climate be like, and what will
                        these flowers be like in this climate? How would your culture alter and
                        better the present, if its powers were equal to its wishes?’ 
 Mr. Rose’s soft lulling tone harmonised well with the scene and hour, and
                        the whole party seemed willing to listen to him; or at any rate no one felt
                        any prompting to interrupt him. 
 ‘I can show you an example, Mr. Herbert,’ he said, ‘of culture demanding a
                        finer climate, in—if you will excuse my seeming egoism—in myself. For
                        instance, (to take the widest matter I can fix upon—the general outward
                        surroundings of our lives), often, when I walk about London, and see how
                        hideous its whole external aspect is, and what a dissonant population throng
                        it, a chill feeling of despair comes over me. Consider how the human eye
                        delights in form and colour, and the ear in tempered and harmonious sounds;
                        and then think for a moment of a London street! Think of the shapeless
                        houses, the forest of ghastly chimney-pots, of the hell of distracting
                        noises made by the carts, the cabs, the carriages—think of the bustling,
                        commonplace, careworn crowds that jostle you—think of an omnibus—think of a
                        four-wheeler—’ 
 ‘I often ride in an omnibus,’ said Lord Allen, with a slight smile to Miss
                        Merton. 
 ‘It is true,’ replied Mr. Rose, only overhearing the tone in which these
                        words were said, ‘that one may ever and again catch some touch of sunlight
                        that will for a moment make the meanest object beautiful with its furtive
                        alchemy. But that is Nature’s work, not man’s; and we must never confound
                        the accidental beauty that Nature will bestow on man’s work, even at its
                        worst, with the rational and designed beauty of man’s work at its best. It
                        is this rational human beauty that I say our modern city life is so
                        completely wanting in; nay, the look of out-of-door London seems literally
                        to stifle the very power of imagining such beauty possible. Indeed, as I
                        wander along our streets, pushing my way among the throngs of faces—faces
                        puckered with misdirected thought, or expressionless with none—barbarous
                        faces set towards Parliament, or Church, or scientific lecture-rooms, or
                        Government offices, or counting-houses—I say, as I push my way amongst all
                        the sights and sounds of the streets of our great city, only one thing ever
                        catches my eye, that breaks in upon my mood, and warns me I need not
                        despair.’ 
 ‘And what is that?’ asked Allen, with some curiosity. 
 ‘The shops,’ Mr. Rose answered, ‘of certain of our upholsterers and dealers
                        in works of art. Their windows, as I look into them, act like a sudden charm
                        on me—like a splash of cold water dashed on my forehead when I am fainting.
                        For I seem there to have got a glimpse of the real heart of things; and as
                        my eyes rest on the perfect pattern (many of which are really quite
                        delicious; indeed, when I go to ugly houses, I often take a scrap of some
                        artistic crétonne with me in my pocket as a kind of æsthetic smelling
                        salts), I say, when I look in at their windows, and my eyes rest on the
                        perfect pattern of some new fabric for a chair or for a window-curtain, or
                        on some new design for a wallpaper, or on some old china vase, I become at
                        once sharply conscious, Mr. Herbert, that, despite the ungenial mental
                        climate of the present age, strange yearnings for, and knowledge of, true
                        beauty, are beginning to show themselves like flowers above the weedy soil;
                        and I remember, amidst the roar and clatter of our streets, and the mad
                        noises of our own times, that there is amongst us a growing number who have
                        deliberately turned their backs on all these things, and have thrown their
                        whole souls and sympathies into the happier art-ages of the past. They have
                        gone back,’ said Mr. Rose, raising his voice a little, ‘to Athens and to
                        Italy, to the Italy of Leo and to the Athens of Pericles. To such men the
                        clamour, the interests, the struggles of our own times, become as
                        meaningless as they really are. To them the boyhood of Bathyllus is of more
                        moment than the manhood of Napoleon. Borgia is a more familiar name than
                        Bismarck. I know, indeed—and I really do not blame them—several
                        distinguished artists who, resolving to make their whole lives consistently
                        perfect, will, on principle, never admit a newspaper into their houses that
                        is of later date than the times of Addison; and I have good trust that the
                        number of such men is on the increase—men I mean,’ said Mr. Rose, toying
                        tenderly with an exquisite wine-glass of Salviati’s, ‘who with a steady and
                        set purpose follow art for the sake of art, beauty for the sake of beauty,
                        love for the sake of love, life for the sake of life.’ 
 Mr. Rose’s slow gentle voice, which was apt at certain times to become
                        peculiarly irritating, sounded now like the evening air grown articulate,
                        and had secured him hitherto a tranquil hearing, as if by a kind of spell.
                        This however seemed here in sudden danger of snapping. 
 ‘What, Mr. Rose!’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose, ‘do you mean to say, then, that
                        the number of people is on the increase who won’t read the newspapers?’ 
 ‘Why, the men must be absolute idiots!’ said Lady Grace, shaking her grey
                        curls, and putting on her spectacles to look at Mr. Rose. 
 Mr. Rose however was imperturbable. 
 ‘Of course,’ he said, ‘you may have newspapers if you will: I myself always
                        have them; though in general they are too full of public events to be of
                        much interest. I was merely speaking just now of the spirit of the movement.
                        And of that we must all of us here have some knowledge. We must all of us
                        have friends whose houses more or less embody it. And even if we had not, we
                        could not help seeing signs of it—signs of how true and earnest it is, in
                        the enormous sums that are now given for really good objects.’ 
 ‘That,’ said Lady Grace, with some tartness, ‘is true enough, thank God!’ 
 ‘But I can’t see,’ said Lady Ambrose, whose name often figured in the
                            Times, in the subscription-lists of advertised charities—
                        ‘I can’t see, Mr. Rose, any reason in that why we should not read the
                        newspapers.’ 
 ‘The other day, for instance,’ said Mr. Rose reflectively, ‘I heard of eight
                        Chelsea shepherdesses, picked up by a dealer, I really forget where—in some
                        common cottage, if I recollect aright, covered with dirt, giving no pleasure
                        to anyone—and these were all sold in a single day, and not one of them
                        fetched less than two hundred and twenty pounds.’ 
 ‘I can’t help thinking they must have come from Cremorne,’ said
                        Mrs. Sinclair softly. 
 ‘But why,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘should I speak of particular instances? We
                            must all of us have friends whose houses are full of
                        priceless treasures such as these—the whole atmosphere of whose rooms really
                        seems impregnated with art—seems in fact, Mr. Herbert, such an atmosphere as
                        we should dream of for our new Republic.’ 
 ‘To be sure,’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose, feeling that she had at last got upon
                        solid ground. ‘By the way, Mr. Rose,’ she said, with her most gracious of
                        smiles, ‘I suppose you have hardly seen Lady Julia Hayman’s new house in
                        Belgrave Square? I’m sure that would delight you. I should like to take you
                        there some day, and show it to you.’ 
 ‘I have seen it,’ said Mr. Rose, with languid condescension. ‘It was very
                        pretty, I thought—some of it really quite nice.’ 
 This and the slight rudeness of manner it was said with, raised Mr. Rose
                        greatly in Lady Ambrose’s estimation, and she began to think with respect of
                        his late utterances. 
 ‘Well, Mr. Herbert,’ Mr. Rose went on, ‘what I want to say is this. We have
                        here in the present age, as it is, fragments of the right thing. We have a
                        number of isolated right interiors; we have a few, very few right exteriors.
                        But in our ideal state, our entire city—our London—the metropolis of our
                        society, would be as a whole as perfect as these fragments. Taste would not
                        there be merely an indoor thing. It would be written visibly for all to look
                        upon, in our streets, our squares, our gardens. Could we only mould England
                        to our wishes, the thing to do, I am persuaded, would be to remove London to
                        some kindlier site, that it might there be altogether born anew. I myself
                        would have it taken to the south-west, and to the sea-coast, where the waves
                        are blue, and where the air is calm and fine, and there—’ 
 ‘Ah me!’ sighed Mr. Luke with a lofty sadness, ‘cœlum non animam
                            mutant.’ 
 ‘Pardon me,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘few paradoxes—and most paradoxes are false—are,
                        I think, so false as that. This much at least of sea-like man’s mind has,
                        that scarcely anything so distinctly gives a tone to it as the colour of the
                        skies he lives under. And I was going to say,’ he went on, looking out
                        dreamily towards the evening waves, ‘that as the imagination is a quick
                        workman, I can at this moment see our metropolis already transplanted and
                        rebuilt. I seem to see it now as it were from a distance, with its palaces,
                        its museums, its churches, its convents, its gardens, its
                        picture-galleries—a cluster of domed and pillared marble, sparkling on a
                        gray headland. It is Rome, it is Athens, it is Florence, arisen and come to
                        life again, in these modern days. The aloe-tree of beauty again blossoms
                        there, under the azure stainless sky.’ 
 ‘Do you know, Mr. Rose,’ said Lady Ambrose in her most cordial manner, ‘all
                        this is very beautiful; and certainly no one can think London
                        as it is more ugly than I do. That’s natural in me, isn’t it, being a
                        denizen of poor prosaic South Audley Street as I am? But don’t you think
                        that your notion is—it’s very beautiful, I quite feel that—but don’t you
                        think it is perhaps a little too dream-like—too unreal, if you know what I
                        mean?’ 
 ‘Such a city,’ said Mr. Rose earnestly, ‘is indeed a dream, but it is a
                        dream which we might make a reality, would circumstances only permit of it.
                        We have many amongst us who know what is beautiful, and who passionately
                        desire it; and would others only be led by these, it is quite conceivable
                        that we might some day have a capital, the entire aspect of which should be
                        the visible embodiment of our finest and most varied culture, our most
                        sensitive taste, and our deepest æsthetic measure of things. This is what
                        this capital of our new Republic must be, this dwelling-place of our ideal
                        society. We shall have houses, galleries, streets, theatres, such as Giulio
                        Romano or Giorgio Vasari, or Giulio Campi would have rejoiced to look at; we
                        shall have metal-work worthy of the hand of Ghiberti and the praise of
                        Michel Angelo; we shall rival Domenico Beccafumi with our pavements. As you
                        wander through our thoroughfares and our gardens, your feelings will not be
                        jarred by the presence of human vulgarity, or the desolating noise of
                        traffic; nor in every spare space will your eyes be caught by abominable
                        advertisements of excursion trains to Brighton, or of Horniman’s cheap tea.
                        They will rest instead, here on an exquisite fountain, here on a statue,
                        here on a bust of Zeus or Hermes or Aphrodite, glimmering in a laurelled
                        nook; or on a Mater Dolorosa looking down on you from her holy shrine; or on
                        the carved marble gate-posts of our palace gardens, or on their wrought iron
                        or wrought bronze gates; or perhaps on such triumphal arches as that which
                        Antonio San Gallo constructed in honour of Charles V., and of which you must
                        all remember the description given by Vasari. Such a city,’ said Mr. Rose,
                        ‘would be the externalisation of the human spirit in the highest state of
                        development that we can conceive for it. We should there see expressed
                        openly all our appreciations of all the beauty that we can detect in the
                        world’s whole history. The wind of the spirit that breathed there would blow
                        to us from all the places of the past, and be charged with infinite odours.
                        Every frieze on our walls, every clustered capital of a marble column, would
                        be a garland or nosegay of associations. Indeed, our whole city, as compared
                        with the London that is now, would be itself a nosegay as compared with a
                        faggot; and as related to the life that I would see lived in it, it would be
                        like a shell murmuring with all the world’s memories, and held to the ear of
                        the two twins, Life and Love.’ 
 Mr. Rose had got so dreamy by this time that he felt himself the necessity
                        of turning a little more matter-of-fact again. 
 ‘You will see what I mean, plainly enough,’ he said, ‘if you will just think
                        of our architecture, and consider how that naturally will be—’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Luke, ‘I should be glad to hear about our architecture.’ 
 ‘—How that naturally will be,’ Mr. Rose went on, ‘of no style in
                        particular.’ 
 ‘The deuce it won’t!’ exclaimed Mr. Luke. 
 ‘No,’ continued Mr. Rose, unmoved; ‘no style in particular, but a
                            renaissance of all styles. It will matter nothing to us
                        whether they be pagan or Catholic, classical or mediæval. We shall be quite
                        without prejudice or bigotry. To the eye of true taste, an Aquinas in his
                        cell before a crucifix, or a Narcissus gazing at himself in a still
                        fountain, are—in their own ways, you know—equally beautiful.’ 
 ‘Well, really,’ said Miss Merton, ‘I can not fancy St. Thomas
                        being a very taking object to people who don’t believe in him either as a
                        saint or a philosopher. I always think that, except from a Christian point
                        of view, a saint can be hardly better described than by Newman’s lines, as—
                                 A bundle of bones, whose breath Infects the world
                                before his death.’

 ‘I remember the lines well,’ said Mr. Rose calmly, ‘and the writer you
                        mention puts them in the mouth of a yelping devil. But devils, as far as I
                        know, are not generally—except, perhaps, Milton’s—conspicuous for taste:
                        indeed, if we may trust Goethe, the very touch of a flower is torture to
                        them.’ 
 ‘Dante’s biggest devil,’ cried Mr. Saunders, to everyone’s amazement,
                        ‘chewed Judas Iscariot like a quid of tobacco, to all eternity. He, at any
                        rate, knew what he liked.’ 
 Mr. Rose started, and visited Mr. Saunders with a rapid frown. He then
                        proceeded, turning again to Miss Merton as if nothing had happened. 
 ‘Let me rather,’ he said, ‘read a nice sonnet to you, which I had sent to me
                        this morning, and which was in my mind just now. These lines’—Mr. Rose here
                        produced a paper from his pocket—‘were written by a boy of eighteen—a youth
                        of extraordinary promise, I think, whose education I may myself claim to
                        have had some share in directing. Listen,’ he said, laying the verses before
                        him, on a clean plate. 

Three visions in the watches of one night Made sweet my
                            sleep—almost too sweet to tell. One was Narcissus by a woodside
                            well, And on the moss his limbs and feet were white; And
                            one, Queen Venus, blown for my delight Across the blue sea in a
                            rosy shell; And one, a lean Aquinas in his cell, Kneeling,
                            his pen in hand, with aching sight Strained towards a carven
                            Christ; and of these three I knew not which was fairest. First I
                            turned Towards that soft boy, who laughed and fled from
                            me; Towards Venus then; and she smiled once, and she Fled
                            also. Then with teeming heart I yearned,

 ‘Yes,’ murmured Mr. Rose to himself, folding up the paper; ‘they are dear
                        lines. Now, there,’ he said, ‘we have a true and tender expression of the
                        really Catholic spirit of modern æstheticism, which holds nothing common or
                        unclean. It is in this spirit, I say, that the architects of our state will
                        set to work. And thus for our houses, for our picture-galleries, for our
                        churches—I trust we shall have many churches—they will select and combine—’ 
 ‘Do you seriously mean,’ broke in Allen, a little impatiently, ‘that it is a
                        thing to wish for and to look forward to, that we should abandon all
                        attempts at original architecture, and content ourselves with simply
                        sponging on the past?’ 
 ‘I do,’ replied Mr. Rose suavely; ‘and for this reason, if for no other,
                        that the world can now successfully do nothing else. Nor, indeed, is it to
                        be expected or even wished that it should.’ 
 ‘You say we have no good architecture now!’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose; ‘but,
                        Mr. Rose, have you forgotten our modern churches? Don’t you think them
                        beautiful? Perhaps you never go to All Saints’?’ 
 ‘I every now and then,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘when I am in the weary mood for it,
                        attend the services of our English Ritualists, and I admire their churches
                        very much indeed. In some places the whole thing is really managed with
                        surprising skill. The dim religious twilight, fragrant with the smoke of
                        incense; the tangled roofs that the music seems to cling to; the tapers, the
                        high altar, and the strange intonation of the priests, all produce a curious
                        old-world effect, and seem to unite one with things that have been long
                        dead. Indeed, it all seems to me far more a part of the past than the
                        services of the Catholics.’ 
 Lady Ambrose did not express her approbation of the last part of this
                        sentiment, out of regard for Miss Merton; but she gave a smile and a nod of
                        pleased intelligence to Mr. Rose. 
 ‘Yes,’ Mr. Rose went on, ‘there is a regretful insincerity about it all,
                        that is very nice, and that at once appeals to me, “Gleich einer
                            alten halbverklungen Sage.” The priests are only half in
                        earnest; the congregations, even—’ 
 ‘Then I am quite sure,’ interrupted Lady Ambrose with vigour, ‘that you can
                        never have heard Mr. Cope preach.’ 
 ‘I don’t know,’ said Mr. Rose languidly. ‘I never enquired, nor have I ever
                        heard anyone so much as mention, the names of any of them. Now all that,
                        Lady Ambrose, were life really in the state it should be, you would be able
                        to keep.’ 
 ‘Do you seriously, and in sober earnest, mean,’ Allen again broke in, ‘that
                        you think it a good thing that all our art and architecture should be
                        borrowed and insincere, and that our very religion should be nothing but a
                        dilettante memory?’ 
 ‘The opinion,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘which by the way you slightly misrepresent,
                        is not mine only, but that of all those of our own day who are really
                        devoting themselves to art for its own sake. I will try to explain the
                        reason of this. In the world’s life, just as in the life of a man, there are
                        certain periods of eager and all-absorbing action, and these are followed by
                        periods of memory and reflection. We then look back upon our past, and
                        become for the first time conscious of what we are, and of what we have
                        done. We then see the dignity of toil, and the grand results of it, the
                        beauty and the strength of faith, and the fervent power of patriotism;
                        which, whilst we laboured, and believed, and loved, we were quite blind to.
                        Upon such a reflective period has the world now entered. It has acted and
                        believed already; its task now is to learn to value action and belief—to
                        feel and to be thrilled at the beauty of them. And the chief means by which
                        it can learn this is art—the art of a renaissance. For by the
                        power of such art, all that was beautiful, strong, heroic, or tender in the
                        past—all the actions, passions, faiths, aspirations of the world, that lie
                        so many fathom deep in the years—float upwards to the tranquil surface of
                        the present, and make our lives like what seems to me one of the loveliest
                        things in nature, the iridescent film on the face of a stagnant water. Yes;
                        the past is not dead unless we choose that it shall be so. Christianity
                        itself is not dead. There is “nothing of it that doth fade,” but turns “into
                        something rich and strange,” for us to give a new tone to our lives with.
                        And, believe me,’ Mr. Rose went on, gathering earnestness, ‘that the
                        happiness possible in such conscious periods is the only true happiness.
                        Indeed, the active periods of the world were not really happy at all. We
                        only fancy them to have been so by a pathetic fallacy. Is the hero happy
                        during his heroism? No, but after it, when he sees what his heroism was, and
                        reads the glory of it in the eyes of youth or maiden.’ 
 ‘ this is very poor stuff—very poor stuff,’ murmured Dr.
                        Jenkinson, whose face had become gradually the very picture of crossness. 
 ‘Do you mean, Mr. Rose,’ said Miss Merton, with a half humorous, half
                        incredulous smile, ‘that we never value religion till we have come to think
                        it nonsense?’ 
 ‘Not nonsense—no,’ exclaimed Mr. Rose in gentle horror; ‘I only mean that it
                        never lights our lives so beautifully as when it is leaving them like the
                        evening sun. It is in such periods of the world’s life that art springs into
                        being in its greatest splendour. Your Raphael, Miss Merton, who painted you
                        your “dear Madonnas,” was a luminous cloud in the sunset sky of the
                        Renaissance,—a cloud that took its fire from a faith that was sunk or
                        sinking.’ 
 ‘I’m afraid that the faith is not quite sunk yet,’ said Miss Merton, with a
                        slight sudden flush in her cheeks, and with just the faintest touch of
                        suppressed anger. 
 Mr. Saunders, Mr. Stockton, Mr. Storks, and Mr. Luke all raised their
                        eyebrows. 
 ‘No,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘such cyclic sunsets are happily apt to linger.’ 
 ‘Mr. Rose,’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose, with her most gracious of smiles, ‘of
                        course everyone who has ears must know that all this is very beautiful, but
                        I am positively so stupid that I haven’t been quite able to follow it all.’ 
 ‘I will try to make my meaning clearer,’ he said, in a brisker tone. ‘I
                        often figure to myself an unconscious period and a conscious one, as two
                        women—one an untamed creature with embrowned limbs native to the air and the
                        sea; the other marble-white and swan-soft, couched delicately on cushions
                        before a mirror, and watching her own supple reflection gleaming in the
                        depths of it. On the one is the sunshine and the sea-spray. The wind of
                        Heaven and her unbound hair are playmates. The light of the sky is in her
                        eyes; on her lips is a free laughter. We look at her, and we know that she
                        is happy. We know it, mark me; but she knows it
                        not. Turn, however, to the other, and all is changed. Outwardly, there is no
                        gladness there. Her dark, gleaming eyes open depth within depth upon us,
                        like the circles of a new Inferno. There is a clear, shadowy pallor on her
                        cheek. Only her lips are scarlet. There is a sadness—a languor, even in the
                        grave tendrils of her heavy hair, and in each changing curve of her bosom as
                        she breathes or sighs.’ 
 ‘What a very odd man Mr. Rose is!’ said Lady Ambrose in a loud whisper. ‘He
                        always seems to talk of everybody as if they had no clothes on. And does he
                        mean by this that we ought to be always in the dumps?’ 
 ‘Yes,’ Mr. Rose was meanwhile proceeding, his voice again growing visionary,
                        ‘there is no eagerness, no action there; and yet all eagerness, all action
                        is known to her as the writing on an open scroll; only, as she reads, even
                        in the reading of it, action turns into emotion, and eagerness into a
                        sighing memory. Yet such a woman really may stand symbolically for us as the
                        patroness and the lady of all gladness, who makes us glad in the only way
                        now left us. And not only in the only way, but in the best way—the way of
                        ways. Her secret is self-consciousness. She knows that she is fair; she
                        knows, too, that she is sad; but she sees that sadness is lovely, and so
                        sadness turns to joy. Such a woman may be taken as a symbol, not of our
                        architecture only, but of all the eesthetic surroundings with which we shall
                        shelter and express our life. Such a woman do I see whenever I enter a
                        ritualistic church—’ 
 ‘I know,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, ‘that very peculiar people do go to such
                        places; but, Mr. Rose,’ she said with a look of appealing enquiry, ‘I
                        thought they were generally rather over-dressed than otherwise?’ 
 ‘The imagination,’ said Mr. Rose, opening his eyes in grave wonder at Mrs.
                        Sinclair, ‘may give her what garb it chooses. Our whole city, then—the city
                        of our new Republic—will be in keeping with this spirit. It will be the
                        architectural and decorative embodiment of the most educated longings of our
                        own times after order and loveliness and delight, whether of the senses or
                        the imagination. It will be, as it were, a resurrection of the past, in
                        response to the longing and the passionate regret of the present. It will be
                        such a resurrection as took place in Italy during its greatest epoch, only
                        with this difference—’ 
 ‘You seem to have forgotten trade and business altogether,’ said Dr.
                        Jenkinson. ‘I think, however rich you intend to be, you will find that they
                        are necessary.’ 
 ‘Yes, Mr. Rose, you’re not going to deprive us of all our shops, I hope?’
                        said Lady Ambrose. 
 ‘Because, you know,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, with a soft maliciousness, ‘we
                        can’t go without dresses altogether, Mr. Rose. And if I were there,’ she
                        continued plaintively, ‘I should want a bookseller to publish the scraps of
                        verse—poetry, as I am pleased to call it—that I am always writing.’ 
 ‘Pooh!’ said Mr. Rose, a little annoyed, ‘we shall have all that somewhere,
                        of course; but it will be out of the way, in a sort of Piræus, where the
                        necessary καπήλοι—’ 
 ‘A sort of what?’ said Lady Ambrose. 
 ‘Mr. Rose merely means,’ said Donald Gordon, ‘that there must be good
                        folding-doors between the offices and the house of life; and that the
                        servants are not to be seen walking about in the pleasure-grounds.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘exactly so.’ 
 ‘Well, then,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘I quite agree with you, Mr. Rose; and if
                        wishing were only having, I’ve not the least doubt that we should all of us
                        be going back to Mr. Rose’s city to-morrow, instead of to London, with its
                        carts, and cabs, and smoke, and all its thousand-and-one drawbacks. I’m
                        sure,’ she said, turning to Miss Merton, ‘you would, my dear, with all your
                        taste.’ 
 ‘It certainly,’ said Miss Merton, smiling, ‘all sounds very beautiful. All I
                        am afraid of is that we should not be quite worthy of it.’ 
 ‘Nay,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘but the very point is that we shall be worthy of it,
                        and that it will be worthy of us. I said, if you recollect, just now, that
                        the world’s ideal of the future must resemble in many ways its memory of the
                        Italian Renaissance. But don’t let that mislead you. It may resemble that,
                        but it will be something far in advance of it. During the last three hundred
                        years—in fact, during the last sixty or seventy years, the soul of man has
                        developed strangely in its sentiments and its powers of feeling; in its
                        powers, in fact, of enjoying life. As I said, I have a work in the press,
                        devoted entirely to a description of this growth. I have some of the proof
                        sheets with me; and if you will let me I should like to read you one or two
                        passages.’ 
 ‘I don’t think much can be made out of that,’ said Dr. Jenkinson, with a
                        vindictive sweetness. ‘Human sentiment dresses itself in different fashions,
                        as human ladies do; but I think beneath the surface it is much the same. I
                        mean,’ he added, suddenly recollecting that he might thus seem to be rooting
                        up the wheat of his own opinions along with the tares of Mr. Rose’s, ‘I mean
                        that I don’t think in seventy years, or even in three hundred, you will be
                        able to show that human nature has very much changed. I don’t
                        think so.’ 
 Unfortunately, however, the Doctor found that, instead of putting down Mr.
                        Rose by this, he had only raised up Mr. Luke. 
 ‘Ah, Jenkinson, I think you are wrong there,’ said Mr. Luke. ‘As long as we
                        recognise that this growth is at present confined to a very small minority,
                        the fact of such growth is the most important, the
                        most significant of all facts. Indeed, our friend Mr. Rose is quite right
                        thus far, in the stress he lays on our appreciation of the past, that we
                        have certainly in these modern times acquired a new sense, by which alone
                        the past can be appreciated truly, the sense which, if I may invent a phrase
                        for it, I should call that of Historical Perspective; so that now really for
                        the first time the landscape of history is beginning to have some
                        intelligible charm for us. And this, you know, is not all. Our whole views
                        of things—(you, Jenkinson, must know this as well as I do)—the
                            Zeitgeist breathes upon them, and they do not die;
                        but they are changed—they are enlightened.’ 
 The Doctor was too much annoyed to make any audible answer to this; but he
                        murmured with some emphasis to himself, ‘That’s not what Mr.
                        Rose was saying; that’s not what I was contradicting.’ 
 ‘You take, Luke, a rather more rose-coloured view of things than you did
                        last night,’ said Mr. Storks. 
 ‘No,’ said Mr. Luke, with a sigh, ‘far from it. I am not denying (pray,
                        Jenkinson, remember this) that the majority of us are at present either
                        Barbarians or Philistines; and the ugliness of these is more glaring now
                        than at any former time. But that any of us are able to see them thus
                        distinctly in their true colours, itself shows that there must be a deal of
                        light somewhere. Even to make darkness visible some light is needed. We
                        should always recollect that. We are only discontented with ourselves when
                        we are struggling to be better than ourselves.’ 
 ‘And in many ways,’ said Laurence, ‘I think the struggle has been
                        successful. Take, for instance, the pleasure we get now from the aspects of
                        external nature, and the way in which these seem to mix themselves with our
                        lives. This certainly is something distinctly modern. And nearly all our
                        other feelings, it seems to me, have changed just like this one, and have
                        become more sensitive, and more highly organised. If we may judge by its
                        expression in literature, love has, certainly; and that I suppose is the
                        most important and comprehensive feeling in life.’ 
 ‘Does Mr. Laurence only suppose that?’ sighed Mrs. Sinclair,
                        casting down her eyes. 
 ‘Well,’ said Dr. Jenkinson, ‘our feelings about these two things—about love
                        and external nature—perhaps have changed somewhat. Yes, I think they have. I
                        think you might make an interesting magazine article out of that—but hardly
                        more.’ 
 ‘I rather,’ said Laurence apologetically, ‘agree with Mr. Luke and Mr. Rose,
                        that all our feelings have developed just as these two have. And I think
                        this is partly owing to the fusion in our minds of our sacred and secular
                        ideas—which indeed you were speaking of this morning in your sermon. Thus,
                        to find some rational purpose in life was once merely enjoined as a
                        supernatural duty. In our times it has taken our common nature upon it, and
                        become a natural longing—though, I fear,’ he added softly, ‘a fruitless
                        one.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ suddenly exclaimed Lady Grace, who had been listening intently to her
                        nephew’s words; ‘and if you are speaking of modern progress, Otho, you
                        should not leave out the diffusion of those grand ideas of justice, and
                        right, and freedom, and humanity which are at work in the great heart of the
                        nation. We are growing cultivated in Mr. Luke’s noble sense of the word, and
                        our whole hearts revolt against the way in which women have hitherto been
                        treated, and against the cruelties which dogma asserts the good God can
                        practise, and the cruelties on the poor animals which wicked men do
                        practise. And war too,’ Lady Grace went on, a glow mounting into her soft
                        faded cheek, ‘think how fast we are outgrowing that! England at any rate
                        will never watch the outbreak of another war, with all its inevitable
                        cruelties, without giving at least one sob that shall make all Europe pause
                        and listen. Indeed, we must not forget how the entire substance of religion
                        is ceasing to be a mass of dogmas, and is becoming embodied instead in
                        practice and in action.’ 
 ‘Quite true, Lady Grace,’ said Mr. Luke. Lady Grace was just about to have
                        given a sign for rising; but Mr. Luke’s assent detained her. ‘As to war,’ he
                        went on, ‘there may, of course, be different opinions. Questions of policy
                        may arise—’ (‘As if any policy,’ murmured Lady Grace, ‘could justify us in
                        such a thing!’) ‘but religion—yes, that, as I have been trying to teach the
                        world, is the great and important point on which culture is beginning to
                        cast its light—and with just the effect which you describe. It is true that
                        culture is at present but a little leaven hid in a barrel of meal; but still
                        it is doing its work slowly; and in the matter of religion—indeed, in all
                        matters, for religion rightly understood embraces all—’ (‘I do
                        like to hear Mr. Luke talk sometimes,’ murmured Lady Grace), ‘its effect is
                        just this—to show us that religion in any civilised, any reasonable, any
                        sweet sense, can never be found except embodied in action; that it is, in
                        fact, nothing but right action, pointed—winged, as it were—by right emotion,
                        by a glow, an aspiration—an aspiration towards God—’ (Lady Grace sighed with
                        feeling) —‘not of course,’ Mr. Luke went on confidentially, ‘that petulant
                        Pedant of the theologians—that irritable angry Father, with the very
                        uncertain temper—but towards—’ ‘An infinite, inscrutable, loving Being,’
                        began Lady Grace, with a slight moisture in her eyes. 
 ‘Quite so,’ said Mr. Luke, not waiting to listen, ‘towards that great
                        Law—that great verifiable tendency of things—that great stream whose flowing
                        such of us as are able are now so anxiously trying to accelerate. There is
                        no vain speculation about creation, and first causes, and consciousness
                        here, which are matters we can never verify, and which matter nothing to
                        us—’ 
 ‘But,’ stammered Lady Grace aghast, ‘Mr. Luke, do you mean to say that—but
                        it surely must matter something whether God can hear our prayers, and will
                        help us, and whether we owe Him any duty, and whether He is conscious of
                        what we do, and will judge us—it must matter—’ 
 Mr. Luke leaned forwards towards Lady Grace, and spoke to her in a
                        confidential whisper. 
 ‘Not two straws—not that,’ he said with a smile, and a very slight fillip of
                        his finger and thumb. 
 Lady Grace was thunderstruck. 
 ‘But,’ again she stammered softly and eagerly, ‘unless you say there is no
                        personal—’ 
 Mr. Luke hated the word personal; it was so much mixed up in
                        his mind with theology, that he even winced if he had to speak of personal
                        talk. 
 ‘My dear Lady Grace,’ he said, in a tone of surprised remonstrance, ‘you are
                        talking like a Bishop.’ 
 ‘Well, certainly,’ said Lady Grace, rising, and struggling, she hardly knew
                        how, into a smile, ‘nolo episcopari. You see I do know a
                        little Latin, Mr. Luke.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Luke with a bow, as he pushed back a chair for her, ‘and a
                        bit that has more wisdom in it than all other ecclesiastical Latin put
                        together.’ 
 ‘We’re going to leave you gentlemen to smoke your cigarettes,’ said Lady
                        Grace. ‘We think of going down on the beach for a little, and looking at the
                        sea, which is getting silvery; and by-and-by, I dare say you will not expel
                        us if we come back for a little tea and coffee.’ 
 ‘Damn it!’ 
 Scarcely had the last trailing skirt swept glimmering out of the pavilion
                        into the mellow slowly-brightening moonlight, than the gentlemen were
                        astounded by this sudden and terrible exclamation. It was soon found to have
                        issued from Mr. Saunders, who had hardly spoken more than a few sentences
                        during the whole of dinner. 
 ‘What can be the matter? ‘was enquired by several voices. 
 ‘My fool of a servant,’ said Mr. Saunders sullenly, ‘has, I find, in
                        packing, wrapped up a small sponge of mine in my disproof of God’s
                        existence.’ 
 ‘H’f,’ shuddered Mr. Rose, shrinking from Mr. Saunders’s somewhat piercing
                        tones, and resting his forehead on his hand, ‘my head aches sadly. I think I
                        will go down to the sea, and join the ladies.’ 
 ‘I,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘if you will excuse me, must go and see in what
                        state the document is, as I left it drying, hung on the handle of my jug.’ 
 No sooner had Mr. Saunders and Mr. Rose departed than Dr. Jenkinson began to
                        recover his equanimity somewhat. Seeing this, Mr. Storks, who had himself
                        during dinner been first soothed and then ruffled into silence, found
                        suddenly the strings of his tongue loosed. 
 ‘Now, those are the sort of young fellows,’ he said, looking after the
                        retreating form of Mr. Saunders, ‘that really do a good deal to bring all
                        solid knowledge into contempt in the minds of the half-educated. There’s a
                        certain hall in London, not far from the top of Regent Street, where I’m
                        told he gives Sunday lectures.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Dr. Jenkinson, sipping his claret, ‘it’s all very bad taste—very
                        bad taste.’ 
 ‘And the worst of it is,’ said Mr. Storks, ‘that these young men really get
                        hold of a fact or two, and then push them on to their own coarse and insane
                        conclusions—which have, I admit, to the vulgar eye, the look of being
                        obvious.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Dr. Jenkinson, with a seraphic sweetness, ‘we should always
                        suspect everything that seems very obvious. Glaring inconsistencies and
                        glaring consistencies are both sure to vanish if you look closely into
                        them.’ 
 ‘Now, all that about God, for instance,’ Mr. Storks went on, ‘is utterly
                        uncalled for; and, as young Saunders puts it, is utterly misleading.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Dr. Jenkinson, ‘it all depends upon the way you say
                        it.’ 
 ‘I hardly think,’ said Mr. Stockton with a sublime weariness, ‘that we need
                        waste much thought upon his way. It is a very common one—that
                        of the puppy that barks at the heels of the master whose meat it steals.’ 
 ‘May I,’ said Mr. Herbert gently, after a moment’s pause, ‘ask this, for I
                        am a little puzzled here. Do I understand that Mr. Saunders’s arguments may
                        be held, on the face of the thing, to disprove the existence of God?’ 
 Mr. Storks and Mr. Stockton both stared gravely on Mr. Herbert; and said
                        nothing. Dr. Jenkinson stared at him too; but the Doctor’s eye lit up into a
                        little sharp twinkle of benign content and amusement, and he said— 
 ‘No, Mr. Herbert, I don’t think Mr. Saunders can disprove that, nor anyone
                        else either. For the world has at present no adequate definition of God; and
                        I think we should be able to define a thing before we can satisfactorily
                        disprove it. I think so. I have no doubt Mr. Saunders can disprove the
                        existence of God, as he would define Him. All atheists can do that.’ 
 ‘Ah,’ murmured Mr. Stockton, ‘nobly said!’ 
 ‘But that’s not the way,’ the Doctor went on, ‘to set to work—this kind of
                        rude denial. We must be loyal to nature. We must do nothing per
                            saltum. We must be patient. We mustn’t leap at Utopias, either
                        religious or irreligious. Let us be content with the knowledge that all
                        dogmas will expand in proportion as we feel they need expansion; for all
                        mere forms are transitory, and even the personality of—’ 
 Fatal word! It was like a match to a cannon. 
 ‘Ah, Jenkinson,’ exclaimed Mr. Luke, and Dr. Jenkinson stopped instantly,
                            ‘we see what you mean; and capital sense it is too. But you
                        do yourself as much as anyone else a great injustice, in not seeing that the
                        age is composed of two parts, and that the cultured minority is infinitely
                        in advance of the Philistine majority—which alone is, properly speaking, the
                        present; the minority being really the soul of the future waiting for its
                        body, which at present can exist only as a Utopia. It is the wants of this
                        soul that we have been talking over this afternoon. When the ladies come
                        back to us, there are several things that I should like to say; and then you
                        will see what we mean, Jenkinson—and that even poor Rose has really some
                        right on his side.’ 
 At the mention of Mr. Rose’s name the Doctor’s face again curdled into
                        frost. 
 ‘I don’t think so.’ That was all he said. 
</div></body></text></TEI>