
CHAPTER XXVI
The next fortnight was a time of truce. Elsmere neither read nor reasoned. He spent his days
      in the school, in the village, pottering about the Mile End cottages, or the new
      Institute—sometimes fishing, sometimes passing long summer hours on the commons with his club
      boys, hunting the ponds for caddises, newts, and water-beetles, peering into the furze-bushes
      for second broods, or watching the sand-martins in the gravel-pits, and trudging home at night
      in the midst of an escort of enthusiasts, all of them with pockets as full and miry as his
      own, to deposit the treasures of the day in the club-room. Once more the rector, though
      physically perhaps less ardent than of yore, was the life of the party, and a certain awe and
      strangeness which had developed in his boys' minds towards him, during the last few weeks,
      passed away.
It was curious that in these days he would neither sit nor walk alone if he could help it.
      Catherine or a stray parishioner was almost always with him. All the while, vaguely, in the
      depths of consciousness, there was the knowledge that behind this piece of quiet water on
      which his life was now sailing, there lay storm and darkness, and that in front loomed fresh
      possibilities of tempest. He knew, in a way, that it was a treacherous peace which had
      overtaken him. And yet it was peace. The pressure exerted by the will had temporarily given
      way, and the deepest forces of the man's being had reasserted themselves. He could feel and
      love and pray again; and Catherine, seeing the old glow in the eyes, the old spring in the
      step, made the whole of life one thank-offering.
On the evening following that moment of reaction in the Murewell library, Robert had written
      to the squire. His letter had been practically a withdrawal from the correspondence.
'I find,' he wrote, 'that I have been spending too much time and energy lately on these
      critical matters. It seems to me that my work as a clergyman has suffered. Nor can I deny that
      your book and your letters have been to me a source of great trouble of mind.
'My heart is where it was, but my head is often confused. Let controversy rest a while. My
      wife says I want a holiday;
       I think so myself, and we are off in three weeks; not, however, I hope, before we
      have welcomed you home again, and got you to open the new Institute, which is already dazzling
      the eyes of the village by its size and splendour, and the white paint that Harris the builder
      has been lavishing upon it.'
Ten days later, rather earlier than was expected, the squire and Mrs. Darcy were at home
      again. Robert re-entered the great house the morning after their arrival with a strange
      reluctance. Its glow and magnificence, the warm perfumed air of the hall, brought back a sense
      of old oppressions, and he walked down the passage to the library with a sinking heart. There
      he found the squire busy as usual with one of those fresh cargoes of books which always
      accompanied him on any homeward journey. He was more brown, more wrinkled, more shrunken; more
      full of force, of harsh epigram, of grim anecdote than ever. Robert sat on the edge of the
      table laughing over his stories of French Orientalists, or Roman cardinals, or modern Greek
      professors, enjoying the impartial sarcasm which one of the greatest of savants was
      always ready to pour out upon his brethren of the craft.
The squire, however, was never genial for a moment during the interview. He did not mention
      his book nor Elsmere's letter. But Elsmere suspected in him a good deal of suppressed
      irritability; and, as after a while he abruptly ceased to talk, the visit grew difficult.
The rector walked home feeling restless and depressed. The mind had begun to work again. It
      was only by a great effort that he could turn his thoughts from the squire, and all that the
      squire had meant to him during the past year, and so woo back to himself 'the shy bird
      Peace.'
Mr. Wendover watched the door close behind him, and then went back to his work with a
      gesture of impatience.
'Once a priest, always a priest. What a fool I was to forget it! You think you make an
      impression on the mystic, and at the bottom there is always something which defies you and
      common sense. "Two and two do not, and shall not, make four,"' he said to himself, in a
      mincing voice of angry sarcasm. '"It would give me too much pain that they should." Well, and
      so I suppose what might have been a rational friendship will go by the board like everything
      else. What can make the man shilly-shally in this way? He is convinced already, as he
      knows—those later letters were conclusive! His living, perhaps, and his work! Not for the
      money's sake—there never was a more incredibly disinterested person born. But his work? Well,
      who is to hinder his work? Will he be the first parson in the Church of England who looks
      after the poor and holds his tongue? If you can't speak your mind, it is something at any rate
      to possess one—nine-tenths of the clergy being without the appendage. But Elsmere—pshaw! he
      will go muddling on to the end of the chapter!'


The squire, indeed, was like a hunter whose prey escapes him at the very moment of capture,
      and there grew on him a mocking aggressive mood which Elsmere often found hard to bear.
One natural symptom of it was his renewed churlishness as to all local matters. Elsmere one
      afternoon spent an hour in trying to persuade him to open the new Institute.
'What on earth do you want me for?' inquired Mr. Wendover, standing before the fire in the
      library, the Medusa head peering over his shoulder. 'You know perfectly well that all the
      gentry about here—I suppose you will have some of them—regard me as an old reprobate, and the
      poor people, I imagine, as a kind of ogre. To me it doesn't matter a twopenny damn—I
      apologise; it was the Duke of Wellington's favourite standard of value—but I can't see what
      good it can do either you or the village, under the circumstances, that I should stand on my
      head for the popular edification.'
Elsmere, however, merely stood his ground, arguing and bantering, till the squire grudgingly
      gave way. This time, after he departed, Mr. Wendover, instead of going to his work, still
      stood gloomily ruminating in front of the fire. His frowning eyes wandered round the great
      room before him. For the first time he was conscious that now, as soon as the charm of
      Elsmere's presence was withdrawn, his working hours were doubly solitary; that his loneliness
      weighed upon him more; and that it mattered to him appreciably whether that young man went or
      stayed. The stirring of a new sensation, however,—unparalleled since the brief days when even
      Roger Wendover had his friends and his attractions like other men,—was soon lost in renewed
      chafing at Elsmere's absurdities. The squire had been at first perfectly content—so he told
      himself—to limit the field of their intercourse, and would have been content to go on doing
      so. But Elsmere himself had invited freedom of speech between them.
'I would have given him my best,' Mr. Wendover reflected impatiently. 'I could have handed
      on to him all I shall never use, and he might use, admirably. And now we might as well be on
      the terms we were to begin with for all the good I get out of him, or he out of me. Clearly
      nothing but cowardice! He cannot face the intellectual change, and he must, I suppose, dread
      lest it should affect his work. Good God, what nonsense! As if any one inquired what an
      English parson believed nowadays, so long as he performs all the usual antics decently!'
And, meanwhile, it never occurred to the squire that Elsmere had a wife, and a pious one.
      Catherine had been dropped out of his calculation as to Elsmere's future, at a very early
      stage.
The following afternoon Robert, coming home from a round, found Catherine out, and a note
      awaiting him from the Hall.
'Can you and Mrs. Elsmere come in to tea?' wrote the squire. 'Madame de Netteville is here,
      and one or two others.'


Robert grumbled a good deal, looked for Catherine to devise an excuse for him, could not
      find her, and at last reluctantly set out again alone.
He was tired and his mood was heavy. As he trudged through the park he never once noticed
      the soft sun-flooded distance, the shining loops of the river, the feeding deer, or any of
      those natural witcheries to which eye and sense were generally so responsive. The labourers
      going home, the children—with aprons full of crab-apples, and lips dyed by the first
      blackberries—who passed him, got but an absent smile or salute from the rector. The interval
      of exaltation and recoil was over. The ship of the mind was once more labouring in alien and
      dreary seas.
He roused himself to remember that he had been curious to see Madame de Netteville. She was
      an old friend of the squire's, the holder of a London salon, much more exquisite and select
      than anything Lady Charlotte could show.
'She had the same thing in Paris before the war,' the squire explained. 'Renan gave me a
      card to her. An extraordinary woman. No particular originality; but one of the best persons
      "to consult about ideas," like Joubert's Madame de Beaumont, I ever saw. Receptiveness itself.
      A beauty, too, or was one, and a bit of a sphinx, which adds to the attraction. Mystery
      becomes a woman vastly. One suspects her of adventures just enough to find her society doubly
      piquant.'
Vincent directed him to the upper terrace, whither tea had been taken. This terrace, which
      was one of the features of Murewell, occupied the top of the yew-clothed hill on which the
      library looked out. Evelyn himself had planned it. Along its upper side ran one of the most
      beautiful of old walls, broken by niches and statues, tapestried with roses and honeysuckle,
      and opening in the centre to reveal Evelyn's darling conceit of all—a semicircular space,
      holding a fountain, and leading to a grotto. The grotto had been scooped out of the hill; it
      was peopled with dim figures of fauns and nymphs who showed white amid its moist greenery; and
      in front a marble Silence drooped over the fountain, which held gold and silver fish in a
      singularly clear water. Outside ran the long stretch of level turf, edged with a jewelled rim
      of flowers; and as the hill fell steeply underneath, the terrace was like a high green
      platform raised into air, in order that a Wendover might see his domain, which from thence lay
      for miles spread out before him.
Here, beside the fountain, were gathered the squire, Mrs. Darcy, Madame de Netteville, and
      two unknown men. One of them was introduced to Elsmere as Mr. Spooner, and recognised by him
      as a Fellow of the Royal Society, a famous mathematician, sceptic, bon vivant, and
      sayer of good things. The other was a young Liberal Catholic, the author of a remarkable
      collection of essays on mediæval subjects in which the squire, treating the man's opinions of
      course as of no account, had
       instantly recognised the note of the true scholar. A pale, small, hectic creature,
      possessed of that restless energy of mind which often goes with the heightened temperature of
      consumption.
Robert took a seat by Madame de Netteville, whose appearance was picturesqueness itself. Her
      dress, a skilful mixture of black and creamy yellow, lay about her in folds, as soft, as
      carelessly effective as her manner. Her plumed hat shadowed a face which was no longer young
      in such a way as to hide all the lines possible; while the half-light brought admirably out
      the rich dark smoothness of the tints, the black lustre of the eyes. A delicate blue-veined
      hand lay upon her knee, and Robert was conscious after ten minutes or so that all her
      movements, which seemed at first merely slow and languid, were in reality singularly full of
      decision and purpose.
She was not easy to talk to on a first acquaintance. Robert felt that she was studying him,
      and was not so much at his ease as usual, partly owing to fatigue and mental worry.
She asked him little abrupt questions about the neighbourhood, his parish, his work, in a
      soft tone which had, however, a distinct aloofness, even hauteur. His answers, on the
      other hand, were often a trifle reckless and offhand. He was in a mood to be impatient with a
       mondaine's languid inquiries into clerical work, and it seemed to him the squire's
      description had been overdone.
'So you try to civilise your peasants,' she said at last. 'Does it succeed—is it worth
      while?'
'That depends upon your general ideas of what is worth while,' he answered smiling.
'Oh, everything is worth while that passes the time,' she said hurriedly. 'The clergy of the
      old régime went through life half asleep. That was their way of passing it. Your way,
      being a modern, is to bustle and try experiments.'
Her eyes, half closed but none the less provocative, ran over Elsmere's keen face and pliant
      frame. An atmosphere of intellectual and social assumption enwrapped her, which annoyed Robert
      in much the same way as Langham's philosophical airs were wont to do. He was drawn without
      knowing it into a match of wits wherein his strokes, if they lacked the finish and subtlety of
      hers, showed certainly no lack of sharpness or mental resource. Madame de Netteville's tone
      insensibly changed, her manner quickened, her great eyes gradually unclosed.
Suddenly, as they were in the middle of a skirmish as to the reality of influence, Madame de
      Netteville paradoxically maintaining that no human being had ever really converted,
      transformed, or convinced another, the voice of young Wishart, shrill and tremulous, rose
      above the general level of talk.
'I am quite ready; I am not the least afraid of a definition. Theology is organised
      knowledge in the field of religion, a science like any other science!'


'Certainly, my dear sir, certainly,' said Mr. Spooner, leaning forward with his hands round
      his knees, and speaking with the most elegant and good-humoured sangfroid imaginable,
      'the science of the world's ghosts! I cannot imagine any more fascinating.'
'Well,' said Madame de Netteville to Robert, with a deep breath, 'that was a remark
      to have hurled at you all at once out of doors on a summer's afternoon! Oh, Mr. Spooner!' she
      said, raising her voice, 'don't play the heretic here! There is no fun in it; there are too
      many with you.'
'I did not begin it, my dear madam, and your reproach is unjust. On one side of me
      Archbishop Manning's fidus Achates,' and the speaker took off his large straw hat and
      gracefully waved it—first to the right, then to the left. 'On the other, the rector of the
      parish. "Cannon to right of me, cannon to left of me." I submit my courage is
      unimpeachable!'
He spoke with a smiling courtesy as excessive as his silky moustache, his long
      straw-coloured beard, and his Panama hat. Madame de Netteville surveyed him with cool critical
      eyes. Robert smiled slightly, acknowledged the bow, but did not speak.
Mr. Wishart evidently took no heed of anything but his own thoughts. He sat bolt upright
      with shining excited eyes.
'Ah, I remember that article of yours in the Fortnightly! How you sceptics miss the
      point!'
And out came a stream of argument and denunciation which had probably lain lava-hot at the
      heart of the young convert for years, waiting for such a moment as this, when he had before
      him at close quarters two of the most famous antagonists of his faith. The outburst was
      striking, but certainly unpardonably ill-timed. Madame de Netteville retreated into herself
      with a shrug. Robert, in whom a sore nerve had been set jarring, did his utmost to begin his
      talk with her again.
In vain!—for the squire struck in. He had been sitting huddled together—his cynical eyes
      wandering from Wishart to Elsmere—when suddenly some extravagant remark of the young Catholic,
      and Robert's effort to edge away from the conversation, caught his attention at the same
      moment. His face hardened, and in his nasal voice he dealt a swift epigram at Mr. Wishart,
      which for the moment left the young disputant floundering.
But only for the moment. In another minute or two the argument, begun so casually, had
      developed into a serious trial of strength, in which the squire and young Wishart took the
      chief parts, while Mr. Spooner threw in a laugh and a sarcasm here and there.
And as long as Mr. Wendover talked, Madame de Netteville listened. Robert's restless
      repulsion to the whole incident, his passionate wish to escape from these phrases and
      illustrations and turns of argument which were all so wearisomely stale and
       familiar to him, found no support in her. Mrs. Darcy dared not second his attempts
      at chat, for Mr. Wendover, on the rare occasions when he held forth, was accustomed to be
      listened to; and Elsmere was of too sensitive a social fibre to break up the party by an
      abrupt exit, which could only have been interpreted in one way.
So he stayed, and perforce listened, but in complete silence. None of Mr. Wendover's
      side-hits touched him. Only as the talk went on, the rector in the background got paler and
      paler; his eyes, as they passed from the mobile face of the Catholic convert, already, for
      those who knew, marked with the signs of death, to the bronzed visage of the squire, grew
      duller—more instinct with a slowly-dawning despair.
Half an hour later he was once more on the road leading to the park gate. He had a vague
      memory that at parting the squire had shown him the cordiality of one suddenly anxious to
      apologise by manner, if not by word. Otherwise everything was forgotten. He was only anxious,
      half dazed as he was, to make out wherein lay the vital difference between his present self
      and the Elsmere who had passed along that road an hour before.
He had heard a conversation on religious topics, wherein nothing was new to him, nothing
      affected him intellectually at all. What was there in that to break the spring of life like
      this? He stood still, heavily trying to understand himself.
Then gradually it became clear to him. A month ago, every word of that hectic young pleader
      for Christ and the Christian certainties would have roused in him a leaping passionate
      sympathy—the heart's yearning assent, even when the intellect was most perplexed. Now that
      inmost strand had given way. Suddenly the disintegrating force he had been so pitifully, so
      blindly, holding at bay had penetrated once for all into the sanctuary! What had happened to
      him had been the first real failure of feeling, the first treachery of the
       heart. Wishart's hopes and hatreds, and sublime defiances of man's petty faculties,
      had aroused in him no echo, no response. His soul had been dead within him.
As he gained the shelter of the wooded lane beyond the gate it seemed to Robert that he was
      going through, once more, that old fierce temptation of Bunyan's,—
'For after the Lord had in this manner thus graciously delivered me, and had set me down so
      sweetly in the faith of His Holy Gospel, and had given me such strong consolation and blessed
      evidence from heaven, touching my interest in His love through Christ, the tempter came upon
      me again, and that with a more grievous and dreadful temptation than before. And that was, "To
      sell and part with this most blessed Christ; to exchange Him for the things of life, for
      anything!" The temptation lay upon me for the space of a year, and did follow me so
      continually that I was not rid of it one day in a month:
       no, not sometimes one hour in many days together, for it did always, in almost
      whatever I thought, intermix itself therewith, in such sort that I could neither eat my food,
      stoop for a pin, chop a stick, or cast mine eyes to look on this or that, but still the
      temptation would come: "Sell Christ for this, or sell Christ for that, sell Him, sell
      Him!"'
Was this what lay before the minister of God now in this selva oscura of life? The
      selling of the Master, of 'the love so sweet, the unction spiritual,' for an intellectual
      satisfaction, the ravaging of all the fair places of the heart by an intellectual need!
And still through all the despair, all the revolt, all the pain, which made the summer air a
      darkness, and closed every sense in him to the evening beauty, he felt the irresistible march
      and pressure of the new instincts, the new forces, which life and thought had been calling
      into being. The words of St. Augustine which he had read to Catherine, taken in a strange new
      sense, came back to him—'Commend to the keeping of the Truth whatever the Truth hath given
      thee, and thou shalt lose nothing!'
Was it the summons of Truth which was rending the whole nature in this way?
Robert stood still, and with his hands locked behind him, and his face turned like the face
      of a blind man towards a world of which it saw nothing, went through a desperate catechism of
      himself.
'Do I believe in God? Surely, surely! "Though He slay me yet will I trust in Him!"
       Do I believe in Christ? Yes,—in the teacher, the martyr, the symbol to us Westerns
      of all things heavenly and abiding, the image and pledge of the invisible life of the
      spirit—with all my soul and all my mind!
'But in the Man-God, the Word from Eternity,—in a wonder-working Christ, in a risen
      and ascended Jesus, in the living Intercessor and Mediator for the lives of His doomed
      brethren?'
He waited, conscious that it was the crisis of his history, and there rose in him, as though
      articulated one by one by an audible voice, words of irrevocable meaning.
'Every human soul in which the voice of God makes itself felt, enjoys, equally with Jesus of
      Nazareth, the divine sonship, and "miracles do not happen!"'
It was done. He felt for the moment as Bunyan did after his lesser defeat.
'Now was the battle won, and down fell I as a bird that is shot from the top of a tree into
      great guilt and fearful despair. Thus getting out of my bed I went moping in the field; but
      God knows with as heavy an heart as mortal man I think could bear, where for the space of two
      hours I was like a man bereft of life.'
All these years of happy spiritual certainty, of rejoicing oneness with Christ, to end in
      this wreck and loss! Was not
       this indeed 'il gran rifiuto'—the greatest of which human daring is
      capable? The lane darkened round him. Not a soul was in sight. The only sounds were the sounds
      of a gently-breathing nature, sounds of birds and swaying branches and intermittent gusts of
      air rustling through the gorse and the drifts of last year's leaves in the wood beside him. He
      moved mechanically onward, and presently, after the first flutter of desolate terror had
      passed away, with a new inrushing sense which seemed to him a sense of liberty—of infinite
      expansion.
Suddenly the trees before him thinned, the ground sloped away, and there to the left on the
      westernmost edge of the hill lay the square stone rectory, its windows open to the evening
      coolness, a white flutter of pigeons round the dovecote on the side lawn, the gold of the
      August wheat in the great cornfield showing against the heavy girdle of oak-wood.
Robert stood gazing at it—the home consecrated by love, by effort, by faith. The high
      alternations of intellectual and spiritual debate, the strange emerging sense of deliverance,
      gave way to a most bitter human pang of misery.
'O God! My wife—my work!'
... There was a sound of a voice calling—Catherine's voice calling for him. He leant against
      the gate of the wood-path, struggling sternly with himself. This was no simple matter of his
      own intellectual consistency or happiness. Another's whole life was concerned. Any precipitate
      speech, or hasty action, would be a crime. A man is bound above all things to protect those
      who depend on him from his own immature or revocable impulses. Not a word yet, till this sense
      of convulsion and upheaval had passed away, and the mind was once more its own master.
He opened the gate and went towards her. She was strolling along the path looking out for
      him, one delicate hand gathering up her long evening dress—that very same black brocade she
      had worn in the old days at Burwood—the other playing with their Dandie Dinmont puppy who was
      leaping beside her. As she caught sight of him, there was the flashing smile, the hurrying
      step. And he felt he could but just drag himself to meet her.
'Robert, how long you have been! I thought you must have stayed to dinner after all! And how
      tired you seem!'
'I had a long walk,' he said, catching her hand, as it slipped itself under his arm, and
      clinging to it as though to a support. 'And I am tired. There is no use whatever in denying
      it.'
His voice was light, but if it had not been so dark she must have been startled by his face.
      As they went on towards the house, however, she scolding him for over-walking, he won his
      battle with himself. He went through the evening so that even Catherine's jealous eyes saw
      nothing but extra fatigue. In the most desperate straits of life love is still the fountain of
      all endurance, and if ever a man loved it was Robert Elsmere.


But that night, as he lay sleepless in their quiet room, with the window open to the stars
      and to the rising gusts of wind, which blew the petals of the cluster-rose outside in drifts
      of 'fair weather snow' on to the window-sill, he went through an agony which no words can
      adequately describe.
He must, of course, give up his living and his orders. His standards and judgments had
      always been simple and plain in these respects. In other men it might be right and possible
      that they should live on in the ministry of the Church, doing the humane and charitable work
      of the Church, while refusing assent to the intellectual and dogmatic framework on which the
      Church system rests; but for himself it would be neither right nor wrong, but simply
      impossible. He did not argue or reason about it. There was a favourite axiom of Mr. Grey's
      which had become part of his pupil's spiritual endowment, and which was perpetually present to
      him at this crisis of his life, in the spirit, if not in the letter—'Conviction is the
       Conscience of the Mind.' And with this intellectual conscience he was no more capable of
      trifling than with the moral conscience.
The night passed away. How the rare intermittent sounds impressed themselves upon him!—the
      stir of the child's waking soon after midnight in the room overhead; the cry of the owls on
      the oak-wood; the purring of the night-jars on the common; the morning chatter of the swallows
      round the eaves.
With the first invasion of the dawn Robert raised himself and looked at Catherine. She was
      sleeping with that light sound sleep which belongs to health of body and mind, one hand under
      her face, the other stretched out in soft relaxation beside her. Her husband hung over her in
      a bewilderment of feeling. Before him passed all sorts of incoherent pictures of the future;
      the mind was caught by all manner of incongruous details in that saddest uprooting which lay
      before him. How her sleep, her ignorance, reproached him! He thought of the wreck of all her
      pure ambitions—for him, for their common work, for the people she had come to love; the ruin
      of her life of charity and tender usefulness, the darkening of all her hopes, the shaking of
      all her trust. Two years of devotion, of exquisite self-surrender, had brought her to this! It
      was for this he had lured her from the shelter of her hills, for this she had opened to him
      all her sweet stores of faith, all the deepest springs of her womanhood. Oh, how she must
      suffer! The thought of it and his own helplessness wrung his heart.
Oh, could he keep her love through it all? There was an unspeakable dread mingled with his
      grief—his remorse. It had been there for months. In her eyes would not only pain but sin
      divide them? Could he possibly prevent her whole relation to him from altering and
      dwindling?
It was to be the problem of his remaining life. With a great cry of the soul to that God it
      yearned and felt for through all
       the darkness and ruin which encompassed it, he laid his hand on hers with the
      timidest passing touch.
'Catherine, I will make amends! My wife, I will make amends!'
