
CHAPTER XLIX
Two days later they were in London again. Robert was a great deal better, and beginning to
      kick against invalid restraints. All men have their pet irrationalities. Elsmere's
      irrationality was an aversion to doctors, from the point of view of his own ailments. He had
      an unbounded admiration for them as a class, and would have nothing to say to them as
      individuals that he could possibly help. Flaxman was sarcastic; Catherine looked imploring in
      vain. He vowed that he was treating himself with a skill any professional might envy, and went
      his
       way. And for a time the stimulus of London and of his work seemed to act favourably
      upon him. After his first welcome at the Club he came home with bright eye and vigorous step,
      declaring that he was another man.
Flaxman established himself in St. James's Place. Town was deserted; the partridges at
      Greenlaws clamoured to be shot; the head-keeper wrote letters which would have melted the
      heart of a stone. Flaxman replied recklessly that any decent fellow in the neighbourhood was
      welcome to shoot his birds—a reply which almost brought upon him the resignation of the
      outraged keeper by return of post. Lady Charlotte wrote and remonstrated with him for
      neglecting a landowner's duties, inquiring at the same time what he meant to do with regard to
      'that young lady.' To which Flaxman replied calmly that he had just come back from the Lakes,
      where he had done, not indeed all that he meant to do, but still something. Miss Leyburn and
      he were not engaged, but he was on probation for six months, and found London the best place
      for getting through it.

'So far,' he said, 'I am getting on well, and developing an amount of energy especially in
       the matter of correspondence, which alone ought to commend the arrangement to the relations
       of an idle man. But we must be left "to dream our dream unto ourselves alone." One word from
       anybody belonging to me to anybody belonging to her on the subject, and—— But threats are
       puerile. For the present, dear aunt, I am your devoted nephew,
Hugh Flaxman.

'On probation!'
Flaxman chuckled as he sent off the letter.
He stayed because he was too restless to be anywhere else, and because he loved the Elsmeres
      for Rose's sake and his own. He thought moreover that a cool-headed friend with an eye for
      something else in the world than religious reform might be useful just then to Elsmere, and he
      was determined at the same time to see what the reformer meant to be at.
In the first place, Robert's attention was directed to getting possession of the whole block
      of buildings, in which the existing school and lecture-rooms took up only the lowest floor.
      This was a matter of some difficulty, for the floors above were employed in warehousing goods
      belonging to various minor import trades, and were held on tenures of different lengths.
      However, by dint of some money and much skill, the requisite clearances were effected during
      September and part of October. By the end of that month all but the top floor, the tenant of
      which refused to be dislodged, fell into Elsmere's hands.
Meanwhile, at a meeting held every Sunday after lecture—a meeting composed mainly of
      artisans of the district, but including also Robert's helpers from the West, and a small
      sprinkling of persons interested in the man and his work from all parts—
      the details of 'The New Brotherhood of Christ' were being hammered out. Catherine
      was generally present, sitting a little apart, with a look which Flaxman, who now knew her
      well, was always trying to decipher afresh—a sort of sweet aloofness, as though the spirit
      behind it saw, down the vistas of the future, ends and solutions which gave it courage to
      endure the present. Murray Edwardes too was always there. It often struck Flaxman afterwards
      that in Robert's attitude towards Edwardes at this time, in his constant desire to bring him
      forward, to associate him with himself as much as possible in the government and formation of
      the infant society, there was a half-conscious prescience of a truth that as yet none knew,
      not even the tender wife, the watchful friend.
The meetings were of extraordinary interest. The men, the great majority of whom had been
      disciplined and moulded for months by contact with Elsmere's teaching and Elsmere's thought,
      showed a responsiveness, a receptivity, even a power of initiation which often struck Flaxman
      with wonder. Were these the men he had seen in the Club-hall on the night of Robert's
      address—sour, stolid, brutalised, hostile to all things in heaven and earth?
'And we go on prating that the age of saints is over, the rôle of the individual lessening
      day by day! Fool! go and be a saint, go and give yourself to ideas; go and
       live the life hid with Christ in God, and see,'—so would run the quick comment of
      the observer.
But incessant as was the reciprocity, the interchange and play of feeling between Robert and
      the wide following growing up around him, it was plain to Flaxman that although he never moved
      a step without carrying his world with him, he was never at the mercy of his world. Nothing
      was ever really left to chance. Through all these strange debates, which began rawly and
      clumsily enough, and grew every week more and more absorbing to all concerned, Flaxman was
      convinced that hardly any rule or formula of the new society was ultimately adopted which had
      not been for long in Robert's mind—thought out and brought into final shape, perhaps, on the
      Petites Dalles sands. It was an unobtrusive art, his art of government, but a most effective
      one.
At any moment, as Flaxman often felt, at any rate in the early meetings, the discussions as
      to the religious practices which were to bind together the new association might have passed
      the line, and become puerile or grotesque. At any moment the jarring characters and ambitions
      of the men Elsmere had to deal with might have dispersed that delicate atmosphere of moral
      sympathy and passion in which the whole new birth seemed to have been conceived, and upon the
      maintenance of which its fruition and development depended. But as soon as Elsmere appeared,
      difficulties vanished, enthusiasm sprang up again. The rules of the new society came simply
       and naturally into being, steeped and haloed, as it were, from the beginning, in
      the passion and genius of one great heart. The fastidious critical instinct in Flaxman was
      silenced no less than the sour, half-educated analysis of such a man as Lestrange.
In the same way all personal jars seemed to melt away beside him. There were some painful
      things connected with the new departure. Wardlaw, for instance, a conscientious Comtist,
      refusing stoutly to admit anything more than 'an unknowable reality behind phenomena,' was
      distressed and affronted by the strongly religious bent Elsmere was giving to the work he had
      begun. Lestrange, who was a man of great though raw ability, who almost always spoke at the
      meetings, and whom Robert was bent on attaching to the society, had times when the things he
      was half inclined to worship one day he was much more inclined to burn the next in the sight
      of all men, and when the smallest failure of temper on Robert's part might have entailed a
      disagreeable scene, and the possible formation of a harassing left wing.
But Robert's manner to Wardlaw was that of a grateful younger brother. It was clear that the
      Comtist could not formally join the Brotherhood. But all the share and influence that could be
      secured him in the practical working of it was secured him. And what was more, Robert
      succeeded in infusing his own delicacy, his own compunctions on the subject, into the men and
      youths who had profited in the past by Wardlaw's rough self-devotion. So that if, through much
      that went on now, he could only be a spectator, at least he was not allowed to feel himself an
      alien or forgotten.
As to Lestrange, against a man who was as ready to laugh as to preach, and into whose ardent
      soul nature had infused a saving sense of the whimsical in life and character, cynicism and
      vanity seemed to have no case. Robert's quick temper had been wonderfully disciplined by life
      since his Oxford days. He had now very little of that stiff-neckedness, so fatal to the
      average reformer, which makes a man insist on all or nothing from his followers. He took what
      each man had to give. Nay, he made it almost seem as though the grudging support of Lestrange,
      or the critical half-patronising approval of the young barrister from the West who came down
      to listen to him, and made a favour of teaching in his night-school, were as precious to him
      as was the whole-hearted, the self-abandoning veneration, which the majority of those about
      him had begun to show towards the man in whom, as Charles Richards said, they had 'seen
      God.'
At last by the middle of November the whole great building, with the exception of the top
      floor, was cleared and ready for use. Robert felt the same joy in it, in its clean paint, the
      half-filled shelves in the library, the pictures standing against the walls ready to be hung,
      the rolls of bright-coloured matting
       ready to be laid down, as he had felt in the Murewell Institute. He and Flaxman,
      helped by a voluntary army of men, worked at it from morning till night. Only Catherine could
      ever persuade him to remember that he was not yet physically himself.
Then came the day when the building was formally opened, when the gilt letters over the
      door, 'The New Brotherhood of Christ,' shone out into the dingy street, and when the first
      enrolment of names in the book of the Brotherhood took place.
For two hours a continuous stream of human beings surrounded the little table beside which
      Elsmere stood, inscribing their names, and receiving from him the silver badge, bearing the
      head of Christ, which was to be the outward and conspicuous sign of membership. Men came of
      all sorts: the intelligent well-paid artisan, the pallid clerk or small accountant, stalwart
      warehousemen, huge carters and draymen, the boy attached to each by the laws of the profession
      often straggling lumpishly behind his master. Women were there: wives who came because their
      lords came, or because Mr. Elsmere had been 'that good' to them that anything they could do to
      oblige him 'they would, and welcome'; prim pupil-teachers, holding themselves with straight
      superior shoulders; children, who came trooping in, grinned up into Robert's face and
      retreated again with red cheeks, the silver badge tight clasped in hands which not even much
      scrubbing could make passable.
Flaxman stood and watched it from the side. It was an extraordinary scene: the crowd, the
      slight figure on the platform, the two great inscriptions, which represented the only
      'articles' of the new faith, gleaming from the freshly coloured walls—
'In Thee, O Eternal, have I put my trust;'
'This do in remembrance of Me;'
—the recesses on either side of the hall lined with white marble, and destined, the one to
      hold the names of the living members of the Brotherhood, the other to commemorate those who
      had passed away (empty this last save for the one poor name of 'Charles Richards'); the copies
      of Giotto's Paduan Virtues—faith, fortitude, charity, and the like—which broke the long wall
      at intervals. The cynic in the onlooker tried to assert itself against the feeling with which
      the air seemed overcharged. In vain.
'Whatever comes of it,' Flaxman said to himself with strong involuntary conviction, 'whether
      he fails or no, the spirit that is moving here is the same spirit that spread the Church, the
      spirit that sent out Benedictine and Franciscan into the world, that fired the children of
      Luther, or Calvin, or George Fox; the spirit of devotion, through a man, to an idea; through
      one much-loved, much-trusted soul to some eternal verity, newly caught, newly conceived,
      behind it. There is no approaching the idea for the masses except through the human life;
      there
       is no lasting power for the man except as the slave of the idea!'
A week later he wrote to his aunt as follows. He could not write to her of Rose, he did not
      care to write of himself, and he knew that Elsmere's club address had left a mark even on her
      restless and overcrowded mind. Moreover, he himself was absorbed.
'We are in the full stream of religion-making. I watch it with a fascination you at a
      distance cannot possibly understand, even when my judgment demurs, and my intelligence
      protests that the thing cannot live without Elsmere, and that Elsmere's life is a frail one.
      After the ceremony of enrolment which I described to you yesterday the Council of the New
      Brotherhood was chosen by popular election, and Elsmere gave an address. Two-thirds of the
      council, I should think, are working-men, the rest of the upper class; Elsmere, of course,
      president.
'Since then the first religious service under the new constitution has been held. The
      service is extremely simple, and the basis of the whole is "new bottles for the new wine." The
      opening prayer is recited by everybody present standing. It is rather an act of adoration and
      faith than a prayer, properly so called. It represents, in fact, the placing of the soul in
      the presence of God. The mortal turns to the eternal; the ignorant and imperfect look away
      from themselves to the knowledge and perfection of the All-Holy. It is Elsmere's drawing up, I
      imagine—at any rate it is essentially modern, expressing the modern spirit, answering to
      modern need, as I imagine the first Christian prayers expressed the spirit and answered to the
      need of an earlier day.
'Then follows some passage from the life of Christ. Elsmere reads it and expounds it, in the
      first place, as a lecturer might expound a passage of Tacitus, historically and critically.
      His explanation of miracle, his efforts to make his audience realise the germs of miraculous
      belief which each man carries with him in the constitution and inherited furniture of his
      mind, are some of the most ingenious—perhaps the most convincing—I have ever heard. My heart
      and my head have never been very much at one, as you know, on this matter of the marvellous
      element in religion.
'But then when the critic has done, the poet and the believer begins. Whether he has got
      hold of the true Christ is another matter; but that the Christ he preaches moves the human
      heart as much as—and in the case of the London artisan, more than—the current orthodox
      presentation of him, I begin to have ocular demonstration.
'I was present, for instance, at his children's Sunday class the other day. He had brought
      them up to the story of the Crucifixion, reading from the Revised Version, and amplifying
      wherever the sense required it. Suddenly a little girl laid her head on the desk before her,
      and with choking sobs implored
       him not to go on. The whole class seemed ready to do the same. The pure human pity
      of the story—the contrast between the innocence and the pain of the sufferer—seemed to be more
      than they could bear. And there was no comforting sense of a jugglery by which the suffering
      was not real after all, and the sufferer not man but God.
'He took one of them upon his knee and tried to console them. But there is something
      piercingly penetrating and austere even in the consolations of this new faith. He did but
      remind the children of the burden of gratitude laid upon them. "Would you let him suffer so
      much in vain? His suffering has made you and me happier and better to-day, at this moment,
      than we could have been without Jesus. You will understand how, and why, more clearly when you
      grow up. Let us in return keep him in our hearts always, and obey his words! It is all you can
      do for his sake, just as all you could do for a mother who died would be to follow her wishes
      and sacredly keep her memory."
'That was about the gist of it. It was a strange little scene, wonderfully suggestive and
      pathetic.
'But a few more words about the Sunday service. After the address came a hymn. There are
      only seven hymns in the little service book, gathered out of the finest we have. It is
      supposed that in a short time they will become so familiar to the members of the Brotherhood
      that they will be sung readily by heart. The singing of them in the public service alternates
      with an equal number of psalms. And both psalms and hymns are meant to be recited or sung
      constantly in the homes of the members, and to become part of the everyday life of the
      Brotherhood. They have been most carefully chosen, and a sort of ritual importance has been
      attached to them from the beginning. Each day in the week has its particular hymn or
      psalm.
'Then the whole wound up with another short prayer, also repeated standing, a commendation
      of the individual, the Brotherhood, the nation, the world, to God. The phrases of it are terse
      and grand. One can see at once that it has laid hold of the popular sense, the popular memory.
      The Lord's Prayer followed. Then, after a silent pause of "recollection," Elsmere dismissed
      them.
'"Go in peace, in the love of God, and in the memory of His servant, Jesus."
'I looked carefully at the men as they were tramping out. Some of them were among the
      Secularist speakers you and I heard at the club in April. In my wonder, I thought of a saying
      of Vinet's: "C'est pour la religion que le peuple a le plus de talent; c'est en religion
       qu'il montre le plus d'esprit."'
In a later letter he wrote—
'I have not yet described to you what is perhaps the most characteristic, the most binding
      practice of the New Brotherhood. It is that which has raised most angry comment, cries of
       "profanity," "wanton insult," and what not. I came upon it yesterday in an
      interesting way. I was working with Elsmere at the arrangement of the library, which is now
      becoming a most fascinating place, under the management of a librarian chosen from the
      neighbourhood, when he asked me to go and take a message to a carpenter who has been giving us
      voluntary help in the evenings after his day's work. He thought that as it was the dinner
      hour, and the man worked in the dock close by, I might find him at home. I went off to the
      model lodging-house where I was told to look for him, mounted the common stairs, and knocked
      at his door. Nobody seemed to hear me, and as the door was ajar I pushed it open.
'Inside was a curious sight.
'The table was spread with the midday meal. Round the table stood four children, the eldest
      about fourteen, and the youngest six or seven. At one end of it stood the carpenter himself in
      his working apron, a brawny Saxon, bowed a little by his trade. Before him was a plate of
      bread, and his horny hands were resting on it. The street was noisy; they had not heard my
      knock; and as I pushed open the door there was an old coat hanging over the corner of it which
      concealed me.
'Something in the attitudes of all concerned reminded me, kept me where I was, silent.
'The father lifted his right hand.
'"The Master said, 'This do in remembrance of Me!'"
'The children stooped for a moment in silence, then the youngest said slowly, in a little
      softened cockney voice that touched me extraordinarily,—
'"Jesus, we remember Thee always!"
'It was the appointed response. As she spoke I recollected the child perfectly at Elsmere's
      class. I also remembered that she had no mother; that her mother had died of cancer in June,
      visited and comforted to the end by Elsmere and his wife.
'Well, the great question of course remains—is there a sufficient strength of
       feeling and conviction behind these things? If so, after all, everything
      was new once, and Christianity was but modified Judaism.'
'December 22.
'I believe I shall soon be as deep in this matter as Elsmere. In Elgood Street great
      preparations are going on for Christmas. But it will be a new sort of Christmas. We shall hear
      very little, it seems, of angels and shepherds, and a great deal of the humble childhood of a
      little Jewish boy whose genius grown to maturity transformed the Western world. To see
      Elsmere, with his boys and girls about him, trying to make them feel themselves the heirs and
      fellows of the Nazarene child, to make them understand something of the lessons that child
      must have learnt, the sights he must have seen, and the thoughts that must have come to him,
      is a spectacle of which I will not miss more than I can help. Don't imagine, however, that I
      am converted exactly!—
      but only that I am more interested and stimulated than I have been for years. And
      don't expect me for Christmas. I shall stay here.'
'New Year's Day.
'I am writing from the library of the New Brotherhood. The amount of activity, social,
      educational, religious, of which this great building promises to be the centre is already
      astonishing. Everything, of course including the constitution of the infant society, is as yet
      purely tentative and experimental. But for a scheme so young, things are falling into working
      order with wonderful rapidity. Each department is worked by committees under the central
      council. Elsmere, of course, is ex-officio chairman of a large proportion; Wardlaw,
      Mackay, I, and a few other fellows "run" the rest for the present. But each committee contains
      working-men; and it is the object of everybody concerned to make the workman element more and
      more real and efficient. What with the "tax" on the members which was fixed by a general
      meeting, and the contributions from outside, the society already commands a fair income. But
      Elsmere is anxious not to attempt too much at once, and will go slowly and train his
      workers.
'Music, it seems, is to be a great feature in the future. I have my own projects as to this
      part of the business, which, however, I forbid you to guess at.
'By the rules of the Brotherhood, every member is bound to some work in connection with it
      during the year, but little or much, as he or she is able. And every meeting, every
      undertaking of whatever kind, opens with the special "word" or formula of the society, "This
      do in remembrance of Me."'
'January 6.
'Besides the Sunday lectures, Elsmere is pegging away on Saturday evenings at "The History
      of the Moral Life in Man." It is a remarkable course, and very largely attended by people of
      all sorts. He tries to make it an exposition of the leading principles of the new movement, of
      "that continuous and only revelation of God in life and nature," which is in reality the basis
      of his whole thought. By the way, the letters that are pouring in upon him from all parts are
      extraordinary. They show an amount and degree of interest in ideas of the kind which are
      surprising to a Laodicean like me. But he is not surprised—says he always expected it—and that
      there are thousands who only want a rallying-point.
'His personal effect, the love that is felt for him, the passion and energy of the
      nature—never has our generation seen anything to equal it. As you perceive, I am reduced to
      taking it all seriously, and don't know what to make of him or myself.
'She, poor soul! is now always with him, comes down with him day after day, and
      works away. She no more believes in
       his ideas, I think, than she ever did; but all her antagonism is gone. In
      the midst of the stir about him her face often haunts me. It has changed lately; she is no
      longer a young woman, but so refined, so spiritual!
'But he is ailing and fragile. There is the one cloud on a scene that fills me with
      increasing wonder and reverence.'
