
CHAPTER XXII
As may be imagined, the Churton Advertiser did not find its way to Murewell. It was
      certainly no pressure of social disapproval that made the squire go down to Mile End in that
      winter's dawn. The county might talk, or the local press might harangue, till Doomsday, and
      Mr. Wendover would either know nothing or care less.
Still his interview with Meyrick in the park after his return from a week in town, whither
      he had gone to see some old Berlin friends, had been a shock to him. A man may play the
      intelligent recluse, may refuse to fit his life to his neighbours' notions as much as you
      please, and still find death, especially death for which he has some responsibility, as
      disturbing a fact as the rest of us.
He went home in much irritable discomfort. It seemed to him probably that fortune need not
      have been so eager to put him in the wrong. To relieve his mind he sent for Henslowe, and in
      an interview, the memory of which sent a shiver through the agent to the end of his days, he
      let it be seen that though it did not for the moment suit him to dismiss the man who had
      brought this upon him, that man's reign in any true sense was over.
But afterwards the squire was still restless. What was astir in him was not so much pity or
      remorse as certain instincts of race which still survived under the strange superstructure of
      manners he had built upon them. It may be the part of a gentleman and a scholar to let the
      agent whom you have interposed between yourself and a boorish peasantry have a free hand; but,
      after all, the estate is yours, and to expose the rector of the parish to all sorts of
      avoidable risks in the pursuit of his official duty by reason of the gratuitous filth of your
      property, is an act of doubtful breeding. The squire in his most rough-and-tumble days at
      Berlin had always felt himself the grandee as well as the student. He abhorred sentimentalism,
      but neither did he choose to cut an unseemly figure in his own eyes.


After a night; therefore, less tranquil or less meditative than usual, he rose early and
      sallied forth at one of those unusual hours he generally chose for walking. The thing must be
      put right somehow, and at once, with as little waste of time and energy as possible, and
      Henslowe had shown himself not to be trusted; so telling a servant to follow him, the squire
      had made his way with difficulty to a place he had not seen for years.
Then had followed the unexpected and unwelcome apparition of the rector. The squire did not
      want to be impressed by the young man, did not want to make friends with him. No doubt his
      devotion had served his own purposes. Still Mr. Wendover was one of the subtlest living judges
      of character when he pleased, and his enforced progress through these hovels with Elsmere had
      not exactly softened him, but had filled him with a curious contempt for his own hastiness of
      judgment.
'History would be inexplicable after all without the honest fanatic,' he said to himself on
      the way home. 'I suppose I had forgotten it. There is nothing like a dread of being bored for
      blunting your psychological instinct.'
In the course of the day he sent off a letter to the rector intimating in the very briefest,
      driest way that the cottages should be rebuilt on a different site as soon as possible, and
      enclosing a liberal contribution towards the expenses incurred in fighting the epidemic. When
      the letter was gone he drew his books towards him with a sound which was partly disgust,
      partly relief. This annoying business had wretchedly interrupted him, and his concessions left
      him mainly conscious of a strong nervous distaste for the idea of any fresh interview with
      young Elsmere. He had got his money and his apology; let him be content.
However, next morning after breakfast Mr. Wendover once more saw his study door open to
      admit the tall figure of the rector. The note and cheque had reached Robert late the night
      before, and, true to his new-born determination to make the best of the squire, he had caught
      up his wideawake at the first opportunity and walked off to the Hall to acknowledge the gift
      in person. The interview opened as awkwardly as it was possible, and with their former
      conversation on the same spot fresh in their minds both men spent a sufficiently difficult ten
      minutes. The squire was asking himself, indeed, impatiently, all the time, whether he could
      possibly be forced in the future to put up with such an experience again, and Robert found his
      host, if less sarcastic than before, certainly as impenetrable as ever.
At last, however, the Mile End matter was exhausted, and then Robert, as good luck would
      have it, turned his longing eyes on the squire's books, especially on the latest volumes of a
      magnificent German Weltgeschichte lying near his elbow, which he had coveted for
      months without being able to conquer his conscience sufficiently to become the possessor of
      it. He took it
       up with an exclamation of delight, and a quiet critical remark that exactly hit the
      value and scope of the book. The squire's eyebrows went up, and the corners of his mouth
      slackened visibly. Half an hour later the two men, to the amazement of Mrs. Darcy, who was
      watching them from the drawing-room window, walked back to the park gates together, and what
      Robert's nobility and beauty of character would never have won him, though he had worn himself
      to death in the service of the poor and the tormented under the squire's eyes, a chance
      coincidence of intellectual interest had won him almost in a moment.
The squire walked back to the house under a threatening sky, his mackintosh cloak wrapped
      about him, his arms folded, his mind full of an unwonted excitement.
The sentiment of long-past days—days in Berlin, in Paris, where conversations such as that
      he had just passed through were the daily relief and reward of labour, was stirring in him.
      Occasionally he had endeavoured to import the materials for them from the Continent, from
      London. But as a matter of fact it was years since he had had any such talk as this with an
      Englishman on English ground, and he suddenly realised that he had been unwholesomely
      solitary, and that for the scholar there is no nerve stimulus like that of an occasional
      interchange of ideas with some one acquainted with his Fach.
'Who would ever have thought of discovering instincts and aptitudes of such a kind in this
      long-legged optimist?' The squire shrugged his shoulders as he thought of the attempt involved
      in such a personality to combine both worlds, the world of action and the world of thought.
      Absurd! Of course, ultimately one or other must go to the wall.
Meanwhile, what a ludicrous waste of time and opportunity that he and this man should have
      been at cross-purposes like this! 'Why the deuce couldn't he have given some rational account
      of himself to begin with!' thought the squire irritably, forgetting, of course, who it was
      that had wholly denied him the opportunity. 'And then the sending back of those books: what a
      piece of idiocy!'
Granted an historical taste in this young parson, it was a curious chance, Mr. Wendover
      reflected, that in his choice of a subject he should just have fallen on the period of the
      later empire—of the passage from the old world to the new, where the squire was a master. The
      squire fell to thinking of the kind of knowledge implied in his remarks, of the stage he
      seemed to have reached, and then to cogitating as to the books he must be now in want of. He
      went back to his library, ran over the shelves, picking out volumes here and there with an
      unwonted glow and interest all the while. He sent for a case, and made a youth who sometimes
      acted as his secretary pack them. And still as he went back to his own work new names would
      occur to him, and full of the scholar's avaricious sense of the shortness of
       time, he would shake his head and frown over the three months which young Elsmere
      had already passed, grappling with problems like Teutonic Arianism, the spread of Monasticism
      in Gaul, and Heaven knows what besides, half a mile from the man and the library which could
      have supplied him with the best help to be got in England, unbenefited by either! Mile End was
      obliterated, and the annoyance of the morning forgotten.
The next day was Sunday, a wet January Sunday, raw and sleety, the frost breaking up on all
      sides and flooding the roads with mire.
Robert, rising in his place to begin morning service, and wondering to see the congregation
      so good on such a day, was suddenly startled, as his eye travelled mechanically over to the
      Hall pew, usually tenanted by Mrs. Darcy in solitary state, to see the characteristic figure
      of the squire. His amazement was so great that he almost stumbled in the exhortation, and his
      feeling was evidently shared by the congregation, which throughout the service showed a
      restlessness, an excited tendency to peer round corners and pillars, that was not favourable
      to devotion.
'Has he come to spy out the land?' the rector thought to himself, and could not help a
      momentary tremor at the idea of preaching before so formidable an auditor. Then he pulled
      himself together by a great effort, and fixing his eyes on a shock-headed urchin half way down
      the church, read the service to him. Catherine meanwhile in her seat on the northern side of
      the nave, her soul lulled in Sunday peace, knew nothing of Mr. Wendover's appearance.
Robert preached on the first sermon of Jesus, on the first appearance of the young Master in
      the synagogue at Nazareth:—
'This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears!'
The sermon dwelt on the Messianic aspect of Christ's mission, on the mystery and poetry of
      that long national expectation, on the pathos of Jewish disillusion, on the sureness and
      beauty of Christian insight as faith gradually transferred trait after trait of the Messiah of
      prophecy to the Christ of Nazareth. At first there was a certain amount of hesitation, a
      slight wavering hither and thither—a difficult choice of words—and then the soul freed itself
      from man, and the preacher forgot all but his Master and his people.
At the door as he came out stood Mr. Wendover, and Catherine, slightly flushed and much
      puzzled for conversation, beside him. The Hall carriage was drawn close up to the door, and
      Mrs. Darcy, evidently much excited, had her small head out of the window, and was showering a
      number of flighty inquiries and suggestions on her brother, to which he paid no more heed than
      to the patter of the rain.
When Robert appeared the squire addressed him ceremoniously—
'With your leave. Mr. Elsmere, I will walk with you to the
       rectory.' Then, in another voice, 'Go home, Lætitia, and don't send anything or
      anybody.'
He made a signal to the coachman, and the carriage started, Mrs. Darcy's protesting head
      remaining out of window as long as anything could be seen of the group at the church door. The
      odd little creature had paid one or two hurried and recent visits to Catherine during the
      quarrel, visits so filled, however, with vague railing against her brother and by a queer
      incoherent melancholy, that Catherine felt them extremely uncomfortable, and took care not to
      invite them. Clearly she was mortally afraid of 'Roger,' and yet ashamed of being afraid.
      Catherine could see that all the poor thing's foolish whims and affectations were trampled on;
      that she suffered, rebelled, found herself no more able to affect Mr. Wendover than if she had
      been a fly buzzing round him, and became all the more foolish and whimsical in
      consequence.
The squire and the Elsmeres crossed the common to the rectory, followed at a discreet
      interval by groups of villagers curious to get a look at the squire. Robert was conscious of a
      good deal of embarrassment, but did his best to hide it. Catherine felt all through as if the
      skies had fallen. The squire alone was at his ease, or as much at his ease as he ever was. He
      commented on the congregation, even condescended to say something of the singing, and passed
      over the staring of the choristers with a magnanimity of silence which did him credit.
They reached the rectory door, and it was evidently the squire's purpose to come in, so
      Robert invited him in. Catherine threw open her little drawing-room door, and then was seized
      with shyness as the squire passed in, and she saw over his shoulder her baby, lying kicking
      and crowing on the hearth-rug, in anticipation of her arrival, the nurse watching it. The
      squire in his great cloak stopped, and looked down at the baby as if it had been some curious
      kind of reptile. The nurse blushed, curtsied, and caught up the gurgling creature in a
      twinkling.
Robert made a laughing remark on the tyranny and ubiquity of babies. The squire smiled
      grimly. He supposed it was necessary that the human race should be carried on. Catherine
      meanwhile slipped out and ordered another place to be laid at the dinner-table, devoutly
      hoping that it might not be used.
It was used. The squire stayed till it was necessary to invite him, then accepted the
      invitation, and Catherine found herself dispensing boiled mutton to him, while Robert supplied
      him with some very modest claret, the sort of wine which a man who drinks none thinks it
      necessary to have in the house, and watched the nervousness of their little parlour-maid with
      a fellow-feeling which made it difficult for him during the early part of the meal to keep a
      perfectly straight countenance. After a while, however, both he and Catherine were ready to
      admit that the squire was making himself agreeable. He talked
       of Paris, of a conversation he had had with M. Renan, whose name luckily was quite
      unknown to Catherine, as to the state of things in the French Chamber.
'A set of chemists and quill-drivers,' he said contemptuously; 'but as Renan remarked to me,
      there is one thing to be said for a government of that sort, "Ils ne font pas la guerre." And
      so long as they don't run France into adventures, and a man can keep a roof over his head and
      a sou in his pocket, the men of letters at any rate can rub along. The really interesting
      thing in France just now is not French politics—Heaven save the mark!—but French scholarship.
      There never was so little original genius going in Paris, and there never was so much good
      work being done.'
Robert thought the point of view eminently characteristic.
'Catholicism, I suppose,' he said, 'as a force to be reckoned with, is dwindling more and
      more?'
'Absolutely dead,' said the squire emphatically, 'as an intellectual force. They
      haven't got a writer, scarcely a preacher. Not one decent book has been produced on that side
      for years.'
'And the Protestants, too,' said Robert, 'have lost all their best men of late,' and he
      mentioned one or two well-known French Protestant names.
'Oh, as to French Protestantism'—and the squire's shrug was superb—'Teutonic Protestantism
      is in the order of things, so to speak, but Latin Protestantism! There is no more
      sterile hybrid in the world!'
Then, becoming suddenly aware that he might have said something inconsistent with his
      company, the squire stopped abruptly. Robert, catching Catherine's quick compression of the
      lips, was grateful to him, and the conversation moved on in another direction.
Yes, certainly, all things considered, Mr. Wendover made himself agreeable. He ate his
      boiled mutton and drank his ordinaire like a man, and when the meal was over, and he
      and Robert had withdrawn into the study, he gave an emphatic word of praise to the coffee
      which Catherine's housewifely care sent after them, and accepting a cigar, he sank into the
      armchair by the fire and spread a bony hand to the blaze, as if he had been at home in that
      particular corner for months. Robert, sitting opposite to him, and watching his guest's eyes
      travel round the room, with its medicine shelves, its rods and nets, and preparations of
      uncanny beasts, its parish litter, and its teeming bookcases, felt that the Mile End matter
      was turning out oddly indeed.
'I have packed you a case of books, Mr. Elsmere,' said the squire, after a puff or two at
      his cigar. 'How have you got on without that collection of Councils?'
He smiled a little awkwardly. It was one of the books Robert had sent back. Robert flushed.
      He did not want the squire to regard him as wholly dependent on Murewell.


'I bought it,' he said, rather shortly. 'I have ruined myself in books lately, and the
      London Library too supplies me really wonderfully well.'
'Are these your books?' The squire got up to look at them. 'Hum, not at all bad for a
      beginning. I have sent you so and so,' and he named one or two costly folios that Robert had
      long pined for in vain.
The rector's eyes glistened.
'That was very good of you,' he said simply. 'They will be most welcome.'
'And now, how much time,' said the other, settling himself again to his cigar, his
      thin legs crossed over each other, and his great head sunk into his shoulders, 'how much time
      do you give to this work?'
'Generally the mornings—not always. A man with twelve hundred souls to look after, you know,
      Mr. Wendover,' said Elsmere, with a bright half-defiant accent, 'can't make grubbing among the
      Franks his main business.'
The squire said nothing, and smoked on. Robert gathered that his companion thought his
      chances of doing anything worth mentioning very small.
'Oh no,' he said, following out his own thought with a shake of his curly hair; 'of course I
      shall never do very much. But if I don't, it won't be for want of knowing what the scholar's
      ideal is.' And he lifted his hand with a smile towards the squire's book on English
       Culture, which stood in the bookcase just above him. The squire, following the gesture,
      smiled too. It was a faint, slight illumining, but it changed the face agreeably.
Robert began to ask questions about the book, about the pictures contained in it of foreign
      life and foreign universities. The squire consented to be drawn out, and presently was talking
      at his very best.
Racy stories of Mommsen or Von Ranke were followed by a description of an evening of mad
      carouse with Heine—a talk at Nohant with George Sand—scenes in the Duchesse de Broglie's
      salon—a contemptuous sketch of Guizot—a caustic sketch of Renan. Robert presently even laid
      aside his pipe, and stood in his favourite attitude, lounging against the mantelpiece, looking
      down, absorbed, on his visitor. All that intellectual passion which his struggle at Mile End
      had for the moment checked in him revived. Nay, after his weeks of exclusive contact with the
      most hideous forms of bodily ill, this interruption, these great names, this talk of great
      movements and great causes, had a special savour and relish. All the horizons of the mind
      expanded, the currents of the blood ran quicker.
Suddenly, however, he sprang up.
'I beg your pardon? Mr. Wendover, it is too bad to interrupt you—I have enjoyed it
      immensely—but the fact is I have only two minutes to get to Sunday School in!'


Mr. Wendover rose also, and resumed his ordinary manner.
'It is I who should apologise,' he said with stiff politeness, 'for having encroached in
      this way on your busy day, Mr. Elsmere.'
Robert helped him on with his coat, and then suddenly the squire turned to him.
'You were preaching this morning on one of the Isaiah quotations in St. Matthew. It would
      interest you, I imagine, to see a recent Jewish book on the subject of the prophecies quoted
      in the Gospels which reached me yesterday. There is nothing particularly new in it, but it
      looked to me well done.'
'Thank you,' said Robert, not, however, with any great heartiness, and the squire moved
      away. They parted at the gate, Robert running down the hill to the village as fast as his long
      legs could carry him.
'Sunday School—pshaw!' cried the squire, as he tramped homeward in the opposite
      direction.
Next morning a huge packing-case arrived from the Hall, and Robert could not forbear a
      little gloating over the treasures in it before he tore himself away to pay his morning visit
      to Mile End. There everything was improving; the poor Sharland child indeed had slipped away
      on the night after the squire's visit, but the other bad cases in the diphtheria ward were
      mending fast. John Allwood was gaining strength daily, and poor Mary Sharland was feebly
      struggling back to a life which seemed hardly worth so much effort to keep. Robert felt, with
      a welcome sense of slackening strain, that the daily and hourly superintendence which he and
      Catherine had been giving to the place might lawfully be relaxed, that the nurses on the spot
      were now more than equal to their task, and after having made his round he raced home again in
      order to secure an hour with his books before luncheon.
The following day a note arrived, while they were at luncheon, in the squire's angular
      precise handwriting. It contained a request that, unless otherwise engaged, the rector would
      walk with Mr. Wendover that afternoon.
Robert flung it across to Catherine.
'Let me see,' he said, deliberating, 'have I any engagement I must keep?'
There was a sort of jealousy for his work within him contending with this new fascination of
      the squire's company. But, honestly, there was nothing in the way, and he went.
That walk was the first of many. The squire had no sooner convinced himself that young
      Elsmere's society did in reality provide him with a stimulus and recreation he had been too
      long without, than in his imperious wilful way he began to possess himself of it as much as
      possible. He never alluded to the trivial matters which had first separated and then united
      them. He worked the better, he thought the more clearly, for these talks and walks with
      Elsmere, and therefore these talks
       and walks became an object with him. They supplied a long-stifled want, the
      scholar's want of disciples, of some form of investment for all that heaped-up capital of
      thought he had been accumulating during a lifetime.
As for Robert, he soon felt himself so much under the spell of the squire's strange and
      powerful personality that he was forced to make a fight for it, lest this new claim should
      encroach upon the old ones. He would walk when the squire liked, but three times out of four
      these walks must be parish rounds, interrupted by descents into cottages and chats in
      farmhouse parlours. The squire submitted. The neighbourhood began to wonder over the strange
      spectacle of Mr. Wendover waiting grimly in the winter dusk outside one of his own farmhouses
      while Elsmere was inside, or patrolling a bit of lane till Elsmere should have inquired after
      an invalid or beaten up a recruit for his confirmation class, dogged the while by stealthy
      children, with fingers in their mouths, who ran away in terror directly he turned.
Rumours of this new friendship spread. One day, on the bit of road between the Hall and the
      rectory, Lady Helen behind her ponies whirled past the two men, and her arch look at Elsmere
      said as plain as words, 'Oh, you young wonder! what hook has served you with this
      leviathan?'
On another occasion, close to Churton, a man in a cassock and cloak came towards them. The
      squire put up his eyeglass.
'Humph!' he remarked; 'do you know this merryandrew, Elsmere?'
It was Newcome. As they passed, Robert with slightly heightened colour gave him an
      affectionate nod and smile. Newcome's quick eye ran over the companions, he responded stiffly,
      and his step grew more rapid. A week or two later Robert noticed with a little prick of
      remorse that he had seen nothing of Newcome for an age. If Newcome would not come to him, he
      must go to Mottringham. He planned an expedition, but something happened to prevent it.
And Catherine? Naturally this new and most unexpected relation of Robert's to the man who
      had begun by insulting him was of considerable importance to the wife. In the first place it
      broke up to some extent the exquisite tête-à-tête of their home life; it encroached
      often upon time that had always been hers; it filled Robert's mind more and more with matters
      in which she had no concern. All these things many wives might have resented. Catherine
      Elsmere resented none of them. It is probable, of course, that she had her natural moments of
      regret and comparison, when love said to itself a little sorely and hungrily, 'It is hard to
      be even a fraction less to him than I once was!' But if so, these moments never betrayed
      themselves in word or act. Her tender common sense, her sweet humility, made her recognise at
      once Robert's need of intellectual comradeship, isolated as he was in this remote rural
      district. She knew
       perfectly that a clergyman's life of perpetual giving forth becomes morbid and
      unhealthy if there is not some corresponding taking in.
If only it had not been Mr. Wendover! She marvelled over the fascination Robert found in his
      dry cynical talk. She wondered that a Christian pastor could ever forget Mr. Wendover's
      antecedents; that the man who had nursed those sick children could forgive Mile End. All in
      all as they were to each other, she felt for the first time that she often understood her
      husband imperfectly. His mobility, his eagerness, were sometimes now a perplexity, even a pain
      to her.
It must not be imagined, however, that Robert let himself drift into this intellectual
      intimacy with one of the most distinguished of anti-Christian thinkers without reflecting on
      its possible consequences. The memory of that night of misery which The Idols of the
       Market-place had inflicted on him was enough. He was no match in controversy for Mr.
      Wendover, and he did not mean to attempt it.
One morning the squire unexpectedly plunged into an account of a German monograph he had
      just received on the subject of the Johannine authorship of the Fourth Gospel. It was almost
      the first occasion on which he had touched what may strictly be called the matériel
      of orthodoxy in their discussions—at any rate directly. But the book was a striking one, and
      in the interest of it he had clearly forgotten his ground a little. Suddenly the man who was
      walking beside him interrupted him.
'I think we ought to understand one another perhaps, Mr. Wendover,' Robert said, speaking
      under a quick sense of oppression, but with his usual dignity and bright courtesy. 'I know
      your opinions, of course, from your books; you know what mine, as an honest man, must be, from
      the position I hold. My conscience does not forbid me to discuss anything, only—I am no match
      for you on points of scholarship, and I should just like to say once for all, that to me,
      whatever else is true, the religion of Christ is true. I am a Christian and a Christian
      minister. Therefore, whenever we come to discuss what may be called Christian evidence, I do
      it with reserves, which you would not have. I believe in an Incarnation, a Resurrection, a
      Revelation. If there are literary difficulties, I must want to smooth them away—you may want
      to make much of them. We come to the matter from different points of view. You will not
      quarrel with me for wanting to make it clear. It isn't as if we differed slightly. We differ
      fundamentally—is it not so?'
The squire was walking beside him with bent shoulders, the lower lip pushed forward, as was
      usual with him when he was considering a matter with close attention, but did not mean to
      communicate his thoughts.
After a pause he said, with a faint inscrutable smile,—
'Your reminder is perfectly just. Naturally we all have our reserves. Neither of us can be
      expected to stultify his own.'


And the talk went forward again, Robert joining in more buoyantly than ever, perhaps because
      he had achieved a necessary but disagreeable thing and got done with it.
In reality he had but been doing as the child does when it sets up its sand-barrier against
      the tide.
