

CHAPTER II
JUST then the door opened at the far end of the car and admitted Leversedge. He
      came down the narrow gangway between the seats, lifting his hat to two athletic Englishwomen
      of the High School variety, whose overflowing hold-alls he slightly displaced in passing.
“Oh, here you all are,” he said. “How d'ye do, Mrs. Mertyns? No, pray, don't anybody move. I
      see you're all settled.”—Mrs. Perry and Septimus, it may be remarked, occupied the single
      seats the other side of the gangway.—“I can just as well find a place farther up the
      carriage.”
All the same he loitered, gazing at Charlotte Perry; hoping, as I thought, that she would
      make some sign. But she made none. Leversedge turned away. I followed him. And so it happened
      that we journeyed towards Geneva, sitting opposite to each other, rather cut off from the rest
      of the company. It was extremely hot, and we had to pull down the canvas blinds and half close
      the windows to keep out sun and dust. The train roared along; the vineyards reeling past on one
       hand, the rocks, white with fluttering mouettes and lapped by clear little green waves, on the other. It
      need hardly be stated that the two athletic Englishwomen had left all windows down and blinds
      up in their compartment, thus supplying us with a liberal measure of glare, cinders, and
      engine smoke. Above the noise of the train, from time to time, I heard Mrs. Mertyns' somewhat
      senseless and soulless laugh. Like many women in society, she had a tendency to laugh, not in
      proportion as she was amused, but in proportion as she was bored. I could well believe Perry
       père's style was finely irritating in all this heat. The
      more excellent of her, then, to have come! I have never entertained a better opinion of Mrs.
      Mertyns.
Leversedge, meanwhile, sat silent, his long legs outstretched beneath the little iron table
      between us, his head bent, his mind busy, judging by his expression, with rather gloomy
      thoughts.
“Sometimes it strikes me we men are awful brutes when it comes to marriage,” he said
      suddenly. “We want so much. We must have everything. Nothing less than the whole will satisfy
      us.”
“Upon my word, I think we give a good deal in return,” I replied. “The counter-demand is
      considerable, a matter by no means to be sneezed at—so considerable, in my estimation, that,
      as you see, I have never yet found myself equal to meeting it, and so remain, to the present
      hour, at once
       hugging and deploring my state of single blessedness. Oh,
      I'm all on the man's side, believe me, in marriage. In my eyes the bridegroom, the husband, is
      the leader of a forlorn hope—at once a noodle and a hero.”
“Thank you,” Leversedge said; “you are encouraging. But the truth is, you don't understand,
      you're out of it.”
I am afraid I made use of an expletive which had better not be repeated. Leversedge regarded
      me with an expression both humorous and dogged.
“Yes, you're out of it,” he repeated. “It's not that you are unequal to meeting the demand.
      You've never felt the thing. You've never been knocked out of time by a woman. Bless me, you
      don't stop to calculate the amount of giving and taking then; you don't weigh things; you
      don't speculate. When a man meets his fate, he meets it. The whole matter is outside argument.
      It is just so,—he may be a noodle, but he doesn't stop to care about that.”
Leversedge paused a moment, shifted his position, laid hold with both hands of the woodwork
      of the back of the seat high above his head.
“No, the man doesn't give much in proportion to the woman, to the girl, to the good woman,”
      he said. “For the man knows the ropes, after all; he has a precious clear idea of what he is
      driving at. He knows what he wants quite well, shamelessly
       lessly well, in too many cases. But hers is an act of faith
      almost divine. God in heaven! it seems to me there is no limit to the gratitude, to the
      reverence, Hammond, with which we should regard an innocent girl who is willing to marry any
      one of us.”
He smiled at me.
“I beg your pardon for prosing like this. But it's borne in upon me to-day that I am a
      wretchedly selfish animal. And I suppose something of the cheap old superstition clings to me
      that in confessing your sins you rid yourself of them, to a certain extent at all events. A
      better man than I, under all the circumstances, would have talked less and done something
      practical. Old Perry's income, such as it is, pretty well dies with him. And she ought to have
      money, she can use it—it is necessary to a woman with her gifts, and it is miserable to think
      of her wanting it, now or any when. A better man than I would have seen to all that, provided
      against any bother that way—and then set her free, given her up, whether she would or
      not.”
Leversedge threw himself forward, and for once the blood rushed into his face.
“But I can't,” he said huskily,—“I can't. Before God, I have tried; but I have not the
      pluck. I want her. I must have her—for a little while—just for a little while—and then—”

At that moment I perceived Mrs. Mertyns standing up and waving to me, across the backs of
      the intervening seats. It was as well. Leversedge had given himself away rather completely.
      The conversation could not continue at that level of emotion; and one always has a sense of
      bathos in struggling towards the surface after such a plunge into the deep sea of feeling.
      Women hold hands, and kiss each other, and cry a little, on the way up to the surface, which
      must be a great help. But to us, to whom these tender modifications of the situation are
      denied, the ascent is extremely embarrassing. So I, not unwillingly, obeyed Mrs. Mertyns'
      summons, leaving that dear fool, Leversedge, to recover his equanimity in private.
Mrs. Mertyns looked slightly distracted.
“Do come, Mr. Hammond,” she exclaimed as I approached. “See, there is a place for you. Mr.
      Perry will kindly put my odds and ends on to the table. Yes—thanks, so.—I am just starting
      that delightful thinking game dear Hattie St. John taught us the other day after luncheon. And
      we want a sixth—we really must have you.”
Mrs. Mertyns leaned her elbow upon the table; she flapped at me with her long narrow hand.
      Her eyes expressed a more direct sentiment than was at all their wont. They intimated that
      something really had to be done, they took me into their confidence.

“Mr. Perry quite surpassed himself, quite excelled in it,” she continued. “He gave us the
      most interesting examples. And Charlotte must learn it. I am devoted to thinking games; they
      fill in so many stray minutes when otherwise”—she laughed. “It will prevent our feeling this
      oppressive heat. Now, Mr. Hammond, you shall give us a subject—an event or a character in
      history or fiction (really it is an excellent exercise of memory)—while I count twelve, do you
      see? Then in twelve words describe it; and then we have twelve guesses between us, in turn,
      you understand. And you answer in numbers as we get more or less near it. Twelve, of course,
      means game. Now, remember, we all have to speak as quick as possible.”
And we played that thinking game. Oh yes, indeed we played it, as the train rushed on, past
      Rolle, past Nyon, past Coppet. We had the burning of Jeanne d'Arc in twelve words; and the
      Relief of Lucknow in twelve words; and the battle of Cannæ, and the interviewing of the Sphinx
      by Œdipus, and the Reform Bill of '32—this last naturally from Septimus Mertyns.
“A bloodstained deck,” said Mr. Perry.
“One, two, three, four,” counted Mrs. Mertyns.
“No—no, three, but three,” he cried. “Blood-stained is one, only one, joined by the
      ever-welcome hyphen.—Torn canvas.”

“Dear me,” put in Mrs. Perry, “I always have disliked shipwrecks. I suppose it's the
      Princess Alice pleasure steamer—poor creatures, an acquaintance of Aunt Trumbull had relatives
      on board—going down in the river. I wish Mr. Perry wouldn't allude to such things, on a
      wedding-day, too.”
“Four, five,” cried Mrs. Mertyns.
“Noble commander laid low,—my love, you are entirely mistaken,—in victory.”
“Coppet—trois minutes d'arrêt,” this from the platform as
      the train slowed up.
I rose, leaving Nelson extended upon the gory deck, with Perry père, so to speak, waving the British flag over his honoured and prostrate form,
      and went to look after Leversedge. He lay back in his place fast asleep. His face was
      singularly peaceful, almost childlike in its simple serenity. But he held his hard brown hat
      stiffly with both hands, and worked it slowly up and down his knees even in sleeping. And that
      was not at all pleasant to see, somehow.
