

CHAPTER VIII
SOME ten minutes later Leversedge got up from beside the little table. He had made
      no outcry. He was quiet, desolatingly quiet, almost apathetic; and he was shaking all over,
      shaking, so that instinctively I put out my hand to support him.
“Thanks,” he said. “There's nothing that I know of to wait for now. Perhaps we may as well
      go in, Hammond; don't you think so?”
But on the threshold of the glass door of the salon he
      paused, shaking too violently to go farther. The ballroom was dark, silent, empty—only lights,
      as one saw through the open doors, beyond in the hall.
“I think I must have got a bit of a chill,” Leversedge remarked. “I expect there's a lot of
      damp at night off the lake, and if you've once had a touch of fever it's likely to lay hold of
      you.”
Then we went on across the salon into the hall, and up the
      great staircase, slowly, waiting now and then, because he shook so badly, to Leversedge's
       sedge's room on the first floor. I remember the impression
      made on me as I opened the door of it. The effect within was striking; for there were candles
      everywhere,—on the chimneypiece, the writing-table, the chest of drawers, by the bedside,—a
      positive blaze of light, turning this bachelor bedchamber into something curiously suggestive
      of a chapelle ardente.
I suppose Leversedge noticed my surprise.
“Candles? Oh yes,” he said; “I always tell them to light a good many like that, now—it's
      pleasanter, you know, at night.”
He gazed round the room in a dazed, vacant kind of way. Upon the writing-table stood a
      folding, leather photograph frame, somewhat worn and travel-stained with much packing. It
      contained a series of pictures of Charlotte Perry, covering quite a number of years, judging
      by the changing fashion of her costume. The last photograph was of very recent date; the
      girl's charming face set in the aureole of the wide-brimmed, rose-garlanded hat which she had
      worn that morning. Leversedge's wandering glance lighted on these pictures; and a terrible
      emotion gripped his very vitals.
“My love!” he cried out loud,—“my love!”
His apathy passed away, and in a moment he had turned and spoke to me courteously, and with
      a certain stateliness.

“You're extremely kind, Hammond,” he said, “and I believe you have always done your very
      best for me. Most likely I shall make use of your kindness again later; but just now, for the
      present, I should be glad to be alone. I feel I am rather a poor companion, I have not much
      talk in me, and I have two or three little matters to attend to. I'm awfully obliged to
      you—thanks—goodnight.”
I leaned for a long while out of the window of my bedroom, downstairs, on the ground floor,
      filled with a vast pity and discontent. The air was very still, an impalpable gloom covered
      the garden, the stars were very large, very many, very bright. The miserable little dog still
      yelped and howled. The Spirit of Fear was still abroad; it agitated, it distressed me. I had
      seen two people wrecked; had contributed, precisely how far I knew not, myself, to their
      wrecking. And in so doing had I, too, seen that Thing-too-Much, of which Leversedge had once
      spoken? Had I, too, been “to the end of the world and looked over the wall,” got to the place
      from which there is no way out? These were not agreeable reflections. The hopeless diversity
      of human character, the hopeless complexity of human relations staggered me. Is there
      absolutely no limit to our misunderstanding of each other, to our torturing of each other, to
      our boring
       of each other? Is there absolutely no safety? Is every
      connection, every friendship, every love, liable to reel away, thus, into disaster?
And then, besides these abstract and general fears, very concrete and close ones oppressed
      me. What would the issue of this business be between Leversedge and the Carissima? What would
      to-morrow bring—what, even, to-night? Suddenly I was overtaken by a certain very definite
      alarm for Leversedge, which forced me to leave my room, and go forth, down long passages,
      across the vacant hall, and up the wide staircase once more. Strange vague noises and vague
      odours saluted me, the clinging quiet of the great house wrapped me about. And a penetrating
      sense possessed me of the common things, the pitiful things, the base things, the delicious
      things—the unholy revelations, the mystic initiations—which must be taking place, to-night, as
      every night, behind these ranges of closely closed doors. The Spirit of Fear was abroad here
      too, with a suggestion of secrets which might not lawfully be looked into. The crowd had
      broken up into units. Darkness and silence shrouded all. Yet the tragedy, the comedy, the
      ecstasy, of human life went forward just the same; all the more strongly and directly, indeed,
      because now it was hidden and concentrated, because each individual had, practically, the
      whole stage to himself.

I waited outside Leversedge's room, but there was no sound within. The candles were still
      burning brightly, for a line of vivid light showed beneath the door. Perhaps, worn-out with
      emotion and fatigue, he slept. I could but hope so. To wake him, if he slept, would be cruel;
      to intrude upon him unasked, if he waked, would be impertinent. I realised that my journey had
      been a piece of folly. I was an idiot to have come. Refreshingly conscious of that fact, I
      turned about and went back.
Where were the proud pleasures now, of preacher, director, evangelist, which had but so
      lately puffed up my silly soul? On my own lines I too had failed—failed as completely as
      broken-hearted Leversedge on his, as the heartless Carissima on hers. We had all played, and
      we had all lost. Destiny had swept our stakes into her lap, as is Destiny's habit; and left
      us, each in our several ways, penniless. We had each, in our several ways, asked the
      impossible of the other, with this inevitable, this very gratifying result! And I—I, at least,
      from my detached standpoint ought to have known better, seen clearer. For, what the devil is
      the use of standing aside from the battle of life, unless by so doing you keep a steady enough
      head and lively enough perceptions, to see how the battle is going, and to be able to foresee
      the result? My conceit of myself was wounded to the death.

It is an humiliating confession to make, since I perceive it brings my habitual
      light-mindedness into rather lurid prominence, but I don't think I had ever felt actively and
      personally miserable, until now, as I shut the great casements of my window together, and
      reflected that there was no help to be given either to the sinned against or the sinning; that
      there was positively nothing more to be done save to wait the event.
Ah! is it not a pity, after all, we have grown so wise, in these latter days, that we regard
      religion merely as a subject of interesting speculation; that we have ceased to have faith in
      the demigods, who were agreeably accessible, comfortably near to us; and have retained only a
      barren, because only a controversial, belief in the Great God who sits behind the Creeds? For
      the adept, no doubt, He represents the final rest, the final beatitude; but, for the rank and
      file of us, He is chillingly far away, too unthinkably great to be of much immediate use in
      poor little twopenny-halfpenny human extremity. I would so thankfully have said a prayer, for
      my unworthy and futile self; for my poor dear friend Leversedge; even for Charlotte née Perry, that most unheroic daughter of a voracious rat and
      excellent suburban clock-moon, in this her hour of self-knowledge, conscious nakedness and
      nothingness. But how could I, in reason, do so? Who was I that I should be heard?
       What my petitions, that they should obtain to change the
      course of history? What would be, would be. My pitiful wishes weighed as a feather against the
      push of Fate.
No doubt such meditations are healthful for the soul, rich with wholesome discipline; but,
      ye powers! they are quite detestably unpleasant all the same.
And so, realising the futility of myself and my endeavours, I declined upon bathos. I went
      to bed. Still worse, I, being most abominably tired, went to sleep.
I suppose I slept heavily, yet I remember the yapping and howling of a dog mingling with my
      dreams, now taking on an almost human sound of appeal and reproachful lamentation, now passing
      into a cry of mere animal distress. I was roused at last by a very real and definite outcry
      under my window, emphasised by a shower of little pebbles against the shutters.
The dawn had just warmed into sunrise. The lawns were drenched with dew. The whole panorama
      of lake and mountain was softened, etherealised by a veil of silver mist. And immediately
      below, on the terrace, stood the red-headed subaltern, arrayed in the most surprising suit of
      pink-and-yellow-checked pyjamas, a roll of bathing-towels under his arm and his honest face
      blanched, for all its freckles and sunburn, by emotion.

“Mr. Hammond,” he stammered apologetically, “I'm awfully sorry to disturb you, but I can't
      very well help it. Something awful's happened, and people ought to know. But I did not want to
      raise an alarm and frighten the ladies. And you and he were friends, I thought I'd best let
      you know first.”
“Quite right,” I said. “And what has happened?”
The boy looked very sick. He also looked absurdly young.
“Why—Mr. Leversedge,” he stammered again. “I was going down to bathe, you see—and I came
      upon him suddenly.”
He pointed over his shoulder.
“Just against the pier, in the water—dead.”
His eyes filled with tears.
“It's awfully foolish, but I never saw anyone dead before, and I felt as if I didn't want it
      to be him. He was such a ripping good sort.”
By the time I reached the little harbour the sun had cleared the top of the vineyard-covered
      hills behind the hotel. Long shafts of delicate light pierced the silvery mist. The pale
      shadow of the great building lay obliquely across the garden. The pale shadow of the trees,
      along the shore, lay obliquely across the surface of the water of the harbour. With raised
      wings and ruffled plumage the two swans sailed in, in stateliest fashion, round
       the head of the grey pier; while, along the top of the wide
      stone wall of it, dark against the vast gleaming steel-coloured levels of the lake, limped the
      wretched little dog, its tail between its legs, and a tag of dirty rope still dangling from
      its scraggy neck.
The boy went on ahead. The concierge and the boatman,
      whom, in passing, we had called from the cottage in the corner under the pollarded plane
      trees, followed me. About a third of the distance along the pier the boy stopped.
“Come here, Mr. Hammond,” he said in an awe-stricken voice. “Look, you can see him.”
And there, beneath some eight feet of divinely clear water, lay Leversedge, flat on his
      back. Fluffy green water-weed rising around him, swayed by the force of some otherwise
      imperceptible current, blurred the outline of his body. He was still in evening dress, and his
      shirt-front showed a wide heart-shaped patch of white; across which, at the top of the water,
      swam a shoal of very small fishes, all their heads one way—lambent green—as the fatal
      glow-worms, or the eyes of the non-existent yet truly diabolic dog, which had combined to
      cause the martyrdom of the man dead, there, among the weed below—when they moved away towards
      the farther shore, and blood-red—when they turned, altogether, rapidly, making
       a tiny ripple on the surface of the water, and swam back
      towards the little pier.
The matter was to raise the body at once, before the hotel was awake, and either curiosity
      or alarm were aroused.
Some Savoy sailors, off one of the lateen-sailed lake-boats, helped us. It was a rather
      hideous business, such as I sincerely hope it may never fall to my lot to take part in again.
      I spare you the details. Suffice it to say that we carried that which had been Leversedge up
      through the sunny garden. The waiters had neglected to clear away the remains of Mr. Perry's
      supper, and a flight of sparrows and chaffinches rose, squeaking and chirruping, off the table
      from among the wet ice-plates and remnants of lobster salad, as we passed by. The spare young
      Russian woman, very much en déshabille, her magnificent hair
      all over her angular shoulders, hung out of a fourth-floor window, crooning one of those
      infinitely pathetic folk-songs which seem so full of the sadness of long snow-bound winters
      and the hopeless monotony of the Steppe. Otherwise we happily met no one, saw no one—save the
      yawning lift-boy—till we reached Leversedge's room and laid him on his bed.
Some of the many candles were still burning. They flared low in the socket. The window had
      been left partly open behind the wooden shutters, and the draught had taken them, so that they had
       guttered from the edge of the candlesticks into great
      shrouds. The air was heavy—notwithstanding the partly open window—with an acrid smell of burnt
      paper, burnt leather. As we opened the door I observed a whirl of tinder fly up from the
      hearthstone, and settle back slowly, in black hovering flakes, on the furniture and the white
      counterpane of the bed. The folding-screen and all the photographs of the Carissima had
      disappeared.
On the writing-table a copy of Vanity Fair lay open at that pathetic page of
      the last chapter of the book, wherein Major Dobbin—after long waiting—at last has his desire,
      and leanness withal, as one fears, in his soul. And upon the page was a half-sheet of
      notepaper, with a few lines on it in Leversedge's rather laboured business hand.
“I HAVE thought it all out, and this is the only way to meet the difficulty, so I
      take it. I do not blame her. She was pressed beyond endurance, and she was badly advised. She
      is safe against the future, moreover, so my main end is secured. Also, I am delivered, at
      last, and for ever, from the power of the dog.”
It was signed, and in the left-hand corner was written carefully—
“To Antony Hammond, Esq.,” and the date.
