
CHAPTER I
THE next day, as far as I remember, passed without incident until evening.
I hold there is but one irremediable evil in life, that of growing tired of oneself. I
      therefore avoid it with great care, and, to that end, entirely refuse to grow accustomed to my
      own idiosyncrasies. I let my characteristics take me by surprise. I am journalier to myself, scorning stereotyped habits as I would scorn to wear a
      livery. I dread to be consistent as I would dread paralysis. Quite the last person of my
      acquaintance with whom I would ever risk being familiar is myself; and so I study earnestly to
      cultivate a various mind, and give my good qualities the slip equally with my bad ones.
To take a minor example. I am naturally gregarious. The manners and customs of my
      fellow-mortals afford me permanent entertainment.
       Consequently I woo solitude, and often seek a hermit hour. I
      sought one, unsuccessfully, on the evening in question.
It was damp out of doors, and the more lively members of the community had gathered in the
      hall, the more serious in the salle de conversation, after
      dinner. A mixed multitude in both cases, splitting itself up, as such multitudes invariably
      do, into cliques and coteries, that jealously guard their own frontiers, while casting glances
      of mingled desire and distrust upon those of their neighbours. At one end of the hall, a
      would-be prima-donna, of transatlantic extraction, reigned
      over the American section of the community, supported by an elegant and obedient mother who
      had kept her figure, a good-tempered and obedient French composer who had lost his, and a
      disobedient French poodle who had followed suit. At the other end, a venerable Russian poet,
      blessed with fine head and silvery beard, a man of really apostolic aspect—he, for cause
      unknown, by the way, invariably wore brown kid, cut-fingered gloves—presided over a court of
      three beautiful daughters; a fierce, spare young woman in a scarlet silk blouse—her wardrobe
      appeared limited—whose black hair hung in a thick pigtail, tied with scarlet ribbons, down her
      back to below her knees; and two young men, also Russian, of debilitated physique and excited
      bearing. The interspaces were filled in by English
       —English, prickly or patronising, nervously dumb or
      nervously boisterous; few, if any of them, quite at their ease. For it must be conceded that
      the number of our dear country-men and women who possess the gentle art of living gracefully
      in public is lamentably small. Persons who, in the security of their moist island homes, are
      well-bred and really quite delightful, become as awkward as chased hens in an hotel. Most
      English are born with their feet glued to little round green stands, like the ladies and
      gentlemen of Noah's Ark. To see them unglued—as in foreign travel—is to see them at a
      disadvantage. For the stand is as necessary to their self-respect as their decent petticoats
      and irreproachable trousers.
In the hall everyone talked. The debilitated Russian young men did more. They waved their
      arms and shouted; while the spare young woman alternately hissed and purred at them, and
      waved, not her arms only, but her whole lithe body. This displeased the poodle—it was very
      disquieting—and caused him to bark, which caused his mistress to slap him. During the process
      she explained exactly why she slapped him to her mother and all her friends; who on their part
      continued chattering volubly to her and her mother, and the poodle, and each other, and the
      French composer. The latter laughed good-temperedly, with raised eyebrows, puffed at his
      cigar, furtively consoled the poodle,
       and tapped out airs from his coming opera upon the floor
      with the heel of his boot.
In the salon the style was different. A retired Deputy
      Surgeon-General of the Madras Army, seated upon a gilded lounge upholstered in crimson and
      yellow (the furniture of the salon was slightly loud), held
      forth to an elderly and respectable audience upon the clear connection between Mr. Gladstone
      and the “little horn” in the Book of the Prophet Daniel, the iniquities of the Opium Traffic,
      and the unfulfilled predictions in Revelations.
Good Mrs. Perry was a member of his congregation. She sat under the full glare of the gas
      chandelier. She was rubicund. She was beaming. Yet she appeared to me worried. Presumably Mr.
      Gladstone and the “little horn” were too much for her. In that she surely did not stand alone.
      Mr. Gladstone and the “little horn,” whether taken singly or in connection, have been too much
      for many persons before now. Realising this, I ventured to disregard the signs the kind
      creature made to me—her pointings to and pattings of a vacant golden seat in the immediate
      vicinity of the exegetical Deputy Surgeon-General. I hurriedly crossed the room, and let
      myself out by one of the glass doors on to the long wide verandah.
The change from the heat and noise and glare within was rather startling.
A wet wind lashed through the balsam poplars
       bordering the lake, swept over the garden, and tormented the
      banks of shrubbery on either side the large lawn. The leaves of the pyramidal magnolias upon
      the terrace slapped together, and the great odorous blossoms swayed ghostly in the half light.
      Flights of ragged cloud, fringed with watery yellow where they crossed the moon, fled across
      the sky. Gleams of white foam and a hoarseness of breaking waves came from the shore. In a
      spirit of economy the lamps upon the terrace and the verandah had been left unlighted. Only a
      tawny brightness from the doors and windows of the salon lay
      in broad stripes along the marble pavement, and touched the edges of the descending steps.
We writers of little verses are addicted to exaggerating the moral and emotional
      significance of Nature's moods, no doubt. The night struck me as full of inarticulate
      complaint, turbulent and distressed—a night to make one think of lost youth, and dead loves;
      and of that most inconveniently haunting of beings, the still living woman whom—almost
      certainly—one ought to have married.—I often think of her, for I have a tender heart, and she
      was really very charming.—I thought of her now as I stood on the wind-swept verandah. A long
      trail of scarlet, trumpet-flowered honeysuckle had torn away from its fastenings, and beat
      against the ironwork just above my head.
       And here observe the advantages of cultivating a various
      mind! In a few seconds I was enjoying all the pensive satisfactions of self-reproach. For I
      ought to have married her. Unquestionably I ought. It is true when I proposed she refused me.
      But that is a detail. I had delayed; I had shilly-shallied. I had been seen in equivocal
      company, and a considerate friend had not been wanting to report that damaging incident. And
      then I had been too ready to take “No” for an answer. Decline to take “No,” oh my brothers,
      wholly decline to take it, and in the end the woman will invariably say “Yes.”—Here modesty
      intervened, inquiring, “What, invariably?” And I replied, “Yes, always, invariably,” refusing
      to permit officious modesty thus to put out the purifying fires of self-reproach.
