

CHAPTER VI
DECIDEDLY the middle class should avoid high spirits. As a condition of mind and
      body, high spirits are questionably becoming, even in the young and noble; while in persons of
      mature age and unexalted, though maybe respectable, station, they are liable to degenerate
      into that which is really very terrible indeed.
All this was borne in upon me forcibly during the ensuing five minutes.
“Mamma!—where is Mrs. Perry? Mamma!”
And, as so frequently, in urgent pursuit of a missing member of his family, Perry père chased along the terrace below. Regardless of the evident
      fervour of their conversation, I beheld him draw up before the two Russians, raise the grey
      felt hat with its streaming pugaree, and inquire—Mr. Perry invariably appeared to entertain
      the idea that all foreigners are afflicted with deafness, so he bawled the said inquiry,
      smiling the while with a sort of voracious intensity—
“Pardon, mademoiselle, pray excuse me—mais
        avez vous vu Madame Perry? Savez vous où elle est, où est,
       enfin, ma femme?”
The young lady looked round in very evident surprise. Then her eyes lighted on me. And their
      expression was not without malice, as she extended her hand in the direction of the verandah
      with a sweeping gesture, which had the effect of enclosing Mrs. Perry and myself, of framing
      us for ever side by side.
“Mais la voilà, monsieur,” she said. “La voilà avèc monsieur son ámi.”
“Ah! ha! I see," cried Mr. Perry gaily. “Mille fois merci,
       mademoiselle.”
And, dragging on a pair of purplish-brown kid gloves, he hurried up the steps.
“I see,” he cried, shaking his two fingers archly, “I see. A sly flirtation with mamma.
      Naughty, very naughty,— 
Billing and cooing together they sat,
Quite unaware they were watched by the cat.”

I am not naturally of a bloodthirsty disposition, but there are hours when the mildest men
      become as furies. I could have massacred Perry père just
      then. An application of the wheel, the rack, the boot, or the thumb-screw would have given me
      rapture. I could have roasted him at a slow fire without a movement of compassion. All the
      more so, that I perceived her knowledge of the
       English language was quite sufficient to give the lady of
      the red silk blouse a strong sense of the inglorious comedy of my position. To kill is well.
      To be offended is often undignified, and always silly. It is not in my power to kill, so I
      smiled benignly upon Mr. Perry, and did my possible to meet him in a Christian spirit.
“Yes,” I said, “Mrs. Perry has been more than kind, and we have had a, to me, delightful
      little talk. I congratulate you. I have been hearing capital news.”
“Ah! ha! I understand,” he replied. “She could not keep it to herself— 
The brimming pitcher sure will overflow,
And spill the ruby liquor on the thirsty soil below.
 Well, well, I own there are excuses for a tendency to garrulity on the part of some
      of us this morning! A difficult chapter in our family annals is happily concluded; a period of
      anxiety is past; a shadow is, as one may say, lifted from our parental hearts. But I trust, my
      love, you have not exaggerated?” he added, in sterner and more judicial accents. “I would not
      have a false impression created. We must not make too much of it, Mr. Hammond.”
“Indeed, there appears to be a most agreeably heavy amount to make much of,” I remarked.
“An elegant competence,” Mr. Perry said
       airily,—“an elegant competence. Our daughter will be in a
      position to gratify her literary and artistic tastes, to entertain her circle of friends in
      becoming style, and take that place in London society for which, as I at once proudly and
      gratefully asseverate, her talents so eminently fit her. This is the reward of my fostering
      care. I recognise it. Yes, yes, I own to-day you see in me a happy father, and a very nice
      thing that is to see, I'm sure. But now to business—my love, I am on my way to the boat. I
      mentioned to Charlotte, and she agreed with me, that after the flattering sympathy—really most
      flattering to all of us as a family—which she has exhibited, it was only due to Mrs. Mertyns
      that she should be early acquainted with the rosy hue which now, as I may say, flushes our
      daughter's future. There have been moments,” said Mr. Perry darkly, drawing himself up and
      addressing me,—“as our charming friend Mrs. Mertyns well knows—only yesterday—but let that
      pass. I will not dwell on fears once entertained. Hope has now taken their place.—Yes, Mr.
      Hammond, our dear children will enjoy a very pretty little fortune— 
Gold, much red gold, shall grace these nuptials
And cement the basis of domestic joys.”

“Well, I am very willing Mrs. Mertyns should know,” Mrs. Perry responded. “I thought of
      writing home myself to my cousins, and dear Aunt
       Trumbull at Brixton. They've always been very true to me,
      and—”
“Quite so, quite so, my dear—and therefore Charlotte has penned a brief note, and has
      commissioned me to be the bearer of it. I have it here”—he tapped the breast-pocket of his
      coat. “Yes, Mr. Hammond, without seeking to obtrude myself, I may just hint that practical
      experience has given me a not contemptible knowledge of such matters, and I have much pleasure
      in testifying to the excellent business capacity of our future son-in-law. Leversedge has done
      well, remarkably well, considering his age and opportunities. I could wish he had displayed
      less reticence regarding the amount of his income. Clear information under that head would
      have spared us many anxious hours,—wouldn't it, Mamma?”
“Leversedge is admirably modest,” I said parenthetically.
This remark produced a really extraordinary expression of reflective wisdom on the part of
      Mr. Perry. He meditated visibly, as visibly roused himself from meditation.
“Most true,” he replied. “I yield to no one in my appreciation of our dear boy
      Constantine—Mamma will bear me out in that. But, as one of our greatest poets observes,— 
Let not your modesty outrun discretion
Lest, falling from fair favour to contempt,
You mask a greater by a lesser good.

 And there has been a touch of secretiveness, a hint,
      perhaps,—though far be it from me to be harsh,—of that pride which apes humility in
      Constantine's attitude.”
“To be sure, I never thought of him as proud now,” interposed Mrs. Perry.
“Ah! ah! my love, public life, the rub of the world—eh, Mr. Hammond?—teaches us men to read
      men—yes, very shrewdly indeed, to read them.”
“It doesn't prevent most of you making mistakes over women, though, sometimes,” the good
      creature said quite sharply. Then she repented, and looked very mildly at her husband.—“So
      you're going up by the boat then, Joseph,” she added.
The fashion of a rat had become very apparent in Mr. Perry, but he controlled himself.
      Perhaps he meant to speak to Mrs. Perry quietly alone afterwards. This is one of the
      advantages of matrimony; let us be fair to that much-canvassed institution;—it gives excellent
      opportunities for the private, unwitnessed adjustment of small differences.
“Yes, yes,” he cried,— 
“With thee, my bark, I swiftly speed
Across the foaming brine—
 call on Mrs. Mertyns; communicate the information, which I am convinced she will cordially
       welcome, and return here in time for the midday meal,
      unless she should ask me to remain. I do not think I could very well refuse, you know. I think
      we owe it to Mrs. Mertyns to accept any invitation of hers. You will not therefore feel
      anxious, my love, should my return be delayed. Make my apologies to our end of the table.”
Here Mr. Perry struggled violently, almost showily, for all his playfulness had returned,
      with the fingers of his kid gloves.
“Oblige me by holding my umbrella, Mamma, while I reduce these offenders to order. New? Yes,
      Mr. Hammond; and they are a little wayward, a little, as I may say, recalcitrant. Patience,
      always patience—even the trivialities of existence call that godlike virtue into exercise at
      times.—Which reminds me of what I was saying to Constantine just now, and I am convinced you
      will endorse it. A fortune must not only be made, it must be guarded, be increased. Is there,
      indeed, any reason why it should not be doubled? A wife, as I pointed out to him (for it is
      only prudent to reckon with these little possible accidents beforehand), not infrequently
      implies a family. It is therefore his duty not to relax his efforts. Children are costly
      commodities in these days, extremely costly. Let him therefore look forward, and continue to
      apply himself to business. As I told him, neither Mrs. Perry nor myself would ever stand in
      his way,
       if the state of his affairs pointed to the desirability of
      his taking a three or six months' trip to the southern confines of the Dark Continent. During
      his absence, his home should be ours. With perfect security he could leave his Charlotte under
      the protection of her natural guardians. Mamma and I would join her at her house in town at
      any moment. Ah, and that reminds me, we must consult you upon a knotty point,—a knotty point,
      Mr. Hammond! In favour of which locality is your vote given? Where shall they reside? Mamma
      inclines to the north side of the park; eh, my love? But I maintain she is in error. A young
       ménage should be en
       evidence. So give me Mayfair or Belgravia,” exclaimed Mr. Perry daringly, “for
      preference, Belgravia.”
“Well, I always shall say people are much more neighbourly in the suburbs or out Bayswater
      way than down in the squares,” Mrs. Perry asserted, with a certain mild obstinacy.
“Neighbourly!” cried her husband, as he might have cried ‘murder.’ “My dear, there are
      social distinctions which I fear your mind will never—here, give me, if you please, my
      umbrella.”
The chunking sound of the engines of the approaching lake-boat claimed the speaker's
      attention and restored his good humour.
“Farewell,” he added—“I must away. Remember, I may be detained. I may be unable to join
       you at déjeûner. Your
      kindest regards, I am sure, to our charming friends, Mr. Hammond.”
And, with flying pugaree and waving umbrella, he fled down the steps and across the sunny
      lawn in the direction of the panting steamer. In even the best trained wives, the most
      thoroughly domesticated—as the advertisements put it—of women, domesticity will wear a trifle
      thread-bare now and again. Mrs. Perry adjusted her cap, around the lace and ribbons of which
      the wind had frolicked somewhat too freely, with dignity.
“You see, Mr. Perry is rather excited,” she said. “I suppose everybody forgets themselves
      sometimes under excitement, and of course he has been very troubled about Charlotte's future,
      and now that everything's so comfortably settled he feels the—”
She so evidently searched about for a word that I suggested “reaction.”
“Yes, reaction. That's just it, and thank you. And I am sure I shall always be grateful to
      you for our pleasant chat, and for letting me be so confidential.”
She executed a movement as of rising from her chair.
“Permit me,” I said, offering my hand as a pulley.
I experienced a sensation of dead weight, followed—Mrs. Perry being on her feet—by one of
       the most affectionate pressure. She had a motherly hand,
      and a motherly hand is still among the dearest things of experience, by whoever possessed,
      even when one acknowledges to the fatal age of forty.
“My dear lady,” I repeated, “the gratitude should be mine. I am honoured by your confidence
      in me.”
She smiled, blinked, choked a little.
“I suppose when you're getting on in life, like I am, you always feel a little lonely. And
      then, kindness, and somebody who'll listen, does go to your heart somehow.”
She arranged herself, smoothed down the Papuan full dress.
“Well, I'll go up and write to Aunt Trumbull,” she said. “The post's at twelve, and, I'm
      sorry to say, I never was very quick over letters.”
