

CHAPTER III
ONE does not, unfortunately, arrive at my time of life without having been in some
      tight places; but no place, I solemnly declare, that I have ever been in quite equalled this
      one for tightness. It pinched me most exceedingly shrewdly. For all that which Miss Perry had
      said was true—true, every word of it!—And we had passed the stage of acquaintance when one can
      successfully take refuge in denial. Not even lying of the most barefaced and unblushing
      character would extricate me from the very ungraceful predicament in which my companion's
      frankness had placed me.
I do not often lose my temper; but now a certain exasperation seized on me. For was it not
      really a little too bad that this charming person should thus lock the door on me and set her
      back against it? It is disgusting to me to be compelled to handle a woman other than
      courteously. Yet, unless I exercised something of brutal masculine force in removing her, how
      on earth was I to get the door open and make good my escape?

“My dear young lady,—my dear young lady, you cover me with shame and confusion!” I cried.
      “You appear to do me the unhappy compliment of attaching an importance to my possible, or
      rather impossible, opinion—for the opinion with which you accredit me is positively
      preposterous—quite deliriously above its value.”
The girl pressed her hands to the sides of her head again.
“I am so tired,” she said. “It is all finished, as I told you. I have burnt my ships, I have
      accepted my lot. Why then try to juggle with me? Why, above all, why be ungenerous and beg the
      question?”
“Good heavens!” I exclaimed, “it is not I who beg the question. It is you, dear Miss Perry,
      who beg it, while I am trying to introduce a trifle of common sense into the consideration of
      it.”
She turned away, letting her arms drop at her sides, and stared over the bows of the
      lake-boat, now heading in towards the row of great Lombardy poplars which line the gay little
      quay and marketplace of Montreux.
“I implore you, in the name of reason, to leave all thought of me out of the business.”
For an instant Miss Perry looked at me.
“But how can I?”—I cannot actually assert that I heard those words, but her quivering lips
      appeared to form them.

“Granting, for the sake of argument, even,” I went on, “that I have been idiot enough to
      think, in any degree, any one of the stupidities of which you accuse me, what does that
      signify as against the very real and serious matter of your marriage? You are—pardon my saying
      so—straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel with a vengeance. Bear with me if I speak
      plainly.—Marry Constantine Leversedge because he loves you, if you wish to do an heroic act of
      kindness. Still better, marry him because you love him, and pity carries the day over
      fear.”
“Ah! how little you understand,” murmured Miss Perry.
Really, I believe at times I have the right to congratulate myself on possessing miraculous
      strength of character. Or is it only the strength of alarm, not of character—the daring of the
      proverbial turning-worm, the valour of the proverbial mouse in a corner? I can't decide.
      Anyhow, I finished my address.
“But to marry him as proof to me that you are not the kind of person you imagine I imagine
      you possibly may be, is absurd and grotesque, an unspeakable and impossible folly. You cannot
      be guilty of it. I refuse to permit you to be guilty of it.”
“And how will you prevent my being guilty of it?” the fair Charlotte asked, with rather
      astonishing composure.

The flower-like, the dewy, the early, early morning and exquisitely virginal effect seemed
      suddenly to have passed away from Miss Perry. The change in her was unseizable—to roughly
      translate an untranslatable Gallicism—but I was keenly aware of its presence.
“Tell my poor dear parents what you have just told me. At first they will neither believe
      nor understand you. You will involve yourself in a series of silly wordy scenes, which will
      make our party the comedy of the whole hotel. Tell Constantine—that will be very simple—he
      will destroy himself.”
She paused.
“And, meanwhile, you will have the inward satisfaction of continuing to think of me just
      what you have always thought. I do not propose to give you that satisfaction.”
“Are you not slightly vindictive?” I inquired. “It was not nice of me. It was a lapse of
      good manners. But, upon my honour, I could not help it.”
Miss Perry put one hand over her eyes, and threw back her head. Her throat was round, firm,
      the colour of it a warm, delicate brown—delicious in the sunshine, which—for I am afraid I was
      shamefully neglecting my office of umbrella bearer—enveloped her graceful figure from head to
      heel.
“You are certainly ungenerous,” she retorted.
       “But all men are that, I believe, if an unhappy woman so
      far forgets conventionality as to obey the dictates of— No, pass that by. Forget what I was
      nearly betrayed into saying. I should be thankful to forget it myself. Let us reason together
      coldly and sensibly, since that is your pleasure; and I will show you why you cannot and must
      not seek to alter my resolution.”
Again Charlotte Perry's bright eyes filled, again she spoke in modest, hesitating
      accents.
“You know how hard society is, how basely commonplace in its judgments, how blind to high
      purposes, how sceptical of pure and elevated motives. You know how it hates to have its
      imagination taxed by action that is touched by ideality. You are a poet, you must have
      suffered from all this at times, and so you must have seen how, if a woman—it is very painful
      to me to speak on this subject—if a woman leaves her home because the demands made upon her
      are degrading, or because her husband is wicked, or because, like the heroine of Ibsen's
      wonderful drama, she revolts against the narrow conditions and paltry occupations of domestic
      life, society looks doubtfully upon her, other women flout her and draw aside their skirts.
      Even should she give herself to philanthropy or enter a religious house, she is still suspect.
      But if she leaves her home because she pleases some other man, society looks
       not so very hardly on her fault; often, in a little while,
      quite condones it. In the eyes of the great, coarse, everyday world we are your slaves yet.
      Success with a man, that a man should desire us, in a measure justifies even the most
      scandalous conduct.”
Pausing in the midst of this surprising essay upon contemporary morals, Miss Perry stooped
      and picked up her hat. She straightened herself up again, and languidly drew the long pins out
      of the crown of it. Where was she coming to? I felt very nervous. The door of escape was by no
      means open yet.
“It is very much the same with a girl's engagement,” she went on. “If she cancels it because
      she discovers that she and the man whom she has promised to marry are not calculated to
      realise what marriage might be—has sometimes been—in all its exquisite completeness, in its
      profound though hidden poetry; if she dreads to do violence to her own ideal of love, she is
      accused of cruelty and caprice. Women treat her with a mixture of pity and contempt. Men are
      familiar or surly with her. She is a failure, and society has no mercy for failure. But if she
      breaks it off because someone else cares for her, in obedience to his will, she is justified
      in the opinion of the world, of her friends, of her parents—in that even of her rejected
      admirer.”

When Charlotte raised her eyes to mine again they were as stars of morning. No wonder poor
      Leversedge worshipped her if, at times, she looked at him thus! She was, indeed, of a quality
      to turn the steadiest head! At this moment, in the wind and sunshine, the blue lake behind
      her, the pale deck before, the gay little Swiss town—its quaintly carved gables and balconies,
      its rows of emerald-green shutters and bright awnings, its line of magnificent, quivering,
      whispering poplars,—sliding by on our right as the steamer slowed up at the pier, Charlotte
      Perry had her moment of triumph, she was absolutely and distractingly lovely.
“She is a success. Society smiles on her, fêtes and
      applauds her. For has she not upon her the hall-mark which all will acknowledge? It is well to
      be loved by one man. It is just doubly well to be loved by two. And—”
The girl stretched out her hands. Thank heaven there was a movement on board, passengers
      acquiring hand-bags, umbrellas, impedimenta in general, prior to disembarking, so nobody, I
      believed,—with relief, I believe so still,—specially noticed our proceedings.
“And she is very, very grateful, Mr. Hammond. Her happiness is secured. It is completed
      instead of being wrecked.”
These are things to turn one's hair grey, even
       contemplating them after a lapse of years. Let me take
      breath!
So very much comes into this question of marriage that one's brain fairly reels under it.
      For a woman it is probably, as Perry père remarked, “an
      arduous undertaking”; but for one of us, oh my brothers, it is—well, what is it not?
      Personally, I am unfitted for a primitive state of society, I know that. Were you to take off
      my clothes and send me up a tree to pick nuts, I should go very hungry myself; while those
      dependent upon me would almost certainly starve. Yet I look back, not without yearning, to the
      epoch of primal innocence, when man and woman mated gaily, parted gaily, even as those most
      delectable of living creatures, the birds, do. For the bond of wedlock, as understood for many
      hundred years now by the more civilised nations—specially those of the Anglo-Saxon race—adds a
      terror to life. To pass two or three days in the Divorce Court would be about as much to my
      taste as passing them in the Old Fleet Ditch; yet how can a man of average sensibility be
      expected, at a given moment, to know and make up his mind finally and irrevocably in respect
      of womanhood and the affections? Aphrodite is a mighty and marvellous goddess. Who that has
      once, in ever so small a degree, beheld her glory, shall dare worship her under a single
      aspect only, or in a single place?

Of course there is the ancient theory—does it not at least date from the days of
      Aristophanes?—of the One Man—the One Woman; and I have laboured valiantly to cherish it, since
      it appeared to offer a practical solution to my moral and emotional difficulties. Like the
      hero of a certain evil and exquisite romance, the title of which I refrain from mentioning, I
      set out early in quest of the One Woman who should satisfy all my aspirations, all my tastes,
      all—if you will have it—my latent masculine sensuality; who should dominate me at first sight,
      who should hold me then and ever after. I have sought her diligently, and—I admit it
      reluctantly, for it must sound most impertinently fastidious—I am seeking her yet. This quest,
      indeed, has become a fixed idea with me. It presents itself, as a matter of course, at sight
      of each new and charming face—and the number of new and charming faces which offer themselves
      for inspection is really delightfully great. It presents itself even in respect of faces
      already fairly well known to me, under circumstances of a peculiar or provocative
      character.
It presented itself very distinctly to me now, on the sunny deck of the lake-boat, as Miss
      Perry's soft voice faltered, and she stretched out her hands in that most moving action of
      appeal. She was so varied, so captivating, so uncommonly clever, at times so deliciously
      pretty; her prospects were
       of so dubiously hopeful and encouraging a sort. And then,
      had she by chance spoken the truth, not only in respect of my reading, but of my misreading,
      of her? Might not, by chance, her picture of herself be a more faithful one than that which
      I—with my wretched little habit of being too sharp by half in the ungracious business of
      picking my neighbours to pieces—had drawn of her? Surely it was very generous, after all my
      silent detraction and, at moments, my outspoken disagreement, thus to give me another chance!
      And then the coercive, the well-nigh irresistible, flattery of thus finding oneself the object
      of a young and lovely person's affection! Is there anything on earth quite so agreeable?—(For
      a little while, at all events. After the first blush of the affair one usually becomes
      inconveniently sensible of make-weights and conceivable complications)—No! I protest there is
      not.
And so it came about that, for the space of at least twenty seconds, I asked myself quite
      seriously whether it was not possible that here, here in the daughter of Perry père et mère, of the lively rat and excellent clock-moon, improbable
      as it might appear at first sight, I had found that which I had sought so long and vainly—the
      complement of my nature, the comprehensively and perpetually seductive being, the, for me, One
      Woman?
Those twenty seconds were immensely pleasant,
       I would willingly have extended them indefinitely. But,
      alas! for that at once so consolatory and so detestable doctrine—the Doctrine of Perpetual
      Flux—twenty seconds were the limit; and then the delectable equilibrium in which my mind had
      hung was rudely disturbed. It went on working—I mean that eternal see-saw, which I call my
      mind, did. It suffered a barbarian invasion of rough doubts, tumultuous questions, inartistic
      moralities, which beat upon it as with heavy clubs. For, after all, when I came to consider
      it, no miraculous change had passed over Charlotte Perry, or her parents, or my friend
      Leversedge, or myself, or our mutual relations, or our prospects, or our antecedents, or our
      surroundings. All these stood precisely where they had stood. That which we had been, both in
      regard of ourselves and each other, that we still essentially and indubitably were. There was
      no squaring the circle. It was all, not otherwise, but just exactly so.
For how was I, who had never yet given myself away, of all men to give myself away thus
      recklessly? Bless my soul, contemplate the inevitable consequences! How was I, who had always
      plumed myself on maintaining a nice standard of taste in friendship, of all men to steal his
       fiancée, and play the part of a Bowdlerised King David to
      the Uriah of poor dear Leversedge? No, no; it was really a trifle tiresome, but, in truth, I had
       neither moral courage nor was I scoundrel enough for all
      this.
And then, with a blush of shame I remember it, for it reflects small credit on either my
      head or heart, one of those trivial incidents occurred which so completely and immediately
      quench the fires of my not perhaps very strikingly volcanic nature.
Miss Perry, I apprehend, had found these twenty seconds longer than I did. She became
      restless; she grew—it was very excusable—somewhat impatient of my silence. The grey deck
      planks, where the hem of her brown holland skirt touched them, were strewn with the remnants
      of her bouquet of buttercups. She put out her right foot, and in a nervous, and—I am compelled
      to add—somewhat awkward, manner pushed the green stems aside and crushed the shining petals.
      Those women who are possessed of well-shaped feet, kindly permit one, in the present day, to
      be fully aware of that agreeable fact; and it occurred to me that, considering her pretensions
      to fashion, the opportunities afforded me of beholding the fair Charlotte's feet had been
      distinctly limited. Now I understood why. Whether Nature or her bootmaker was in fault, I
      cannot, of course, pretend to determine. I charitably trust the former. For with Nature
      clearly there is no arguing; whereas any human being, possessed of the powers of speech and
      volition, can remonstrate with and, in extreme
       cases, change their bootmaker. Miss Perry's boots or
      shoes—I think they were shoes—were wide, easy, trodden over, their square toes turned badly
      heavenward. I could write a pamphlet on the subject of boots—they are an awful revelation of
      personal character. Vulgarities otherwise skilfully concealed come out in the shape of a heel;
      sloth leaves indelible tracks across upper leathers. In moments of illumination I have
      detected gluttony in a lace and profligacy in a button. The Carissima's shoes did not betray
      the presence of any mortal sin, let me hasten to add. But since, judging by the rest of her
      costume, I could be in no doubt as to the sufficiency of her purse, they disclosed a vein of
      indolence, of insufficient pride, of lack of perception; they were the shoes of one whose
      promise is better than her performance, of one capable of alarming lapses—briefly, they didn't
      do.
And in the theory of the One Woman it is imperatively necessary that the whole should please
      in detail, as well as in its completeness. And—what a relief (yes! I had reached that stage
      already!) to be able to pack the manifold pros and cons into the compass of a syllogism—here
      was a detail which radically displeased, therefore Miss Perry was not the One Woman.
It was undoubtedly soothing to have the matter thus definitely settled; but it was anything
      but a
       graceful pastime to convey the assurance of that settlement
      to my companion. Is it conceivable that women really enjoy refusing their admirers? If so,
      they are amazingly strong-minded, judging by my own—but I abstain from further comment.
      Suffice it to say, I am conscious that a certain ardour which must have been perceptible in my
      attitude and manner—though I am not endowed with a superfluity of what is technically known as
      “facial expression”—flickered and died. And Miss Perry—I was unspeakably ashamed, yet how, oh!
      how I blessed her—must have been aware of that waning of a fine flame.
“Please give me my parasol, Mr. Hammond,” she said, suddenly, hastily. “The sun is very
      hot.”
She sat down, drooped down, upon the camp stool again. I was horribly afraid she was crying,
      as I handed her her umbrella—but I am not sure. I avoided looking at her. I really had not the
      face to do so, for I knew I must appear utterly despicable to her. I appeared so to myself. In
      spirit I poured forth volumes of scathing invectives against myself, vials of contemptuous
      wrath upon my own devoted head. I found it in my heart to wish the lake-boat might
      incontinently strike upon a rock and founder, and that I might magnanimously sacrifice my
      life—I am a singularly poor swimmer—in saving that of Miss Perry. This was
       a cheap wish, since I was aware the Lake of Geneva is deep
      beyond all possibility of shipwreck from the above cause.
During these twenty seconds—and more, for the silence lasted—I certainly paid a heavy price
      for those other twenty seconds of delightful mental equilibrium. To speak was of necessity to
      apologise; and to apologise was little short of an insult. I might have gone away; but to go
      away seemed to me a course of action at once uncourteous and inconclusive. So, in rich
      discomfort, I waited. The bell had rung, we were steaming westward once more, while Montreux
      and its poplars receded in the distance.
“The civil marriage will take place on Thursday, at Geneva,” Charlotte Perry said, at last.
      “Constantine has gone there to-day to see the Consul and make all necessary arrangements. He
      has been resident in the district for a sufficient length of time, there will be no difficulty
      or—or delay. The religious ceremony will take place here on Friday.”
The girl looked up. Our eyes met.
“You will be present?” she added softly.
“Unfortunately I cannot be,” I replied. “I leave by the mail to-night. I shall be in Paris,
      on my way to England.”
“No, no!” Miss Perry cried.
She rose to her feet and faced me imperiously.
       Her tearful mood had wholly vanished. She became that which
      she had been the night before, almost alarming, almost tremendous, notwithstanding her youth
      and remarkable good looks.
“You shall not escape so easily,” she said. “I have borne much from you, but I refuse to
      bear that. You shall not slip away comfortably and amuse yourself—perhaps with some other
      friend—friend?”—her voice took a most disconcerting inflection of sarcasm—“elsewhere, while
      you leave me to lift the great burden which you—yes, you—have helped to force upon me, unaided
      and alone. I have a claim on you—we need not discuss the exact nature of it, since you, I
      think, hardly dare deny its existence—and I require you to meet that claim to the full. This
      is not revenge, this is justice—bare justice. You shall be witness of this business to the
      very end. You shall see what I do, hear what I say—I will leave you no loophole for disbelief,
      for doubt. You shall recognise my worth—you shall admire my conduct—I will compel you to
      admire it.”
Suddenly Charlotte Perry's eyes filled and her mouth gathered into that really delicious
      suggestion of a kiss. I was carried away in spite of myself.
“I admire you already,” I exclaimed. “You are extraordinary, you are enchanting.”
Again, for a moment, the girl's appearance grew absolutely dazzling.

“Ah!” she cried, “I have wrung that out of you at last—no, pray say no more. Do not spoil
      your admission either by exaggeration or by explanation. Leave it as it stands. Submit to be
      spontaneous for once!”—
Her tone changed, became pensive, modest, full of hesitation.
“You will remain, Mr. Hammond, and take part in the—the sad—for some of us it must be
      sad—ceremony of Friday. Constantine will ask you to be his best man, and you will accept.
      Meanwhile you will help me—I think you will? This is Tuesday, so after all the time is
      short—you will help me to prevent my poor dear parents arriving at any premature knowledge of
      the truth. They must think that I—am happy—that—that I am glad. And I fear they are growing
      suspicious. To-day Mamma—but I will not trouble you with all that. You must help me lull their
      fears to rest.”
Miss Perry raised her hand, laid it upon her eyes.
“I am very tired,” she said. “We have talked enough.”
She turned her back upon me, so disposing her yellow and black parasol that it offered an
      insuperable barrier to further conversation.
And I strolled away to the stern of the boat, there lighting upon Perry père and the Deputy
       Surgeon-General in full session, discussing the enormities
      of the Opium Traffic and the still greater ones of our venerable, late Radical premier. While
      listening to their artless, though wordy conversation, I bowed low before the genius of
      Charlotte Perry. I could not fathom her, she was beyond me; consequently—for masculine vanity
      recoils instinctively from the feminine creature it has not the wit to fathom—she was not, and
      never could be for me, the One Woman. Yet she was, I owned it, a woman of ten thousand, for
      she could play a losing game, she could show herself great in the hour of defeat.
