
CHAPTER XVI. EDGAR VAUGHAN's STORY CONTINUED. 
The next day I was a different man. All my energy had returned, and all
                            my reasoning power; but not, thank God, the rigour of my mind, the petty
                            contempt of my fellow-men. Nothing is more hard to strip than that coat
                            of flinty closeness formed upon Deucalion's offcast in the petrifying
                            well of self. Though I have done my utmost, and prayed of late for help
                            in doing it, never have I quite scaled off this accursed deposit. This
                            it was that so estranged your warm nature, Clara; a nature essentially
                            like your father's, but never allowed free scope. You could not tell the
                            reason, children never can; but somehow it made you shiver to be in
                            contact with me.
Petro and Marcantonia would have been astonished at my sudden change, but
                            they had lately dosed me with some narcotic herb, procured, by a special
                            expedition, from the Monte Rotondo, and esteemed a perfect Stregomastix;
                            so of course the worthy pair expected my recovery. No longer did they
                            attempt to conceal from me the truth as to my poor infants, who had been
                            carried off on the day of my return. What I learned of the great
                            calamity, which then befell me, was this.
Towards sunset, my dear wife, with her usual fondness, went forth to look
                            for the little yacht returning from the gulf of Porto. Our darling
                            Harry, then in his third year, was with her, and the young nurse from
                            Muro. Lily sat upon the cliff, watching a sail far in the offing,
                            probably our vessel. Then as she turned towards the tower, a man from
                            the shrubbery stood before her, and called her by her maiden name. She
                            knew her cousin Lepardo, and supposed that he was come to kill her.
                            Nevertheless she asked him proudly how he dared to insult her so, in the
                            presence of her child and servant. He answered that it was her name, and
                            she was entitled to no other. Then he promised not to harm her, if she
                            would send the maid away, for he had important things to speak of. And
                            thereupon he laid before her documents and letters.
Meanwhile the tower was surrounded by his comrades; but they durst not
                            enter, for the trusty fusileer kept the one approach up the steep
                            hillside; and his grandson, a brave boy, stood at the loop-hole with
                            him. The maid, however, with her little charge, was allowed to pass, and
                            she joined the two other women in weak preparations for defence. The
                            period of attack had been chosen skilfully. So simple and patriarchal is
                            the Corsican mode of life, that very few servants are kept, even by men
                            of the highest station; and those few are not servants in our sense of
                            the word. It happened this night that the only two men employed upon the
                            premises, beside the old fusileer, had been sent into the town for
                            things wherewith to welcome me.
However, the faithful gunner, with his eye along the barrels, kept the
                            foe at bay, and seemed likely to keep them there, until the return of
                            the men; while his sturdy grandson split his red cheeks at the warder's
                            conch. But they little knew their enemy. Lepardo Della Croce was not to
                            be baulked by an old man and a boy. At the narrow entrance a lady's
                            dress came fluttering in the brisk north wind. Poor Lily tottered across
                            the line of fire, her life she never thought of; what use to live after
                            all that she had heard? Close behind her, and in the dusk invisible past
                            her wind-tossed drapery, stole her scoundrel cousin; whom, like trees
                            set in a row, or feather-edged boards seen lengthwise, a score of lithe
                            and active sailors followed. No chance for the marksman; like tiles they
                            overlapped one another, and poor Lily, upright in her outraged pride,
                            covered the stooping graduated file. French and English, Moorish and
                            Maltese, a motley band as ever swore, they burst into a hearty laugh at
                            the old gunner's predicament, the moment they had passed his range. All
                            within was at their mercy. True he kept the main gate still, and all the
                            doors were barred; but gates and doors were lubber's holes for seamen
                            such as they. Up the ivy they clambered, along the chesnut branches, or
                            the mere coignes of the granite, and into the house they poured at every
                            loop-hole and window. One thing must be said in their favour—they did
                            very little mischief. They were kept thoroughly under command, and a
                            wave of their captain's hand drove them anywhither. All he wanted was
                            possession of my children, and of some valuable property which he
                            claimed in right of his father.
Having secured both objects, he ordered his men to depart, allowing them
                            only to carry what wine and provisions they found. But the three
                            domestics, and the ancient sentinel and his boy, were bound hand and
                            foot, and concealed in a cave on the beach, to prevent any stir in the
                            neighbouring hamlet. Poor Lily was left where she fell, to recover or
                            not, as might be. My own darling was not insulted or touched; the men
                            were afraid, and Lepardo too proud to outrage one of his kin. Moreover,
                            his word was pledged; and they say that he always keeps it. Soon after
                            dark the robbers set sail, and slipped away down the coast, before that
                            strong north wind which had so baffled me. But for me a letter was left,
                            full of triumph and contumely. It was addressed to "Valentine Vaughan,
                            the Englishman;" "Signor Valentine" was the title conferred on me by the
                            fusileer, and adopted by the neighbourhood. To my surprise that letter
                            was written in English, and English as good as a foreigner ever indites:
                            I can repeat it word for word:—
"SIR,—I am reluctant to obtrude good counsel, but with the obtuseness of
                            your nation you are prone to the undervaluing of others. It is my
                            privilege to amend this error, while meekly I revindicate my own
                            neglected rights. From me you have stolen my bride and my good
                            inheritance, and in a manner which the persons unversed in human nature
                            would be inclined to characterise as dastardly and dissolute.
                            Furthermore, you have rendered the heiress of the noblest house in
                            Corsica a common Englishman's adulteress. If I had heard this on the day
                            of your mocking marriage, not the poor victim but you, you, would have
                            been my direction. Now I will punish you more gradually, and longer, as
                            you deserve. Your unhappy adulteress knows the perfidy of your
                            treachery, and your two poor bastards shall take refuge with me. The
                            inquiry with respect to my drowning them to-night is dependent upon the
                            stars. But if I shall spare them, as I may, because they cannot come
                            between me and my property, I will teach them, when they are old enough,
                            to despise and loathe your name. They shall know that in the stead of a
                            father's love they have only had a vagabond's lust, and they shall know
                            how you seduced and then slew their mother; for death, in my humble
                            opinion, appears in her face to-night. Although she has betrayed me, I
                            am regretful for her: but to you who have disgraced my name and
                            plundered me, as a man of liberal and exalted views I grant a
                            contemptuous forbearance; so long, that is to say, as you remain
                            unhappy, which the wicked ought to be. Of one thing, however, I bid you
                            to take admonishment. If I hear that you ever forget this episode of
                            debauchery, and return to your English wife and property, no house, no
                            castle that ever was edified, shall protect you from my dagger. Remember
                            the one thing, as your proverb tells, I am slow and sure.
LEPARDO DELLA CROCE."
