
CHAPTER VII.
In the early morning, I was off for London, taking Mrs. Fletcher with me,
                            much against my will, because she seemed to cumber me both in thought
                            and action. Between the door and the avenue, I looked from the open
                            carriage—I hate to be shut up in summer—at the dear old house. Lily had
                            got up to breakfast with me, in spite of my prohibition; and she was
                            going with us as far as the lodge, to have a nice walk back. To my great
                            surprise I saw my poor Uncle, standing at his open window, wrapped in a
                            dressing-gown. He kissed his hand and waved me his last farewell. I
                            leaped on the seat to reply, and then scolded him with my glove. Half in
                            play and half in sorrow, he mocked my lively gestures, and the morning
                            breeze lifted his silver hair, as he wafted me the last kiss. I told
                            Lily to scold him well, with my very best love, and she asked me in the
                            most ladylike manner, if I saw any green in her eye. The girl had picked
                            up a great deal of slang among the fair collegians. Mrs. Fletcher looked
                            sadly shocked; so I said, to reassure her: "You know, Mrs. Fletcher, we
                            must make allowances for young ladies who come from college."
"To be sure, Miss Vaughan, to be sure we must," she replied with her most
                            sagacious air: and at Gloucester she whispered to the coachman, "John,
                            the villain that stole Miss Lily sent her to Oxford, in a young
                            gentleman's clothes, and she took a very high degree: but don't say a
                            word about it." "Not by any means, ma'am," answered John, with a grin.
                            Nevertheless, it found its way over the house, and the result was that
                            all the girls came to Lily about their sweethearts.
I mention this trifling incident only to show how little I thought that I
                            then saw the last of my Uncle.
At Paddington we met Annie Franks taking her ticket for Gloucester, and
                            looking most bright and blooming, with a grand pocket in her cloak, made
                            to hold a three-volumed novel. I had only time for a few words with her,
                            in which I commended my Uncle to her especial attention, as she had ten
                            times my cousin's experience. Then I went with her to the down-platform,
                            and saw her get into the carriage, and gave her the last of my
                            sandwiches, while a cruel guard made her turn out her new pocket,
                            insisting that she must have a little dog concealed there. I laughed at
                            the poor little dear, as crimson with mortification she showed before
                            all the gentlemen the triple fluted bulk, and the guard read out, more
                            in amazement than rudeness, "Sir Ingomar of the Red Hand; or, The Knight
                            of St. Valentine, and the Paynim Lady." The gentlemen were gentlemen,
                            and tried very hard not to smile; but the way the guard scratched his
                            head was a great deal too much for them. "Dog's ears, anyhow," cried he,
                            trying to escape with a joke. I drew her out of the carriage, with tears
                            in her soft gray eyes, and put her into another, where Sir Ingomar was
                            unknown, and might spur on at pleasure. Then the smiles returned to her
                            shy and innocent face, and she put her head to the window, and whispered
                            gently to me:
"Any strawberries left, dear?"
"I should think so, Annie. The best of them all, the British Queens, are
                            just coming in. And such a crop of grapes!"
Annie's conception of perfect bliss was to sit upon a shady bank, "the
                            breeze just fanning her delicate cheek," with a cabbage-leaf full of
                            strawberries by her, and a cut-and-thrust novel upon her lap. Off she
                            went with a lovely smile, foreseeing all these delights.
From Paddington we drove straightway to the lodgings of Conrad Vaughan.
                            As we jolted along the New-road, which always has more holes in it than
                            any other street in London, I lost my wits in a tumult of thick
                            tempestuous thought. What would Conny say to see me, me the haughty
                            Clara, coming all impatiently even in quest of him? Would it not have
                            been far better, far more like an English maiden, to wait, and wait, and
                            wear the soul out, rather than to run the risk of mis-interpretation?
                            True, it was for his father's sake, to save him from deadly peril, and
                            to make his happiness complete; but might not all have been done by
                            messenger, as well as by me in person? So at least might fancy those who
                            did not know our enemy. Worst of all, and cloudiest thought, that filled
                            the eyes every time it came,—would he love me still? Would not the
                            strong revulsion, that must have torn him in two, when he dashed his
                            hand on his forehead, and forgot even man's forbearance, would not, must
                            not this have snapped all the delicate roots of love? I could not tell.
                            Of man's heart I know nothing; but I felt that with me, a woman, such a
                            horrible thing would create only longing to make amends.
"Mrs. Fletcher, how is my hair?"
"Lovely, my pretty child"—she always called me so from habit when no one
                            else was present—"you look your very best; and I'd like to see them that
                            could—talk to me of Lilies indeed, when our Miss Clara—"
"No smuts on my nose, Mrs. Fletcher, I hope? I never feel sure, in
                            London. You don't know London, you see."
"No, my pretty, as clean as a whistle, and as clear as the voice of a
                            May-bird, every atom of you. There's no such complexion nowhere out of
                            Gloshire or in it: and its all along of the brimstone and treacle I give
                            you, when you was small. Talk to me of Lilies—why I see three great
                            butter spots, as big as the point of a needle, and I know by the make of
                            her boot that her little toe turn over; and what's more than that—"
"Mrs. Fletcher, I won't hear a word of it. As to her little toe, I can
                            most solemnly declare that you are wrong altogether; for I have seen her
                            naked foot, and a lovelier one never was—"
"Take yours out of the way, Miss. But—"
"But— here we are; and you have made my cheeks quite red! I shall be
                            ashamed to be seen."
However, it did not matter; for there was no one there to see me. Conrad
                            was gone to Paris; he had quitted London quite suddenly, and there was a
                            letter left for his sister, which the girl forgot to post, till she
                            thought it was too late. And he said very likely he should go on to
                            Italy; and they were not to keep the rooms, if they had a chance of
                            letting them, only to put away the things he had left, in the cupboard.
                            So I took the letter, directed "Miss Isola Ross," but I did not dare to
                            open it, much as I longed to do so. Having enclosed it in a new
                            envelope, and posted it in the nearest letter-box, with a heavy heart I
                            re-entered the cab, and went on to Mrs. Shelfer's.
Mrs. Shelfer was of course surprised to see me so soon again.
                            Nevertheless she was all kindness and hospitality, as usual. The residue
                            of her little debt had been long ago released, and now I paid full rent,
                            for I could easily afford it. In answer to my eager inquiries as to what
                            had occurred since Wednesday, the little woman said shortly:
"Nothing at all, Miss, of any account, I thank you. Only Charley threw
                            double size, three times running, and won—"
"I don't mean that, Mrs. Shelfer; I mean, what has happened for me?"
"Nothing, Miss Vaughan; no, nothing to concern a great lady like you:
                            only such a queer lot come, and they seemed to be friends of yours. They
                            ain't gone from here more than half an hour ago."
"Tell me all about them."
"They come and ringed the bell, as modest as could be; and when I went to
                            the door, says they, 'If you please, where be Miss Clara, ma'am?' 'Miss
                            Clara!' says I, 'a set of dressed up trollops like you, come and ask for
                            Miss Clara! She'd Miss Clara you, pretty quick time, I doubt, if she was
                            only here.' 'Us humbly hopes no offence, ma'am,' says the great big man,
                            the biggest man as ever I see without paying, 'only us has come up from
                            the country, ma'am.' 'Up from the country!' says I, 'needn't tell me
                            that, my good giant; any fool can see that. And if you take my advice,
                            you'll clap your hat on, and go down again, and thank God for it.' You
                            see, Miss, he had got his hat off, and he standing out of doors, on the
                            shady side of the street! So what I said seemed to stop him altogether,
                            and he looked as if he wanted to think about it; and I was just a
                            slapping the door in their faces, when the other man, the queerest guy I
                            ever see, a hanging in his clothes like a skiver in a dish-clout, he
                            look full in my face as grave as a heretic parson, and stretch out his
                            skinny arm, and keep time with one foot, while he say or sing,

"'Ma'am, us be here now in this Lunnon town,
And it bain't likely as we be going down,
Till us see every mortal thing as there be for to see,
And take all the change out in a thorough-going spree.'
 

Then the big man laugh and clap him on the back; and the
                            little one wink both his eyes, and look to see what I think of it. Then
                            when he see me laugh, he make me such a coorous bow, that what with
                            his—what do they call the plaister, Miss?"
"Diachylon, perhaps you mean, Mrs. Shelfer?"
"Ah, that's the word. What with his strange diaculum, and his dancing
                            altitude, I declare I was a most a going to invite them in: but I
                            recollects, no, no: If Charley gets along of such Reginalds as these, I
                            may stand at the bed-room door and whistle for a week. There's nothing
                            Charley loves so much as a downright Reginald."
Poor simple-minded woman; how little she perceived that she of all the
                            number was by far the most original! And, like most of those who are
                            truly so, she would have taken the imputation as an outrageous insult.
                            Only the sham original glories in being thought queer.
"Well, Mrs. Shelfer, I want to hear the end of it."
"Just what I say, Miss. Yes, yes, no time to spare, and the pudding
                            boiling. So I says, quite sharp, 'What name, my good sir, and will you
                            leave a message? Miss Vaughan is out of town.' 'Wull,' says he, just as
                            I tell you, Miss, 'ony plase you say, ma'am, as Jan Uxtable, and Beany
                            Dawe, and the two beggest of the chillers has doed theirselves the
                            honour of coming to lave their dooty.' Then the little girl look up and
                            she flash her ribbons and say, 'Mr. Huxtable, if you please, ma'am, and
                            Mr. Ebenezer Dawe, and Miss Huxtable, and Master John, has called.'
                            'Hadn't you better write it down, Miss?' says I, as innocent as
                            possible. 'Do you suppose I can't then?' says she, with such a spitting
                            out of her eyes, and she swinging a new parry sole. 'Just give me a
                            sheet of papper, if you keep such a thing in the house.' 'Plase to
                            excuse the little wanch, ma'am,' says the big man, quite humble, 'us
                            can't hardly make head nor tail of her, since her come to this here
                            Lunnon. If I had only knowed it I'd have had her mother along of me,
                            that I would ees fai, and the coo be her own midwaife. But ony plase you
                            say Jan Uxtable come if they count it dacent hereaway. Threescore acres
                            and five, ma'am, without reckon the Cleeve, and no man have a call, to
                            my mind, to christen himself "Mister" on less than a hundred acres, in
                            Lunnon or out of it.' 'Very well, sir,' I says, for I took to the big
                            man somehow, 'I will deliver your message. Miss Vaughan only went from
                            here of middle day on Wednesday.' 'And tell her please, if she do come
                            back,' says spirity Miss Parrysole, with the tears in her great blue
                            eyes, 'that Sally Huxtable leave her very best love and duty, and hope
                            so much Miss Clara will come to see the great wrestling to-morrow,
                            twelve o'clock, and be early. And they be betting now two to one on the
                            other man, ma'am. But he have no chance, no more than Tim Badcock with
                            father.' 'I be much afeared, ma'am,' says the deep-voiced man, as soft
                            as any bell, 'I be afeared our Sally will be begger by a lanyard nor
                            ever her daddy or her mammy was. But likely it be all for the best.' And
                            with that all four of them crooked their legs to me most polite, and
                            went on round the corner; and after them went a score of boys, that
                            seemed to follow them everywhere. The boys knew all about it, and so did
                            I at last, that it was the great champion wrestling, that is to be
                            to-morrow. Charley have been mad about it going on now two months. And
                            can you please to tell him, Miss, which way to lay his money?"
"To be sure, I can. Let him take every offer of two to one against the
                            Devonshire champion; and if he loses I will make it good to him, upon
                            condition that he gives you everything he wins. Now please to let me
                            have a cup of strong tea."
Having thus got rid of my most talkative friend, and Mrs. Fletcher having
                            started off to buy something, I had time to think a little.
It was nearly two o'clock on the Friday afternoon. Nothing more could be
                            done at present towards recovering Conrad, for he had not even left at
                            his lodgings any Continental address. Possibly his place of sojourn
                            might be revealed in the letter to his sister, posted by my hand: but it
                            was far more likely that he himself knew not, at the time of writing,
                            where he should find quarters. I must have been beside myself with worry
                            and disappointment, when I dropped that letter into Her Majesty's box;
                            for if I returned, as had been arranged, by the express at five o'clock,
                            several hours would be saved in the delivery of its tidings. And, as
                            yet, I little dreamed where I should be at five P.M.
In that little room, whose walls were more relieved than decorated by
                            certain daubs of mine, which even in my narrowest straits I could not
                            bear to part with, because an indulgent critic had found merit in them—a
                            discovery requiring much acumen—here I now sat, gazing fondly, dreaming
                            hazily, yearning strongly for the days gone by, yet only three months
                            old, when I had not a crust or dress till I earned it by my labour. How
                            that pinch enlarged my heart, God only knows, not I. Ah, then I was a
                            happy girl, though I never guessed it. How proudly I walked down the
                            Square, with my black straw bonnet on—which Idols called the Dowdy,—and
                            my dark plaid shawl around me, the plainest of the plain, yet not
                            prepared to confess myself so quotidian as my dress. Who could tell, in
                            those happy days, who might come, or round what corner, and who could
                            say whether of the twain would look the more accidental? And then the
                            doubt—shall I look or not, better perhaps be intent on the fire-plug,
                            and make him come round again?
But now. Ah me, they have heaped up riches for me, and who shall come to
                            enjoy them?
Just as I was warming to this subject, gushing along in a fine vein of
                            that compassion which alone of soft emotions we find it no duty to
                            wrestle with, I mean of course self-pity—in came Mrs. Fletcher,
                            suddenly, and in anger.
"Well, Miss Clara," she exclaimed, throwing down her parcel, "so this is
                            London, is it?"
"To be sure, Mrs. Fletcher. What objection have you to make to it?"
"No objection, Miss, only this, that if ever I seen a set of countrified
                            folk, the Londoners are them. Why the commonest of our kitchen-maids
                            would be ashamed to talk so broad, and to dress so contemptuous. And
                            here I went half a mile to buy boots, real London-made; and trees all
                            along by the side of the road, and pots on the shelves of the windows. I
                            never, if Gloucester don't look much more like a town."
As Mrs. Fletcher did not tell a story with the Herodotean vivacity of Tim
                            Badcock, I will render her facts in my own unpretending version,
                            premising only that she had taken the farmer and Sally for specimens of
                            the true Cockney; a bit of saltatory reasoning of which she has not
                            heard (and perhaps never will hear) the last. While then the worthy
                            housekeeper was driving a slow but shrewd bargain, in a smart shop by
                            the Broadway, taking the boots to the sunshine, to pick clever holes in
                            the stitching, she observed a diminutive boy, of the genuine shoe-black
                            order, encamping in a bight or back-eddy of pavement, just at the side
                            of the door. This little fellow was uniformed, or rather multi-coloured,
                            in gold, and red, and green. His cap was scarlet, and edged with gold
                            twist; his tunic red, and his apron of very bright green baize. On his
                            cap, and on one shoulder, appeared his number, 32, in figures of brass,
                            an inch and a half in length. Strapped on his back he carried an oblong
                            block of wood, like a great club-foot, and nearly as large as himself.
                            This he deposited, with elaborate fuss, on the curb of the inner
                            pavement, which terraced some inches above the true thoroughfare. A
                            blacking-jar hung at one end of his block; from a drawer below he pulled
                            out three well-worn brushes, and began to hiss and to work away, in
                            double quick time, with both hands, at some boot projected towards him
                            on the delicate foot of fancy. As he grew warm at his work, with one
                            sharp eye all the while looking out for a genial passenger, there slowly
                            came straggling towards him a bevy quite fresh from Arcadia. First, in
                            treble importance walked, impressively rolling and leering around,
                            Hermes, Pan, and the owl of Pallas, combined in one Ebenezer Dawe. His
                            eyes, never too co-operative, roved away upon either side, in quest of
                            intelligence, which they received with a blink that meant, "Pooh, don't
                            I know it?" With occasional jerks of his lank right arm, he was dragging
                            along, like a saw through a knot, the sturdy, tight-buttoned, and
                            close-pronged form of our little Jack. Jack was arrayed in a black
                            wide-awake, with blue ribbons, and a bran-new suit of broad-furrowed
                            corduroy, made of nights by his mother and Suke, and turned out with
                            countless pockets, each having three broad buttons, to foil the London
                            thieves. In one of these pockets, the trouser one I do believe, in spite
                            of all Sally had taught him, he was now chinking, to the creak of the
                            corduroys, his last-abiding halfpence, and lagging heavily on the poet's
                            arm, he cast fond glances at a pile of glorious peg-tops. Sticking her
                            toes into little Jack's heels, to kick anybody that dared to steal him,
                            came my little Sally, all fire, and wonder, and self-assertion, towing
                            her mighty father along, like a grasshopper leading an ox. At times she
                            strove to drag him towards the finery of the windows, and paid very
                            little heed to his placid protestations. "Walk fitty, my dear; walk as
                            you ought to do, my dear. Oh fai! oh fai! Whatever wull they Lunnoners
                            think of Davonsheer, if they zees you agooin on laike this here? There,
                            dang that Beany Dawe; blest if I baint a toornin Poüt too. Coomth of
                            larnin to wraite, I reckon." The farmer's pockets were crammed with
                            circulars, handbills, and puffs of every description, which he received
                            from all who offered, and was saving them all for his wife.
"Clean your boots, my gentleman," cried a little shrill voice; "clean
                            both your boots for a halfpenny. Never say die, Sir; polish 'em bright
                            till the cat at home won't know them. Three-fardings-worth of blacking,
                            and a penny in skill and labour, and all for the laughable sum of one
                            half-penny. Pure satisfaction guaranteed, or the whole of the money
                            returned. Up with your foot, my gentleman!"
The farmer pulled up suddenly, for fear of walking over him, as the boy,
                            despising Beany Dawe, had dashed in between Jack and Sally, and danced
                            before Mr. Huxtable. His brushes were whisking about, like bumble-bees
                            roughly disturbed, and already menaced the drab of the Sunday fustian
                            gaiters.
"Zober now," cried the farmer, who could not believe that he was
                            addressed, having never dreamed, in his most ambitious moments (if any
                            such he had), of ever being called a gentleman, "zober now, wull'e.
                            Where bee'st gooin to, thou little hosebird; be they your Lunnon-town
                            manners? Lat alo-un, I zay; lat alo-un now, wull 'e?"—as the boy got
                            more and more tentative—"Heart alaive, cant e zee, they be my Zunday
                            gaiters? Oh, if my missus wor here! And 'e bain't more nor naine year
                            old! Wull, wull, where ever do 'e goo to schoüll?"
"Hinstitooshun 66. No children or females admitted. Up with your foot,
                            old bloke! Do the young uns and tootor half-price. Just two minutes to
                            spare, till the Dook of Cambridge's turn. Great Exhibition polish, and
                            all to encourage the fine arts."
The good farmer was lost beyond hope, in the multitude of subjects
                            pressed all of a pulp on his slow understanding; nevertheless, he had
                            presence of mind to feel first for his watch and his money, and then for
                            the best pocket-handkerchief stitched into the crown of his hat;
                            meanwhile the boy got hold of one foot, and began to turn up his
                            gaiters. Then Sally and little Jack rushed to the rescue, and Jack
                            punched the boy in the face, while Beany Dawe looked on with a grin of
                            broad experience. But in spite of all aid, the farmer began to collapse
                            before his mosquito enemy; when luckily three giant Life-guards (for a
                            crowd was now collected) opened their mouths, like the ends of a
                            monkey-fur muff, in a round and loud guffaw, with a very coarse sneer at
                            poor Sally. The farmer looked at them in much amazement; then his
                            perplexity went like a cloud, and his face shone with something to do,
                            as he gave Sally his hat to hold. Till now all the mockers had been too
                            small for him anyhow to fall foul of. Ere the echo of laughter was over,
                            the three dandy Lifeguards lay on their backs in the mud, with their
                            striped legs erect in the air, like the rods of a railway surveyor. The
                            crowd fell back headlong, as if from a plunging horse, then laughed at
                            the fallen and with the conqueror. Even the boy was humility multiplied
                            into servility.
"Wutt be up to, arl on 'e?" asked the farmer, replacing his hat; "cas'n
                            none on 'e lat a pacible chap alo-un? And wutt will they chillers think
                            as coom here to get example? Why, Beany, if us had knowed this, us would
                            have brought Bill constable with us, ees fai. Now 'e don't know nothing
                            about it"—he remonstrated with the admiring multitude—"one o' them dree
                            worn't throw handsome laike, ony dree pins, I tull 'e. But us'll do it
                            over again, if he claimeth it. Can't do nothing vitty, zin I laved my
                            missus at home. But her wadn't coom, God knows." These last two remarks
                            were addressed to himself, but the crowd had full benefit of them.
                            "Worn't 'e axing of lave, two or dree minutes agone, little chap with
                            the brisk there, to tend my butts, and tuk it amost wiout axing? Us be
                            bound laike to stap here now till us zees if them 'lisher men feels up
                            for any moor plai. Do as 'e plase, little chap, zoon as Sally hath
                            toorned my best gaiters up, if her bain't too grand in Lunnon."
With bright ribbons fluttering and finery flapping about her, poor Sally
                            knelt down in a moment to work at the muddy fustian: but her father
                            would not allow it, he had only wished to try her; so he caught her up
                            with one hand, and kissed her, and I think, from what Mrs. Fletcher
                            said, he must have given her sixpence at least.
It is needless to say that, although the boy worked with both hands in
                            the most conscientious manner, the farmer's boots defied him.
                            Neats'-foot oil, and tallow, and beeswax held their own against Day and
                            Martin. "Coom, little chap," said Mr. Huxtable, kindly, "thee hast dooed
                            thy very best, but our Zuke will have the laugh of thee. Tache thee
                            perhaps it wull to be zoberer next taime, and not be quite so peart to
                            do a dale more nor thee can do. But thee hast used more ink than ai wud
                            over two copies. Here be a groat for the Exhibition polish."
In this little episode, as will be manifest, Sally has helped me more
                            than Mrs. Fletcher. But now, to return to my narrative.
Almost directly after the housekeeper left me, Patty came trotting in
                            with a large white breakfast-cup full of most powerful tea. I cannot
                            help thinking that the little woman put some brandy in it, or allowed
                            Mrs. Fletcher, who trusted much in that cordial, to do so; but they
                            stoutly deny the charge, and declare that there was only a pinch of
                            gunpowder. Whatever it was, being parched with thirst, I swallowed
                            without tasting it, and the effect upon my jaded brain was immediate and
                            amazing. All self-pity was gone; and self-admiration, and haughty
                            courage succeeded. Was I, Clara Vaughan, who had groped and grubbed for
                            years to find the hole of a blasting snake, and had now got my hand upon
                            it, was I to start back and turn pale at his hiss, and say, "God speed
                            you and polish your skin. Give me your slough for a keepsake?" Would I
                            not rather seize the incarnate devil, trample his spine, and make his
                            tongue sputter in dust? In a moment my cloak and hat were on again; I
                            scarcely looked at the glass, but felt the hot flush on my cheeks, as I
                            lightly skipped down the stairs, and silently left the house. What to do
                            next I knew not, nor asked, but flew headlong before the impulse, to
                            lift and confront—as is my nature—the danger that lay before me. As I
                            glided along, I was conscious of one thing, the people in the street
                            turned in surprise to watch me. As if by instinct, I hurried straight to
                            Lucas Street, my courage mounting higher and higher as I neared the
                            accursed threshold. Balaam and Balak stood at the bar of a tavern which
                            commanded a view of the street, but were much too busy with beer to see
                            me passing so swiftly. Loudly I rang the bell of No. 37; the figures
                            were bright on the door, and looking narrowly, I perceived the old No.
                            19, more by the lines than the colour.
Old Cora came as usual; but started at seeing me, and turned as pale as
                            death.
"Is your master within?" I could not use his false name.
"Yes, Meesa, but you not see him now."
"Dare you to disobey Our Lady's heart?" And I held my gordit before her.
                            She cowered with one knee on the mat and kissed it; then led me into the
                            presence of Lepardo Della Croce.
