
CHAPTER III.
When my Uncle saw that letter, he declared that he would go to London
                            with me. No power on earth should prevent him. Not even his self-willed
                            Clara. It was not revenge he wanted: even though it were for his
                            innocent brother, whose wrongs he could not pardon. No, if the
                            small-minded wretch who had spent his life in destroying a
                            fellow-creature's, if that contemptible miscreant lay at his feet
                            to-morrow, he would not plant foot upon him; but forgive him heartily,
                            if he had the grace to desire it. But for his children,—for them he must
                            go to London. Only let him see them once before he died. No torpid limbs
                            for him. Who said he was old—and he only forty-seven?
One thing seemed rather strange to me. He longed, yearned I should say,
                            to look upon his little Lily even more than on the child he knew, his
                            son, his first-born Harry. "Why, Clara," he used to say, "she is nearly
                            as old as you, and you are a full-grown girl. On the 21st of this
                            month"—it was now July—"she will be eighteen; I can hardly believe it. I
                            wonder what she is like. Most likely she takes after her lovely mother.
                            No doubt of it, I should say. Don't you think so, Clara?"
"Of course, Uncle," I would reply, knowing nothing at all about it, "of
                            course she does. How I should like to see her."
Perhaps fifty times a day, he would ask for my opinion, and I would
                            deliver it firmly, perhaps in the very same words and without a shade of
                            misgiving; and though of no value whatever, it seemed to comfort him
                            every time. But the prolonged excitement, and the stress of imagination
                            exerted on Lily junior, told upon him rapidly in his worn and weak
                            condition. Longing for his company, assistance, and advice, I waited
                            from day to day, even at the risk of leaving Balaam and Balak without
                            good beer. All this time, my imagination was busy with weak surmises,
                            faint suspicions, and tangled recollections.
At last, I could delay no longer. Tuesday was the latest day I could
                            consent to wait for, and on the Monday my Uncle was more nervous and
                            weak than ever. It was too plain that he must not attempt the journey,
                            and that the long suspense was impairing his feeble health. So for once
                            I showed some decision—which seemed to have failed me of late—without
                            telling him any more about it, I got everything ready, and appeared at
                            his bedroom door, only to say "Good bye." Annie Franks, who was going
                            with me, for a short visit to her father, hung back in some amazement,
                            doubting whether she had any right to be there, and dragged off her legs
                            by the coil of my strong will. My poor Uncle seemed quite taken aback;
                            but as it could not be helped, he speedily made up his mind to it. "The
                            carriage was at the door;" which announcement to English minds precludes
                            all further argument.
"Good bye, Uncle dear," I cried, as cheerily as I could, "I shall be back
                            by the end of the week and bring your Lily with me. Give me a good kiss
                            for her, and now another for myself."
He was sitting up in the bed, with a Cashmere dressing-gown on, and
                            poring over some relics of olden time.
"Good bye, my darling, and don't be long away. They have robbed me enough
                            already."
After giving Judy the strictest orders, I hurried off in fear and hope,
                            doubtful whether I ought to go. Annie lingered and gave him a kiss, for
                            she was very fond of him. He whispered something about me, which I did
                            not stop to hear, for I wanted to leave him in good spirits.
After a rapid journey, I saw dear Annie safe in the arms of her father
                            and mother, and found Mrs. Shelfer at home, and in capital spirits, all
                            the birds, etc. well, and no distress in the house. Charley was doing
                            wonders, wonders, my good friend, sticking to his work, yes, yes, and
                            not inside the public house for the best part of the week. Leastways so
                            he said, and it would not do to contradict him. And she really did
                            believe there were only three bills over-due!
My little rooms were snug and quiet, and the dust not more than half an
                            inch thick. Mrs. Shelfer used to say that dusting furniture was the
                            worst thing in the world to wear it out. According to her theory, the
                            dust excluded the air, especially from the joints, and prevented the
                            fly-blows coming. However, I made her come up and furbish, while I went
                            out to post a letter for Messrs. Balaam and Balak, requesting them to
                            visit me in the morning.
When things were set to rights a little, and air, which Mrs. Shelfer
                            hated, flowed in from either balcony, I bought a fine crab and some
                            Sally Lunns, and begged for the pleasure of my landlady's company at
                            tea. This she gladly gave me, for the little woman loved nothing better
                            than sucking the hairy legs of a crab. But she was so overcome by the
                            rumours of my wealth, that she even feared to eject the pieces in her
                            ordinary manner, and the front rail of her chair was like the beam of a
                            balance. Infinitely rather would I be poor myself, than have people
                            ceremonious to me because I am not poor; and to tell the honest truth, I
                            believe there is a vein of very low blood in me, which blushes at the
                            sense of riches and position. Why should I have every luxury, that is if
                            I choose to have it, while men and women of a thousand times my mind,
                            and soul, and heart, spend their precious lives in earning the value of
                            their coffins?
This thought has wearied many a mind of pure aerial flight, compared
                            whereto my weak departures are but the hops of a flea; so I lose the
                            imago, but catch the larva, upon the nettle, practice. Mrs. Shelfer is
                            soon at ease; and we talk of the price of cat's meat, and how dear
                            sausages are, and laugh—myself with sorrow—over the bygone days, when
                            dripping played the role of butter, and Judy would not take a bone
                            because he thought I wanted it.
Then we talk over the news. Miss Idols had been there, bless her sweet
                            face, yes, ever so many times, to look for letters, or to hear tidings
                            of me. But she was not one bit like herself. She never teased the poor
                            little woman now; the poor little woman wished very much she would. Oh,
                            I should hardly know her. She did not know which bird it was that had
                            the wooden leg, and had forgotten the difference between a meal-worm and
                            a lob. And she did not care which way she rubbed the ears of the
                            marmoset. Mrs. Shelfer believed, but for the world it must not be told
                            again, that Isola was deeply in love, unrequited love, perhaps one of
                            the weteranarian gents. They did say they had some stuff as would lead a
                            girl like a horse. But whatever it was, Mrs. Shelfer only knew that she
                            could not get at the rights of it. Girls had grown so cunning
                            now-a-days, what with the great supernatural exhibition, and the hats
                            they had taken to wear flat on the tops of their heads, not at all what
                            they used to be when she and Charley were young. Then a young woman was
                            not afraid of showing what her neck was like; now she tucked it in
                            cotton wool like a canary's egg. And what were they the better, sly
                            minxes? She saw enough of it in the Square garden, and them showing
                            their little sisters' legs for patterns of their own, oh fie!"
"Come, Mrs. Shelfer, no scandal, if you please. What news of your Uncle
                            John?"
"Ah, Miss, you must ask the sharks, and the lobsters, and the big
                            sea-serpent. They do say, down at Wapping, that the ship was cast away
                            among the cannibal islands, and the people ate a policeman, and he upon
                            his promotion. What a pity, what a pity! And his coat four and sixpence
                            a yard, ready shrunk! But them natives is outrageous."
"Nonsense, Patty, I don't believe a word of it. Sailors are dreadful
                            story-tellers, ever since the days of Sindbad. Has any one besides Miss
                            Isola, Mrs. Elton, or any one, been here to ask for me?"
"No, Miss, Mr. Conrad never come after the day you served him so
                            dreadful; and Miss Idols say he went back and spoiled 300*l.* worth of
                            work; but that great lady with the red plush breeches, and the pink silk
                            stockings, and the baker's shop in their hair, she been here twice last
                            week, and left a letter for you. And Balaam been here several times, and
                            Balak along of him; but I banged the door on them both, now I hear they
                            be out of the business, and a nice young man set up who don't bother
                            about the gun."
"Lady Cranberry's letter may lie there, and go back the next time Ann
                            Maples comes. But the bailiffs I must see. If they come to-morrow, let
                            them in immediately. And how are all my friends at the Mews?"
Her reply would fill a chapter, so I will not enter upon it, but go to
                            bed and miss the sound of dear Judy's tail at the door. In the first
                            course of my dreams, Mr. Shelfer passed on his bedward road, having
                            politely taken his shoes off at the bottom of the stairs; in doing which
                            he made at least three times the noise his shodden feet would have
                            inflicted.
In the morning I took my old walk round the Square, and then sat down and
                            tried to be patient until the bailiffs should come. Of course I did not
                            mean to go to my darling Isola, nor even to let her know that I was so
                            near at hand, although my heart was burning to see her sweet face again.
                            I even kept away from the window, though I wanted to watch for the
                            bailiffs, and strictly ordered Mrs. Shelfer not to tell her, if she
                            should call, a word about my being there. However, it was all in vain.
                            Mr. Shelfer went out after breakfast to his play-work in the Square, and
                            the smell of his pipe invaded my little room. I think he must have left
                            the front door open; at any rate I heard, all of a sudden, a quick
                            patter of running feet, and such a crying and sobbing, and Mrs. Shelfer
                            hurrying out to meet it.
"You can't, Miss, you can't indeed—not for a thousand pounds. The rooms
                            are let, I tell you, and you can't go up. Oh dear, oh dear, whatever am
                            I to do?"
"Patty, I will go up. I don't care who's there. My
                            heart is breaking, and I will die on my darling's
                            bed. If you stand there, I'll push you. Out of the way, I tell you." And
                            up flew Idols, in a perfect mess of tears. What could I do but fly to
                            meet her, and hug my only pet? What with her passion of grief, and
                            sudden joy, at seeing me, she fainted away in my arms. I got her somehow
                            to the sofa, and kissed her into her senses again. When she came to
                            herself, and felt sure it was not a dream, she nestled into my bosom, as
                            if I had been her husband, and stole long glances at me to see whether I
                            was offended. Her pretty cloak lay on the floor, and her hat beneath the
                            table. For a long time she sobbed and trembled so that she could not say
                            a word, while I kept on whispering such vain words as these:
"Never mind, my pet. There, you have cried enough. Tell your own dear
                            Clara who has dared to vex you."
To see that sweet child's misery, I felt in such a rage, I could have
                            boxed her enemy's ears. But I never thought that it was more than a
                            child's vexation. At last, after drinking a tumblerful of water, and
                            giving room to her palpitating heart, she contrived to tell me her
                            trouble.
"Why, dear, you know my pappy—pappy I used to call him—he is not my papa
                            at all, he says himself he is not; and that is not the worst of it, for
                            I could do well enough without him, he is always so dreadfully cross,
                            and doesn't care for me one bit. I could do without him very well, if I
                            had a proper papa, or if my father was dead and had loved me before he
                            died; but now I have no father at all, and never had any in the world; I
                            am only an outcast, an abandoned— Oh, Clara, will you promise to forgive
                            me, and love me all the same?"
"To be sure I will, my dearest. I am sure, you have done no harm. And
                            even if you have been led astray—"
She looked at me with quick pride flashing through her abasement, and she
                            took her arm off my shoulder.
"No, you have quite mistaken me. Do you think I would sit here and kiss
                            you, if I were a wicked girl? But who am I to be indignant at anything
                            now? He told me—are you sure the door is shut?—he told me, with a sneer,
                            that I was a base-born child, and he used a worse word than that."
She fell away from me, her cheeks all crimson with shame, and her long
                            eyelashes drooping heavily on them. I caught her to my heart: poor
                            wronged one, was she a whit less pure? I seemed to love her the better,
                            for her great misfortune. Of course, I had guessed it long ago, from
                            what her brother told me.
"And who is your father, my pretty? Any father must be a fool who would
                            not be proud of you."
"Oh, Clara, the worst of it is that I have not the least idea. But from
                            something that hard man said, I believe he was an Englishman. I think I
                            could have got everything from him, he was so beside himself; but when
                            he told me that dreadful thing, and said that my father had lied to my
                            mother and ruined her, I felt so sick that I could not speak, till he
                            turned me out of the house, and struck me as I went."
"What?"
"Yes, he turned me out of the house, and gave me the blow of disgrace,
                            and said I should never look on his face again. He had won his revenge—I
                            cannot tell what he meant, for I never harmed him—and now I might follow
                            my mother, and take to—I can't repeat it, but it was worse than death.
                            No fear of my starving, he said, with this poor face of mine. And so I
                            was going to Conny, dear Conny; I think he knew it all long ago, but
                            could not bear to tell me. And I sat on some steps in a lonely place,
                            for I did not know how to walk, and I prayed to see you and die: then
                            old Cora came after me, and even she was crying, and she gave me all her
                            money, and a morsel of the true cross, and told me to come here first,
                            for Conny was out of town, and she would come to see me at dark; and
                            perhaps the Professor would take me back when his rage was over. Do you
                            think I would ever go? And after what he told me to do!"
Such depth of loathing and scorn in those gentle violet eyes, and her
                            playful face for the moment so haughtily wild and implacable—Clara
                            Vaughan, in her stately rancour, seemed an iceberg by a volcano.
I saw that it was the moment for learning all that she knew; and the time
                            for scruples was past.
"Isola, tell me all you have heard, about this dastard bully?"
"I know very little; he has taken good care of that. I only know that he
                            did most horrible things to unfortunate cats and dogs. It made me
                            shudder to touch him at one time. But he gave that up I believe. But
                            there is some dark and fearful mystery, which my brother has found out;
                            that is if he be my brother. How can I tell even that? Whatever the
                            discovery was, it made such a change in him, that he cared for nothing
                            afterwards, until he saw you, Clara. I am not very sharp, you know,
                            though I have learned so much, that perhaps you think I am."
"My darling, I never thought such a thing for a moment."
"Oh, I am very glad. At any rate I like to talk as if I was clever. And
                            some people say I am. But, clever or stupid, I am almost certain that
                            Conny found out only half the secret; and then on the day when he came
                            of age, that man told him the rest, either for his own purposes, or holy
                            Madonna knows why."
"When was your brother of age?"
"Last Christmas Eve. Don't you remember what I told you at the school of
                            design that day?"
"And when is your birthday, Isola?"
"I am sure I don't know, but somewhere about Midsummer. They never told
                            Conny when his was, but he knew it somehow. Come, he is clever now,
                            Clara, though you don't think I am. Isn't he now? Tell the truth."
"I am thinking of far more important matters than your rude brother's
                            ability. Whence did you come to England and when?"
This was quite a shot in the dark. But I had long suspected that they
                            were of Southern race.
"I am sure I don't know. I was quite a child at the time, and the subject
                            has been interdicted; but I think we came from Italy, and at least ten
                            years ago."
"And your brother speaks Italian more readily than English. Can you tell
                            me anything more?"
"Nothing. Only I know that old Cora is a Corsican: she boasts of it every
                            night, when she comes to see me in bed, although she has been forbidden.
                            But what does she care—she asks—for this dirty little English island?
                            And she sits by my bed, and sings droning songs, which I hardly
                            understand; but she says they are beautiful nannas."
How my heart was beating, at every simple sentence. None of this had I
                            heard before, because she durst not tell it.
"Any other questions, Donna?" She was recovering her spirits, as girls
                            always do by talking. "Why, my darling, you ought to have a wig. You
                            beat all the senior sophists."
"Yes. Now come and kiss me. Kiss me for a pledge that you will never
                            leave me. I am rich again now: you can't tell how rich I am, and nothing
                            to do with my money, and nobody likely to share it. If you were my own
                            sister, I could not love you more; and most likely I should not love you
                            a quarter as much. And my Uncle longs to see you so. You shall come and
                            live with me, and we'll be two old maids together. Now promise, darling,
                            promise. Kiss me, and seal the bargain."
"Clara, I would rather be your servant than the queen of the world. Only
                            promise first that you will never scold me. I cannot bear being scolded.
                            I never used to be; and it will turn all my hair gray."
"I will promise never to scold you, unless you run away."
She swept back her beautiful hair, threw her arms round my neck, looked
                            in my eyes with a well-spring of love, and kissed me. Oh, traitorous
                            Clara, it was not the kiss—deeply as I loved her—but the evidence I
                            wanted. I knew that with her ardent nature she would breathe her soul
                            upon me. The exquisite fragrance of her breath was like the wind
                            stealing over violets. I had noticed it often before. My last weak doubt
                            was scattered; yet I played with her and myself, one sweet moment
                            longer.
"Darling, what scent do you use? What is it you wash your teeth
                            with?"
"Nothing but water, Clara; what makes you ask in that way?"
"And the perfume in your hair—what is it? Oh, you little Rimmel!"
"Nothing at all, Donna. I never use anything scented. Not even Eau de
                            Cologne. I hate all the stuff they sell."
"How very odd! Why, I could have declared that your lips and your hair
                            were sprinkled with extract of violets."
"Oh, now I know what you mean. I never perceive it myself, but numbers of
                            people have fancied that I use artificial perfume. But that man—oh, what
                            shall I call him? And only this morning I called him 'pappy'—he always
                            accounts for everything, you know; and he said it was hered—herod—I
                            can't say it now, the long English word, but I could at college—no
                            matter, it means something in the family. My mother, he said, was so
                            well known to possess it, that she had an Italian name among the
                            servants for it; though her real name was quite a different flower.
                            Clara, why do you look at me so? And what are you crying for?"
"Because, my own darling dear, I have not loved you for nothing. You are
                            my own flesh and blood. You are my own cousin, I tell you, my dear
                            Uncle's daughter; and your name is Lily Vaughan."
She drew her arms from me, and leaped up from the sofa; she was so amazed
                            and frightened. She looked at me most sadly, believing that I was mad;
                            then she fainted again, and fell back into my arms.
When I had brought her round, and propped her up with a pillow—for
                            cushions were very scarce—the strain of the mind being over, my brain
                            began to whirl so that I could neither think nor act. For a long time I
                            could not have enough of kissing and hugging Idols. I played with her
                            hair, as if I had been her lover; and then patted and caressed her, as
                            if she had been my baby. And had I no thought of another, who ought to
                            be doing all this to me? Yes, I fear that it lay in the depth of my
                            heart, stronger than maid's love of maiden, or even than my delight at
                            the joy coming to my Uncle.
Then I hated myself for my selfishness, and caught up my Lily and rubbed
                            her, and made her understand things. I flung a decanter of water over
                            both her and myself, which saved us from hysterics.
Poor little thing! She was not like me. Strong Passion was a stranger to
                            her, and she fell before his blow. I had fought with him so long, that I
                            met him like a prize-fighter, and countered at every stroke. Up ran Mrs.
                            Shelfer, in the height and crest of the wave, when backwards or
                            forwards, crying or laughing, hung on a puff of wind. She came with a
                            commonplace motive; she thought we were playing at cricket with her
                            beloved sticks. Her arrival made a diversion, though it had no other
                            effect, for I walked the little thing out, and locked the door behind
                            her.
Then I got my darling new cousin into my arms, and kissed her, and
                            marched her about the room, and made her show her Vaughan instep. Excuse
                            the petty nonsense—what women are quite free from it?—but for many
                            generations our feet have been arched and pointed: of course it does not
                            matter; still I was glad that hers were of the true Vaughan pattern.
                            Then, as she so hated all the stuffs they sell, I showered over her an
                            entire bottle of the very best Eau de Cologne. It was a bit of bullying;
                            but all girls of high spirit are bullies. And it made her eyes water so
                            dreadfully, that she cried as hard as I did.
