<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>
<p>On the fifth anniversary of my father's death, when I was fifteen years
                            of age, I went to visit (as I always did upon that day) the fatal room.
                            Although this chamber had been so long unused, the furniture was allowed
                            to remain; and I insisted passionately that it should be my charge. What
                            had seemed the petulance of a child was now the strong will of a
                            thoughtful girl.</p>
<p>I took the key from my bosom, where I always kept it, and turned it in
                            the lock. No mortal had entered that door since I passed it in my last
                            paroxysm, three weeks and a day before. I saw a cobweb reaching from the
                            black finger-plate to the third mould of the beading. The weather had
                            been damp, and the door stuck fast to the jamb, then yielded with a
                            crack. Though I was bold that day, and in a mood of triumph, some awe
                            fell on me as I entered. There hung the heavy curtain, last drawn by the
                            murderer's hand; there lay the bed-clothes, raised for the blow, and
                            replaced on death; and there was the pillow where sleep had been so
                            prolonged. All these I saw with a forced and fearful glance, and my
                            breath stood still as the wind in a grave.</p>
<p>Presently a light cloud floated off the sun, and a white glare from the
                            snow of the morning burst across the room. My sight was not so dimmed
                            with tears as it generally was when I stood there, for I had just read
                            the history of a long-hidden crime detected, and my eyes were full of
                            fierce hope. But stricken soon to the wonted depth of sadness, with the
                            throbs of my heart falling like the avenger's step, I went minutely
                            through my death-inspection. I felt all round the dusty wainscot, opened
                            the wardrobes and cupboards, raised the lids of the deep-bayed
                            window-seats, peered shuddering down the dark closet, where I believed
                            the assassin had lurked, started and stared at myself in the mirror, to
                            see how lone and wan I looked, and then approached the bed, to finish my
                            search in the usual place, by lying and sobbing where my father died. I
                            had glanced beneath it and round the pillars, and clutched the curtain
                            as if to squeeze out the truth, and was just about to throw myself on
                            the coverlet and indulge the fit so bitterly held at bay, when something
                            on the hangings above the head-board stopped me suddenly. There I saw a
                            narrow line of deep and glowing red. It grew so vivid on the faded
                            damask, and in the white glare of the level sun, that I thought it was
                            on fire. Hastily setting a chair by the pillar, for I would not tread on
                            that bed, I leaped up, and closely examined the crimson vein.</p>
<p>Without thinking, I knew what it was—the heart-blood of my father. There
                            were three distinct and several marks, traced by the reeking dagger. The
                            first on the left, which had caught my glance, was the broadest and
                            clearest to read. Two lines, meeting at a right angle, rudely formed a
                            Roman L. Rudely I say, for the poniard had been too rich in red ink,
                            which had clotted where the two strokes met. The second letter was a
                            Roman D, formed also by two bold strokes, the upright very distinct, the
                            curve less easily traced at the top, but the lower part deep and clear.
                            The third letter was not so plain. It looked like C at first, but upon
                            further examination I felt convinced that it was meant for an O, left
                            incomplete through the want of more writing fluid; or was it then that
                            my mother had seized the dark author by the hair, as he stooped to
                            incline his pen that the last drop might trickle down?</p>
<p>Deciphering thus with fingers and eyes, I traced these letters of blood,
                            one by one, over and over again, till they danced in my gaze like the
                            northern lights. I stood upon tiptoe and kissed them; I cared not what I
                            was doing: it was my own father's blood, and I thought of the heart it
                            came from, not of the hand which shed it. When I turned away, the
                            surprise, for which till then I had found no time, broke full upon me.
                            How could these letters, in spite of all my vigilance, so long have
                            remained unseen? Why did the murderer peril his life yet more by staying
                            to write the record, and seal perhaps the conviction of his deed? And
                            what did these characters mean? Of these three questions, the first was
                            readily solved. The other two remained to me as new shadows of wonder.
                            Several causes had conspired to defer so long this discovery. In the
                            first place, the damask had been of rich lilac, shot with a pile of
                            carmine, which, in the waving play of light, glossed at once and
                            obscured the crimson stain, until the fading hues of art left in strong
                            contrast nature's abiding paint. Secondly, my rapid growth and the
                            clearness of my eyes that day lessened the distance and favoured
                            perception. Again—and this was perhaps the paramount cause—the winter
                            sun, with rays unabsorbed by the snow, threw his sheer dint upon that
                            very spot, keen, level, and uncoloured—a thing which could happen on few
                            days in the year, and for few minutes each day, and which never had
                            happened during my previous search. Perhaps there was also some chemical
                            action of the rays of light which evoked as well as showed the colour;
                            but of this I do not know enough to speak. Suffice it that the letters
                            were there, at first a great shock and terror, but soon a strong
                            encouragement to me.</p>
<p>My course was at once to perpetuate the marks and speculate upon them at
                            leisure, for I knew not how fleeting they might be. I hurried
                            downstairs, and speaking to no one procured some clear tissue paper.
                            Applying this to the damask, and holding a card behind, I carefully
                            traced with a pencil so much of the letters as could be perceived
                            through the medium, and completed the sketch by copying most carefully
                            the rest; It was, however, beyond my power to keep my hand from
                            trembling. A shade flitted over my drawing—oh, how my heart leaped!</p>
<p>When I had finished the pencil-sketch, and before it was inked over (for
                            I could not bring myself to paint it red), I knelt where my father died
                            and thanked God for this guidance to me. By the time I had dried my eyes
                            the sun was passed and the lines of blood were gone, even though I knew
                            where to seek them, having left a pin in the damask. By measuring I
                            found that the letters were just three feet and a quarter above the spot
                            where my father's head had been. The largest of them, the L, was three
                            inches long and an eighth of an inch in width; the others were nearly as
                            long, but nothing like so wide.</p>
<p>Trembling now, for the rush of passion which stills the body was past,
                            and stepping silently on the long silent floor, I went to the deep
                            dark-mullioned window and tried to look forth. After all my lone tumult,
                            perhaps I wanted to see the world. But my jaded eyes and brain showed
                            only the same three letters burning on the snow and sky. Evening, a
                            winter evening, was fluttering down. The sun was spent and stopped by a
                            grey mist, and the landscape full of dreariness and cold. For miles, the
                            earth lay white and wan, with nothing to part life from death. No step
                            was on the snow, no wind among the trees; fences, shrubs, and hillocks
                            were as wrinkles in a winding-sheet, and every stark branch had like me
                            its own cold load to carry.</p>
<p>But on the left, just in sight from the gable-window, was a spot, black
                            as midnight, in the billowy snow. It was the spring which had stored for
                            me the footprints. Perhaps I was superstitious then; the omen was
                            accepted. Suddenly a last gleam from the dauntless sun came through the
                            ancient glass, and flung a crimson spot upon my breast. It was the red
                            heart, centre of our shield, won with Coeur de Lion.</p>
<p>Oh scutcheons, blazonments, and other gewgaws, by which men think to
                            ennoble daylight murders, how long shall fools account it honour to be
                            tattooed with you? Mercy, fellow-feeling, truth, humility, virtues that
                            never flap their wings, but shrink lest they should know they stoop,
                            what have these won? Gaze sinister, and their crest a pillory.</p>
<p>With that red pride upon my breast, and that black heart within, and my
                            young form stately with revenge, I was a true descendant of
                            Crusaders.</p>
</div>