<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER IV.</head>
<p>My life—childhood I can scarcely call it—went quietly for several years.
                            The eastern wing of the house was left unused, and rarely traversed by
                            any but myself. Foolish tales, of course, were told about it; but my
                            frequent visits found nothing to confirm them. At night, whenever I
                            could slip from the care of good but matter-of-fact Ann Maples, I used
                            to wander down the long corridor, and squeeze through the iron gate now
                            set there, half in hope and half in fear of meeting my father's spirit.
                            For such an occasion all my questions were prepared, and all the answers
                            canvassed. My infant mind was struggling ever to pierce the mystery
                            which so vaguely led its life. Years only quickened my resolve to be the
                            due avenger, and hardened the set resolve into a fatalist's conviction.
                            My mother, always full of religious feeling, taught me daily in the
                            Scriptures, and tried to make me pray. But I could not take the mild
                            teachings of the Gospel as a little child. To me the Psalms of David,
                            and those books of the Old Testament which recount and seem to applaud
                            revenge, were sweeter than all the balm of Gilead; they supplied a terse
                            and vigorous form to my perpetual yearnings. With a child's impiety, I
                            claimed for myself the mission of the Jews against the enemies of the
                            Lord. The forms of prayer, which my mother taught me, I mumbled through,
                            while looking in her gentle face, with anything but a prayerful gaze.
                            For my own bedside I kept a widely different form, which even now I
                            shudder to repeat. And yet I loved dear mother truly, and pitied her
                            sometimes with tears; but the shadow-love was far the deeper.</p>
<p>My father's grave was in the churchyard of the little village which
                            clustered and nestled beyond our lodge. It was a real grave. The thought
                            of lying in a vault had always been loathsome to him, and he said that
                            it struck him cold. So fond was he of air and light and freedom, the
                            change of seasons and weather, and the shifting of the sun and stars,
                            that he used to pray that they still might pass over his buried head;
                            that he might lie, not in the dark lockers of death, but in the open
                            hand of time. His friends used to think it strange that a man of so
                            light and festive nature should ever talk of death; yet so he often did,
                            not morbidly, but with good cheer. In pursuance, therefore, of his
                            well-known wish, the vaults wherein there lay five centuries of Vaughan
                            dust were not opened for him; neither was his grave built over with a
                            hideous ash-bin; but lay narrow, fair, and humble, with a plain, low
                            headstone of the whitest marble, bearing his initials deeply carved in
                            grey. Through our warm love and pity, and that of all the village, and
                            not in mere compliance with an old usage of the western counties, his
                            simple bed was ever green and white with the fairest of low flowers.
                            Though otherwise too moody and reckless to be a gardener, I loved to
                            rear from seed his favourite plants, and keep them in my room until they
                            blossomed; then I would set them carefully along his grave, and lie down
                            beside it, and wonder whether his spirit took pleasure in them.</p>
<p>But more often, it must be owned, I laid a darker tribute there. The
                            gloomy channel into which my young mind had been forced was overhung, as
                            might be expected, by a sombre growth. The legends of midnight spirits,
                            and the tales of blackest crime, shed their poison on me. From the dust
                            of the library I exhumed all records of the most famous atrocities, and
                            devoured them at my father's grave. As yet I was too young to know what
                            grief it would cause to him who slept there, could he but learn what his
                            only child was doing. That knowledge would at once have checked me, for
                            his presence was ever with me, and his memory cast my thoughts, as
                            moonlight shapes the shadows.</p>
<p>The view from the churchyard was a lovely English scene. What higher
                            praise can I give than this? Long time a wanderer in foreign parts,
                            nothing have I seen that comes from nature to the heart like a true
                            English landscape.</p>
<p>The little church stood back on a quiet hill, which bent its wings in a
                            gentle curve to shelter it from the north and east. These bending wings
                            were feathered, soft as down, with, larches, hawthorn, and the
                            lightly-pencilled birch, between which, here and there, the bluff rocks
                            stood their ground. Southward, and beyond the glen, how fair a spread of
                            waving country we could see! To the left, our pretty lake, all clear and
                            calm, gave back the survey of the trees, until a bold gnoll, fringed
                            with alders, led it out of sight. Far away upon the right, the Severn
                            stole along its silver road, leaving many a reach and bend, which caught
                            towards eventide the notice of the travelled sun. Upon the horizon might
                            be seen at times, the blue distance of the Brecon hills.</p>
<p>Often when I sat here all alone, and the evening dusk came on, although I
                            held those volumes on my lap, I could not but forget the murders and the
                            revenge of men, the motives, form, and evidence of crime, and nurse a
                            vague desire to dream my life away.</p>
<p>Sometimes also my mother would come here, to read her favourite Gospel of
                            St. John. Then I would lay the dark records on the turf, and sit with my
                            injury hot upon me, wondering at her peaceful face. While, for her sake,
                            I rejoiced to see the tears of comfort and contentment dawning in her
                            eyes, I never grieved that the soft chastenment was not shed on me. For
                            her I loved and admired it; for myself I scorned it utterly.</p>
<p>The same clear sunshine was upon us both: we both were looking on the
                            same fair scene—the gold of ripening corn, the emerald of woods and
                            pastures, the crystal of the lake and stream; above us both the peaceful
                            heaven was shed, and the late distress was but a night gone by—wherefore
                            had it left to one the dew of life, to the other a thunderbolt? I knew
                            not the reason then, but now I know it well.</p>
<p>Although my favourite style of literature was not likely to improve the
                            mind, or yield that honeyed melancholy which some young ladies woo, to
                            me it did but little harm. My will was so bent upon one object, and the
                            whole substance and shape of my thoughts so stanch in their sole
                            ductility thereto, that other things went idly by me, if they showed no
                            power to promote my end. But upon palpable life, and the doings of
                            nature I became observant beyond my age. Things in growth or motion
                            round me impressed themselves on my senses, as if a nerve were touched.
                            The uncoiling of a fern-frond, the shrinking of a bind-weed blossom, the
                            escape of a cap-pinched bud, the projection of a seed, or the sparks
                            from a fading tuberose, in short, the lighter prints of Nature's
                            sandalled foot, were traced and counted by me. Not that I derived a
                            maiden pleasure from them, as happy persons do, but that it seemed my
                            business narrowly to heed them.</p>
<p>As for the proud phenomena of imperial man, so far as they yet survive
                            the crucible of convention—the lines where cunning crouches, the smile
                            that is but a brain-flash, the veil let down across the wide mouth of
                            greed, the guilt they try to make volatile in charity,—all these I was
                            not old and poor enough to learn. Yet I marked unconsciously the traits
                            of individuals, the mannerism, the gesture, and the mode of speech, the
                            complex motive, and the underflow of thought. So all I did, and all I
                            dreamed, had one colour and one aim.</p>
<p>My education, it is just to say, was neglected by no one but myself. My
                            father's love of air and heaven had descended to me, and nothing but my
                            mother's prayers or my own dark quest could keep me in the house.
                            Abstract principles and skeleton dogmas I could never grasp; but
                            whatever was vivid and shrewd and native, whatever had point and
                            purpose, was seized by me and made my own. My faculties were not large,
                            but steadfast now, and concentrated.</p>
<p>Though several masters tried their best, and my governess did all she
                            could, I chose to learn but little. Drawing and music (to soothe my
                            mother) were my principal studies. Of poetry I took no heed, except in
                            the fierce old drama.</p>
<p>Enough of this. I have said so much, not for my sake, but for my
                            story.</p>
</div>