<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XVIII. EDGAR VAUGHAN's STORY CONCLUDED. </head>
<p>They put me in the very hammock where that murderer of all my
                            happiness had slept, and no wonder that I could find no rest there. Soon
                            as I knew the reason, I was allowed to change, and crept into the little
                            berth where my innocent pets had lain in each other's arms. Here I slept
                            much better than a king, for I even fancied that it smelt of Lily. If
                            little Lily, as she shall be called, whatever the rogues have christened
                            her, if my little beauty—for that I am sure she must be—ever comes to
                            light, when I am in my grave, remember one thing, Clara, you will find
                            her breath and general fragrance just as her mother's were. Such things
                            are hereditary, especially among women.</p>
<p>After a long and stormy passage, and a fortnight spent in repairing at
                            Bordeaux, we passed the familiar Essex marshes by night, and were off
                            the Custom House by the last day of the year. When that tedious work was
                            over—talk as we please of the douane, our own is as bad as most of
                            them—feeling quite out of my latitude, and not a bit like an Englishman,
                            I betook myself to a tavern near London Bridge. There everything seemed
                            new, and I could not walk the streets without yawing into the wrong
                            tide. But one old London custom held its ground with time. Papers a week
                            and a fortnight old still strayed about in the coffee-room. Being told
                            that the journals of that day were "in hand," as they always are, I took
                            up a weekly paper of some ten days back to yawn over it till supper
                            time. It was too late for me to think of disturbing Peter Green by a
                            sudden arrival, and so I had ordered a bed at this hotel.</p>
<p>The weekly gazette in my hand was one of those which use the shears with
                            diligence and method. Under the heading "Provincial News," I found the
                            following paragraph:—</p>
<quote><p>"<label>SEASONABLE BENEVOLENCE</label>.—We understand that in these times of severe
                            and unmerited pressure upon the agricultural interest—the true back-bone
                            of old England—the head of one of our most ancient and respected county
                            families has announced his intention of remitting to all his tenantry no
                            less than twenty per cent. upon their rentals. He has also bespoken a
                            lavish and most princely repast—shall we say dinner—to be provided on
                            Christmas eve for every man, woman, and child upon his large domain.
                            When we announce that mine host of the Elephant is to be major domo, and
                            our respected townsman George Jenkins, who purchased as our readers are
                            aware the gold medal ox at Smithfield, is to cater for the occasion,
                            need we say anything more? At the risk of gratuitous insult to the
                            intelligence of the county, we must subjoin that the honoured gentleman
                            to whom we allude is Henry Valentine Vaughan, Esquire, of Vaughan Park.
                            Is not such a man, the representative of time-honoured sentiments, and
                            who to a distinguished degree adds the experience of continental travel,
                            is not such a man, we ask, a thousand times fitter to express in the
                            Senate the opinions and wishes of this great county, than the scion, we
                            had almost said spawn, of the Manchester mushrooms, whom a Castle that
                            shall be nameless is attempting to foist on the county? We pause for a
                                reply.—<label rend="italic">Gloucester Argus</label>."</p></quote>
<p>My dear brother's distinguished degree was that of B.A. after a narrow
                            escape from pluck. Clara, don't look offended. Your father had very good
                            abilities, but spent most of his Oxford time in pigeon matches at the
                            Weirs, and expeditions to Bagley wood, which later in life he would have
                            looked upon as felonious.</p>
<p>This paltry puff would never have been reprinted by a London journal of
                            eminence and influence, but for the suggestion at the end, which
                            happened just to hit the sentiments of the more exalted editor. Now this
                            weekly paper was sure to circulate among refugees from the continent, by
                            reason of its well-known antipathy towards them; and there happened to
                            be in this very number a violent tirade against our Government for
                            displaying what we delight to call the mighty Ægis of England. I saw the
                            danger at once, and my heart turned sick within me. My gay and harmless
                            brother in the midst of his Christmas rejoicings, and a stealthy
                            murderer creeping perhaps at that very moment towards him.</p>
<p>But even if it were so, was there not some chance of Lepardo discovering
                            his mistake, when in the neighbourhood where the Vaughans were so well
                            known? Yes, some chance there was, but very little. Bound upon such an
                            errand he would not dare to show himself, or to make any inquiries, even
                            if they seemed needful. And the mention by that cursed gossip of what he
                            called "continental travel"—your father's wedding tour—would banish all
                            doubt of identity, had any been entertained. Even supposing that
                            cold-blooded fiend should meet my poor brother, face to face, in the
                            open daylight, it was not likely that he would be undeceived. Lepardo
                            and I had met only once, and then in hot encounter. My brother was like
                            me in figure, in face, and in voice; and though I was somewhat taller
                            and much darker of complexion, the former difference would not attract
                            attention, unless we stood side by side; the latter would of course be
                            attributed to the effects of climate. From the gamekeeper's evidence, I
                            am now inclined to believe that Lepardo, while lurking in the lower
                            coppice, among the holly bushes, must have cast his evil eyes on your
                            poor father's face, and convinced himself that he beheld his enemy.</p>
<p>Flurried and frightened, I looked at the date of the paper. It was twelve
                            days old. Possibly I might yet be in time, for most likely the murderer
                            would set out on foot, according to Corsican practice, with the
                            travel-stone bound on his knee. Even if he had travelled in modern
                            fashion, he would probably lurk and lie in ambush about the house,
                            enduring hunger and cold and privation, until his moment came. Could I
                            leave for Gloucester that night? No, the last train would have started,
                            before I could get to Paddington. So I resolved to go by the morning
                            express, which would take me to Gloucester by middle day.</p>
<p>After a sleepless night, I was up betimes in the morning, and went
                            through the form of breakfast while the cab was sent for. Presently a
                            waiter came in with the morning papers, the papers of New Year's-day,
                            1843. What I saw and what my feelings were, you, my poor child, can too
                            well imagine. That day I could not bear to go. It was cowardly of me,
                            and perhaps unmanly; but I could not face your mother's grief and the
                            desolate household. Therefore I persuaded myself that I had discharged
                            my duty, by visiting all the London police stations, and leaving the
                            best description I could give of Lepardo. The following day I left
                            London, and arrived, as perhaps you remember, long after dark, and
                            during a heavy fall of snow. There at the very threshold I began amiss
                            with you, for I outraged your childish pride by mistaking you for the
                            housekeeper's daughter. With a well-born child's high self-esteem, and
                            making no allowance for the dim light, you believed it to be a sham
                            intended to mortify you; and it poisoned your heart towards me. But you
                            were wholly mistaken. My mind was full of your mother and of the
                            terrible blow to her; to you, whom I had never seen, and scarcely even
                            heard of, I never gave a thought; except the mistaken one that you were
                            not old enough to be sensible of your loss. Little did I imagine what a
                            fount of resolute will, and deep feeling, found a vent in the kicks and
                            screams of the large-eyed minnikin, that would not be ordered away.</p>
<p>You are entitled, Clara, to know all that I have done towards the
                            discovery of your father's assassin, and all that I can tell to aid your
                            own pursuit. The hair found in your mother's grasp was beyond a doubt
                            Lepardo's; that laid upon your father's bosom was, of course, my Lily's.
                            It was to show that her supposed seduction had been expiated. The one
                            thing that most surprised me was that the murderer left no token, no
                            symbol of himself. In a Vendetta murder they almost always do, as a mark
                            of triumph and a gage to the victim's family. Hence I believed that
                            Signor Dezio was not killed in Vendetta, but by his nephew for gain. How
                            Lepardo got into the house I have no idea, or rather I had none, until
                            you told me of the secret passage, and Mrs. Daldy's entrance. Till then
                            I always thought that he had clambered up, as he did at Veduta tower.
                            But unless there was a traitor in the household, he must have been there
                            more than once, to have known so well your father's sleeping room.</p>
<p>It would have been waste of time for me to concern myself about the
                            county police. That body of well-conducted navvies—Lepardo would have
                            outwitted them, when he was five years old. Neither did I meddle with
                            the coroner and his jury, but left them to their own devices and
                            indigenous intellect. These displayed themselves in much puzzle-headed
                            cross-questioning, sagacious looks, and nods, and winks of acute
                            reservation. It was, as most often it is, a bulldog after a hare.
                            Lepardo might safely have been in the midst of them, asked for a chair,
                            and made suggestions. as "amicus curiæ."</p>
<p>But with the London police it was somewhat different. They showed some
                            little acumen, but their fundamental error is this—they pride themselves
                            on their intelligence. No man of any real depth ever does such a thing
                            as this. He knows very well that whatever he is, there are half a
                            million more so; that the age of exceptional intellects expired, at
                            least in this country, with Mr. Edmund Burke, and is not likely to rise
                            from the dead. Now we are all pretty much good useful clods on a level:
                            education, like all good husbandry, tends to pulverisation; and if the
                            collective produce is greater, let us be at once thankful and
                            humble.</p>
<p>The London police, being proud of their intelligence, declared that there
                            could be no doubt about their catching the criminal. They laughed at my
                            belief that he might walk through the midst of them, while they would
                            touch their hats to him, and beg him to look after his handkerchief. At
                            one time, I think, they were really on his track, and I went to London,
                            and stayed there, and did my best to help them. But they were all too
                            late; Lepardo, if he it were, had left for Paris the week before. To
                            Paris I followed, but found no trace of him there. Then I went on to
                            Corsica, thinking it likely that he would return to his old piratical
                            ways. Moreover, I wanted to see how my children's estates were managed,
                            and to revisit St. Katharine's.</p>
<p>All was calm and peaceful. Lily's grave and her father's were blended in
                            one rich herbage. There all the bloom of my life was drooping, like the
                            yellow mountain-rose, whence if a single flower be plucked, all the
                            other blossoms fall.</p>
<p>Count Gaffori received me kindly. His daughter was married and had two
                            children, who played where Lily's boy and girl should by rights be
                            playing. I could not bear it, and came away, having nothing now to care
                            for. Wherever I went the world seemed much of a muchness to me; and to
                            my own misfortunes the blood of my brother was added. I found the
                            "Lilyflower" still under worthy Petro, and returned in her to England,
                            and she still is mine. Petro would not come; he was too true a Corsican
                            to leave the beloved island now his hair was grey. So I set him up at
                            Calvi with a vessel of his own, and now and then I receive a letter from
                            good Marcantonia. They have promised to watch for the reappearance of
                            our fearful enemy; and Petro has sworn to shoot him, if ever he gets a
                            chance.</p>
<p>After my return to England, I set to work with all my energy to improve
                            this property. In this, if in nothing else, I have thoroughly succeeded.
                            Much opposition I had to encounter; for the tenants regarded me as a
                            mere interloper, and their hearts were with you and your mother. When I
                            call them together to-morrow, as I intend to do, abandon all my right,
                            title, and interest, and declare you their Signora, it is my firm belief
                            that they will hardly think me worth cursing before they worship you.
                            This old retainership is a thing to be proud and yet ashamed of. It is a
                            folly that makes one glory in being a fool. Why, after you left for
                            Devonshire (much, as you know, against my will), I could not ride out
                            without being insulted, and even the boys called me "Jonathan Wild." But
                            this was due, in some measure, to your father's gay geniality, and
                            hearty good-will to all men, contrasted with my satiric and moody
                            reserve. Neither were your youth, and sex, and helplessness, lost upon
                            that chivalrous being—if he only knew his chivalry—the sturdy English
                            yeoman.</p>
<p>Why did I let you go? Well, I believe it was one of the many mistakes of
                            my life; but I had a number of reasons, though personal dislike of you
                            was not, as you thought, one of them. No, my child, I have never
                            disliked you; not even on the night when you came and denounced me, with
                            the dagger in your hand. I must indeed have been worse than I am, if I
                            could have nourished ill-will against a young thing, whom I had made an
                            orphan. By some instinct, you knew from the first that the deed was
                            mine, although I was not the doer. I would have loved you, if you would
                            have let me, my heart yearned so over children. But of my reason for
                            letting you go, the chiefest perhaps—setting aside that I could not stop
                            you—was this consideration. For years I had longed, and craved in my
                            heart of hearts, to tell your mother all, and obtain her gentle
                            forgiveness. But any allusion—no matter how veiled and mantled—to the
                            story of her loss threw her, as you know well, into a most peculiar
                            state, wherein all the powers of mind and body seemed to be quite
                            suspended. With a man's usual roughness of prescription for the more
                            delicate sex, I believed firmly that total change of living, and air,
                            and place, and habits, would relax this wonderful closure, secure my
                            forgiveness, and re-establish her health. The shock I received at her
                            death was almost as terrible as when my brother died. When I stood
                            beside you at her grave, I was come with the full intention of telling
                            you all my story, and begging you to return with me, and live once more
                            in your father's house. But your behaviour to me was so cold and
                            contemptuous, that I forgot my crushing debt to you; and humiliation
                            became, for the moment, impossible. I meant, however, to have written to
                            you that evening, before you should leave the village; but (as you now
                            are aware) that very evening, I was smitten helpless. Partially
                            recovering, after months of illness, I was deeply distressed to find
                            that you had left your good friends in Devonshire, and were gone, my
                            informants could not say whither. Neither had I learned your whereabouts
                            up to the time of my last illness, when I was making inquiries, of which
                            your enemy reaped the benefit. For the rest, you know that I never meant
                            to rob you of your inheritance, though bigoted nonsense enables me.
                            To-morrow, please God, I will put it out of my power to do so. Mrs.
                            Daldy's motive you have long since perceived. Failing my children, and
                            the attainted Lepardo, her son is the heir to all the lands of the Della
                            Croce. She has held me much in her power, by her knowledge of parts of
                            my history. Henry's baptismal entry, as well as that of my marriage, was
                            in the packet she stole. One word more, my darling—and from an old man,
                            who has wandered and suffered much, you will not think it impertinent.
                            Leave your revenge to God. In His way—which we call wonderful, because
                            the steps are unseen—He will accomplish it for you, as righteousness
                            demands. Any interference of ours is a worm-cast in His avenue. Though I
                            am stricken and dying, He, if so pleases Him, will bring me my children
                            before I die, that I may bless Him, and tell my Lily."</p>
<p>I fell upon the old man's neck—old he was, though not in years—and as I
                            wept I kissed him. How could I have wronged him so, and how could I keep
                            myself from loving one so long unhappy? If sorrow be the sponge of sin,
                            his fault was wiped away.</p>
</div>