
CHAPTER XII.
Though Lily and I were most desirous to keep things as
                            quiet as possible, by this time our engagement was talked of in every
                            house of the Balagna. That paternal fusileer and my merry yachtsmen,
                            although they looked the other way whenever we approached, would not
                            permit the flower of Corsica, as she was now proclaimed, to blush with
                            me unseen. My sailors attended to her far more than to their business,
                            and would have leaped into the water for one smile of Lily.
It is the fashion of the island to make a wedding jubilee; and the Signor
                            was anxious to outdo all that had ever been done. We, absorbed in one
                            another, did our best to disappoint him; but he scorned the notion of
                            any private marriage. I never shall forget how he knit his silver brows
                            when I made a last attempt to bring him to our views. "Signor Vogheno,
                            to me you appear to forget whose daughter it is that loves you. Perhaps
                            in your remote, but well regarded island maidens may be stolen before
                            their fathers can look round. Indeed, I have heard that they leap over a
                            broomstick. That is not the custom here. Fiordalisa Della Croce is my
                            only child—the child of my old age; and not altogether one to be ashamed
                            of. I can afford to be hospitable, and I mean to be so."
The Corsicans are a most excitable race, and, when affronted, seem to
                            lash their sides as they talk. By the time the good Signor had finished
                            his speech, every hair of his beard was curling with indignation. But
                            his daughter sprang into his arms and kissed away the tempest, and
                            promised, if it must be so, to make herself one mass of gold and coral.
                            So the Parolanti, or mediators, were invoked; an armistice for a week
                            was signed, and honour pledged on either side. Free and haughty was the
                            step of the Signor Dezio as he set forth for the town to order
                            everything he could see; and very wroth again he was, because I would
                            not postpone the day for him to get a shipload of trumpery from
                            Marseilles. This time I was resolved to have my way. Besides the fervour
                            of my passion and my dread of accidents, the one thing of all others I
                            detest is to be stared at anywhere. And it is far worse to be stared at
                            by a foreign race. The Corsicans are gentlemen by nature, but they could
                            not be expected to regard without some curiosity the lucky stranger who
                            had won their Lily.
I will not weary you, as I myself was wearied, with all the ceremonies of
                            the wedding-day. All I wanted was my bride, and she wanted none but me:
                            yet we could not help being touched by the hearty good-will of the
                            commune. The fame of Lily's beauty had spread even to Sardinia, and many
                            a handsome woman came to measure her own thereby. Clever as they are at
                            such things, not one of them could find a blemish or defect in Lily, and
                            our fair Balagnese told them to go home and break their mirrors.
It was a sweet spring morning, and amid a fearful din of guns and
                            trumpets, mandolins and fiddles, I waited with a nervous smile under the
                            triumphal arch in front of my fictitious house. A sham house had been
                            made of boards, and boughs, and flowers, because it is most essential
                            that the bride should be introduced to the bridegroom's dwelling. Here I
                            was to receive the procession, which at last appeared. First came fifty
                            well-armed youths, crowned with leaves and ribbons; then four-and-twenty
                            maidens dressed alike, singing and scattering flowers, and then a boy of
                            noble birth, mounted on a pony, and carrying the freno, symbol of many
                            scions. None of them I looked at; only for my Lily. On a noble
                            snow-white palfrey, decked from head to foot with flowers, her father
                            walking at her side, came the bloom, the flower, the lily of them all,
                            arrayed in clear white muslin, self-possessed, and smiling. One glorious
                            wreath was round her head; it was her own black hair by her own sweet
                            fingers twined with sprigs of myrtle. A sash, or fazoletto, of violet
                            transparent crape, looped at the crown of her head, fell over the shy
                            lift of her bosom, parting like a sunset cloud, where the boddice opened
                            below the pear-like waist. To me she looked like a white coralline
                            rising through an amethyst sea. Behind her came the authorities of the
                            commune. The sham keys were already hanging at her slender zone. It was
                            my place to lift her down and introduce her formally. This I did with
                            excellent grace, feeling the weight of eyes upon me. But when I got her
                            inside, I spoiled the folds of the fazoletto. I heard the old man
                            shouting, "Who are ye gallant sons of the mountain, who have carried off
                            my daughter? To me, indeed, ye seem to be brave and noble men, yet have
                            ye taken her rather after the manner of bandits. Know ye not that she is
                            the fairest flower that ever was reared in Corsica?"
"Yes, old fellow, I know that well enough; and that's the very reason why
                            I have got her here." One more virgin kiss, and with Lily on my arm,
                            forth I sally to respond.
"Friends we are, who claim some hospitality. We have plucked the fairest
                            flower on all the strands of Corsica, and we bear her to the priest, fit
                            offering for Madonna."
"Bide on, my noble friends; then come and enjoy my feast."
No more delay. The maids have got all they can do to keep in front of us
                            with their flowers. The armed youths stand on either side at the
                            entrance to the church. The tapers are already lit, the passage up the
                            little church is strewed with flowering myrtle. Lily, holding her veil
                            around her, walks hand in hand with me.
Fiordalisa Della Croce now is Lily Vaughan; amidst a world of shouting,
                            shooting, and cornamusas, we are led to the banqueting-room; there they
                            seat us in two chairs, and a fine fat baby is placed on Lily's lap, to
                            remind her of her duties. She dandles it, and kisses it as if she
                            understood the business, and then presents it with a cap of corals and
                            gay ribbons. Now Lily Vaughan throws off her fazoletto, and gives me for
                            a keepsake the myrtles in her hair. Then all who can claim kin with her,
                            to the fortieth generation, hurry up and press her hand, and wish the
                            good old wish. "Long life and growing pleasure, sons like him, and
                            daughters like yourself."
After the banquet, we were free to go, having first led off the ballo in
                            the Cerca dance. Thank God, my Lily is at last my own; she falls upon my
                            bosom weary and delighted. Clara, remember this: the little church in
                            which we were married is called St. Katharine's on the cliff; and I
                            signed the record in my proper name, Edgar Malins Vaughan: the Malins,
                            very likely, they did not know from Valentine, for I always wrote it
                            with a flourish at the end. The Signor, with all his friends, escorted
                            us to the limits of his domain; there we bade them heartily farewell,
                            and they returned to renew the feast. My little yacht was in the bay,
                            and we saw the boat push off to fetch us as had been arranged. We were
                            to sail for Girolata, where the Signor had a country-house, lonely
                            enough even for two such lovers. Three or four hours would take us
                            thither, and the sun was still in the heavens. As no one now could see
                            us, Lily performed a little dance for my especial delight. How beaming
                            she looked, how full of spirits, now all the worry was over. Then she
                            tripped roguishly at my side to the winding rocky steps that lead to St.
                            Katharine's cove. The cove was like a well scooped in the giant cliffs.
                            As we descended the steep and narrow stairs, my Lily trembled on my arm.
                            The house and all the merry-makers were out of sight and hearing. Of
                            course we stopped every now and then, for the boat could not be at the
                            landing yet, and we had much to tell each other.
As we stepped upon the beach, and under the eaves of a jutting rock, a
                            tall man stood before us. His eyes and beard were black as jet, and he
                            wore the loose dress of a Southern seaman. Three sailors, unmistakeably
                            English, were smoking and playing cards in the corner shade of the
                            cliff. Lily started violently, turned pale, and clung to me, but faced
                            the intruder bravely. He was quite amazed at her beauty, I at his
                            insolent gaze.
"Fiordalisa Della Croce," he said with a pure Tuscan accent, "behold me!
                            I am come to claim you."
He actually laid his small, but muscular hand upon my Lily's shoulder.
                            She leaped back as from a snake. I knew it must be Lepardo.
"Sir," I said, as calmly as I could, "oblige me by allowing my wife to
                            pass."
The sneering, supercilious look which he hardly deigned to spare me, was
                            honest, compared to his foul stare at her.
"Signor, she is too beautiful. I must have my rights. Come for her when I
                            am tired, if any can tire of her."
And he thrust his filthy, hairy lips under my own pet's hat. My muscles
                            leaped, and my soul was in the blow. Down he went like a flail, and I
                            thought he was stunned for an hour; but while I was bearing my pet to
                            the boat, which now was close to the beach, up he leaped, and rushed at
                            me with a dagger—a dagger like one which you know. I did not see him,
                            but Lily did over my shoulder; she sprang from my arms and flung herself
                            between us. He thrust her aside, and leaped at me like a panther, aiming
                            straight at my heart. How he missed me I cannot tell, but think it was
                            through Lily. Before he recovered, I closed with him, wrested away the
                            weapon and flung it far into the sea. But one main thing I omitted; I
                            ought to have stunned him thoroughly. Into the boat with Lily—I caught
                            up an oar, and away we dashed. The three English sailors were running
                            up. As a wave took the boat about, one of them grasped the stern; down
                            on his knuckles crashed my oar, and with a curse he let go. All right,
                            all clear, off for the yacht for your lives. I would show fight, for my
                            blood is up, but what would become of Lily? And we are but three against
                            four, and none of us have arms.
Meanwhile, that black Italian, I can never call him a Corsican, sneaked
                            away to a tuft of sea-grass for his double-barrelled fusil. Bowing with
                            all my might, I saw him examine the priming, lay his red cap on a rock,
                            and the glistening gun on the cap, and, closing one eye, take steady
                            aim, not at me, but at Lily. Poor Lily sat on the thwart at my side,
                            faintly staring with terror. No time to think; oar and all I dashed in
                            front of my darling. A ping in the air, a jar on my wrist, a slight blow
                            on my breast, and at my feet dropped the bullet. It had passed through
                            the tough ash handle. Down, Lily, down, for God's sake; he is firing the
                            other barrel. I flung her down in the bilge water; the brute cannot see
                            her now. Not quite so easily off. Up a steep rock he climbed like a cat,
                            the cursed gun still in his hand. He won fifty feet of vantage, and
                            commanded the whole of the boat. We were not eighty yards away. There he
                            coolly levelled at my prostrate Lily. I had grey hairs next morning.
                            Forward, I threw myself, over my wife; me he might kill if he chose. One
                            lurch of the boat—a short sea was running—and my darling's head was
                            shown. He saw his chance and fired. Thank God, he had too little powder
                            in; my own love is untouched. The ball fell short of Lily, and passed
                            through my left foot, in at the sole and out below the instep. Luckily I
                            had retained my dancing shoes, or my thick boots would have kept the
                            ball in my foot. The brute could not see that he had hit any one, and he
                            cursed us in choice Italian.
Poor Lily had quite swooned away, and knew nothing of my wound. Over the
                            side of the yacht I lifted her myself, standing upon one leg. No one
                            else should touch her. So furious I was with that cold-blooded
                            miscreant, that if I could only have walked, I would have returned to
                            fight him. My men, too, were quite up for it. But when Lily came to
                            herself, and threw her arms round me and wept, and thanked God and her
                            saints, I found my foot quite soaked in a pool of blood, and stiffening.
                            Poor little dear! what a fuss she did make about it! I would have borne
                            ten times the pain for the smiles and tears she gave me. One thing was
                            certain—under the mercy of God, we owed our lives to each other, and
                            held them henceforth in common.
As, with a flowing sheet, we doubled the craggy point, concealed close
                            under the rocks we saw a low and snake-like vessel, of the felucca
                            build. She was banked for three pair of sweeps, and looked a thorough
                            rover. This was, of course, Lepardo's boat. We now bore away for
                            Ajaccio, dear Lily having implored me not to think of Girolata, where no
                            medical aid could anyhow be procured. Moreover, she wanted to fly from
                            that dark Lepardo; and I am quite willing to own that, despite my
                            delicious nursing, I was not ambitious to stand as target again during
                            our honeymoon.
