
CHAPTER XV.
Isola happened that day to leave me before the usual time, being afraid
                            that her father, who was not in his sweetest mood, would be angry with
                            her. She was grieved of course at the new dissension, and thought me
                            (her ideas were of loose texture) somewhat to blame somehow.
                            Nevertheless she soon forgave me the crime I had not committed.
That day I could paint no more, but sat me down to meditate. Suddenly a
                            loud ring and a louder knock echoed through the house. Quickly Mrs.
                            Shelfer's little feet came pattering up the stairs, and her grey eyes
                            actually seemed to come in first at the door. On the crown of her head
                            her black cap hung, like the top of a chaise doubled back.
"Oh my good friend, look here! I was never so frightened in all my
                            life."
She held as far from her as she could reach a closed envelope, addressed
                            "Miss Clara Vaughan." I tore it open and read—"Mr. Vaughan is dying,
                            come instantly. Sent by Mrs. Fletcher."
"Telegraph, my good soul," cried Mrs. Shelfer, "Electric Telegraph
                            Company, all screams the wires red hot, and you must sign the message he
                            says. And is there any answer? And they give him eighteen pence. Oh
                            dear, I shall never get over it. Never had such a turn since my brother
                            John went, and they tucked him up so bootiful, and I said to the clerk
                            at Barbican—"
"Out of my way if you please. Let me sign the form, and leave me alone a
                            minute. There is no answer."
Should I go or not? Bitterly as I disliked him, could I let him die among
                            hirelings and strangers—I, his brother's daughter! A year ago I would
                            have done so and thought it the judgment of God. Now I remembered my
                            dear mother's death, and doubted about going only because I knew not how
                            he would take it. My hesitation was very brief. A cab was ordered,
                            Giudice entrusted to Mrs. Shelfer's care, a short note left for Isola, a
                            few things put together anyhow, and I was ready to start.
Even in this hurry a selfish terror smote me, and I cautioned Mrs.
                            Shelfer strictly to conceal both name and destination. She had only to
                            say that some relative was suddenly taken ill, somewhere down in the
                            country; the country being to her mind a desert marked with milestones,
                            my description did not seem unreasonably vague.
As I stood in the passage waiting for the cab, the poor dog, who had been
                            quite flurried, and scented indefinite evil, commenced, prolonged, and
                            would not conclude a howl of passing sadness.
"Oh, my good friend," cried Mrs. Shelfer, "let me stop the cab. All waste
                            of money to go. The good gentleman, whoever he is, is as dead as a
                            crabshell now. There was a terrier with a split ear, next door but one,
                            when my poor brother John was ill; his name was Jack, I think, no, Tom;
                            bless me, no, what am I thinking of, Bob—Charley knows, I dare say—"
"Well, send me his name by telegraph. Here's the cab, Mrs. Shelfer."
Heavy thumps of weary wambling feet, grating of wheels, a needless
                            "whoa," and we open the door.
Giudice bolts first into the cab, and sitting upright with his tongue out
                            and a sprightly pant, occupies the whole. It takes the united strength,
                            address, and authority of cabman, landlady, and myself to get him out
                            again. Then he coils his tail to his stomach, droops his ears and eyes,
                            and receiving two hot tears and a kiss is sidled and deluded into the
                            narrow passage. The last thing I hear is a howl that winds far round the
                            corner and beyond the square.
In an hour and a half from the delivery of the message, I was in a
                            second-class carriage, and we shrieked away from Paddington. The hurry
                            and rush overcame me for a while. Soon the April evening was spread with
                            shadowy gray, and we were rushing past the wooded waves of Pangbourne,
                            and casting silver rings of steam on the many-fingered spruce, before I
                            could collect and feel my thoughts again. As we glided through
                            plantations and between the winding hills, with the partridge beginning
                            his twilight call, the pheasants come out of the coppice to feed, and
                            the late rook plying his dusky wings, at length the dust and city
                            turmoil lagged round the corner miles away, and we sparkled in the dewy
                            freshness of the silent moon. Though all alone in the carriage, I vainly
                            tried for prudence' sake to creep into the cloak of sleep. Every vein
                            and every pore was full of gushing thrilling electric life. The country,
                            the country! the heavenly country's glory! how had I breathed and groped
                            in the city grave so long? For every thought that dribbled there and
                            guttered in my brain, a hundred thousand now flow through me, not of
                            brain, but soul. Thoughts I cannot call them, for there is no volition,
                            neither have they sequence, impress, or seen image: only a broad stream
                            gliding, whence and whither I know not. How can I describe to others
                            what I cannot tell myself?
"Glost'! Glost'! change here for Chelt'm!" etc. broke my dreaming
                            suddenly. It was eleven at night. I had come unwrapped; the heavenly
                            country and nature's tide forgot to keep me warm. Out I came upon the
                            platform, and dreamily began to seek my carpet-bag, for I had no heavy
                            luggage. The moon was struggling with the gas-lights, as nature in me
                            fought with modern life.
"Fly, Miss, fly?" the lonely porter asked.
"Yes, please," said I.
"Where for, Miss?"
"Vaughan St. Mary."—At this part of my life, I dropped the grand "Vaughan
                            Park;" it seemed too fine for me, and I was well content to be of
                            Conrad's class in the world.
"Oh, there's a carriage waiting at every train, if you please, Miss."
And with tenfold politeness the porter showed me across the square to one
                            of the family hearses, which my father and I so detested. It so happened
                            that the driver and footman were taking some light refreshment at the
                            bar of a neighbouring edifice, while the horses champed their bits and
                            whinnied. The men came out against their will, and stared at me in the
                            broad moonshine. I was very simply, plainly, and cheaply dressed, in
                            deep mourning still for my darling mother; but no servant of even slight
                            experience could take me, I think, for anything but a lady; little as it
                            matters. The men were half-drunk, very surly at being disturbed, and
                            inclined to form a low estimate of my dress and carpet-bag.
"You mean to say you be Miss Vaughan, young 'ooman?" stuttered the
                            reeling coachman, with his hands beneath his flaps and a short pipe in
                            his mouth, "Now I tell you plainly, there's no mistake about me mind, I
                            can't noway credit it. It don't seem likely, do it, Bob?"
"Likely, Jacob? Yes, like enough to a fool; but nohow creditable to the
                            like of us. Think I don't know now? Perhaps the young 'ooman will answer
                            a few questions, Jacob."
"Ah, let you alone; let you alone, Bob! Specially for young women!"
"Porter, a cab at once, if you please; or a fly I think you call it
                            here." Oh my London impudence!
"To be sure, Miss; the best in Gloucester directly. And,
                            Miss"—confidentially, "if I was in your shoes, I'd walk them chaps about
                            their business to-morrow. How they have been carrying on here, to be
                            sure, ever since the six o'clock train come in. Why, in the time of the
                            old Squire Vaughan—"
"Thank you, the fly, if you please."
In two minutes I was off for my father's home with mighty rattle of
                            glass, and many jerking noises. About three miles from Gloucester we
                            were passed by Jacob and Robert, who were sitting side by side and
                            driving furiously. Convinced at last by the porter of my genuine
                            Vaughanship, they had set off full speed to secure first audience.
At length we passed the lodge, where the gates creaked as of yore, and
                            dear old Whitehead trembled at my voice, and so along the great avenue
                            where I had studied the manners and ways of every tree, and where Tulip
                            (Nestor among deer) came to stare at us with his grey face silver in the
                            moonlight. Poor old friend, he knew me as well as Giudice did, but I
                            could not stop to talk to him. Soon as the bell was rung the broad bolt
                            of the great lock, which I was once so proud to draw, flew back with
                            suspicious promptitude.
Albeit he had changed the cloth too ochrously described by Sally, for a
                            suit of gentle gray, and had drawn out his face to a most unjovial
                            length, and assumed an attitude of very profound respect, there he was,
                            quite unmistakeable to observant eyes, the Bacchanalian Bob.
"And please, Miss"—after he had fussed awhile—"what train did you please
                            to come by? I understand that the carriage has been waiting there all
                            day; indeed, I saw it come back from the pantry window myself, and they
                            said in the yard the last train was in afore they come away."
"I came by the train that ought to be there at half-past ten
                            o'clock."
"Well to be sure! That must be the very train as Samuel and Humphry said
                            they waited for; but they never has much judgment, them two men. And to
                            let you come in a common fly, Miss!"
"I saw my father's carriage at the station, and two low-looking servants
                            quite tipsy. Their names, however, were not Samuel and Humphry, but
                            Jacob and Robert."
Strange servants now came thronging round, with an obsequiousness so long
                            unknown that it quite disgusted me. No familiar face among them, none
                            whom I could bring myself to ask how my guardian was. But from their
                            servility to me I concluded that his time was short.
"Will you step into the small drawing-room, if you be so kind, Miss?
                            There is a good fire there, Miss, and a lady waiting for you."
"Thank you. Take my things to my own little room, if you please; that is,
                            if you know which room was called mine."
"Tilly knows, Miss. I'll run and fetch Tilly," cried the officious
                            Bob.
"If Matilda Jenkins is still here, let her answer my bell as long as I
                            remain."
And therewith I was shown into the room where the lady was expecting me.
                            She sat with her back to the door, and I could only see that she was
                            richly attired in full evening dress. There was a powerful smell of
                            vinegar in the room, and two pastiles were burning. As I walked round
                            the table she rose with some reluctance, and I confronted Mrs.
                            Daldy.
