<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER IX.</head>
<head>STORY OF EDGAR VAUGHAN.</head>
<p>Let me hold myself. Weak as I am and crippled by premature old age, not
                            the shortness of my breath, not the numbness of my heart, not even the
                            palsy of my frame, can quench or check the fire rekindled by the mere
                            name of that heavenly valley. To live there only half a minute is worth
                            a day of English life. Life—it is a space to measure, not by pendulum or
                            clock-hand, not by our own strides to and fro (the ordnance scale of the
                            million), not even by the rolling sun, and nature's hail and farewell;
                            but by the well-spring of ourselves, the fount of thought and feeling.
                            Every single breath I draw of this living air—air the bride of earth our
                            sire, wedded to him by God Creator, air whose mother-milk we fight for
                            in clusters baulking one another—every breath I draw dances with a
                            buoyant virtue, sucked, in any other land, but from mountain nipples.
                            Bright air of a rosy blue, where northern eyes are dazed with beauty,
                            where every flower cuts stars of light, and every cloud is sunshine's
                            step; can even lovers parted thus believe themselves divided? Every rock
                            has its myrtle favour, every tree its clematis wreath; under the cistus
                            and oleander hides the pink to lace its bodice, watched by the pansy's
                            sprightly eye. Lavishly, as children's bubbles, hover overhead oranges,
                            and citrons, lemons, almonds, figs, varied by the blushing peach and the
                            purpling grape. Far behind, and leaning forth the swarthy bosom of the
                            mountain, whose white head leans on the heaven, are ranks on ranks of
                            glaucous olive, giants of a green old age dashed with silver gray. And
                            oh, the fragrance under foot, the tribute of the ground, which Corsica's
                            great son—as we men measure greatness—pined for in the barren isle,
                            where the iron of his selfishness entered his own soul.</p>
<p>These are said to be the largest olive-trees in the world, and of the
                            very best varieties. Heaps upon heaps the rich fruit lies at the foot of
                            the glorious tree; nature is too bountiful for man to heed her gifts.
                            For this district of Balagna, and that of Nebbio further north, my
                            attention had been especially bespoken by my shrewd and sagacious
                            friend. Therefore and by reason of the charms around me, here I resolved
                            to pass the summer; so my vessel was laid up at Calvi, and being
                            quartered in Belgodere at a little Inn—"locanda" it should be called,
                            but I hate interlarding—I addressed myself right heartily to business
                            and to pleasure.</p>
<p>First I had to study the grand Palladian gift. Unless old Seneca was, as
                            the Corsicans say, a great liar, he cannot have been the author of that
                            epigram which declares this land a stranger to the peaceful boon. It is
                            impossible to believe that a country so adapted to that tree, so often
                            colonized by cultured races, can have been so long ungifted with its
                            staff of life. The island itself in that same epigram is utterly
                            mis-described.</p>
<p>As regards the inhabitants, the first line of the well-known couplet is
                            verified by ages; to the second it does not plead guilty now, and
                            probably never did.</p>
<quote>
<p>"Law the first revenge. Law the second to live by robbery.</p>
<p>Law the third to lie. The fourth to deny any Gods."</p>
<p> </p>
</quote>
<p rend="pfirst">The Corsicans, on the contrary, have always been famous for
                            candour, whose very soul is truth, and for superstition, the wen or hump
                            of religion. For my own part, loving not that unprincipled<ref target="#ENG18640_N9"/> fellow hard labour, towards whom these noble
                            islanders entertain a like antipathy, and loving much any freedom not
                            hostile to my own, I got on with the natives admirably, for a certain
                            time. Time had reconciled me to their custom of carrying, instead of
                            cane or umbrella, long double-barrelled guns, whose muzzle they afford
                            the stranger full opportunity of inspecting. First-rate marksmen are
                            they, but they sling their guns at hap-hazard on their backs, and cheek
                            to jowl we come upon the cold metal at the corner of the narrow streets.
                            Tall and powerful men they are, especially the mountaineers; with all
                            the Spaniard's dignity and the Italian's native grace. The women are
                            lithe, erect, and beautifully formed, with a swan-like carriage, and a
                            free and courteous bearing, such as very few of our high-born damsels
                            own.</p>
<p>The olive-growers frankly gave me all their little information about that
                            tree whose typical virtues they have never cared to learn. The variety
                            chiefly grown, or rather which chiefly grows itself, is one they call
                            the Genoese. The owners afford them very little culture, and many are
                            too idle even to collect the fruit. There are said to be ten million
                            olive-trees in the island; at least they were reckoned up to that number
                            by order of the Government; then the enumerators grew tired, and left
                            off counting. Whatever number there is might easily be tripled, if any
                            one had the energy to graft the oleasters, with which the hills are
                            covered. There is also the Saracen olive, and the Sabine, the latter
                            perhaps the Regia of Columella, Raggiaria of Cæsalpinus, and Radius of
                            Virgil. However, though not unlike my sample fruit, it was not quite
                            identical, and as my employers wanted a very special sort for very
                            special qualities, I was as far from my object as ever.</p>
<p>One magnificent summer evening, as I rode along the mountain side near
                            the village of Speloncato, suddenly the track turned sharply into a
                            wooded dingle. Steeped in the dream of nature's beauty, I was thinking
                            of nothing at all, as becomes a true Corsican, when I received a
                            sharpish knock in the eye. Something fell and lodged in my capacious
                            beard. Smarting from the pain. I caught it, and not being able to see
                            clearly, took it at first for a spent and dropping bullet. But when my
                            eyes had ceased to water, I found in my hand a half-grown olive of the
                            very kind I had so long been seeking. I drew forth some of my London
                            specimens which had been chemically treated to prevent their
                            shrivelling, and compared it narrowly. Yes, there could be no doubt; the
                            same pyriform curve, the same bulge near the peduncle, the same violet
                            lines in the skin, and when cut open, the same granulation and nucleus.
                            I was truly delighted, at length I should be of some real service; at
                            least if there were many trees here of this most rare variety. By riding
                            up the dingle, I soon ascertained that it was planted with trees of this
                            sort only, gray old trees of a different habit from any other olive.
                            Afterwards I found that it requires a different soil, and a different
                            aspect. Full speed I galloped back to the hamlet of Speloncato, and
                            inquired for the owner of this olive Eldorado. Signor Dezio Della Croce,
                            owner of all this lovely slope, and of large estates extending as far as
                            the road to Corte; in fact the chief proprietor of the neighbourhood. He
                            was, said the peasant with some pride, a true descendant of the great
                            race of Cinarca, foremost in the island annals for a thousand years, and
                            of whom was the famous Giudice Della Rocca, Count and Judge of Corsica,
                            six hundred years ago."</p>
<p>At the sound of his name, Giudice opened his great sleepy eyes, and
                            pricked his ears: I promised not to interrupt, but he gave no such
                            pledge.</p>
<p>"Let the Cinarchesi blood go for its full value; but it was worth
                            something to the Della Croce to be descended also from the Tuscan
                            Malaspina; for the lands of those great Marquises were now in the
                            possession of the Signor Dezio. And the Signor had such a daughter, a
                            young maiden. Ah, Madonna! The loveliest girl in Corsica. And the
                            vine-dresser crossed himself. As I listened to all this information, I
                            began to look through my unused credentials, which I always carried. It
                            struck me that this name of Della Croce was quite familiar to me, though
                            I knew not how, until a letter in the sprawling hand of young Laurence
                            Daldy fell out from among Peter's crabbed characters. Laurence Daldy, my
                            mother's younger son, was now in full career, as a pigeon and a
                            Guardsman, spending at full gallop his dead father's money. These Daldys
                            were of Italian origin, the true name being D'Aldis, which after some
                            years of English life they had naturalised into Daldy. And now I
                            recollected that when we Vaughan boys scorned them as ignoble sons of
                            commerce, they used to brag about their kinship to the ancient Della
                            Croce.</p>
<p>Riding up the forest hill, on whose western bluff stands boldly the gray
                            old tower of the Malaspinas, I began of course to make forecasts about
                            the character of my host. My host I knew he needs must be, for Corsica
                            is of all the world the most hospitable spot. Although by this time well
                            acquainted with the simple island habits, I could not but expect to find
                            a man of stateliness and surroundings, of stiffness and some arrogance.
                            Now the sun was setting, and the western fire from off the sea glanced
                            in spears of reddening gold into the solemn timeworn keep. All things
                            looked majestic, but a deal too lonely. Where was I to apply, how was I
                            to get in? The narrow doorway overhung with the wreck of some
                            portcullis, was blocked instead with a sort of mantlet like the Roman
                            Vinea; the loopholes on the ground-tier were boarded almost to the top,
                            the high windows, such as they were, had their rough shutters closed.
                            Everything betokened a state of siege and fear. Two or three magnificent
                            chesnuts, which must have commanded the front of the tower, had been cut
                            down and added to the defences of the approach. Over these I managed at
                            last to leap my horse, who was by no means a perfect hunter; and there I
                            halted at a loss how to proceed. I had been long enough in Corsica to
                            know, even without a certain ominous gleam from a loophole, and the view
                            in transverse section of a large double-barrelled gun, that the owner of
                            this old mansion was now in the pleasant state of Vendetta.</p>
<p>Expecting every moment to be shot, and nothing said about it, I waved my
                            letter, as a white flag, furiously above my head. Presently that
                            frightful muzzle was withdrawn, and the slide pushed back, to
                            reconnoitre me at leisure. I tried, for the first time in my life, to
                            look like a real Briton; my Corsican ambition was already on the wane.
                            So I sat my horse, and waited; and what came was worth a thousand years
                            of waiting.</p>
<p>Round the bastion of the tower, under the rich magnolia bloom, towards me
                            glided through the rosy shadow the loveliest being that ever moved
                            outside the gates of heaven. She seemed not to walk but waft along, like
                            the pearly Nautilus. A pink mandile of lightest gauze lit the sable of
                            her clustering hair, and wreathing round her graceful head deepened the
                            tinge of the nestling cheeks. The lithe faldetta of white cashmere,
                            thrown hastily over the shoulders, half concealed the flowing curves of
                            the slender supple form, half betrayed them as it followed every facile
                            motion. But when she smiled—oh, Clara, I would have leaped from her
                            father's tower, or into the black caves of the Restonica, for one smile
                            of hers. The dark-fringed lustre of her eyes seemed to dance with golden
                            joy, trusting, hoping, loving all things, pleasure pleased at pleasing.
                            And the gleesome arch of her laughing lips, that never shaped evil word!
                            Oh, my Lily, my own Lily, I shall see you soon again.</p>
<p>My dear Clara, I ought to know better. I am ashamed of myself. And after
                            so many years! But at the first glance of Fiordalisa, my fate was fixed
                            for this life and the other. I never had loved before. I never had cared
                            to look at a girl; in fact I despised them all. Now I paid for that
                            contemptuous folly. Loving at one glance, loving once, for all, for
                            ever, my heart stood still like the focus of a hurricane; my speech and
                            every power but that of vision failed me. I dared not try to leave the
                            saddle, such a trembling took me.</p>
<p>It was a visitation unknown in our foggy plains, scoffed at by our prosy
                            race, but known full well in Southern climes, as the sunstroke of love.
                            My own darling—I can call her nothing less—my own delicious darling was
                            quite startled at me. Whether she had a like visitation in a milder
                            form, is more than I can say; but I hope with all my heart she had; for
                            then, as the Southern tale recites, God placed her hand in mine.</p>
<p>How I got my horse tied up, how I followed her through the side entrance,
                            and returned her father's greeting, I have not the least idea; all I
                            know is that she smiled, and I wanted nothing more. But I could not bear
                            to see her in the true Homeric fashion still maintained in Corsica,
                            waiting on us like a common servant, with her beautiful arched feet
                            glancing under the brown pelone, and her tapering white arms laid
                            demurely on her bosom; then at her father's signal how she flew for the
                            purple grapes or the fragrant broccio! But do what she would, it seemed
                            to become her more than all she had done before. As that form of love
                            and elegance flitted through the simple room, and those lustrous
                            heavenly eyes beamed with hospitable warmth, Signor Dezio Della Croce,
                            careworn man with beard of snow, seemed at times no little proud of his
                            sweet and only child, but was too proud to show his pride. As for me, he
                            must have thought that I spoke very poor Italian.</p>
</div>