<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER VII.</head>
<p>The spring of the year 1849 was remarkable, throughout the western
                            counties, for long drought. I know not how it may be in the east of
                            England, but I have observed that in the west long droughts occur only
                            in the spring and early summer. In the autumn we have sometimes as much
                            as six weeks without rain, and in the summer a month at most, but all
                            the real droughts (so far as my experience goes) commence in February or
                            March; these are, however, so rare, and April has won such poetic fame
                            for showers, and July for heat and dryness, that what I state is at
                            variance with the popular impression.</p>
<p>Be that as it may, about Valentine's-day, 1849, and after a length of
                            very changeable weather, the wind fixed its home in the east, and the
                            sky for a week was grey and monotonous. Brilliant weather ensued; white
                            frost at night, and strong sun by day. The frost became less biting as
                            the year went on, and the sun more powerful; there were two or three
                            overcast days, and people hoped for rain. But no rain fell, except one
                            poor drizzle, more like dew than rain.</p>
<p>With habits now so ingrained as to become true pleasures, I marked the
                            effects of the drought on all the scene around me. The meadows took the
                            colour of Russian leather, the cornlands that of a knife-board. The
                            young leaves of the wood hung pinched and crisp, unable to shake off
                            their tunics, and more like catkins than leaves. The pools went low and
                            dark and thick with a coppery scum (in autumn it would have been green),
                            and little bubbles came up and popped where the earth cracked round the
                            sides. The tap-rooted plants looked comely and brave in the morning,
                            after their drink of dew, but flagged and flopped in the afternoon, as a
                            clubbed cabbage does. As for those which had only the surface to suck,
                            they dried by the acre, and powdered away like the base of a
                            bonfire.</p>
<p>The ground was hard as horn, and fissured in stars, and angles, and
                            jagged gaping cracks, like a dissecting map or a badly-plastered wall.
                            It amused me sometimes to see a beetle suddenly cut off from his home by
                            that which to him was an earthquake. How he would run to and fro, look
                            doubtfully into the dark abyss, then, rising to the occasion, bridge his
                            road with a straw. The snails shrunk close in their shells, and resigned
                            themselves to a spongy distance of slime. The birds might be seen in the
                            morning, hopping over the hollows of the shrunken ponds, prying for
                            worms, which had shut themselves up like caddises deep in the thirsty
                            ground. Our lake, which was very deep at the lower end, became a refuge
                            for all the widgeons and coots and moorhens of the neighbourhood, and
                            the quick-diving grebe, and even the summer snipe, with his wild and
                            lonely "cheep." The brink of the water was feathered, and dabbled with
                            countless impressions of feet of all sorts—dibbers, and waders, and
                            wagtails, and weasels, and otters, and foxes, and the bores of a
                            thousand bills, and muscles laid high and dry.</p>
<p>For my own pet robins I used to fill pans with water along the edge of
                            the grass, for I knew their dislike of the mineral spring (which never
                            went dry), and to these they would fly down and drink, and perk up their
                            impudent heads, and sluice their poor little dusty wings; and then, as
                            they could not sing now, they would give me a chirp of gratitude.</p>
<p>When the drought had lasted about three months, the east wind, which till
                            then had been cold and creeping, became suddenly parching hot. Arid and
                            heavy, and choking, it panted along the glades, like a dog on a dusty
                            road. It came down the water-meadows, where the crowsfoot grew, and wild
                            celery, and it licked up the dregs of the stream, and powdered the
                            flood-gates, all skeletons now, with grey dust. It came through the
                            copse, and the young leaves shrunk before it, like a child from the hiss
                            of a snake. The blast pushed the doors of our house, and its dry
                            wrinkled hand was laid on the walls and the staircase and woodwork; a
                            hot grime tracked its steps, and a taint fell on all that was fresh. As
                            it folded its baleful wings, and lay down like a desert dragon,
                            vegetation, so long a time sick, gave way at last to despair, and
                            flagged off flabbed and dead. The clammy grey dust, like hot sand thrown
                            from ramparts, ate to the core of everything, choking the shrivelled
                            pores and stifling the languid breath. Old gaffers were talking of
                            murrain in cattle, and famine and plague among men, and farmers were too
                            badly off to grumble.</p>
<p>But the change even now was at hand. The sky which had long presented a
                            hard and cloudless blue, but trailing a light haze round its rim in the
                            morning, was bedimmed more every day with a white scudding vapour across
                            it. The sun grew larger and paler, and leaned more on the heavens, which
                            soon became ribbed with white skeleton-clouds; and these in their turn
                            grew softer and deeper, then furry and ravelled and wisped. One night
                            the hot east wind dropped, and, next morning (though the vane had not
                            changed), the clouds drove heavily from the south-west. But these signs
                            of rain grew for several days before a single drop fell; as is always
                            the case after discontinuance, it was hard to begin again. Indeed, the
                            sky was amassed with black clouds, and the dust went swirling like a mat
                            beaten over the trees, and the air became cold, and the wind moaned
                            three days and three nights, and yet no rain fell. As old Whitehead, the
                            man at the lodge, well observed, it had "forgotten the way to rain."
                            Then it suddenly cleared one morning (the 28th of May), and the west was
                            streaked with red clouds, that came up to crow at the sun, and the wind
                            for the time was lulled, and the hills looked close to my hand. So I
                            went to my father's grave without the little green watering-pot or a
                            trowel to fill the chinks, for I knew it would rain that very day.</p>
<p>In the eastern shrubbery there was a pond, which my father had taken much
                            trouble to make and adorn; it was not fed by the mineral spring, for
                            that was thought likely to injure the fish, but by a larger and purer
                            stream, called the "Witches' brook," which, however, was now quite dry.
                            This pond had been planted around and through with silver-weed,
                            thrumwort and sun-clew, water-lilies, arrow-head, and the rare double
                            frog-bit, and other aquatic plants, some of them brought from a long
                            distance. At one end there was a grotto, cased with fantastic porous
                            stone, and inside it a small fountain played. But now the fountain was
                            silent, and the pond shrunk almost to its centre. The silver eels which
                            once had abounded here, finding their element likely to fail, made a
                            migration, one dewy night, overland to the lake below. The fish, in vain
                            envy of that great enterprise, huddled together in the small wet space
                            which remained, with their back-fins here and there above water. When
                            any one came near, they dashed away, as I have seen grey mullet do in
                            the shallow sea-side pools. Several times I had water poured in for
                            their benefit, but it was gone again directly. The mud round the edge of
                            the remnant puddle was baked and cracked, and foul with an oozy green
                            sludge, the relic of water-weeds.</p>
<p>This little lake, once so clear and pretty, and full of bright dimples
                            and crystal shadows, now looked so forlorn and wasted and old, like a
                            bright eye worn dim with years, and the trees stood round it so faded
                            and wan, the poplar unkempt of its silver and green, the willow without
                            wherewithal to weep, and the sprays of the birch laid dead at its feet;
                            altogether it looked so empty and sad and piteous, that I had been
                            deeply grieved for the sake of him who had loved it.</p>
<p>So, when the sky clouded up again, in the afternoon of that day, I
                            hastened thither to mark the first effects of the rain.</p>
<p>As I reached the white shell-walk, which loosely girt the pond, the
                            lead-coloured sky took a greyer and woollier cast, and overhead became
                            blurred and pulpy; while round the horizon it lifted in frayed festoons.
                            As I took my seat in the grotto, the big drops began to patter among the
                            dry leaves, and the globules rolled in the dust, like parched peas. A
                            long hissing sound ensued, and a cloud of powder went up, and the trees
                            moved their boughs with a heavy dull sway. Then broke from the laurels
                            the song of the long-silent thrush, and reptiles, and insects, and all
                            that could move, darted forth to rejoice in the freshness. The earth
                            sent forth that smell of sweet newness, the breath of young nature
                            awaking, which reminds us of milk, and of clover, of balm, and the smile
                            of a child.</p>
<p>But, most of all, it was in and around the pool that the signs of new
                            life were stirring. As the circles began to jostle, and the bubbles
                            sailed closer together, the water, the slime, and the banks, danced,
                            flickered, and darkened, with a whirl of living creatures. The surface
                            was brushed, as green corn is flawed by the wind, with the quivering dip
                            of swallows' wings; and the ripples that raced to the land splashed over
                            the feet of the wagtails.</p>
<p>Here, as I marked all narrowly, and seemed to rejoice in their gladness,
                            a sudden new wonder befell me. I was watching a monster frog emerge from
                            his penthouse of ooze, and lift with some pride his brown spots and his
                            bright golden throat from the matted green cake of dry weed, when a
                            quick gleam shot through the fibres. With a listless curiosity,
                            wondering whether the frog, like his cousin the toad, were a jeweller, I
                            advanced to the brim of the pool. The poor frog looked timidly at me
                            with his large starting eyes; then, shouldering off the green coil, made
                            one rapid spring, and was safe in the water. But his movement had
                            further disclosed some glittering object below. Determined to know what
                            it was, despite the rain, I placed some large pebbles for steps, ran
                            lightly, and lifted the weed. Before me lay, as bright as if polished
                            that day, with the jewelled hilt towards me, a long narrow dagger. With
                            a haste too rapid for thought to keep up, I snatched it, and rushed to
                            the grotto.</p>
<p>There, in the drought of my long revenge, with eyes on fire, and teeth
                            set hard and dry, and every root of my heart cleaving and crying to
                            heaven for blood, I pored on that weapon, whose last sheath had been—how
                            well I knew what. I did not lift it towards God, nor fall on my knees
                            and make a theatrical vow; for that there was no necessity. But for the
                            moment my life and my soul seemed to pass along that cold blade, just as
                            my father's had done. A treacherous, blue, three-cornered blade, with a
                            point as keen as a viper's fang, sublustrous like ice in the moonlight,
                            sleuth as hate, and tenacious as death. To my curdled and fury-struck
                            vision it seemed to writhe in the gleam of the storm which played along
                            it like a corpse-candle. I fancied how it had quivered and rung to find
                            itself deep in that heart.</p>
<p>My passions at length overpowered me, and I lay, how long I know not,
                            utterly insensible. When I came to myself again, the storm had passed
                            over, the calm pool covered my stepping stones, the shrubs and trees
                            wept joy in the moonlight, the nightingales sang in the elms, healing
                            and beauty were in the air, peace and content walked abroad on the
                            earth. The May moon slept on the water before me, and streamed through
                            the grotto arch; but there it fell cold and ghost-like upon the tool of
                            murder. Over this I hastily flung my scarf; coward, perhaps I was, for I
                            could not handle it then, but fled to the house and dreamed in my lonely
                            bed.</p>
<p>When I examined the dagger next day, I found it to be of foreign fabric.
                            "Ferrati, Bologna," the name and abode of the maker, as I supposed, was
                            damascened on the hilt. A cross, like that on the footprint, but
                            smaller, and made of gold, was inlaid on the blade, just above the
                            handle. The hilt itself was wreathed with a snake of green enamel,
                            having garnet eyes. From the fine temper of the metal, or some annealing
                            process, it showed not a stain of rust, and the blood which remained
                            after writing the letters before described had probably been washed off
                            by the water. I laid it most carefully by, along with my other relics,
                            in a box which I always kept locked.</p>
<p>So God, as I thought, by His sun, and His seasons, and weather, and the
                            mind He had so prepared, was holding the clue for me, and shaking it
                            clear from time to time, along my dark and many-winding path.</p>
</div>