<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER X.</head>
<p>Soon as ever my sight was fully restored, and I had Dr. Frank's
                            permission, I took to my drawing again, and worked at it till my eyes
                            ached. This was the symptom upon which I had promised immediately to
                            leave off. Then out I would rush, towards dusk, and away into the great
                            square, full of the pure air of heaven, round by the church at the top,
                            and six times round it till my breath was short. The senior sophist
                            reminds me that round a square is impossible. After squaring the circle,
                            extract the square root, dear Idols, by the binomial theorem. You do
                            learn so much at college: but I write simple and often foolish English.
                            Never mind; I would rather write bad English, than the best French ever
                            written. One is the tongue of power and multitude: the other the
                            language of nicety and demarcation. Which of the two is the more
                            expansive, even a woman may guess.</p>
<p>High time it was for me to recruit my exchequer. Dr. Franks had charged
                            me far less than I even dared to hope. How I trembled when I opened the
                            envelope! What quick terror is half so bad as the slow fear of gathering
                            debt? I was accustomed to medical charges of the time when I was an
                            heiress: but his appeared to me now to be even below reason. The sum
                            could hardly have paid him for his numerous walks to and fro. Then a
                            wretched idea shot through me: had he charged me so little, because he
                            knew I was poor? I took Mrs. Shelfer into my confidence; she was likely
                            to know what the London scale should be. The little thing soon reassured
                            me: it was quite enough, she declared; if she were in my place, she
                            would demand a discount for ready money!</p>
<p>"Oh you dreadfully mean little woman! I should lose my sight, and deserve
                            it, if I did."</p>
<p>However, in spite of all this, money was scarce and scarcer every day,
                            and none of my grand revenues would fall due for ever so long. So
                            another visit must be paid to Mr. Oxgall. Isola insisted on coming with
                            me; to my surprise I found that, with all her soft simplicity she had
                            much more idea of making a market than I had. The reason probably was
                            that she had much less pride. No pocket would hold mine, when a
                            tradesman attempted any familiarity. And whoso stands on a pedestal to
                            sell, is like to find the buyer's arm too short.</p>
<p>Whether it were that, or the golden charm of her manner, or of something
                            else, let Mr. Oxgall say; certain it is that the man of crackly canvas
                            (for whom, by-the-bye, I have a sincere respect, because he cheated me
                            so little and so neatly)—this man, I say, regarded her with a
                            wide-mouthed, brooch-eyed, admiration, which he hardly ever expended on
                            anything out of oils. For the king of painters himself she was a vision
                            sweeter than dreams of heaven. Such a tint in her lustrous eyes, such
                            tone in her dainty cheeks, such perfection of line in her features, and
                            every curve of her exquisite shape. And bounding and sparkling through
                            all, from the rippled wealth of her hair to the light-curved arch of her
                            foot, the full play of her innocent, joyous, loving life.</p>
<p>No wonder the picture-dealer shaded his eyes and gazed, and rubbed them
                            and gazed again. I have frequently seen respectable elderly gentlemen,
                            whose rakishness has never been more than found vent in the cock of a
                            hat, magisterial men I mean, who would no more think of insulting a girl
                            in London or anywhere else, than of giving their daughters as prizes for
                            competitive skill in poaching, such good men and true, also
                            simple-hearted clergymen (for some there still are from the country)
                            these and the like, I Clara Vaughan have seen, when they met my Isola,
                            stop short, wink frequently, and without much presence of mind, until
                            she was gone by; then shumble hotly across the street, with hands in
                            their tail-coat pockets (for these gentlemen always expect most to be
                            robbed when there is least chance of it) pretend to look at a shop, then
                            march at top speed, fumbling all the while for their spectacles, until
                            they got well a-head of us. Then I have seen them cross again, some
                            thirty yards in front, with spectacles nicely adjusted, and become again
                            wholly absorbed by the beauty of metropolitan goods. But when the light
                            foot sounded, from a fair gazing distance, these same gentlemen have (by
                            some strange coincidence) alway turned full upon us, in an absent and
                            yet nervous manner, and focussed their green or pale blue eyes upon the
                            rich violet orbs of Isola. I have even known them to look at me (when
                            they could see her no more), to find some sympathy for their vague
                            emotions. Idols knew it: of course she did. And she rather gloried in
                            it. She had much respect for a fine old gentleman; and I know not how it
                            was, but nobody ever thought of insulting her when she could be clearly
                            seen.</p>
<p>A "pretty girl" you would never call her—though Mr. Shelfer did—the term
                            would be quite unworthy; even a "beautiful girl," sweetly beautiful
                            though she was, would hardly be your expression, at least for a while.
                            But a "lovely girl," and the loveliest one ever seen, that is what she
                            would be called at once, if you could take your eyes off, to analyse
                            your ideas.</p>
<p>Isola knew it of course, as I said before, she knew all her wondrous
                            gifts; but as for being conceited, a trull with a splay foot and a crop
                            of short-horn carrots has often thrice her conceit. A certain pretty
                            graceful pride she had, which threw a rosy playful halo round her, but
                            never made other women look plain in her eyes. She will not value her
                            beauty much, until she falls in love; and blessed is he who shall be the
                            object, if she is allowed to abide with him.</p>
<p>Meanwhile Mr. Oxgall wished for nothing but to hear and see her talk; and
                            this she did to some purpose. I like a man who at the age of sixty is
                            still impressible to the gay vein of youth. I know at once by his eyes
                            whether his admiration is abstract and admissible. If it be, I
                            reciprocate it. What clearer proof can we find, that his heart has not
                            withered with his body; that he is not a man of mammon, tinsel, or
                            phylactery,—in a word, no mummy?</p>
<p>Shall I ever finish this bargain? I have never been so reflective before;
                            and all the time no less a sum than five pounds hangs upon it. Five
                            guineas (which sounds better) was the amount at which dear Idols let off
                            Mr. Oxgall. I believe she might have got ten, but she had an excellent
                            conscience. It worked like a patent chronometer, with compensation
                            balance. Mine was still more sensitive. I could hardly think my
                            landscape, perspective mare's nest and all, worth that amount of money,
                            and I wished to throw off a guinea, but Idols would not hear of it.</p>
<p>"Miss Valence, I am your factor for this beautiful landscape, which has
                            cost you so much labour. Either accept my terms, inadequate as they are,
                            or take the agency from me, and recommence with Mr. Oxgall 'de novo,' as
                            we say at College."</p>
<p>Betwixt her beauty and my stately integrity, poor Mr. Oxgall knew not
                            where he stood. I heard him mutter that he would rather go through fifty
                            auctions, even if it was George Robins. But if she had come to sell him
                            a picture the very next day, he would have gone through it all again
                            with the same infatuation. So I took the money; and now my evil demon,
                            who had chafed beneath all this trampling, had his turn again. We had
                            foolishly brought the great dog Giudice, for our delight and the
                            expansion of his mind. In Mr. Oxgall's shop he behaved to admiration.
                            With the air of a connoisseur he walked from picture to picture, closed
                            one eye, and faintly wagged his tail. Then he found a Scotch terrier
                            scarcely worth a sniff, and a mastiff whom he saluted with a
                            contemptuous growl. The only work of high art he could discover was an
                            interior, with a flitch of bacon in the foreground uncommonly well
                            drawn. Before this he sat down, and receiving no invitation, bedewed the
                            boards with a stalactite from either side of his mouth. The dog was so
                            well behaved, he never took anything without leave and saying t a long
                            grace.</p>
<p>Unluckily Mr. Oxgall, mainly I believe to prolong his interview with
                            Idols, insisted upon taking us to the shop of a carver and gilder close
                            by; where my first drawing (which had been sold) was to be seen in its
                            frame. He declared that we could not tell what a painting was like,
                            until we had seen it framed. Observing several large mirrors in this
                            shop, I begged that Giudice might be left outside. And so he was, but he
                            did not stay there. Scarcely had we begun to discuss the effect of the
                            frame on my drawing, when Giudice pushed his way in, and looked about
                            with a truly judicial air. The shop was long, and the owner was with us
                            at the further end. I saw what would follow, and dashed off to stop him,
                            but it was too late. Giudice had seen the very finest dog he ever beheld
                            in his life—a dog really worth fighting. Up went his crest and his tail,
                            one savage growl, and he sprang at him. Crash,—and the largest mirror
                            there was a wreck, and Giudice the rock beneath it. For a time he lay
                            quite stunned; then to my great delight he staggered to me, not Isola,
                            laid his cut paws in my hands and his bleeding nose in my lap, and
                            explained it all to me with much entreaty for sympathy. This I gave him
                            readily, even to tears and kisses. Isola wanted to scold and even to
                            beat him, but I would not hear of it. He had seen another great dog
                            between himself and us, how could he help attacking him? I ordered a
                            sponge and some water at once, and bathed his fore paws, which were
                            terribly cut; then remembering the Inspector, I sent Idols for some
                            arnica. But the blood was not stanched by it as I expected; perhaps the
                            drug was not pure, or the hair obstructed its action. So I held his paws
                            in the basin, and he whinged, and licked me, and made my face all
                            bloody.</p>
<p>Meanwhile the poor carver and gilder thought much more of his
                            looking-glass than of noble flesh and blood. The picture-dealer as well
                            was in a great predicament.</p>
<p>"Mr. Oxgall," I cried, still sponging the wounded dog's nose, "let us
                            hear no more about it. Tell me the full value of the mirror, and I will
                            pay for it. What are glass and quicksilver, or even gold, compared to a
                            noble dog like this? Not worth a wag of your tail, are they, my duck of
                            diamonds? Give me another kiss, you delicious pet of a dog."</p>
<p>The delicious dog was entirely of my opinion. His beautiful eyes were
                            unhurt. His nose tasted wholesomely salt. But Isola was not half so
                            romantic. Little she cared about money for herself; yet she had no idea
                            of seeing a friend disburse. Empowered by nature to wind all men round
                            her finger, she now called art to her aid, and Mr. Oxgall, who was
                            half-way round already, had no chance of escape.</p>
<p>She settled it thus: the carver and gilder, in consideration of his
                            dealings with Mr. Oxgall and his own "careless exposure" of the mirror,
                            should accept cost price for the article. That amount should be paid in
                            equal shares by all three of us: by Mr. Oxgall because he would drag us
                            thither, by herself as the mistress of the dog, and by me as the cause
                            of the expedition. She had attended a course of lectures upon
                            jurisprudence, and her decision was better than that of a judge, because
                            she had seen the whole of it, and because the dog was hers—at least her
                            brother's, which was all the same. As for the owner of the mirror, he
                            must think himself wonderfully lucky in having met with such honest
                            people, and in having sold his glass, and hadn't he got all the pieces,
                            and she must have the largest one for Judy to dress his hair by. And so
                            indeed she did.</p>
<p>After our dear Portia had finished, and the whole thing was settled, it
                            struck me that no lectures upon jurisprudence could turn wrong into
                            right. Mr. Oxgall was quite blameless, so was I, so was Idols, except in
                            bringing unlucky Giudice with her, which, from the outset, I had
                            discouraged. She, as the temporary owner of the dog, should have borne
                            all the loss; and so she would have done gladly, only she did not see it
                            in that light. As it was, she tried afterwards to force upon me her last
                            three guineas (that being the sum which I had paid, as my third of the
                            whole), but of course I would not accept them. She had no money with
                            her, so I paid her contribution, but allowed her to repay me. Mr.
                            Oxgall's third I made good to him (without consulting her) when he paid
                            me for my next drawing. So I had earned five guineas, and lost six. Is
                            it always to be so when I labour to make a little money?</p>
<p>At my earnest entreaty—Idols could refuse me nothing, when I was in
                            earnest—darling Giudice was brought home in a cab to my lodgings. I knew
                            that he would not be cared for at the stables where he was boarded; and
                            his wounds were very serious. As for home, Professor Ross, who detested
                            dogs in general, would not admit him into the house. He even thought it
                            a great stretch of grace to allow old Cora to watch the dog back to the
                            stables, after he had been patrolling all the afternoon with his
                            mistress. How I hate such low ingratitude! An animal is to serve us,
                            body and soul, to crouch and fawn for our notice—not that Giudice ever
                            fawned to him, but growled awfully—and we are to think it well off with
                            a curse or a kick, which we durst not give it but for its loyalty to
                            us.</p>
<p>What pleasure I had in nursing that poor Giudice, and how grateful he
                            was! When we got home, I washed his wounds again, with warm water this
                            time, as the bleeding was stanched; and then I "exhibited" (as the
                            doctors absurdly say) a little friar's balsam. "Oh, it does smart so!"
                            Giudice exclaimed with his eyes, "but I know it's for the best, and you
                            won't see me give one wince." Neither did I. Then a nice soft bandage
                            over his lovely paws, and a plaister across his nose, and he lies
                            snugly, at the proper distance from the fire, as proud as possible of
                            being nursed, and with an interesting air of pallid refinement on his
                            features. He will hardly notice Idols, but exclaims, at length, with the
                            petulance of an invalid, "Isola, can't you let me alone? Clara
                            understands a dog, and I like her much the best." So he followed me all
                            round the room with his eyes, and begged me to come and talk to him,
                            which I would not do, because he needed quiet and composure.</p>
</div>