<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XII.</head>
<p>The lake was dragged that night, and all the following day, in spite of
                            the gamekeeper's strong remonstrance for the sake of the tender
                            pintails. But nothing whatever was found, except the Italian cap. The
                            "Witches' grave," invisible I am glad to say from the house, is more
                            than forty feet deep, when the water is at its lowest. Three or four
                            years afterwards young William Hiatt caught a monstrous pike in the
                            lake, and sent him, with our permission, to be stuffed at Gloucester.
                            Like the famous fish of Samos, this pike had swallowed a ring, which was
                            sent to Conrad by the Gloucester gun-maker. It was Lepardo's seal-ring,
                            the cross of the family engraved on a bloodstone, with L.D.C. below
                            it.</p>
<p>Whether the midnight stabber died by the blow of an English fist, or
                            suffered vivisection through a dog's vendetta—an institution more
                            excusable and dignified than man's—is known to Him, and Him alone, who
                            holds the scales of retribution, and laughs in scorn as well as wrath at
                            our attempts to swing them. For are we not therein ourselves; and how
                            shall the best and strongest of us carry the thing he is carried in?
                            Right glad I am, and ever shall be, that I moved not in the awful scene,
                            which closed my father's tragedy.</p>
<p>Through Conrad's skill and presence of mind, the dear farmer's life was
                            saved. We sent to Gloucester immediately for the cleverest surgeon
                            there; and he owned that he could not have fixed the ligatures better,
                            though he did what Conny durst not attempt, he extracted the murderer's
                            bullet. It was the first shot that did all the mischief, being aimed
                            deliberately at the large and tender heart. Thanks to the waving of the
                            willow-tree, for Lepardo was a known marksman, it had missed by about
                            two inches. The second shot, fired quite close and wildly, had grooved
                            the left temple, and stricken the farmer senseless.</p>
<p>For six weeks now our dear friend, whose patience amazed all but me, was
                            kept from his Devonshire home. To London I sent at once for the two
                            children and Mr. Dawe, and would have sent to Devon as well, for kind
                            and good Mrs. Huxtable, but her husband would not hear of it. By Ann
                            Maples, who had left Lady Cranberry "shockingly," on hearing from Mrs.
                            Fletcher that I would take her again, he sent to his wife "kind love and
                            best duty, and for goodness' sake, stop at home now. No call to make a
                            fule of yourself, and the farm go to rack and ruin. There be fuss enough
                            'bout I already, and never I brag no more, when a pill like thiccy upsot
                            me. But Miss Clara, God bless her bootiful eyes, she nurse me, just as
                            if she wor my own darter, with the apron on as you give her. And you
                            should see the kitchen, Honor, you loves a kitchen so; they be a bilin
                            and roastin arl day, and they be vorced to swape the chimbley three
                            times in a vortnight"—the rest of this glorious message, about three
                            pages long, I am "vorced" to suppress; I only hope Ann Maples remembered
                            a quarter of it.</p>
<p>But his wonderful Miss Clara did not nurse him long. Hearing from the
                            surgeon that all the danger was over by the end of the following week—so
                            strong was the constitution—Conrad, Lily, and I set sail for Corsica on
                            our melancholy errand. In that letter, which seemed to come to me from
                            the grave, my poor Uncle after expressing his joy and deep gratitude at
                            so happy a close to his life, continued thus:—</p>
<p>"Yes, my dear child, the close of my wasted and weary life. You may be
                            surprised and perplexed at what I am about to tell you; but you are not
                            one of those low-minded ones, who condemn as superstition all beyond
                            their philosophy. The very night after you brought me my new Lily, a
                            sweet thing just like her mother, I lay for some hours awake, broad
                            awake as I am now. I was thinking of my two Lilies, the lovely and
                            loving creatures. I was not in the least excited, but calm, reflective,
                            and happy. Soon after the clock struck two, at the time when our life
                            burns lowest, I heard a soft voice, sweet as the music of heaven, call
                            me by name three times. Of course I knew whose it was: too often that
                            voice had murmured upon my bosom, for me not to know it now. Not rashly,
                            but with a mind long since resolved, I answered: 'Sweetest mine'—her own
                            artless and young endearment—'Sweetest mine, no longer will I keep you
                            lonely.' No answer came in words; but the light, the golden light of my
                            own love's smile, as I had seen it in Corsica, when she came from the
                            grave to comfort me. And now, as after that visit, I fell into deep and
                            perfect rest, such rest as comes but rarely until the sleep of all. No
                            wonder you and Lily thought me so strong next day. In the morning I knew
                            and rejoiced in my quick departure. This cold obstruction was to be cast
                            aside, this palsied frame to release the winged soul. On the third day I
                            was to find and dwell with my Lily for ever. So on the first day I
                            enjoyed the harmless pleasures of life, and could not bear you to leave
                            me, because that would have turned them to pain. The second day I got
                            through all the business that still remained, refreshing its dryness
                            often with my sweet child's society. On this, the third, I write to you,
                            and am, through the grace of God, as calm and content, nay more content
                            than if I were going to bed.</p>
<p>"Beloved daughters both, and my dear son as well, I implore you not to
                            grieve painfully for me. Too well I know the weight of excessive sorrow,
                            and how it oppresses the lost one, even more than the loser. Since the
                            parting is so brief, the reunion so eternal, why make the interval long
                            and dreary by counting every footstep?</p>
<p>Alas, it is easy to talk and think so, but very hard to feel it. Time
                            demands his walk with sorrow, and will not have his arm dispensed with.
                            Then think of my happiness, darlings, and how your own will increase
                            it.</p>
<p>Only one more request, which after Ciceronian sentiments—which Cicero
                            could not practise—you are all too young not to wonder at. If you, my
                            three children, can manage it, without any heavy expense, or much
                            trouble to yourselves, it is my last wish as regards the body, that it
                            should lie by the side of my wife's. The name of the little church, St.
                            Katharine's on the Cliff, can scarcely have escaped my Clara's excellent
                            memory. Lily lies beside her father, in the right-hand corner towards
                            the sea. Each of them has a cross of the Signor's alabaster, made from
                            my own design. Lily's is enough for me: put my name with hers."</p>
<p>Not only did we look upon his last fond wish as sacred, but we
                            accomplished it in the manner that was likely to please him most. We put
                            his own "Lilyflower," the little love-boat as they called it, into
                            commission again, engaged a good captain and crew, and taking old Cora
                            with us, set sail from Gloucester for the Mediterranean. Poor Cora was
                            now all devotion to Conrad and Lily, ever since she had found that they
                            were lawful blood and direct heirs of the Della Croce. The more recent
                            part of the family story she had known only from her master's version,
                            and had set little store by the children as bearing the stamp of
                            disgrace; though she could not help loving sweet Lily. Now, by her
                            evidence, coupled with my dear Uncle's deposition, his relics, and
                            documents, and my own testimony, confirmed by Balaam and Balak, we
                            established very easily the birth and the claims of my Uncle Edgar's
                            children; and the old Count Gaffori, most venerable of signors, would
                            have kept us a month at least to go through all his accounts. He was
                            entreated to retain his position as the guardian of our Lily.</p>
<p>So far as our recent sorrow permitted enjoyment of scenery, we were all
                            enchanted with the Balagna. At the funeral of "Signor Valentine," whose
                            name was still remembered and loved, nearly all the commune was present;
                            and many a dignified matron shed tears, who had smiled as a graceful
                            girl, and strown flowers, at his wedding. They were burning with
                            curiosity to see our beautiful Lily, for the tender tale had moved them,
                            as Southern natures are moved; and many of them had loved and gloried in
                            her mother.</p>
<p>But in spite of all this desire, not a prying glance fell on her, as she
                            bowed in the hooded robe, and wept to the mournful vocero. Foremost of
                            all stood old Petro and Marcantonia, who had found out and kissed with
                            sobs of delight their beloved master's daughter. For my part, I loved
                            the Corsicans; there is something so noble and simple about the men, so
                            graceful, warm-hearted, and lady-like in the women; and in a very short
                            time I could understand more than half they said. The black Vendetta,
                            they told me, was dying out among them, and in a few years would be but
                            a wonder of the past. God in His mercy grant it.</p>
<p>There must have been something surely in my Uncle Edgar's nature, which
                            won the Southern hearts, as my father won British affections. Such
                            things I cannot explain, or account for. I only know and feel them.</p>
<p>We were all back at Vaughan St. Mary before the end of August, and found
                            the farmer, the two chillers, and Beany Dawe as happy as if they were
                            born and reared there. Old Cora was left at Veduta Tower; and having
                            obtained Mr. Dawe's permission I presented her once and for all with the
                            whole treasure of the gordit. She intends, however, to bequeath it to me
                            in her will. Soon afterwards Conrad gave her a more substantial
                            blessing; for he sold the things left in Lucas Street, under letters of
                            administration, as being the next of kin. All the proceeds he handed
                            over to Cora, except one-tenth, which he presented to the Society for
                            the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. As many of the specimens,
                            iguanodon, and other monsters, fetched prices as hard to explain away as
                            themselves, poor Cora was amply provided for: all which of course she
                            attributed to the holy Madonna's heart. And now at last I understood how
                            19, Grove Street had become No. 37, Lucas Street. The change of number I
                            have already explained; the change of name was on this wise:—The
                            builder, a rising man, who had bought the old part of the street, and
                            built thereto the new one, had a son, a fine undergraduate, better
                            skilled in the boats than in the books of Oxford. Reading hard one day,
                            after his third pluck, this young man discovered that lucus was the
                            Latin for grove. He smote his hand on his forehead, and a great idea
                            presented itself. Had there not been both nymphs and philosophers of the
                            grove? The street that was his inheritance should be distinguished by
                            nomenclature from the thousand groves of London, wherein the nightingale
                            pipeth not, neither—but I am getting poetical, and don't understand the
                            Gradus. Enough, that he wrote at once and earnestly to his father,
                            forgetting the vivid description, which was now growing stale, of his
                            pluck—a result secured, as the Winchester gentlemen tell me, by learning
                            too solid to carry—but begging that his Oxford career might at least be
                            commemorated in and by the street that paid his bills there. "Lucus" he
                            wrote plainly enough, and in very large letters, but the father read it
                            "Lucks." No, said the mother, she was sure Alexander never meant such a
                            low thing as that, it was "Lucas" of course; why the Lucases were her
                            own cousins, and Rosa such a nice girl, she saw how it was, that she
                            did, and Alexander might have done worse. And so it was painted most
                            bravely "Lucas Street," and the builder wasn't going to make a fool of
                            himself, when Alexander protested.</p>
<p>When John Huxtable set off for home, just in time to see to his harvest,
                            which is always late round Exmoor, I kissed him—ay, Conny, you saw
                            it—and thrust, during his amazement, something far down into his mighty
                            pocket, which something he was not upon any account to look at until he
                            got home. It was a deed, prepared by our solicitors, presenting him with
                            the fee simple of Tossil's Barton farm. True, I was not of age, but I
                            signed it as if I had been, and Conny and I again signed it, when we
                            paid our first visit there. Perhaps, in strict law, it binds not my
                            interest even now; but if ever any one claiming "by, from, through,
                            under, or in trust for" me, forgets the Vaughan honour and dares to
                            dream of that farm, I'll be at him as sure as a ghost; and I trust
                            before that time comes, the farmer will have sound title by immemorial
                            years of possession. He is now a prosperous man; and has never found it
                            necessary to give up his beer, as he threatened Young John, who is just
                            like his father, cleaves fast to Tabby Badcock, now a blooming maiden;
                            but my Sally has more than balanced that imminent loss of caste, by
                            fixing the eyes and transfixing the heart of George Tamlin, the son of
                            our principal tenant, and himself of Devonshire origin. The young lady
                            comes to and fro every six weeks, and is to be married from our house,
                            when her father considers her "zober enough." Beany Dawe, who does not
                            like work, still lives at Tossil's Barton, and is in receipt of a
                            pension of sixpence a day from Government, as a bard at last
                            appreciated.</p>
<p>As for me, Clara Vaughan, on the very day after that which released me
                            from my teens (counting forward, as we do, till we count receding
                            years), to wit on the 31st of December, 1851, I did not change my name,
                            but wrote it in the old church register, half an inch below a better and
                            firmer hand. There was no fuss or frippery; no four clergymen and ten
                            bridesmaids simpering at one another. Our good vicar represented the one
                            class, dear Lily and Annie Franks the other. My godfather, newly
                            disclosed for the purpose, gave me away very gracefully, and young Peter
                            Green helped Conrad. Lily Vaughan looked so exquisite, so deliciously
                            lovely, that nobody in the whole world—Now Conny, hold your tongue, I
                            never fish for compliments, don't degrade yourself so for a kiss, of
                            course I know all my perfections, but how can I care about them, when
                            you say they belong to you?—Lily Vaughan, I say once more, was such a
                            sunrise of loveliness, that young Peter Green, just new from his Oxford
                            honours, collapsed, and fell over the railings, and wedged his head in
                            the "piscina," or whatever those nice young gentlemen, who see the duty
                            of wearing strait waistcoats, are pleased to denominate it.</p>
<p>Ah, Little Distaff Lane, most unconnubial title, ah firm of Green,
                            Vowler, and Green, your Hercules holds the distaff, and holds it, alas,
                            in his heart! From that shock he never recovered, until we had at
                            Vaughan Park a really merry wedding; and I, ah me, I could not dance
                            just then, but I showered roses upon them, for the shadow of death was
                            past. Old Mr. Green,—nay, nay, not fifty yet, by our Lady,—Mr. Peter
                            Green the elder, came down here for the occasion, and I hardly ever took
                            such a fancy to any man before. He seemed to know almost everything, not
                            by the skin, as Dr. Ross seemed to hold things, but by the marrow and
                            fibrine of their alimentary part. And withal such a perfect gentleman:
                            he kept in the horns of his knowledge, instead of exalting them, and
                            making us wish for hay on them, while tossed in headlong ignorance.</p>
<p>Scant as I am of space, I must tell how he behaved, when his son revealed
                            his attachment.</p>
<p>"Is it a lady, Peter?" "I should rather think she is, father." "Do you
                            love her with all your heart?" "Of course I do, every bit. I am tough,
                            but I know I shall die, unless—" "That will do, my son. You have my full
                            consent, and your mother's is sure to follow. Most likely you got it
                            beforehand. You young fellows are so deep. Let me kiss your forehead, my
                            boy, although I am not dramatic."</p>
<p>Having behaved so nobly, for this boy was his only hope, he deserved to
                            find, as he did, that if he had searched the world he could not have hit
                            upon any other so desirable for his son, as the daughter of his old
                            friend. The only mistake he has made is that he so adores her, he cannot
                            bear her to be in Corsica; though the trade they conduct is worth at
                            least fifty thousand a year. When Lily fell in love, I told her that it
                            was because she had an eye for the olives; and olives enough the darling
                            has, I trow, and olive branches too. The eldest is called Clara. "Clara
                            Green!" I don't like the sound altogether; but the substance is
                            something beautiful, and the freshest of all Spring verdure.
                            Nevertheless, my Clara is an inch larger round the calf, and I think her
                            eyelashes are longer. Her hair weighs more, that is certain. We compare
                            them very often; for they live only half the year at Veduta Tower. In
                            the summer heats they are here, and the children between them, my own
                            every bit as bad, leave dear Annie Elton (Annie Franks of old),
                            uncommonly few British Queens. It is all Mr. Shelfer's fault. What is
                            the use of a gardener, if he allows dessert all the day long?</p>
<p>Every autumn we go to Corsica to help at the olive harvest, and rarely we
                            enjoy it. The Old Veduta Tower is like a nest in the ivy, chirruping
                            with young voices; and the happy sleep of the two who loved so well is
                            dreaming, if dream it can or care to do, of the fairest flowers in
                            Europe, scattered there by little soft hands. Conny is wild every time
                            about the Rogliano and Luri; and if Peter Green listens to him—which
                            every one does, except me—he will introduce, very slowly of course,
                            those fine-bodied yet aerial wines to the noble British public, that
                            loves not even intoxication, unless it be adulterated.</p>
<p>Oh, queer Mrs. Shelfer, oh Balaam and Balak, shall I pretermit your
                            annals? The two Sheriff's officers, having secured their reward, set up
                            therewith a public-house called the "Posse-Comitatus," which soon became
                            the head quarters of all who are agents or patients in the machinery of
                            levying. As at such times all people drink and pay more than double, the
                            public-house has already a Queensbench-ful of good-will.</p>
<p>Poor Mrs. Shelfer and Charley did not invest the 325*l.* altogether
                            judiciously: at least, it went mainly to purchase "eternal gratitude,"
                            whose time does not begin to run till the purchaser's is over. But
                            Patty, I am glad to say, has still that 30*l.* a year of her own, left
                            to her in the funds by good and grateful Miss Minto. "Can't touch it, my
                            good friend, not the Queen, the Lord Mayor, and all the royal family.
                            Government give their bond for it, on parchment made of their skins, and
                            the ink come out of their gall." Be this as it may, what is much more to
                            the purpose is that Mr. Shelfer cannot touch it. And now I have pride in
                            announcing, for I never expected such glory, that all the cats and
                            birds, squirrels, mice, and monkeys, live, like the happy family, in our
                            northern lodge, where Patty is most useful and happy as the Queen of the
                            poultry. In a word, they keep the gate, not of their enemies, but of old
                            and grateful friends. I expected to see at least a leading article in
                            the "Times," when Mr. Shelfer left the metropolis; but they let him go
                            very easily for the sake of the discount market. They gave him only
                            two-and-twenty dinners; but when he first came to Vaughan Park, how he
                            wanted country air! Now he attends to the wall-trees, and the avenue,
                            and I hope finds harmony there. At any rate, he never breaks it by any
                            undue exertion. Nevertheless, his very long pipe is of some account with
                            the green fly, which has been very bad on our peaches, ever since they
                            repealed the corn laws. Mr. Shelfer, accordingly, is compelled to spend
                            half his time in smoking them. "Wonderful nice they do taste, Miss
                            Clara; you'd be quite surprised, you know. Wonderful good, Miss, and
                            werry high-flavoured you know, when they begins to fry."</p>
<p>"Come, come, Mr. Shelfer, I fear you cultivate them for their flavour.
                            There are ten times as many of them, I see, as of peaches on the trees.
                            And you charge me every week five shillings for tobacco."</p>
<p>"To be sure, Miss Clara. Shows a fine constitooshun, you know. And
                            dreadful hard work it is to have to smoke so much, you know. And then
                            the sun will come on the wall, and only a quart of beer allowed all the
                            afternoon. And sometimes they makes me go for it myself, you know!
                            Indeed they does, Miss, they has such cheek here in
                            Gloucestershire!"</p>
<p>Patty brought all her sticks of course, in spite of the twenty-five bills
                            of sale, which by this time had grown upon them. One whole roomful was
                            packed in the duplicate inventories. The law on this subject she
                            contemplated from a peculiar point of view.</p>
<p>"Lor, Miss, I never grudges 'em. They do cost a bit at the time; but see
                            how safe they makes them. If it wasn't for them I should be frightened
                            out of my wits of thieves, down here where the trees and all the green
                            grocery is, worse than the Regency Park. Bless me, I never should have
                            gone out of doors, Miss, if you hadn't pulled me. And to see the flowers
                            here all a-growing with their heads up as bootiful as a bonnet. Pray, my
                            good friend, is that what they was made for, if I may be so bold?"</p>
<p>"No, Patty, not for bonnets. They were made for the bees and the
                            butterflies, and for us to enjoy them, while they enjoy themselves."</p>
<p>"Well, I never. Pray, Miss, did I tell you Uncle John's come home, and
                            they only ate a piece of his shoulder for they found his belt was
                            tenderer; and he put the glazing on it the same as they wears on their
                            hats, and three cork pins to hold it, and he find it werry convenient,
                            it save so much rheumatism: and he'll be here next week to convict the
                            man that made his wife swallow the tea-pot. Dear, dear, what things they
                            does do in the country. Not a bit like Christians. And so, Miss Clara,
                            the old man won't drop off after all; and Uncle John a-coming, how nice
                            it would have been."</p>
<p>The old man was poor Whitehead, whose lodge Mrs. Shelfer coveted, as it
                            was larger and livelier than her own.</p>
<p>"No, Mrs. Shelfer, I think he will get over it. Surely you would not wish
                            to hurry him."</p>
<p>"To be sure, my good friend; no, no: let him have his time, I say. But he
                            would have had it long ago, if he had any reason in him. What good can
                            he do now, holding on with his eyebrows? Please God to let him go in
                            peace; and so much happier for us all."</p>
<p>When Uncle John appeared, he scolded me for my want of intelligence on
                            the night when I was blinded. Of the four men in that room, the one whom
                            I had noticed least was the very one whom he had meant me especially to
                            observe. At least, so he said; but I fully believed, and did not scruple
                            to tell him, that he had discovered little beyond the information and
                            description given at the time by Mr. Edgar Vaughan. These he had
                            disinterred from the archives of Bow Street and Whitehall, and was then
                            trying to apply them. However, I forgave him freely; inasmuch as, but
                            for my blindness, even blind love would have known me as an
                            objectionable being.</p>
<p>And now I come to a real grievance. When there is another Miss Clara—such
                            a beauty! I can't tell you—and a little Harry, for whose sake this tale
                            is told—why will every one on these premises, even the under-gardener's
                            boy, persist in calling me "Miss Clara?" It makes me stamp sometimes,
                            and such a bad example that is for my children. Dear me, if either of my
                            ducklings were to carry on as I did at their age, I would cut down
                            immediately the largest birch-tree on the property, and order a hogshead
                            of salt. But, to return to that contumely—is it to be suspected that I
                            was more forcible and pronounced, in the days of my trial and misery,
                            than now when I am the happiest of all the young mothers of England?
                            "Come, Conny, tell the truth now, don't I keep you in order?"</p>
<p>"My own delight, I should think you did. I am nearly as much afraid of
                            you as I am of little Clary. Clary ride on Judy now, and Harry on pup
                            Sampiero, and come and see papa go chip, chip, chip?"</p>
<p>"No, Clary stop and see mamma go scratch, scratch, scratch, like Cooky at
                            the pie-crust. Clary love mamma to-day, and papa to-morrow."</p>
<p>And the lovely dear jumps on the stool, to pull the top of my pen. Harry
                            pops out from under the table, and prepares himself for onset. My
                            husband comes and lifts my hair, and throws his arm around me. It is all
                            up now with writing.</p>
<p>"Darlings, I love all three of you, to-day, to-morrow, and for ever. Only
                            don't pull me to pieces."</p>
<trailer>THE END.</trailer>
</div>