<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER XI.</head>
<p rend="pfirst">"Six long months to be away from Lily! And perhaps forget
                            her, and find some lovelier maiden."</p>
<p>"By Lily's side, all maids are burdocks. And yet what if I do?"</p>
<p>She showed a small stiletto toy with a cross upon the handle, and ground
                            her pearly teeth together.</p>
<p>"Will it be for me, or her?"</p>
<p>"Both; and Lily afterwards."</p>
<p>"Oh you wholesale little murderer! Three great kisses directly, one for
                            every murder."</p>
<p>"Only if you promise, on the relics, never to look twice at a pretty
                            maiden."</p>
<p>And so we spent the precious time,—ten days allowed me to prepare my
                            yacht—in talking utter nonsense, and conning fifty foolish schemes, to
                            make us seem together. I was for departing at once, that the period
                            might begin to run; but Lily was for keeping me to the last possible
                            moment, and of course she had her way. It was fixed that I should sail
                            on the 10th day of September. My little boat, now called the "Lily
                            flower," was brought from Calvi, and moored in a secluded cove, where my
                            love could see it from her bedroom window. It was no longer Corsican law
                            that I should live in the castle. The privileges of a guest were gone;
                            and the rigorous code of suitorship began. But to me and my own darling
                            it made very little difference. I never left Vendetta tower, as I
                            lightly named it, until my pet was ordered off to bed; and every morn I
                            climbed the heights, after a long swim in the sapphire ripple, and met
                            my own sweet Lily sparkling from the dew of her early toilet. How she
                            loved me, how I loved her; which more than other let angels say; for we
                            could not decide. That ancient Corsican her father, albeit little versed
                            in books, was as upright and downright a gentleman as ever knew when his
                            presence was not required. Therefore he took my word of honour for his
                            Lily's safety; and left her to her own sweet will; and her sweet will
                            was to spend with me all her waking hours. For her as yet there was no
                            fear of the blood-avenger. According to their etiquette they cannot
                            shoot the daughter, until they have shot the father. As to the sons the
                            restriction does not hold. The feud we were concerned in had lasted now
                            120 years, and cost the lives of 130 people. It lay between the ancient
                            races of Della Croce, and De Gentili, and owed its origin to the
                            discovery of a dead mule on the road to church. The question was which
                            family should be exterminated first. For many years the house of Della
                            Croce had been in the ascendant, having produced a long succession of
                            good shots and clever bushmen. At one time all the hopes of the De
                            Gentili hung upon one infant life, which was not thought worth the
                            taking. Fatal error—that one life had proved a mighty trump. One after
                            one the Della Croce fell before that original artist, who invented a
                            patent method of trunking himself in olive bark and firing from a
                            knot-hole. Many a story Lily told me of his devilish wiles; and in those
                            stories I rejoiced, because she clung around my neck, and trembled so
                            that I must hold her. Happily now this olive-branch was dead, having
                            received his death-wound while he administered one to Lily's youngest
                            brother. Ever since that, the feud had languished, and strict etiquette
                            required that the Della Croce should perpetrate the next murder. But her
                            father, said my Lily, with her sweet head on my breast and her soft eyes
                            full of fire, her father did not seem to care even to shoot the cousin
                            of the man who had shot her brothers.</p>
<p>Darling Lily, my blood runs cold, even with your beauty in my arms, to
                            hear you talk of murder so. Own pet, I shall change you. You heaven
                            meant for love, and softness, and delight: human devilry has tainted
                            even you. It was not an easy task to change her. Of all human passions
                            revenge is far the strongest. Clara, how your eyes flash. You ought to
                            have been a Corsican. It was not an easy task; but love loves
                            difficulties. In my ten short days of delicious wretchedness, almost I
                            taught Fiordalisa to despise revenge. And what do you think availed me
                            most? Not the Bible. No, her mind and soul were swathed by Popery in the
                            rags of too many saints. What helped me most, and the only thing that
                            helped me at all, except caresses, was the broad and free expanse of the
                            ever changing sea. Her nature was all poetry, her throbbing breast an
                            Idyl. Upon my little quarter-deck I had a cushioned niche for her, and
                            there we sat and steered ourselves while the sailors slept below. Alone
                            upon the crystal world, pledged for life or death together, drinking
                            deepest draughts of passion and thirsting still for more, what cared we
                            for petty hatreds, we whose all in all was love? How she listened as I
                            spoke, how her large eyes grew enlarged.</p>
<p>At last those eyes, pure wells of love, were troubled with hot tears. The
                            fatal day was come. Tokens we had interchanged, myriad vows, and
                            countless pledges, which even love could scarce remember. With all the
                            passion of her race, and all the fervour of the clime, she bared her
                            beautiful round arm, the part that lay most near the heart and touched
                            it with the keen stiletto, then she threw her breast on mine, and I laid
                            the crimsoned ivory on my lips. How the devil—excuse me, Clara—how the
                            devil I got away, only phlegmatic Englishmen can tell. No Frenchman, or
                            Italian, would have left that heavenly darling so. We put it off to the
                            last moment, till it was quite dangerous to pass the rocky jaws. As my
                            bad luck would have it, there was a purpling sunset breeze. My own love
                            on the furthest point, her white feet in the water, growing smaller and
                            smaller yet, and standing upon tiptoe to be seen for another yard; my
                            own darling love of ages, she loosed her black hair down her snowy vest,
                            for me to know her from the rocks behind; then she waved and waved her
                            sweet palm hat, fragrant of my Lily,—I had kissed every single inch of
                            it,—until she thought I could not see her; and then, as my telescope
                            showed me, back she fell upon a ledge of rocks, and I could see or fancy
                            her delicious bosom heaving to the fury of her tears. We glided past the
                            cavern mouth, and the silver beach beyond it, whence we had often
                            watched the sunset; and then a beetling crag took from me the last view
                            of Lily.</p>
<p>However long the schoolboy may have bled from some big coward's bullying,
                            or the sway of the rustling birch and the bosky thrill that follows,
                            however sore he may have wept while hung head-downwards through the
                            midnight hours, with a tallow candle between his teeth, or in the pang
                            of nouns heteroclite and brachycatalectic dinners; yet despite these
                            minor ills, his fond heart turns through after life to the scene of
                            foot-ball and I-spy, to the days when he could jump or eat any mortal
                            thing. And so it is with bygone love. Even the times of separation or of
                            bitter quarrel, the aching heart whereon the keepsake lies, the spasms
                            of jealousy, the tenterhooks of doubt; remembrance looks upon them all
                            as treasures of a golden age.</p>
<p>Over the darkening sea, we bore away for Sardinia. Hours and hours, I
                            gazed upon the cushions, where my own pet darling used to lean and love
                            me. To me they were fairer than all the stars, or the phosphorescent
                            sea. From time to time our Corsican pilot kept himself awake, by
                            chanting to strangely mournful airs some of the voceros or dirges, the
                            burden of many ages in that lamenting land. Fit home for Rachel, Niobe,
                            or Cassandra, where half a million gallant beings, twice the number of
                            the present population, have fallen victims to the blood-revenge. So
                            Corsican historians tell; a thousand violent deaths each year, for the
                            last five centuries. Sometimes the avenger waits for half a lifetime,
                            lurking till his moment comes. Before his victim has ceased to quiver,
                            or the shot to ring down the rocky pass, he is off for the bush or the
                            mountains, and leads thenceforth a bandit's life.</p>
<p>They tell me, Clara, that things are better now, and this black stain on
                            a chivalrous race is being purged by Christian civilization. Be it as it
                            may, I love the island of my Lily still; and hope, please God, to see it
                            once more, before I go to her.</p>
<p>Banished though I was, for the present, from the only place I cared for,
                            it seemed still greater severance to go further than I could help.
                            Therefore instead of returning to England, I spent the winter in
                            cruising along the western coast of Italy, and the south of Spain; and
                            coasted back to Genoa. To Seville, and other places famed for beautiful
                            women, I made especial trips, to search for any fit to compare with my
                            own maiden. Of course I knew none could be found; but it gave me some
                            employment, and bitter pleasure, to observe how inferior were all. To my
                            eyes, bright with one sweet image, no other form had grace enough to be
                            fit pillow for my charmer's foot. How I longed and yearned for some
                            fresh token of her: all her little gifts I carried ever in my bosom, but
                            never let another's eyes rest one moment on them. Not even would I tell
                            my friends one word about my love; it seemed as if it would grow common
                            by being talked about. To Peter Green I wrote, resigning my commission,
                            although I did not tell him that I had found the olives. No, friend
                            Peter, those olives are much too near my Lily; and I won't have you or
                            any other stranger there. I know she would not look at you; still I
                            would rather have you a thousand miles away. Free trade, if you like,
                            when I have made my fortune; which by the bye is somewhat the maxim of
                            that school. My fortune, not in olives, oil, or even guineas—all that
                            rubbish you are welcome to—but my fortune where my heart and soul are
                            all invested, and now, no more my fortune, but my certain fate in
                            Lily.</p>
<p>At length and at last my calendar—like a homesick pair at school, we had
                            made one for each other, thanking God that it was not a leap-year—my
                            calendar so often counted, so punctually erased, began to yield and
                            totter to the stubborn sap of time. My patience long ago had yielded, my
                            blood was in a fever. Another thing began to yield, alas it was my
                            money. Green, Vowler, and Green had behaved most liberally; but of
                            course the expenses of my vessel had been heavy on me; and now my salary
                            had ceased. Peter Green wrote to me in the kindest and most handsome
                            manner, pressing me, if tired (as he concluded) of those murderous
                            Corsicans, to accept another engagement in Sardinia. Even without
                            imparting my last discovery, I had done good service to the firm. I
                            smiled at the idea of my being weary of Corsicans: even now the mere
                            word sends a warm tide to my heart.</p>
<p>It was not for the beauty of the scene, or the works of art, that I
                            remained in Genoa; but because it was the likeliest place to see the
                            Negro's head. As we lay at the end of the mole, my glass commanded all
                            that entered; and every lugger or xebec that bore the sacred emblem—off
                            my little dingy pushed from our raking stern, and with one man, now my
                            friend because a thorough Corsican, I boarded her, at all hazards of
                            imprisonment; and craved for tidings of the sacred land. Although, of
                            course, I would not show the nest of all my thoughts, yet by beating
                            about the bush, I got some scraps of news. The great Signor was
                            flourishing, and had harvested an enormous crop of olives: his lovely
                            daughter, now becoming the glory of the island, had been ill of
                            something like marsh-fever, but was now as blooming as the roses. They
                            did say, but the captain could not at all believe it, that she had been
                            betrothed to some foreign olive-merchant. What disgrace! The highest
                            blood and the sweetest maid in Corsica, to be betrayed to an oilman!
                            Plenty of other news I gathered—the good people are great gossips—but
                            this was all I cared for. Meanwhile your father, Clara dear, replied
                            most warmly to my letter, sending me a sum on loan, which quite relieved
                            me from cheese-paring. And now the wind was in the north, and it was
                            almost time to start for the arms of Lily. If I waited any longer, I
                            should be too mad to bear the voyage. At the break of day we left the
                            magnificent harbour, and the cold wind from the maritime Alps chilled
                            all but the fire of love. Up and down the little deck, up and down all
                            day and night; sleep I never would again, until I touched my Lily. On
                            the evening of the 8th of March, we were near Cape Corso; next day we
                            coasted down the west to the lively breeze of spring, and so upon the
                            9th we moored to the tongue of Calvi. At midnight we were under way, and
                            when the sun could reach the sea over the snowy peaks, we glided past
                            the mountain crescent that looks on the Balagna. In the early morning
                            still, when the dew was floating, we rounded the gray headland of Signor
                            Dezio's cove, and I climbed along the bowsprit to glance beyond the
                            corner.</p>
<p>What is that white dress I see fluttering at the water's edge? Whose is
                            that red-striped mandile tossed on high and caught again? And there the
                            flag-staff I erected, with my colours flying! Only one such shape on
                            earth—only two such arms—out with the boat or I must swim, or run the
                            yacht ashore. The boat has been towing alongside for the last six hours:
                            Lily can't wait for the boat any more than I can. From rock to rock she
                            is leaping; which is the nearest one? Into the water she runs, then away
                            in blushing terror—she forgot all about the other men. But I know where
                            to find her, she has dropped her little shoe, she must be in my
                            grotto.</p>
<p>There I press her to my heart of hearts, trembling, weeping, laughing,
                            all unable to get close enough to me.</p>
<p>"Sweetest mine, ten thousand times, I have been so wretched." Her voice
                            is like a silver bell.</p>
<p>"My own, I am so glad to hear it. But how well you look!"</p>
<p>If she were lovely when I left her, what shall I call her now? There is
                            not one atom of her but is pure perfection. I hold her from me for one
                            moment, to take in all her beauties. She has a most delicious fragrance
                            that steals upon my senses. Toilet bottles she never heard of; what she
                            has is nature's gift, and unperceived except by love. I have often told
                            her of it, but she won't believe it. It is not your breath, you darling;
                            your breath is only violets; it comes from every fibre of you, even from
                            your hair; it is as when the wind has kissed a lily of the valley.</p>
<p>The ancient Signor being a man of very keen observation, did not delay
                            our wedding any longer than could be helped. That evening we hauled down
                            the family fusileer, gave him a goblet of wine, and sent him about his
                            business: for one night we would take our chance even of Vendetta. At
                            supper-time the Signor was in wonderful spirits, and drank our health
                            with many praises of our constancy and obedience. One little fact he
                            mentioned worth a thousand propinations; his daughter's fever had been
                            cured by some chance news of me. He even went away to fetch a bottle of
                            choicest Rogliano, when he saw how I was fidgetting to get my arm round
                            Lily. Then after making his re-entrance, with due clumsiness at the
                            door, he quite disgraced himself, while drawing the cork, by even
                            winking at me, as he said abruptly,</p>
<p>"Fiordalisa, when would you like to be married?"</p>
<p>My Lily blushed, I must confess, but did not fence with the question.</p>
<p>"As soon as ever you please, papa. That is, if my love wishes it." But
                            she would not look at me to ask. In the porch she whispered to me, that
                            it was only from her terror of the bad Lepardo coming. Did the loving
                            creature fancy that I would believe it?</p>
<p>Once more we sailed together over the amethyst sea; she was as fond of
                            the water as a true-born Briton. In her thoughts and glances was
                            infinite variety. None could ever guess the next thing she would say.
                            Thoroughly I knew her heart, because I lived therein, and sweeter
                            lodgings never man was blessed with. But of her mind she veiled as yet
                            the maiden delicacies, strictly as she would the glowing riches of her
                            figure. What amazed me more than all, was that while most Corsican girls
                            are of the nut-brown order, no sun ever burned the snowy skin of Lily:
                            she always looked so clear and clean, as if it were impossible for
                            anything to stain her. Clara, you are always talking of your lovely
                            Isola. I wonder where she got her name: it is no stranger to me.
                            Something in your description of her reminds me of my Lily. I long to
                            see the girl: and you must have some reason for so obstinately
                            preventing me.</p>
</div>