<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>
<p>Before that week was over, my uncle could sit up in bed for a short time
                            every day, being duly propped in a downy nest of pillows. One arm,
                            however, remained quite impotent, and part of one side rigid and numb.
                            His recovery was slow and tedious, as might well be expected with one
                            who had been dragged not from the jaws but the very throat of death. For
                            a long time also his mind was feeble and dim, a mirror overcast by the
                            vapours of the body.</p>
<p>To me, who am fond of observing, in my own little childish way, it was
                            interesting as well as delightful to note how, day by day, the mind and
                            body, hand in hand, rose stronger. More than all was I taught, and
                            humbled in my own conceit, by taking heed how tardily came back the
                            power to guide and control the imagination. That object-glass of the
                            mind—not achromatic even in first-rate intellects—had long been out of
                            the focal distance from the lens of reason's eye. Upon it had been
                            glancing loose distorted images, rendered home imperfectly, if at all,
                            to the retina of the brain. Herein its state was the very opposite to
                            that of my own phrenoscope. I have no large imagination; but the images
                            it presents are vivid, and I see well round them. Every one of them is
                            not cast, but cut, on my sensorium. Whether I can strike them off in
                            words—whether my telegraph can print its message—is quite another
                            question, and beside its purpose. Having rendered home to me the idols
                            (oftentimes inverted, though distinct) it leaves expression and judgment
                            to do their best with the copyright.</p>
<p>Now, both in fabric and in mould, my uncle's mind was different.
                            Naturally his powers were far superior, but he seemed to take no pride
                            in them. No dark and settled purpose had ever thrown its shadow, and
                            even its weight, upon them; nor had they felt, so far as I knew, the
                            rough grasp of adversity. Therefore they were longer in recovering from
                            the blow, than I think my own would have been.</p>
<p>There were few things, among the many desired by Mrs. Daldy, which she
                            failed to reconcile with her strong sense of religion. "There is not
                            one"—I have heard her say—"not one of the things we believe to be for
                            our good, which we should scruple to lay before the Throne of Grace.
                            Even the throbbings of that little unregenerate heart"—Clara Vaughan's
                            to wit, who had kicked her that morning, quite by accident of
                            course—"even they are known and sifted there"—slight confusion of
                            metaphor caused by strong conviction of sin—"Infinite mercy knows the
                            things that be for our edification, and confirmation in the faith. Yes,
                            backsliding sinner, the want of real heart-felt spiritual life can be
                            supplied by prayer alone. Is it not so in your experience, Elder?"
                            "Prayer, my dear Madam, and searching of the heart. Oh the depth of the
                            wickedness of the unconverted heart!" And he took another glass of
                            sherry. That night I remember she worked very hard, for her; and the
                            next day she presented me with markers the size of a gallows, progged
                            with many holes; on one was done in cross-stitch, "Pray without
                            ceasing," and upon the other "Wrestle thou in prayer. Gen. xxxii. 24."
                            Both of these I threw into the fire there before her eyes.</p>
<p>From this it will be clear, that in her devotions she still remembered
                            me, and doubtless prayed in good Scriptural phraseology for my release
                            from this wicked world. Dr. Churchyard's last report had raised her
                            terror to the highest pitch, and instead of wrestling in prayer, she had
                            run away in high panic, upon hearing that the fever-nurse was seen at
                            large the night before. "We must use the means of grace," she said to
                            Mrs. Fletcher, before she locked her in, "and accept the mercies
                            vouchsafed to us. And it would be sinful, dear Mrs. Fletcher, in me to
                            neglect such a warning as this."</p>
<p>It was wise, as well as righteous, in her to keep aloof for a time, while
                            her devices worked their consummation. For the present it appeared to me
                            that they were failing signally. My uncle was regaining strength of mind
                            and body; while native air, a sense of triumph, and daily exercise, kept
                            me in blooming health. My patient, who otherwise could hardly bear me to
                            leave him for an hour, insisted upon my taking a long ride every day.
                            Lilla was charmed, and so was I, with the sweet spring air, and the rich
                            familiar scenery. And how it did make me eat! Thankful indeed I ought to
                            be, and am, that it pleased God to spare me that awful and deadly
                            pestilence. But the worst injury done by canting hypocrites is, that the
                            repulsion they create drives away others from good. Truly I may say,
                            that for days after being in contact with that slimy sanctity, I could
                            not say my own prayers, as a little child should do.</p>
<p>Of that fever there had been three fatal cases in the village, before it
                            entered our house; and I found that it was spreading rapidly. With my
                            uncle's authority, I had the drainage surveyed and amended at once; and
                            so the pest was stayed. Of course we did not neglect our own weak point;
                            and the crawling noisome smell was no longer perceived in the room, nor
                            the white vapour on the grass.</p>
<p>And so three weeks went by; no news from London or Devonshire, no
                            explanation between my uncle and myself, no arrangements as to my
                            expectations in life. As yet my uncle was too weak to bear any sort of
                            excitement, and seemed desirous only to be passive in my hands. His eyes
                            always followed me to every part of the room, and he would even be
                            propped on the sofa to see me ride down the avenue; and there I always
                            found him watching for my return. Meanwhile I yearned to be once more in
                            a certain little room with a north aspect, opposite a cheesemonger's
                            shop in an obscure street of London. Nightly I dreamed of Giudice, and
                            daily I dreamed of dear Isola and Conrad. The dog in the stableyard, who
                            had hitherto owned no especial attractions for me, suddenly found
                            himself petted, and coaxed, and fed (which he thought much more of) to
                            the scandal of Mrs. Fletcher, and the great alarm of the grooms, who
                            would rather not have me there. Moreover, the dog himself, though I
                            strove to invest him with every chivalrous attribute, was of a low and
                            ungenial order, adorned with no graces of mind, and little taste, except
                            for bones and gravy. But perhaps my standard was too high: peradventure
                            I even commenced with more prejudice than a bulldog's. Be that as it
                            may—and if I can see round things, I ought to see round myself—every day
                            fell heavier and heavier from the fair balance of time; and every night
                            the stars—for there was now no moon—looked wearier in the heavens, and
                            less inclined for business. How long, how long shall you go round the
                            pole in your steady pacing way, as if the sky were for auction, and you
                            were pacing the lots; while I, with more fire in me than you can strike
                            or steal, am ditched like a glow-worm kicked under a dock-leaf, and see
                            no polestar at all?</p>
<p>Here is May, the height of May: I am full of life and spirit: the garb of
                            death, like an April cloud, blows over. Let me see. Last birthday I was
                            eighteen: I have known more troubles than years, and enjoyed no youth as
                            yet. Last year I spent in growing, and pining, and starving. Now the
                            Power, that balances earth and heaven, has filled me with joy and
                            light.</p>
<p>Neither am I renegade to my life, in opening wide my heart to this flood
                            of love and happiness. Still am I set upon one strong purpose. Still am
                            I sworn, and will not repent, that if filial duty demand it, I will
                            trample love under my feet, and cut the throat of happiness.</p>
<p>During most of this time, I had no idea where the queen of hypocrites
                            was; though doubtless she knew all that was happening to us. As soon as
                            he heard of my uncle's surprising rally, Dr. Churchyard came over, and
                            claimed all the merit for his own last prescription. Brought face to
                            face with the awkward fact that the medicine had not been procured, he
                            was not in the least disconcerted, but found that we had misunderstood
                            him, the prescription to which he referred was the one before the last.
                            At any rate, he enhanced his own fame immensely, and became
                            "instrumental under Providence" in killing more people than ever. In
                            reply to Mrs. Fletcher, for I would not deign to ask him, he stated that
                            the excellent and devoted Mrs. Daldy had not been seen lately in
                            Cheltenham. Her son, however, was there, and foremost in the ranks of
                            Pump-room Lady-killers. Just what he was fit for.</p>
<p>The doctor entertained a belief, and spread the report in Cheltenham,
                            that Dorcas was lodged in a humble cot among the haunts of pestilence,
                            imperilling her life and lavishing her substance to relieve the
                            fever-stricken. This being more than I could stand, I asked the worthy
                            doctor—who, after all, was a man of the world—what three wealthy persons
                            Dorcas had carried with her. At first he feigned not to understand me,
                            then looked sly, and changed the subject cleverly. Of course I referred
                            to the well-known fact, that she supported her grandeur and her son's
                            extravagance by playing an admirable rubber. She was playing a better
                            one now.</p>
<p>Dr. Churchyard finished by writing another prescription, which, after his
                            departure, I handed to the husband of Venus, legitimate disposer of
                            mineral medicines.</p>
</div>