
CHAPTER II.
"Composure is my only chance." What chance have I of composure until I
                            know the meaning of what I saw last night? Blind though I am, one face
                            is ever before me. No thickening of the membrane can exclude that face.
                            Inspector Cutting is still below; I will send for him at once.
Mrs. Shelfer remonstrates. "It will excite you so, my good friend. The
                            doctor said perfect quiet."
"Just so. I can have none, until I have spoken to your Uncle John. Let
                            him stay in my sitting-room, open the folding-door a little, and then,
                            Mrs. Shelfer, please to go down stairs."
I hear the Inspector's step, not so heavy this time. He asks how I am,
                            and expresses his sorrow. I feel obliged to him for not reminding me
                            that the fault was all my own. Then I implore him, if he wishes me ever
                            to see again, to tell me all he knows about the men I saw last
                            night.
Thus entreated, he cannot refuse me, but first looks up and down the
                            stairs, as I know by the sound of his steps; then he shuts the door of
                            the sitting-room. All he knows is not very much. They are refugees,
                            Italian refugees; two political and two criminal exiles, leaders now of
                            a conspiracy to revolutionize their country.
"But why does he not arrest them?'
"Simply because he has no right. As for the political refugees, of
                            course, we never meddle with them; as for the two criminals, they have
                            not been demanded by their Government. Wonderful now, isn't it? The two
                            fellows who have committed murder their Government would not give
                            sixpence for them; but the two men who have only spouted a little, it
                            would give a thousand pounds for either of them. He can't understand
                            such a system."
And Inspector Cutting sucks his lips—I know it by the sound—he always
                            does it when he is in a puzzle. Being a true Englishman, he knows no
                            more of serfdom, than of the dark half of the moon. I mean, of course,
                            political serfdom. Of social slavery we have enough to last ten
                            generations more.
"Would he be afraid to arrest them? He said they were desperate men."
"He should rather hope he wouldn't. They had got their knives, and
                            pistols, and all that humbug. But it was more show than fight. They were
                            desperate men in a private quarrel, particular when they could come
                            round a corner, and when women were concerned; but as for showing honest
                            fight, he would sooner come across three of them, than one good Irish
                            murderer."
"What was his proof against my enemy? I need not ask him which it
                            was."
The excitement of this question sent needles through my eyes. And I could
                            not see him, to probe his pupils.
"Well, his proof was very little. In fact it was no proof at all as yet.
                            But he was not like a juryman. He was quite convinced; and his eyes
                            should never be off that man, until he had him under warrant, and the
                            whole case clear. Would that satisfy me?"
He spoke with such hearty professional pride, that I could not help
                            believing him. But as for being satisfied—why should his evidence be a
                            mystery to me? "Catch him at once," was my idea; but a hot and foolish
                            one. "Get up the evidence first," was Inspector Cutting's, "I can catch
                            him at any time." That was the whole gist of it. Could he always catch
                            him?
He scorned the idea of there being any difficulty about it. The man could
                            leave for no part of the Continent; he was a political refugee. America
                            was his only bourne beyond the Inspector's jurisdiction. And thither he
                            could not try to go without the Police being down upon him at once.
By this time I was worn out, though my reasons were not exhausted. In a
                            word, I was only half satisfied, but I could not help myself. If, in my
                            helpless blindness, I offended Inspector Cutting, the whole chance
                            disappeared. Only one question remained. "Why did he take me
                            thither?"
"For excellent reasons. As to the one, it was most important that I
                            should always know him again. Moreover, it saved my energies from waste.
                            As to the other three, he had his own reasons for requiring an
                            intelligent witness about their proceedings."
I thought of the thousand pounds, and said no more. Inspector Cutting was
                            an Englishman, and proud, in his way, of English freedom. But, like
                            nine-tenths of us, he thought that we alone understand what freedom is.
                            What good was it to such fellows as those? They would only be free of
                            one another's throats. And like all of us, with most rare exception,
                            next to freedom, he valued money. For our love of this, many foreigners
                            jeer us. All we can say is, that with us it is second, with them it is
                            first. But we are of such staple, our second is stronger than their
                            first.
When the Inspector was gone, I formed a very sensible resolve. Since
                            there was nothing more to be done or learned at present, my only care
                            should be the recovery of my sight. If I were to be blind till death,
                            the purpose of my life was lost, and I might as well die at once. But
                            now the first blind agony, the sudden shock, was over; and I had too
                            much of what the Inspector denominated "pluck," to knock under so.
In the afternoon, when all was quiet, lovely Isola came. Strict orders
                            had been given that no one should be admitted. But Mrs. Shelfer was not
                            proof against the wiles of Isola.
"She smiled so bootiful, when I opened the door, Miss, it fetched out all
                            my hair pins; and when I told her you was ill in bed, and struck stone
                            blind along of some chemical stuff, two big tears came out of her long
                            blue eyes, same as the wet out of a pennorth of violets, Miss; and as
                            for stopping her, she threw her muff at me, and told me to stop that if
                            I liked, and to run and tell you that she was coming, quick, quick!
"To be sure, and here I am!" cried the cheery voice I loved so well. "Oh,
                            Clara dear, dear Clara!" The little darling flung her soft warm arms
                            around me, utterly forgetful of her dress, forgetful of all the world,
                            but that little bit of it she held. Her delicious breath came over my
                            fevered cheek, her cool satin flesh was on my burning eyelids. What
                            lotion could be compared to this? How long she stayed, I cannot tell; I
                            only know that while I heard her voice, and felt her touch, blindness
                            seemed no loss to me. She pronounced herself head nurse; and as for
                            doctors, what were they, compared to her own father? If she could coax
                            him, he should come next day, and deliver his opinion, and then the
                            doctor might betake himself to things he understood, if indeed he
                            understood anything, which she did not believe he did, because he had
                            said she was not to come. My drawings too she admired, much more than
                            they deserved, and her brother Conrad must come and see them, he was so
                            fond of drawing, and there was nothing he could not do. She was so sorry
                            she must go now, but old Cora must be tired of patroling, and she
                            herself had a lecture to attend upon the chemical affinity of bodies.
                            What it meant she had no idea, but that would not matter the least; some
                            of the clever girls said they did, but she would not believe them; it
                            took a man, she was sure, to understand such subjects. She would bring
                            her work the next day, such as it was, and the nicest bit of sponge that
                            was ever seen, it could not be bought in London; and she would answer
                            for it I should be able to paint her likeness in a week; and she would
                            not go till it was dark; and then the Professor should come for her when
                            his lectures were over, and examine me; he knew all about optics, and
                            retinas, and pencils of light, and refraction and aberration, and she
                            could not remember any more names; but she felt quite certain this was a
                            case of optical delusion, and nothing else.
How I wished I could have seen her, when she pronounced this opinion,
                            with no little solemnity. She must have looked such a sage! The thought
                            of that made me laugh, as well as the absurdity of the idea. But I only
                            asked how the Professor was to examine my eyes, if he did not come till
                            dark.
To be sure! She never thought of that. What a little goose she was! But
                            she would make him come in the morning, before his work began; and then
                            old Cora would fetch her home to tea. And she had very great hopes, that
                            if she could only persuade her papa to deliver a lecture in my room, it
                            would have such an effect on my optic nerves, that they would come all
                            right directly, at any rate I should know how to treat them.
Delighted with this idea, she kissed me, and hugged me, and off she ran,
                            after telling me to be sure to keep my spirits up, and the bandage not
                            too tight.
The latter injunction was much easier to obey than the former. She had
                            enlivened me wonderfully, as well as nursed me most delicately; but now
                            that she was gone, the usual reaction commenced. Moreover, although as
                            the saying is, the sight of her would have been good for sore eyes, the
                            effort at seeing her, which I could not control, when she was present,
                            was, I already felt, anything but good for them. And the loss, when she
                            was gone, was like a second loss of light.
Light! What million thoughts flash through me at that little word!
                            Swiftest thing the mind has met, too like itself to understand. Is it
                            steed or wing of mind? Nay, not swift enough for that. Is it then the
                            food of life, prepared betimes ere life appeared, the food the blind
                            receive but cannot taste? If so, far better to be blind from birth. Well
                            I know the taste from memory; shall I never taste it else? Has beauty
                            lost its way to me? The many golden folds of air, the lustrous dance of
                            sunny morn, the soft reclining of the moon, the grand perspective of the
                            stars (long avenue to God's own home), are these all blank to me, and
                            night made one with day?
Oh God, whose first approach was light, replenisher of sun and stars,
                            whence dart anew thy gushing floods (solid or liquid we know not), whose
                            subtle volume has no bourne or track; light, the dayside half of life,
                            leaping, flashing, beaming; glistening, twinkling, stealing; light! Oh
                            God, if live I must, grudge me not a ray!
