
CHAPTER III.
The beautiful light of summer had never shone on a scene and surrounding landscape
       which recalled happier images of English nature, and sweeter recollections of English
       manners, than that to which we would now introduce our readers. One of those true old English
       Halls now unhappily so rare, built in the time of the Tudors, and in its elaborate timber
       framing and decorative woodwork, indicating perhaps the scarcity of brick and stone at the
       period of its structure as much as the grotesque genius of its fabricator, rose on a terrace
       surrounded by ancient and very formal
        gardens. The hall itself during many generations had been vigilantly and
       tastefully preserved by its proprietors. There was not a point which was not as fresh as if
       it had been renovated but yesterday. It stood a huge and strange blending of Grecian, Gothic,
       and Italian architecture, with a wild dash of the Fantastic in addition. The lantern
       watch-towers of a baronial castle were placed in juxta position with Doric columns employed
       for chimneys, while under oriel windows might be observed Italian doorways with Grecian
       pediments. Beyond the extensive gardens, an avenue of Spanish chestnuts at each point of the
       compass approached the mansion, or led into a small park which was table land, its limits
       opening on all sides to beautiful and extensive valleys, sparkling with cultivation, except
       at one point, where the river Darl formed the boundary of the domain, and then spread in many
       a winding through the rich country beyond.
Such was Hellingsley, the new home that Oswald Millbank was about to visit for the
        first time. Coningsby and himself had travelled together as far as Darlford,
       where their roads diverged, and they had separated with an engagement on the part of
       Coningsby to visit Hellingsley on the morrow. As they had travelled along, Coningsby had
       frequently led the conversation to domestic topics: gradually he had talked, and talked much,
       of Edith. Without an obtrusive curiosity, he extracted unconsciously to his companion traits
       of her character and early days, which filled him with a wild and secret interest. The
       thought that in a few hours, he was to meet her again, infused into his being a degree of
       transport, which the very necessity of repressing before his companion, rendered more magical
       and thrilling. How often it happens in life, that we have with a grave face to discourse of
       the most ordinary topics, while, all the time our heart and memory are engrossed with some
       enchanting secret!
The Castle of his grandfather presented a far different scene on the arrival of Coningsby
       to that which it had offered on his first visit.
        The Marquess had given him a formal permission to repair to it at his pleasure,
       and had instructed the steward accordingly. But he came without notice, at a season of the
       year when the absence of all sports made his arrival unexpected. The scattered and sauntering
       household roused themselves into action, and contemplated the conviction that it might be
       necessary to do some service for their wages. There was a stir in that vast, sleepy castle.
       At last the steward was found, and came forward to welcome their young master, whose simple
       wants were limited to the rooms he had formerly occupied.
Coningsby reached the castle a little before sunset, almost the same hour that he had
       arrived there more than three years ago. How much had happened in the interval! Coningsby had
       already lived long enough to find interest in pondering over the past. That past too must
       inevitably exercise a great influence over his present. He recalled his morning drive with
       his grandfather to the brink of that river, which was the boundary
        between his own domain and Hellingsley. Who dwelt at Hellingsley now?
Restless, excited, not insensible to the difficulties, perhaps the dangers, of his
       position, yet full of an entrancing emotion in which all thoughts and feelings seemed to
       merge, Coningsby went forth into the fair gardens to muse over his love amid objects as
       beautiful. A rosy light hung over the rare shrubs and tall fantastic trees; while a rich yet
       darker tint suffused the distant woods. This euthanasia of the day exercises a strange
       influence on the hearts of those who love. Who has not felt it? Magical emotions that touch
       the immortal part!
But as for Coningsby, the mitigating hour that softens the heart made his spirit brave.
       Amid the ennobling sympathies of nature, the pursuits and purposes of worldly prudence and
       conventional advantage subsided into their essential nothingness. He willed to blend his life
       and fate with a being beautiful as that nature that subdued him, and he felt in his own
       breast the intrinsic energies that in spite
        of all obstacles should mould such an imagination into reality.
He descended the slopes, now growing dimmer in the fleeting light, into the park. The
       stillness was almost supernatural; the jocund sounds of day had died, and the voices of the
       night had not commenced. His heart too was still. A sacred calm had succeeded to that
       distraction of emotion which had agitated him the whole day, while he had mused over his love
       and the infinite and insurmountable barriers that seemed to oppose his will. Now he felt one
       of those strong groundless convictions that are the inspiration of passion, that all would
       yield to him as to one holding an enchanted wand.
Onward he strolled; it seemed without purpose, yet always proceeding. A pale and then
       gleaming tint stole over the masses of mighty timber; and soon a glittering light flooded the
       lawns and glades. The moon was high in her summer heaven, and still Coningsby strolled on. He
       crossed the broad lawns, he traversed the bright glades: amid the gleaming
        and shadowy woods, he traced his prescient way.
He came to the bank of a rushing river, foaming in the moonlight, and wafting on its blue
       breast the shadow of a thousand stars.
"O! River!" he said, "that rollest to my mistress, bear her, bear her, my heart!"

