
CHAPTER VII.
To be alone; to have no need of feigning a tranquillity he could not feel; of
       coining common-place courtesy, when his heart was gushing with rapture; this was a great
       relief for Coningsby, though gained by a separation from Edith.
The deed was done; he had breathed his long brooding passion, he had received the sweet
       expression of her sympathy, he had gained the long coveted heart. Youth, beauty, love, the
       innocence of unsophisticated breasts, and the inspiration of an exquisite nature, combined to
       fashion the spell that now entranced his life.
        He turned to gaze upon the moonlit towers and peaked roofs of Hellingsley.
       Silent and dreamlike, the picturesque pile rested on its broad terrace flooded with the
       silver light, and surrounded by the quaint bowers of its fantastic gardens tipped by the
       glittering beam. Half hid in deep shadow, half sparkling in the mid-night blaze, he
       recognized the oriel window that had been the subject of the morning's sketch. Almost he
       wished there should be some sound to assure him of his reality. But nothing broke the
       all-pervading stillness. Was his life to be as bright and as tranquil? And what was to be his
       life?
Whither was he to bear the beautiful bride he had gained? Were the portals of Coningsby the
       proud and hospitable gates that were to greet her? How long would they greet him after the
       achievement of the last four and twenty hours was known to their Lord? Was this the return
       for the confiding kindness of his grandsire? That he should pledge his troth to the daughter
       of that grandsire's foe?

Away with such dark and scaring vision! Is it not the noon of a summer night fragrant with
       the breath of gardens, bright with the beam that lovers love, and soft with the breath of
       Ausonian breezes? Within that sweet and stately residence, dwells there not a maiden fair
       enough to revive chivalry; who is even now thinking of him as she leans on her pensive hand,
       or if perchance she dream, recalls him in her visions? And himself, is he one who would cry
       craven with such a lot! What avail his golden youth, his high blood, his daring and devising
       spirit, and all his stores of wisdom, if they help not now! Does not he feel the energy
       divine that can confront fate and carve out fortunes? Besides it is nigh Midsummer Eve, and
       what should fairies reign for, but to aid such a bright pair as this?
He recalls a thousand times the scene, the moment, in which but a few hours past, he dared
       to tell her that he loved; he recalls a thousand times the still, small voice, that murmured
       her agitated felicity; more than a thousand times, for his heart clenched the idea
        as a diver grasps a gem, he recalls the enraptured yet gentle embrace, that had
       sealed upon her blushing cheek his mystical and delicious sovereignty.

