
CHAPTER III.
In a green valley of Lancaster, contiguous to that district of factories on which
       we have already touched, a clear and powerful stream flows through a broad meadow land. Upon
       its margin, adorned, rather than shadowed, by some very old elm trees, for they are too
       distant to serve except for ornament, rises a vast deep red brick pile which, though formal
       and monotonous in its general character, is not without a certain beauty of proportion and an
       artist-like finish in its occasional masonry. The front which is of great extent, and covered
       with many tiers of small windows, is flanked by two projecting
        wings in the same style, which form a large court, completed by a dwarf wall
       crowned with a light and rather elegant railing; in the centre, the principal entrance, a
       lofty portal of bold and beautiful design, surmounted by a statue of Commerce.
This building, not without a degree of dignity, is what is technically and not very
       felicitously called a mill; always translated by the French in their accounts of our
       manufacturing riots, "moulin"; and which really was the principal factory of Oswald Millbank,
       the father of that youth, whom we trust our readers have not quite forgotten.
At some little distance, and rather withdrawn from the principal stream, were two other
       smaller structures of the same style. About a quarter of a mile further on, appeared a
       village of not inconsiderable size, and remarkable from the neatness and even picturesque
       character of its architecture, and the gay gardens that surrounded it. On a sunny knoll in
       the back ground rose a church in the best style of Christian architecture, and near it was a
       clerical
        residence and a school-house of similar design. The village too could boast of
       another public building; an Institute where there were a library and a lecture-room; and a
       reading hall which any one might frequent at certain hours, and under reasonable
       regulations.
On the other side of the principal factory, but more remote, about half-a-mile indeed up
       the valley, surrounded by beautiful meadows, and built on an agreeable and well-wooded
       elevation was the mansion of the mill-owner; apparently a commodious and not inconsiderable
       dwellinghouse, built in what is called the villa-style, with a variety of gardens and
       conservatories. The atmosphere of this somewhat striking settlement was not disturbed and
       polluted by the dark vapour, which to the shame of Manchester still infests that great town,
       for the river of the valley was a motive power which rendered the steam-engine unnecessary,
       though doubtless had its presence been inevitable, Mr. Millbank, unlike the inhabitants of
       Manchester, would have taken care to consume his own smoke.
The sun was declining when Coningsby arrived
        at Millbank, and the gratification which he experienced on first beholding it
       was not a little diminished, when on inquiring at the village, he was informed that the hour
       was past for seeing the works. Determined not to relinquish his purpose without a struggle,
       he repaired to the principal mill, and entered the counting-house, which was situated in one
       of the wings of the building.
"Your pleasure, sir?" said one of three individuals sitting on high stools behind a high
       desk.
"I wish, if possible, to see the works."
"Quite impossible, sir," and the clerk withdrawing his glance, continued his writing. "No
       admission without an order, and no admission with an order after two o'clock."
"I am very unfortunate," said Coningsby.
"Sorry for it, sir. Give me ledger K. X., will you Mr. Benson?"
"I think, Mr. Millbank would grant me permission," said Coningsby.
"Very likely, sir; to-morrow. Mr. Millbank is there, sir, but very much engaged." He
        pointed to an inner counting-house, and the glass doors permitted Coningsby to
       observe several individuals in close converse.
"Perhaps his son, Mr. Oswald Millbank is here?" inquired Coningsby.
"Mr. Oswald is in Belgium," said the clerk.
"Would you give a message to Mr. Millbank, and say a friend of his son's at Eton is here,
       and here only for a day, and wishes very much to see his works?"
"Can't possibly disturb Mr. Millbank now, sir; but, if you like to sit down, you can wait
       and see him yourself."
Coningsby was content to sit down, though he grew very impatient at the end of a quarter of
       an hour. The ticking of the clock, the scratching of the pens of the three silent clerks,
       irritated him. At length voices were heard, doors opened, and a clerk said: "Mr. Millbank is
       coming, sir," but nobody came; voices became hushed, doors were again shut; again nothing was
       heard, save ticking of clock and scratching of pen.
At length there was a general stir, and they
        all did come forth, Mr. Millbank among them, a well-proportioned, comely man,
       with a fair face inclining to ruddiness, a quick, glancing, hazel eye, the whitest teeth, and
       short, curly, chestnut hair, here and there slightly tinged with grey. It was a visage of
       energy and decision.
He was about to pass through the counting-house with his companions with whom his affairs
       were not concluded, when he observed Coningsby, who had risen.
"This gentleman wishes to see me?" he inquired of his clerk, who bowed assent.
"I shall be at your service, sir, the moment I have finished with these gentlemen."
"The gentleman wishes to see the works, sir," said the clerk.
"He can see the works at proper times," said Mr. Millbank, somewhat pettishly; "tell him
       the regulations," and he was about to go.
"I beg your pardon, sir," said Coningsby, coming forward, and with an air of earnestness
       and grace that arrested the step of the manufacturer. "I am aware of the regulations, but I
       would beg to be permitted to infringe them."

"It cannot be, sir," said Mr. Millbank, moving.
"I thought, sir, being here only for a day, and as a friend of your son—"
Mr. Millbank stopped and said:
"Oh! a friend of Oswald's, eh? What, at Eton?"
"Yes, sir, at Eton; and I had hoped perhaps to have found him here."
"I am very much engaged, sir, at this moment," said Mr. Millbank; "I am sorry I cannot pay
       you any personal attention, but my clerk will show you everything. Mr. Benson, let this
       gentleman see everything," and he withdrew.
"Be pleased to write your name here, sir," said Mr. Benson, opening a book, and our friend
       wrote his name and the date of his visit to Millbank.
" Harry Coningsby, Sept . 2, 1836."
Coningsby beheld in this great factory the last and the most refined inventions of
       mechanical genius. The building had been fitted up by a capitalist as anxious to raise a
       monument of
        the skill and power of his order, as to obtain a return for the great
       investment.
"It is the glory of Lancashire!" exclaimed the enthusiastic Mr. Benson.
The clerk spoke freely of his master, whom he evidently idolized, and his great
       achievements, and Coningsby encouraged him. He detailed to Coningsby the plans which Mr.
       Millbank had pursued both for the moral and physical well-being of his people; how he had
       built churches, and schools, and institutes; houses and cottages on a new system of
       ventilation; how he had allotted gardens; established singing classes.
"Here is Mr. Millbank," continued the clerk, as he and Coningsby, quitting the factory,
       re-entered the court.
Mr. Millbank was approaching the factory, and the moment that he observed them, he
       quickened his pace.
"Mr. Coningsby?" he said when he reached them. His countenance was rather disturbed, and
       his voice a little trembled, and he looked on our friend with a glance scrutinizing and
       serious. Coningsby bowed.

"I am sorry that you should have been received at this place with so little ceremony, sir,"
       said Mr. Millbank; "but had your name been mentioned, you would have found it cherished
       here." He nodded to the clerk, who disappeared.
Coningsby began to talk about the wonders of the factory, but Mr. Millbank recurred to
       other thoughts that were passing in his mind. He spoke of his son; he expressed a kind
       reproach that Coningsby should have thought of visiting this part of the world without giving
       them some notice of his intention, that he might have been their guest, that Oswald might
       have made arrangements that he should see everything and in the best manner in short, that
       they might all have shown however slightly, the deep sense of their obligations to him.
"My visit to Manchester, which led to this was quite accidental," said Coningsby. "I am
       bound for the other division of the county, to pay a visit to my grandfather, Lord Monmouth,
       but an irresistible desire came over me during
        my journey to view this famous district of industry. It is some days since I
       ought to have found myself at Coningsby, and this is the reason why I am so pressed."
A cloud passed over the countenance of Millbank as the name of Lord Monmouth was mentioned,
       but he said nothing. Turning towards Coningsby, with an air of kindness:
"At least," said he, "let not Oswald hear that you did not taste our salt. Pray dine with
       me to-day; there is yet an hour to dinner; and as you have seen the factory, suppose we
       stroll together through the village."

