
CHAPTER III.
" And you walked here," said Lady Everingham to Coningsby, when the stir of
       arranging themselves at dinner had subsided. "Only think, papa, Mr. Coningsby walked here! I
       also am a great walker."
"I had heard much of the forest," said Coningsby.
"Which I am sure did not disappoint you," said the Duke.
"But forest without adventures," said Lady Everingham, a little shrugging her pretty
       shoulders.
"But I had an adventure," said Coningsby.
"Oh! tell it us by all means!" said the Lady
        with great animation. "Adventures are my weakness. I have had more adventures
       than any one. Have I not had, Augustus?" she added, addressing her husband.
"But you make everything out to be an adventure, Isabel," said Lord Everingham. "I dare say
       that Mr. Coningsby's was more substantial." And looking at our young friend, he invited him
       to inform them.
"I met a most extraordinary man," said Coningsby.
"It should have been a heroine!" exclaimed Lady Everingham.
"Do you know anybody in this neighbourhood who rides the finest Arab in the world?" asked
       Coningsby. "She is called the 'Daughter of the Star,' and was given to her rider by the Pacha
       of Egypt."
"This is really an adventure," said Lady Everingham interested.
"The Daughter of the Star!" said Lady Theresa. "What a pretty name! Percy has a horse
       called 'Sunbeam.'"
"A fine Arab, the finest in the world!" said
        the Duke who was very fond of horses. "Who can it be?"
"Can you throw any light on this, Mr. Lyle?" asked the Duchess of a young man who sat next
       her.
He was a neighbour who had joined their dinner party. Eustace Lyle, a Roman Catholic, and
       the richest commoner in the county; for he had succeeded to a great estate early in his
       minority, which had only this year terminated.
"I certainly do not know the horse," said Mr. Lyle; "but if Mr. Coningsby would describe
       the rider, perhaps—"
"He is a man something under thirty," said Coningsby, "pale, with dark hair. We met in a
       sort of forest inn during a storm. A most singular man! Indeed I never met any one who seemed
       to me so clever, or to say such remarkable things."
"He must have been the spirit of the storm," said Lady Everingham.
"Charles Verney has a great deal of dark hair," said Lady Theresa. "But then he is anything
       but pale, and his eyes are blue."

"And certainly he keeps his wonderful things for your ear, Theresa," said her sister.
"I wish that Mr. Coningsby would tell us some of the wonderful things he said," said the
       Duchess smiling.
"Take a glass of wine first with my mother, Coningsby," said Henry Sydney, who had just
       finished helping them all to fish.
Coningsby had too much tact to be entrapped into a long story. He already regretted that he
       had been betrayed into any allusion to the stranger. He had a wild fanciful notion that their
       meeting ought to have been preserved as a sacred secret. But he had been impelled to refer to
       it in the first instance by the chance observation of Lady Everingham; and he had pursued his
       remark from the hope that the conversation might have led to the discovery of the unknown.
       When he found that his inquiry in this respect was unsuccessful, he was willing to turn the
       conversation. In reply to the Duchess then, he generally described the talk of the stranger
       as full of lively anecdote and epigrammatic views of life; and gave
        them, for example, a saying of a very illustrious foreign Prince, which was
       quite new and pointed, and which Coningsby told well. This led to a new train of discourse.
       The Duke also knew this illustrious foreign Prince, and told another story of him; and Lord
       Everingham had played whist with this illustrious foreign Prince very often at the
       Travellers', and this led to a third story; none of them too long. Then Lady Everingham came
       in again, and sparkled very agreeably. She indeed sustained throughout dinner the principal
       weight of the conversation; but as she asked questions of every body, all seemed to
       contribute. Even the voice of Mr. Lyle, who was rather bashful, was occasionally heard in
       reply. Coningsby, who had at first unintentionally taken a more leading part than he aspired
       to, would have retired into the background for the rest of the dinner, but Lady Everingham
       continually signalled him out for her questions, and as she sat opposite to him, he seemed
       the person to whom they were principally addressed.
At length the ladies rose to retire. A very great
        personage in a foreign, but not remote, country, once mentioned to the writer
       of these pages, that he ascribed the superiority of the English in political life in their
       conduct of public business and practical views of affairs, in a great measure to "that little
       half hour" that separates after dinner, the dark from the fair sex. The writer humbly
       submitted, that if the period of disjunction were strictly limited to a "little half hour,"
       its salutary consequences for both sexes need not be disputed, but that in England the
       "little half hour" was too apt to swell into a term of far more awful character and duration.
       Lady Everingham was a disciple of the "very little half hour" school; for as she gaily
       followed her mother, she said to Coningsby, whose happy lot it was to usher them from the
       apartment,
"Pray, do not be too long at the Board of Guardians to-day."
These were prophetic words. For no sooner were they all again seated, than the Duke filling
       his glass, and pushing the claret to Coningsby, observed:

"I suppose Lord Monmouth does not trouble himself much about the New Poor Law?"
"Hardly," said Coningsby. "My grandfather's frequent absence from England, which his health
       I believe renders quite necessary, deprives him of the advantage of personal observation on a
       subject, than which I can myself conceive none more deeply interesting."
"I am glad to hear you say so," said the Duke, "and it does you great credit and Henry too,
       whose attention I observe is directed very much to these subjects. In my time, the young men
       did not think so much of such things, and we suffer consequently. By the bye, Everingham, you
       who are a chairman of a Board of Guardians, can give me some information. Supposing a case of
       out-door relief—"
"I could not suppose anything so absurd," said the son-in-law.
"Well," rejoined the Duke. "I know your views on that subject, and it certainly is a
       question on which there is a good deal to be said. But would you under any circumstances give
        relief out of the Union even if the parish were to save a considerable
       sum."
"I wish I knew the Union where such a system was followed," said Lord Everingham; and his
       Grace seemed to tremble under his son-in-law's glance.
The Duke had a good heart, and not a bad head. If he had not made in his youth so many
       Latin and English verses, he might have acquired considerable information, for he had a
       natural love of letters, though his pack were the pride of England, his barrel seldom missed,
       and his fortune on the turf, where he never betted, was a proverb. He was good, and he wished
       to do good; but his views were confused from want of knowledge; and his conduct often
       inconsistent because a sense of duty made him immediately active,—and he often acquired in
       the consequent experience, a conviction exactly contrary to that which had prompted his
       activity.
His Grace had been a great patron and a zealous administrator of the New Poor Law. He had
       been persuaded that it would elevate the condition of the labouring class. His son-in-law,
        Lord Everingham, who was a Whig, and a clear-headed, cold-blooded man, looked
       upon the New Poor Law as another Magna Charta. Lord Everingham was completely master of the
       subject. He was himself the Chairman of one of the most considerable Unions in the kingdom.
       The Duke, if he ever had a misgiving, had no chance in argument with his son-in-law. Lord
       Everingham overwhelmed him with quotations from Commissioners' rules, and Sub-Commissioners'
       reports, statistical tables, and references to dietaries. Sometimes with a strong case, the
       Duke struggled to make a fight; but Lord Everingham, when he was at fault for a reply, which
       was very rare, upbraided his father-in-law with the abuses of the old system, and frightened
       him with visions of rates exceeding rentals.
Of late however a considerable change had taken place in the Duke's feelings on this great
       question. His son Henry entertained strong opinions upon it, and had combatted his father
       with all the fervour of a young votary. A
        victory over his Grace indeed was not very difficult. His natural impulse would
       have early enlisted him on the side, if not of opposition to the new system, at least of
       critical suspicion of its spirit and provisions. It was only the statistics and sharp
       acuteness of his son-in-law, that had indeed ever kept him to his colours. Lord Henry would
       not listen to statistics, dietary tables, Commissioners' rules, Sub-Commissioners' reports.
       He went far higher than his father; far deeper than his brother-in-law. He represented to the
       Duke that the order of the Peasantry was as ancient, legal, and recognised an order as the
       order of the Nobility; that it had distinct rights and privileges though for centuries they
       had been invaded and violated, and permitted to fall into desuetude. He impressed upon the
       Duke that the parochial constitution of this country was more important than its political
       constitution; that it was more ancient, more universal in its influence; and that this
       parochial constitution had already been shaken to its centre by the New Poor Law. He assured
       his father that
        it would never be well for England until this order of the Peasantry was
       restored to its pristine condition; not merely in physical comfort, for that must vary
       according to the economical circumstances of the time like that of every class; but to its
       condition in all those moral attributes, which make a recognised rank in a nation; and which
       in a great degree, are independent of economics; manners, customs, ceremonies, rights, and
       privileges.
"Henry thinks," said Lord Everingham, "that the people are to be fed by dancing around a
       May-pole."
"But will the people be more fed because they do not dance round a May-pole?" urged Lord
       Henry.
"Obsolete customs!" said Lord Everingham.
"And why should dancing round a May-pole be more obsolete than holding a Chapter of the
       Garter?" asked Lord Henry.
The Duke, who was a blue ribbon, felt this a home thrust. "I must say," said his Grace,
       "that I for one deeply regret that our popular
        customs have been permitted to fall so into desuetude."
"The Spirit of the Age is against such things," said Lord Everingham.
"And what is the Spirit of the Age?" asked Coningsby.
"The Spirit of Utility," said Lord Everingham.
"And you think then that ceremony is not useful?" urged Coningsby mildly.
"It depends upon circumstances," said Lord Everingham. "There are some ceremonies no doubt
       that are very proper, and of course very useful. But the best thing we can do for the
       labouring classes is to provide them with work."
"But what do you mean by the labouring classes, Everingham?" asked Lord Henry. "Lawyers are
       a labouring class for instance, and by the bye sufficiently provided with work. But would you
       approve of Westminster Hall being denuded of all its ceremonies?"
"And the long vacation being abolished?" added Coningsby.

"Theresa brings me terrible accounts of the sufferings of the poor about us," said the
       Duke, shaking his head.
"Women think everything to be suffering!" said Lord Everingham.
"How do you find them about you, Mr. Lyle?" continued the Duke.
"I have revived the monastic customs at St. Geneviève," said the young man blushing very
       much. "There is an almsgiving twice a week."
"I am sure I wish I could see the labouring classes happy," said the Duke.
"Oh! pray do not use, my dear father, that phrase the labouring classes!" said Lord Henry.
       "What do you think, Coningsby, the other day we had a meeting in this neighbourhood to vote
       an agricultural petition that was to comprise all classes. I went with my father, and I was
       made chairman of the committee to draw up the petition. Of course I described it as the
       petition of the nobility, clergy, gentry, yeomanry, and peasantry of the County of—; and
       could you believe it, they struck out peasantry
 as a word no longer used, and inserted labourers ."
"What can it signify," said Lord Everingham, "whether a man be called a labourer or a
       peasant!"
"And what can it signify," said his brother-in-law, "whether a man be called Mr. Howard or
       Lord Everingham!"
They were the most affectionate family under this roof of Beaumanoir, and of all members of
       of it Lord Henry the sweetest tempered, and yet it was astonishing what sharp skirmishes
       every day arose between him and his brother-in-law during "that little half hour," that forms
       so happily the political character of the nation. The Duke who from experience felt that a
       guerilla movement was impending, asked his guests whether they would take any more claret;
       and on their signifying their dissent, moved an adjournment to the ladies.
They joined the ladies in the music room. Coningsby not experienced in feminine society,
       and who found a little difficulty from want of practice in maintaining conversation, though
       he was very
        desirous of succeeding, was delighted with Lady Everingham, who instead of
       requiring to be amused, amused him; and suggested so many subjects, and glanced at so many
       topics, that there never was that cold awkward pause so common with sullen spirits and barren
       brains. Lady Everingham thoroughly understood the art of conversation, which indeed consists
       of the exercise of two fine qualities. You must originate, and you must sympathize; you must
       possess at the same time the habit of communicating, and the habit of listening. The union is
       rather rare, but irresistible.
Lady Everingham was not a celebrated beauty, but she was something infinitely more
       delightful —a captivating woman. There were combined in her qualities not commonly met
       together, great vivacity of mind with great grace of manner. Her words sparkled and her
       movements charmed. There was indeed in all she said and did that congruity that indicates a
       complete and harmonious organization. It was the same just proportion which characterised her
       form: a shape slight and undulating with grace; the most beautifully shaped ear; a small,
       soft hand; a
        foot that would have fitted the glass slipper; and which, by the bye, she lost
       no opportunity of displaying.
Then there was music. Lady Theresa sung like a seraph: a rich voice, a grand style. And her
       sister could support her with grace and sweetness. And they did not sing too much. The Duke
       took up a review, and looked at Rigby's last slashing article. The country seemed ruined, but
       it appeared that the Whigs were still worse off than the Tories. The assassins had committed
       suicide. This poetical justice is pleasing. Lord Everingham lounging in an easy chair perused
       with great satisfaction his Morning Chronicle, which contained a cutting reply to Mr. Rigby's
       article, not quite so "slashing" as the Right Honourable scribe's manifesto, but with some
       searching mockery, that became the subject and the subject-monger.
Mr. Lyle seated himself by the Duchess and encouraged by her amenity, and speaking in
       whispers, became animated and agreeable, occasionally patting the lap-dog. Coningsby stood by
       the singers, or talked with them when the
        music had ceased; and Henry Sydney looked over a volume of Strutt's Sports and
       Pastimes, occasionally, without taking his eyes off the volume calling the attention of his
       friends to his discoveries.
Mr. Lyle rose to depart, for he had some miles to return; he came forward with some
       hesitation to hope that Coningsby would visit his bloodhounds, which Lord Henry had told him
       that Coningsby had expressed a wish to do. Lady Everingham remarked that she had not been at
       St. Geneviève since she was a girl, and it appeared Lady Theresa had never visited it. Lady
       Everingham proposed that they should all ride over on the morrow, and she appealed to her
       husband for his approbation, instantly given, for though she loved admiration, and he
       apparently was an iceberg, they were really devoted to each other. Then there was a
       consultation as to their arrangements. The Duchess would drive over in her pony chaise with
       Theresa. The Duke as usual had affairs that would occupy him. The rest were to ride. It was a
       happy suggestion, all anticipated pleasure;
        and the evening terminated with the prospect of what Lady Everingham called an
       adventure.
The ladies themselves soon withdrew; the gentlemen lingered for a while; the Duke took up
       his candle, and bid his guests good night; Lord Everingham drank a glass of Seltzer water,
       nodded and vanished. Lord Henry and his friend sate up talking over the past. They were too
       young to call them old times; and yet what a life seemed to have elapsed since they had
       quitted Eton, dear old Eton! Their boyish feelings, and still latent boyish character,
       developed with their reminiscences.
"Do you remember Bucknall? Which Bucknall? The eldest: I saw him the other day at
       Nottingham; he is in the Rifles. Do you remember that day at Sirly Hall, that Paulet had that
       row with Dickinson? Did you like Dickinson? Hum! Paulet was a good fellow, I tell you who was
       a good fellow,—Paulet's little cousin. What! Augustus Le Grange. Oh! I liked Augustus Le
       Grange. I wonder where
        Buckhurst is. I had a latter from him the other day. He has gone with his uncle
       to Paris. We shall find him at Cambridge in October. I suppose you know Millbank has gone to
       Oriel. Has he though! I wonder who will have our room at Cookesley's?— Cookesley was a good
       fellow! Oh, capital! How well he behaved when there was that row about our going out with the
       hounds! Do you remember Vere's face? It makes me laugh now when I think of it. I tell you who
       was a good fellow, Kangaroo Grey; I liked him. I don't know any fellow who sang a better
       song!"
"By the bye," said Coningsby, "what sort of fellow is Eustace Lyle? I rather liked his
       look."
"Oh! I will tell you all about him," said Lord Henry. "He is a great ally of mine, and I
       think you will like him very much. It is a Roman Catholic family, about the oldest we have in
       the county, and the wealthiest. You see, Lyle's father was the most violent ultra Whig, and
       so were all Eustace's guardians;
        but the moment he came of age, he announced that he should not mix himself up
       with either of the parties in the county, and that his tenantry might act exactly as they
       thought fit. My father thinks of course that Lyle is a Conservative, and that he only waits
       the occasion to come forward, but he is quite wrong. I know Lyle well, and he speaks to me
       without disguise. You see 'tis an old Cavalier family, and Lyle has all the opinions and
       feelings of his race. He will not ally himself with anti-monarchists, and democrats, and
       infidels, and sectarians; at the same time why should he support a party who pretend to
       oppose these, but who never lose an opportunity of insulting his religion, and would deprive
       him, if possible, of the advantages of the very institutions which his family assisted in
       establishing?"
"Why indeed? I am glad to have made his acquaintance," said Coningsby; "Is he clever?"
"I think so," said Lord Henry. "He is the most shy fellow, especially among women, that I
       ever knew, but he is very popular in the
        county. He does an amazing deal of good, and is one of the best riders we have.
       My father says the very best; bold, but so very certain."
"He is older than we are?"
"My senior by a year; he is just of age."
"Oh, ah! twenty one. A year younger than Gaston de Foix when he won Ravenna, and four years
       younger than John of Austria when he won Lepanto," observed Coningsby, musingly. "I vote we
       go to bed, old fellow!"

