<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="12">
CHAPTER XII
Meanwhile downstairs a curious little scene was passing, watched by Langham, who, in his
      usual anti-social way, had retreated into a corner of his own as soon as another visitor
      appeared. Beside Catherine sat a Ritualist clergyman in cassock and long cloak—a saint
      clearly, though perhaps, to judge from the slight restlessness of movement that seemed to
      quiver through him perpetually, an irritable one. But he had the saint's wasted unearthly
      look, the ascetic brow high and narrow, the veins showing through the skin, and a personality
      as magnetic as it was strong.
Catherine listened to the new-comer, and gave him his tea, with an aloofness of manner which
      was not lost on Langham. 'She is the Thirty-nine Articles in the flesh!' he said to himself.
      'For her there must neither be too much nor too little. How can Elsmere stand it?'
Elsmere apparently was not perfectly happy. He sat balancing his long person over the arm of
      a chair listening to the recital of some of the High Churchman's parish troubles with a slight
      half-embarrassed smile. The vicar of Nottingham was always in trouble. The narrative he was
      pouring out took shape in Langham's sarcastic sense as a sort of classical epic, with the High
      Churchman as a new champion of Christendom, harassed on all sides by pagan parishioners, crass
      churchwardens, and treacherous bishops. Catherine's fine face grew more and more set, nay
      disdainful. Mr. Newcome was quite blind to it. Women never entered into his calculations
      except as sisters or as penitents. At a certain diocesan conference he had discovered a
      sympathetic fibre in the young rector of Murewell, which had been to the imperious persecuted
      zealot like water to the thirsty. He had come to-day, drawn by the same quality in Elsmere as
      had originally attracted Langham to the St. Anselm's undergraduate, and he sat pouring himself
      out with as much freedom as if all his companions had been as ready as he was to die for an
      alb, or to spend half their days in piously circumventing a bishop.
But presently the conversation had slid, no one knew how, from Nottingham and its intrigues
      to London and its teeming East. Robert was leading, his eye now on the apostolic-looking
       priest, now on his wife. Mr. Newcome resisted, but Robert had his way. Then it came
      out that behind these battles of kites and crows at Mottringham, there lay an heroic period,
      when the pale ascetic had wrestled ten years with London poverty, leaving health and youth and
      nerves behind him in the mêlée. Robert dragged it out at last, that struggle, into
      open view, but with difficulty. The Ritualist may glory in the discomfiture of an Erastian
      bishop—what Christian dare parade ten years of love to God and man? And presently round
      Elsmere's lip there dawned a little smile of triumph. Catherine had shaken off her cold
      silence, her Puritan aloofness, was bending forward eagerly—listening. Stroke by stroke, as
      the words and facts were beguiled from him, all that was futile and quarrelsome in the
      sharp-featured priest sank out of sight; the face glowed with inward light; the stature of the
      man seemed to rise; the angel in him unsheathed its wings. Suddenly a story of the slums that
      Mr. Newcome was telling—a story of the purest Christian heroism told in the simplest way—came
      to an end, and Catherine leaned towards him with a long quivering breath.
'Oh, thank you, thank you! That must have been a joy, a privilege!'
Mr. Newcome turned and looked at her with surprise.
'Yes, it was a privilege,' he said slowly—the story had been an account of the rescue of a
      young country lad from a London den of thieves and profligates—'you are right; it was just
      that.'
And then some sensitive inner fibre of the man was set vibrating, and he would talk no more
      of himself or his past, do what they would.
So Robert had hastily to provide another subject, and he fell upon that of the squire.
Mr. Newcome's eyes flashed.
'He is coming back? I am sorry for you, Elsmere. "Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell
      with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar!"'
And he fell back in his chair, his lips tightening, his thin long hand lying along the arm
      of it, answering to that general impression of combat, of the spiritual athlete, that hung
      about him.
'I don't know,' said Robert brightly, as he leant against the mantelpiece looking curiously
      at his visitor. 'The squire is a man of strong character, of vast learning. His library is one
      of the finest in England, and it is at my service. I am not concerned with his opinions.'
'Ah, I see,' said Newcome in his driest voice, but sadly. 'You are one of the people who
      believe in what you call tolerance—I remember.'
'Yes, that is an impeachment to which I plead guilty,' said Robert, perhaps with equal
      dryness; 'and you—have your worries driven you to throw tolerance overboard?'
Newcome bent forward quickly. Strange glow and intensity
       of the fanatical eyes—strange beauty of the wasted persecuting lips!
'Tolerance!' he said with irritable vehemence—'tolerance! Simply another name for betrayal,
      cowardice, desertion—nothing else. God, Heaven, Salvation on the one side, the devil and hell
      on the other—and one miserable life, one wretched sin-stained will, to win the battle with;
      and in such a state of things you—' he drooped his voice, throwing out every word
      with a scornful, sibilant emphasis—'you would have us behave as though our friends
      were our enemies and our enemies our friends, as though eternal misery were a bagatelle and
      our faith a mere alternative. I stand for Christ, and His foes are mine.'
'By which I suppose you mean,' said Robert quietly, 'that you would shut your door on the
      writer of The Idols of the Market-place?'
'Certainly.'
And the priest rose, his whole attention concentrated on Robert, as though some deeper-lying
      motive were suddenly brought into play than any suggested by the conversation itself.
'Certainly. Judge not—so long as a man has not judged himself,—only till then. As
      to an open enemy, the Christian's path is clear. We are but soldiers under orders. What
      business have we to be truce-making on our own account? The war is not ours, but God's!'
Robert's eyes had kindled. He was about to indulge himself in such a quick passage of arms
      as all such natures as his delight in, when his look travelled past the gaunt figure of the
      Ritualist vicar to his wife. A sudden pang smote, silenced him. She was sitting with her face
      raised to Newcome; and her beautiful gray eyes were full of a secret passion of sympathy. It
      was like the sudden re-emergence of something repressed, the satisfaction of something hungry.
      Robert moved closer to her, and the colour flushed over all his young boyish face.
'To me,' he said in a low voice, his eyes fixed rather on her than on Newcome, 'a clergyman
      has enough to do with those foes of Christ he cannot choose but recognise. There is no making
      truce with vice or cruelty. Why should we complicate our task and spend in needless struggle
      the energies we might give to love and to our brother?'
His wife turned to him. There was trouble in her look, then a swift lovely dawn of something
      indescribable. Newcome moved away with a gesture that was half bitterness, half weariness.
'Wait, my friend,' he said slowly, 'till you have watched that man's books eating the very
      heart out of a poor creature as I have. When you have once seen Christ robbed of a soul that
      might have been His, by the infidel of genius, you will loathe all this Laodicean cant of
      tolerance as I do!'


There was an awkward pause. Langham, with his eyeglass on, was carefully examining the make
      of a carved paper-knife lying near him. The strained preoccupied mind of the High Churchman
      had never taken the smallest account of his presence, of which Robert had been keenly, not to
      say humorously, conscious throughout.
But after a minute or so the tutor got up, strolled forward, and addressed Robert on some
      Oxford topic of common interest. Newcome, in a kind of dream which seemed to have suddenly
      descended on him, stood near them, his priestly cloak falling in long folds about him, his
      ascetic face grave and rapt. Gradually, however, the talk of the two men dissipated the
      mystical cloud about him. He began to listen, to catch the savour of Langham's modes of
      speech, and of his languid indifferent personality.
'I must go,' he said abruptly, after a minute or two, breaking in upon the friends'
      conversation. 'I shall hardly get home before dark.'
He took a cold punctilious leave of Catherine, and a still colder and slighter leave of
      Langham. Elsmere accompanied him to the gate.
On the way the older man suddenly caught him by the arm.
'Elsmere, let me—I am the elder by so many years—let me speak to you. My heart goes out to
      you!'
And the eagle face softened; the harsh commanding presence became enveloping, magnetic.
      Robert paused and looked down upon him, a quick light of foresight in his eye. He felt what
      was coming.
And down it swept upon him, a hurricane of words hot from Newcome's inmost being, a protest
      winged by the gathered passion of years against certain 'dangerous tendencies' the elder
      priest discerned in the younger, against the worship of intellect and science as such which
      appeared in Elsmere's talk, in Elsmere's choice of friends. It was the eternal cry of the
      mystic of all ages.
'Scholarship! learning!' Eyes and lips flashed into a vehement scorn. 'You allow them a
      value in themselves, apart from the Christian's test. It is the modern canker, the modern
      curse! Thank God, my years in London burnt it out of me! Oh, my friend, what have you and I to
      do with all these curious triflings, which lead men oftener to rebellion than to worship? Is
      this a time for wholesale trust, for a maudlin universal sympathy? Nay, rather a day of
      suspicion, a day of repression!—a time for trampling on the lusts of the mind no less than the
      lusts of the body, a time when it is better to believe than to know, to pray than to
      understand!'
Robert was silent a moment, and they stood together, Newcome's gaze of fiery appeal fixed
      upon him.
'We are differently made, you and I,' said the young rector at last with difficulty. 'Where
      you see temptation I see oppor
      tunity. I cannot conceive of God as the Arch-plotter against His own creation!'
Newcome dropped his hold abruptly.
'A groundless optimism,' he said with harshness. 'On the track of the soul from birth to
      death there are two sleuth-hounds—Sin and Satan. Mankind for ever flies them, is for ever
      vanquished and devoured. I see life always as a thread-like path between abysses along which
      man creeps'—and his gesture illustrated the words—'with bleeding hands and feet
      towards one—narrow—solitary outlet. Woe to him if he turn to the right hand or the left—"I
      will repay, saith the Lord!"'
Elsmere drew himself up suddenly; the words seemed to him a blasphemy. Then something stayed
      the vehement answer on his lips. It was a sense of profound intolerable pity. What a maimed
      life! what an indomitable soul! Husbandhood, fatherhood, and all the sacred education that
      flows from human joy for ever self-forbidden, and this grim creed for recompense!
He caught Newcome's hand with a kind of filial eagerness.
'You are a perpetual lesson to me,' he said, most gently. 'When the world is too much with
      me, I think of you and am rebuked. God bless you! But I know myself. If I could see life and
      God as you see them for one hour, I should cease to be a Christian in the next!'
A flush of something like sombre resentment passed over Newcome's face. There is a
      tyrannical element in all fanaticism, an element which makes opposition a torment. He turned
      abruptly away, and Robert was left alone.
It was a still clear evening, rich in the languid softness and balm which mark the first
      approaches of autumn. Elsmere walked back to the house, his head uplifted to the sky which lay
      beyond the cornfield, his whole being wrought into a passionate protest—a passionate
      invocation of all things beautiful and strong and free, a clinging to life and nature as to
      something wronged and outraged.
Suddenly his wife stood beside him. She had come down to warn him that it was late and that
      Langham had gone to dress; but she stood lingering by his side after her message was given,
      and he made no movement to go in. He turned to her, the exaltation gradually dying out of his
      face, and at last he stooped and kissed her with a kind of timidity unlike him. She clasped
      both hands on his arm and stood pressing towards him as though to make amends—for she knew not
      what. Something—some sharp momentary sense of difference, of antagonism, had hurt that inmost
      fibre which is the conscience of true passion. She did the most generous, the most ample
      penance for it as she stood there talking to him of half-indifferent things, but with a magic,
      a significance of eye and voice which seemed to take all the severity from her beauty and make
      her womanhood itself.
At the evening meal Rose appeared in pale blue, and it seemed
       to Langham, fresh from the absolute seclusion of college rooms in vacation, that
      everything looked flat and stale beside her, beside the flash of her white arms, the gleam of
      her hair, the confident grace of every movement. He thought her much too self-conscious and
      self-satisfied; and she certainly did not make herself agreeable to him; but for all that he
      could hardly take his eyes off her; and it occurred to him once or twice to envy Robert the
      easy childish friendliness she showed to him, and to him alone of the party. The lack of real
      sympathy between her and Catherine was evident to the stranger at once—what, indeed, could the
      two have in common? He saw that Catherine was constantly on the point of blaming, and Rose
      constantly on the point of rebelling. He caught the wrinkling of Catherine's brow as Rose
      presently, in emulation apparently of some acquaintances she had been making in London, let
      slip the names of some of her male friends without the 'Mr.,' or launched into some bolder
      affectation than usual of a comprehensive knowledge of London society. The girl, in spite of
      all her beauty, and her fashion, and the little studied details of her dress, was in reality
      so crude, so much of a child under it all, that it made her audacities and assumptions the
      more absurd, and he could see that Robert was vastly amused by them.
But Langham was not merely amused by her. She was too beautiful and too full of
      character.
It astonished him to find himself afterwards edging over to the corner where she sat with
      the rectory cat on her knee—an inferior animal, but the best substitute for Chattie available.
      So it was, however; and once in her neighbourhood he made another serious effort to get her to
      talk to him. The Elsmeres had never seen him so conversational. He dropped his paradoxical
      melancholy; he roared as gently as any sucking dove; and Robert, catching from the pessimist
      of St. Anselm's, as the evening went on, some hesitating commonplaces worthy of a bashful
      undergraduate on the subject of the boats and Commemoration, had to beat a hasty retreat, so
      greatly did the situation tickle his sense of humour.
But the tutor made his various ventures under a discouraging sense of failure. What a
      capricious ambiguous creature it was, how fearless, how disagreeably alive to all his own
      damaging peculiarities! Never had he been so piqued for years, and as he floundered about
      trying to find some common ground where he and she might be at ease, he was conscious
      throughout of her mocking indifferent eyes, which seemed to be saying to him all the time,
      'You are not interesting—no, not a bit! You are tiresome, and I see through you, but I must
      talk to you, I suppose, faute de mieux.'
Long before the little party separated for the night Langham had given it up, and had
      betaken himself to Catherine, reminding himself with some sharpness that he had come down to
      study his friend's life, rather than the humours of a provoking
       girl. How still the summer night was round the isolated rectory; how fresh and
      spotless were all the appointments of the house; what a Quaker neatness and refinement
      everywhere! He drank in the scent of air and flowers with which the rooms were filled; for the
      first time his fastidious sense was pleasantly conscious of Catherine's grave beauty; and even
      the mystic ceremonies of family prayer had a certain charm for him, pagan as he was. How much
      dignity and persuasiveness it has still, he thought to himself, this commonplace country life
      of ours, on its best sides!
Half-past ten arrived. Rose just let him touch her hand; Catherine gave him a quiet
      good-night, with various hospitable wishes for his nocturnal comfort, and the ladies withdrew.
      He saw Robert open the door for his wife, and catch her thin white fingers as she passed him
      with all the secrecy and passion of a lover.
Then they plunged into the study, he and Robert, and smoked their fill. The study was an
      astonishing medley. Books, natural history specimens, a half-written sermon, fishing-rods,
      cricket-bats, a huge medicine cupboard—all the main elements of Elsmere's new existence were
      represented there. In the drawing-room with his wife and his sister-in-law he had been as much
      of a boy as ever; here clearly he was a man, very much in earnest. What about? What did it all
      come to? Can the English country clergyman do much with his life and his energies? Langham
      approached the subject with his usual scepticism.
Robert for a while, however, did not help him to solve it. He fell at once to talking about
      the squire, as though it cleared his mind to talk out his difficulties even to so ineffective
      a counsellor as Langham. Langham, indeed, was but faintly interested in the squire's crimes as
      a landlord, but there was a certain interest to be got out of the struggle in Elsmere's mind
      between the attractiveness of the squire, as one of the most difficult and original
      personalities of English letters, and that moral condemnation of him as a man of possessions
      and ordinary human responsibilities with which the young reforming rector was clearly
      penetrated. So that, as long as he could smoke under it, he was content to let his companion
      describe to him Mr. Wendover's connection with the property, his accession to it in middle
      life after a long residence in Germany, his ineffectual attempts to play the English country
      gentleman, and his subsequent complete withdrawal from the life about him.
'You have no idea what a queer sort of existence he lives in that huge place,' said Robert
      with energy. 'He is not unpopular exactly with the poor down here. When they want to belabour
      anybody they lay on at the agent, Henslowe. On the whole, I have come to the conclusion the
      poor like a mystery. They never see him; when he is here the park is shut up; the
       common report is that he walks at night; and he lives alone in that enormous house
      with his books. The county folk have all quarrelled with him, or nearly. It pleases him to get
      a few of the humbler people about, clergy, professional men, and so on, to dine with him
      sometimes. And he often fills the Hall, I am told, with London people for a day or two. But
      otherwise he knows no one, and nobody knows him.'
'But you say he has a widowed sister? How does she relish the kind of life?'
'Oh; by all accounts,' said the rector with a shrug, 'she is as little like other people as
      himself. A queer elfish little creature, they say, as fond of solitude down here as the
      squire, and full of hobbies. In her youth she was about the court. Then she married a canon of
      Warham, one of the popular preachers, I believe, of the day. There is a bright little cousin
      of hers, a certain Lady Helen Varley, who lives near here, and tells me stories of her. She
      must be the most whimsical little aristocrat imaginable. She liked her husband apparently, but
      she never got over leaving London and the fashionable world, and is as hungry now, after her
      long fast, for titles and big-wigs, as though she were the purest parvenu. The squire of
      course makes mock of her, and she has no influence with him. However, there is something naïve
      in the stories they tell of her. I feel as if I might get on with her. But the
      squire!'
And the rector, having laid down his pipe, took to studying his boots with a certain
      dolefulness.
Langham, however, who always treated the subjects of conversation presented to him as an
      epicure treats foods, felt at this point that he had had enough of the Wendovers, and started
      something else.
'So you physic bodies as well as minds?' he said, pointing to the medicine cupboard.
'I should think so!' cried Robert, brightening at once. 'Last winter I causticked all the
      diphtheritic throats in the place with my own hand. Our parish doctor is an infirm old noodle,
      and I just had to do it. And if the state of part of the parish remains what it is, it's a
      pleasure I may promise myself most years. But it shan't remain what it is.'
And the rector reached out his hand again for his pipe, and gave one or two energetic puffs
      to it as he surveyed his friend stretched before him in the depths of an armchair.
'I will make myself a public nuisance, but the people shall have their drains!'
'It seems to me,' said Langham, musing, 'that in my youth people talked about Ruskin; now
      they talk about drains.'
'And quite right too. Dirt and drains, Catherine says I have gone mad upon them. It's all
      very well, but they are the foundations of a sound religion.'
'Dirt, drains, and Darwin,' said Langham meditatively, taking up Darwin's
       Earthworms, which lay on the study table
       beside him, side by side with a volume of Grant Allen's Sketches. 'I
      didn't know you cared for this sort of thing!'
Robert did not answer for a moment, and a faint flush stole into his face.
'Imagine, Langham!' he said presently, 'I had never read even The Origin of Species
      before I came here. We used to take the thing half for granted, I remember, at Oxford, in a
      more or less modified sense. But to drive the mind through all the details of the evidence, to
      force one's self to understand the whole hypothesis and the grounds for it, is a very
      different matter. It is a revelation.'
'Yes,' said Langham; and could not forbear adding, 'but it is a revelation, my friend, that
      has not always been held to square with other revelations.'
In general these two kept carefully off the religious ground. The man who is religious by
      nature tends to keep his treasure hid from the man who is critical by nature, and Langham was
      much more interested in other things. But still it had always been understood that each was
      free to say what he would.
'There was a natural panic,' said Robert, throwing back his head at the challenge. 'Men
      shrank and will always shrink, say what you will, from what seems to touch things dearer to
      them than life. But the panic is passing. The smoke is clearing away, and we see that the
      battle-field is falling into new lines. But the old truth remains the same. Where and when and
      how you will, but somewhen and somehow, God created the heavens and the earth!'
Langham said nothing. It had seemed to him for long that the clergy were becoming
      dangerously ready to throw the Old Testament overboard, and all that it appeared to him to
      imply was that men's logical sense is easily benumbed where their hearts are concerned.
'Not that every one need be troubled with the new facts,' resumed Robert after a while,
      going back to his pipe. 'Why should they? We are not saved by Darwinism. I should never press
      them on my wife, for instance, with all her clearness and courage of mind.'
His voice altered as he mentioned his wife—grew extraordinarily soft, even reverential.
'It would distress her?' said Langham interrogatively, and inwardly conscious of pursuing
      investigations begun a year before.
'Yes, it would distress her. She holds the old ideas as she was taught them. It is all
      beautiful to her, what may seem doubtful or grotesque to others. And why should I or any one
      else trouble her? I above all, who am not fit to tie her shoe-strings.'
The young husband's face seemed to gleam in the dim light which fell upon it. Langham
      involuntarily put up his hand in silence and touched his sleeve. Robert gave him a quiet
      friendly
       look, and the two men instantly plunged into some quite trivial and commonplace
      subject.
Langham entered his room that night with a renewed sense of pleasure in the country quiet,
      the peaceful flower-scented house. Catherine, who was an admirable housewife, had put out her
      best guest-sheets for his benefit, and the tutor, accustomed for long years to the second-best
      of college service, looked at their shining surfaces and frilled edges, at the freshly matted
      floor, at the flowers on the dressing-table, at the spotlessness of everything in the room,
      with a distinct sense that matrimony had its advantages. He had come down to visit the
      Elsmeres, sustained by a considerable sense of virtue. He still loved Elsmere and cared to see
      him. It was a much colder love, no doubt, than that which he had given to the undergraduate.
      But the man altogether was a colder creature, who for years had been drawing in tentacle after
      tentacle, and becoming more and more content to live without his kind. Robert's parsonage,
      however, and Robert's wife had no attractions for him; and it was with an effort that he had
      made up his mind to accept the invitation which Catherine had made an effort to write.
And, after all, the experience promised to be pleasant. His fastidious love for the quieter,
      subtler sorts of beauty was touched by the Elsmere surroundings. And whatever Miss Leyburn
      might be, she was not commonplace. The demon of convention had no large part in her!
      Langham lay awake for a time analysing his impressions of her with some gusto, and meditating,
      with a whimsical candour which seldom tailed him, on the manner in which she had trampled on
      him, and the reasons why.
He woke up, however, in a totally different frame of mind. He was pre-eminently a person of
      moods, dependent, probably, as all moods are, on certain obscure physical variations. And his
      mental temperature had run down in the night. The house, the people who had been fresh and
      interesting to him twelve hours before, were now the burden he had more than half expected
      them to be. He lay and thought of the unbroken solitude of his college rooms, of Senancour's
      flight from human kind, of the uselessness of all friendship, the absurdity of all effort, and
      could hardly persuade himself to get up and face a futile world, which had, moreover, the
      enormous disadvantage for the moment of being a new one.
Convention, however, is master even of an Obermann. That prototype of all the disillusioned
      had to cut himself adrift from the society of the eagles on the Dent du Midi, to go and hang
      like any other ridiculous mortal on the Paris law-courts. Langham, whether he liked it or no,
      had to face the parsonic breakfast and the parsonic day.
He had just finished dressing when the sound of a girl's voice drew him to the window, which
      was open. In the garden stood Rose, on the edge of the sunk fence dividing the rectory domain
       from the cornfield. She was stooping forward playing with Robert's Dandie Dinmont.
      In one hand she held a mass of poppies, which showed a vivid scarlet against her blue dress;
      the other was stretched out seductively to the dog leaping round her. A crystal buckle flashed
      at her waist; the sunshine caught the curls of auburn hair, the pink cheek, the white moving
      hand, the lace ruffles at her throat and wrist. The lithe glittering figure stood thrown out
      against the heavy woods behind, the gold of the cornfield, the blues of the distance. All the
      gaiety and colour which is as truly representative of autumn as the gray languor of a
      September mist had passed into it.
Langham stood and watched, hidden, as he thought, by the curtain, till a gust of wind shook
      the casement window beside him, and threatened to blow it in upon him. He put out his hand
      perforce to save it, and the slight noise caught Rose's ear. She looked up; her smile
      vanished. 'Go down, Dandie,' she said severely, and walked quickly into the house with as much
      dignity as nineteen is capable of.
At breakfast the Elsmeres found their guest a difficulty. But they also, as we know, had
      expected it. He was languor itself; none of their conversational efforts succeeded; and Rose,
      studying him out of the corners of her eyes, felt that it would be of no use even to torment
      so strange and impenetrable a being. Why on earth should people come and visit their friends
      if they could not keep up even the ordinary decent pretences of society?
Robert had to go off to some clerical business afterwards, and Langham wandered out into the
      garden by himself. As he thought of his Greek texts and his untenanted Oxford rooms, he had
      the same sort of craving that an opium-eater has cut off from his drugs. How was he to get
      through?
Presently he walked back into the study, secured an armful of volumes, and carried them out.
      True to himself in the smallest things, he could never in his life be content with the
      companionship of one book. To cut off the possibility of choice and change in anything
      whatever was repugnant to him.
He sat himself down under the shade of a great chestnut near the house, and an hour glided
      pleasantly away. As it happened, however, he did not open one of the books he had brought with
      him. A thought had struck him as he sat down, and he went groping in his pockets in search of
      a yellow-covered brochure, which, when found, proved to be a new play by Dumas, just
      about to be produced by a French company in London. Langham, whose passion for the French
      theatre supplied him, as we know, with a great deal of life without the trouble of living, was
      going to see it, and always made a point of reading the piece beforehand.
The play turned upon a typical French situation, treated in a manner rather more French than
      usual. The reader shrugged
       his shoulders a good deal as he read on. 'Strange nation!' he muttered to himself
      after an act or two. 'How they do revel in mud!'
Presently, just as the fifth act was beginning to get hold of him with that force which,
      after all, only a French playwright is master of, he looked up and saw the two sisters coming
      round the corner of the house from the great kitchen garden, which stretched its grass paths
      and tangled flower-masses down the further slope of the hill. The transition was sharp from
      Dumas's heated atmosphere of passion and crime to the quiet English rectory, its rural
      surroundings, and the figures of the two Englishwomen advancing towards him.
Catherine was in a loose white dress with a black lace scarf draped about her head and form.
      Her look hardly suggested youth, and there was certainly no touch of age in it. Ripeness,
      maturity, serenity—these were the chief ideas which seemed to rise in the mind at sight of
      her.
'Are you amusing yourself, Mr. Langham?' she said, stopping beside him and retaining with
      slight imperceptible force Rose's hand, which threatened to slip away.
'Very much. I have been skimming through a play, which I hope to see next week, by way of
      preparation.'
Rose turned involuntarily. Not wishing to discuss Marianne with either Catherine or
      her sister, Langham had just closed the book and was returning it to his pocket. But she had
      caught sight of it.
'You are reading Marianne,' she exclaimed, the slightest possible touch of wonder
      in her tone.
'Yes, it is Marianne,' said Langham, surprised in his turn. He had very
      old-fashioned notions about the limits of a girl's acquaintance with the world, knowing
      nothing, therefore, as may be supposed, about the modern young woman, and he was a trifle
      scandalised by Rose's accent of knowledge.
'I read it last week,' she said carelessly; 'and the Piersons'—turning to her sister—'have
      promised to take me to see it next winter if Desforêts comes again, as every one expects.'
'Who wrote it?' asked Catherine innocently. The theatre not only gave her little pleasure,
      but wounded in her a hundred deep unconquerable instincts. But she had long ago given up in
      despair the hope of protesting against Rose's dramatic instincts with success.
'Dumas fils,' said Langham drily. He was distinctly a good deal astonished.
Rose looked at him, and something brought a sudden flame into her cheek.
'It is one of the best of his,' she said defiantly. 'I have read a good many others. Mrs.
      Pierson lent me a volume. And when I was introduced to Madame Desforêts last week, she agreed
      with me that Marianne is nearly the best of all.'
All this, of course, with the delicate nose well in air.


'You were introduced to Madame Desforêts?' cried Langham, surprised this time quite out of
      discretion. Catherine looked at him with anxiety. The reputation of the black-eyed little
      French actress, who had been for a year or two the idol of the theatrical public of Paris and
      London, had reached even to her, and the tone of Langham's exclamation struck her
      painfully.
'I was,' said Rose proudly. 'Other people may think it a disgrace. I thought it an
      honour!'
Langham could not help smiling, the girl's naïveté was so evident. It was clear
      that, if she had read Marianne, she had never understood it.
'Rose, you don't know!' exclaimed Catherine, turning to her sister with a sudden trouble in
      her eyes. 'I don't think Mrs. Pierson ought to have done that, without consulting mamma
      especially.'
'Why not?' cried Rose vehemently. Her face was burning, and her heart was full of something
      like hatred of Langham, but she tried hard to be calm.
'I think,' she said, with a desperate attempt at crushing dignity, 'that the way in which
      all sorts of stories are believed against a woman, just because she is an actress, is
       disgraceful! Just because a woman is on the stage, everybody thinks they may throw
      stones at her. I know, because—because she told me,' cried the speaker, growing,
      however, half embarrassed as she spoke, 'that she feels the things that are said of her
      deeply! She has been ill, very ill, and one of her friends said to me, "You know it isn't her
      work, or a cold, or anything else that's made her ill—it's calumny!" And so it is.'
The speaker flashed an angry glance at Langham. She was sitting on the arm of the cane chair
      into which Catherine had fallen, one hand grasping the back of the chair for support, one
      pointed foot beating the ground restlessly in front of her, her small full mouth pursed
      indignantly, the greenish-gray eyes flashing and brilliant.
As for Langham, the cynic within him was on the point of uncontrollable laughter. Madame
      Desforêts complaining of calumny to this little Westmoreland maiden! But his eyes
      involuntarily met Catherine's, and the expression of both fused into a common
      wonderment—amused on his side, anxious on hers. 'What a child, what an infant it is!' they
      seemed to confide to one another. Catherine laid her hand softly on Rose's, and was about to
      say something soothing, which might secure her an opening for some sisterly advice later on,
      when there was a sound of calling from the gate. She looked up and saw Robert waving to her.
      Evidently he had just run up from the school to deliver a message. She hurried across the
      drive to him and afterwards into the house, while he disappeared.
Rose got up from her perch on the armchair and would have followed, but a movement of
      obstinacy or Quixotic wrath, or both, detained her.


'At any rate, Mr. Langham,' she said, drawing herself up, and speaking with the most lofty
      accent, 'if you don't know anything personally about Madame Desforêts, I think it would be
      much fairer to say nothing—and not to assume at once that all you hear is true!'
Langham had rarely felt more awkward than he did then, as he sat leaning forward under the
      tree, this slim indignant creature standing over him, and his consciousness about equally
      divided between a sense of her absurdity and a sense of her prettiness.
'You are an advocate worth having, Miss Leyburn,' he said at last, an enigmatical smile he
      could not restrain playing about his mouth. 'I could not argue with you; I had better not
      try.'
Rose looked at him, at his dark regular face, at the black eyes which were much vivider than
      usual, perhaps because they could not help reflecting some of the irrepressible memories of
      Madame Desforêts and her causes célèbres which were coursing through the brain behind
      them, and with a momentary impression of rawness, defeat, and yet involuntary attraction,
      which galled her intolerably, she turned away and left him.
In the afternoon Robert was still unavailable, to his own great chagrin, and Langham
      summoned up all his resignation and walked with the ladies. The general impression left upon
      his mind by the performance was, first, that the dust of an English August is intolerable,
      and, secondly, that women's society ought only to be ventured on by the men who are made for
      it. The views of Catherine and Rose may be deduced from his with tolerable certainty.
But in the late afternoon, when they thought they had done their duty by him, and he was
      again alone in the garden reading, he suddenly heard the sounds of music.
Who was playing, and in that way? He got up and strolled past the drawing-room window to
      find out.
Rose had got hold of an accompanist, the timid dowdy daughter of a local solicitor, with
      some capacity for reading, and was now, in her lavish impetuous fashion, rushing through a
      quantity of new music, the accumulations of her visit to London. She stood up beside the
      piano, her hair gleaming in the shadow of the drawing-room, her white brow hanging forward
      over her violin as she peered her way through the music, her whole soul absorbed in what she
      was doing. Langham passed unnoticed.
What astonishing playing! Why had no one warned him of the presence of such a gift in this
      dazzling, prickly, unripe creature? He sat down against the wall of the house, as close as
      possible, but out of sight, and listened. All the romance of his spoilt and solitary life had
      come to him so far through music, and through such music as this! For she was playing Wagner,
      Brahms, and Rubinstein, interpreting all those passionate voices of the subtlest moderns,
      through which the
       heart of our own day has expressed itself even more freely and exactly than through
      the voice of literature. Hans Sachs' immortal song, echoes from the love duets in 'Tristan und
      Isolde,' fragments from a wild and alien dance-music, they rippled over him in a warm
      intoxicating stream of sound, stirring association after association, and rousing from sleep a
      hundred bygone moods of feeling.
What magic and mastery in the girl's touch! What power of divination, and of rendering! Ah!
      she too was floating in passion and romance, but of a different sort altogether from the
      conscious reflected product of the man's nature. She was not thinking of the past, but of the
      future; she was weaving her story that was to be into the flying notes, playing to the unknown
      of her Whindale dreams, the strong ardent unknown,—'insufferable, if he pleases, to all the
      world besides, but to me heaven!' She had caught no breath yet of his coming, but her
      heart was ready for him.
Suddenly, as she put down her violin, the French window opened, and Langham stood before
      her. She looked at him with a quick stiffening of the face which a minute before had been all
      quivering and relaxed, and his instant perception of it chilled the impulse which had brought
      him there.
He said something banal about his enjoyment, something totally different from what
      he had meant to say. The moment presented itself, but he could not seize it or her.
'I had no notion you cared for music,' she said carelessly, as she shut the piano, and then
      she went away.
Langham felt a strange fierce pang of disappointment. What had he meant to do or say? Idiot!
      What common ground was there between him and any such exquisite youth? What girl would ever
      see in him anything but the dull remains of what once had been a man!
</div></body></text></TEI>