<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER XXXII
Naturally, it was during their two months of autumn travel that Elsmere and Catherine first
      realised in detail what Elsmere's act was to mean to them, as husband and wife, in the future.
      Each left England with the most tender and heroic resolves. And no one who knows anything of
      life will need to be told that even for these two finely-natured people such resolves were
      infinitely easier to make than to carry out.


'I will not preach to you—I will not persecute you!' Catherine had said to her husband at
      the moment of her first shock and anguish. And she did her utmost, poor thing, to keep her
      word! All through the innumerable bitternesses which accompanied Elsmere's withdrawal from
      Murewell—the letters which followed them, the remonstrances of public and private friends, the
      paragraphs which found their way, do what they would, into the newspapers—the pain of
      deserting, as it seemed to her, certain poor and helpless folk who had been taught to look to
      her and Robert, and whose bewildered lamentations came to them through young
      Armitstead—through all this she held her peace; she did her best to soften Robert's grief; she
      never once reproached him with her own.
But at the same time the inevitable separation of their inmost hopes and beliefs had thrown
      her back on herself, had immensely strengthened that puritan independent fibre in her which
      her youth had developed, and which her happy marriage had only temporarily masked, not
      weakened. Never had Catherine believed so strongly and intensely as now, when the husband, who
      had been the guide and inspirer of her religious life, had given up the old faith and
      practices. By virtue of a kind of nervous instinctive dread, his relaxations bred increased
      rigidity in her. Often when she was alone—or at night—she was seized with a lonely, an awful
      sense of responsibility. Oh! let her guard her faith, not only for her own sake, her child's,
      her Lord's, but for his—that it might be given to her patience at last to lead him
      back.
And the only way in which it seemed to her possible to guard it was to set up certain
      barriers of silence. She feared that fiery persuasive quality in Robert she had so often seen
      at work on other people. With him conviction was life—it was the man himself, to an
      extraordinary degree. How was she to resist the pressure of those new ardours with which his
      mind was filling—she who loved him!—except by building, at any rate for the time, an enclosure
      of silence round her Christian beliefs? It was in some ways a pathetic repetition of the
      situation between Robert and the squire in the early days of their friendship, but in
      Catherine's mind there was no troubling presence of new knowledge conspiring from within with
      the forces without. At this moment of her life she was more passionately convinced than ever
      that the only knowledge truly worth having in this world was the knowledge of God's mercies in
      Christ.
So gradually with a gentle persistency she withdrew certain parts of herself from Robert's
      ken; she avoided certain subjects, or anything that might lead to them; she ignored the
      religious and philosophical books he was constantly reading; she prayed and thought
      alone—always for him, of him—but still resolutely alone. It was impossible, however, that so
      great a change in their life could be effected without a perpetual sense of breaking links, a
      perpetual series of dumb wounds and griefs on both
       sides. There came a moment when, as he sat alone one evening in a pine wood above
      the Lake of Geneva, Elsmere suddenly awoke to the conviction that in spite of all his efforts
      and illusions, their relation to each other was altering, dwindling, impoverishing;
      the terror of that summer night at Murewell was being dismally justified.
His own mind during this time was in a state of perpetual discovery, 'sailing the seas where
      there was never sand'—the vast shadowy seas of speculative thought. All his life, reserve to
      those nearest to him had been pain and grief to him. He was one of those people, as we know,
      who throw off readily; to whom sympathy, expansion, are indispensable; who suffer physically
      and mentally from anything cold and rigid beside them. And now, at every turn, in their talk,
      their reading, in many of the smallest details of their common existence, Elsmere began to
      feel the presence of this cold and rigid something. He was ever conscious of self-defence on
      her side, of pained drawing back on his. And with every succeeding effort of his at
      self-repression, it seemed to him as though fresh nails were driven into the coffin of that
      old free habit of perfect confidence which had made the heaven of their life since they had
      been man and wife.
He sat on for long, through the September evening, pondering, wrestling. Was it simply
      inevitable, the natural result of his own act, and of her antecedents, to which he must submit
      himself, as to any mutilation or loss of power in the body? The young lover and husband
      rebelled—the believer rebelled—against the admission. Probably if his change had left him
      anchorless and forsaken, as it leaves many men, he would have been ready enough to submit, in
      terror lest his own forlornness should bring about hers. But in spite of the intellectual
      confusion, which inevitably attends any wholesale reconstruction of a man's platform of
      action, he had never been more sure of God, or the Divine aims of the world, than now; never
      more open than now, amid this exquisite Alpine world, to those passionate moments of religious
      trust which are man's eternal defiance to the iron silences about him. Originally, as we know,
      he had shrunk from the thought of change in her corresponding to his own; now that his own
      foothold was strengthening, his longing for a new union was overpowering that old dread. The
      proselytising instinct may be never quite morally defensible, even as between husband and
      wife. Nevertheless, in all strong, convinced, and ardent souls it exists, and must be reckoned
      with.
At last one evening he was overcome by a sudden impulse which neutralised for the moment his
      nervous dread of hurting her. Some little incident of their day together was rankling, and it
      was borne in upon him that almost any violent protest on her part would have been preferable
      to this constant soft evasion of hers, which was gradually, imperceptibly dividing heart from
      heart.


They were in a bare attic room at the very top of one of the huge newly-built hotels which
      during the last twenty years have invaded all the high places of Switzerland. The August which
      had been so hot in England had been rainy and broken in Switzerland. But it had been followed
      by a warm and mellow September, and the favourite hotels below a certain height were still
      full. When the Elsmeres arrived at Les Avants, this scantily furnished garret, out of which
      some servants had been hurried to make room for them, was all that could be found. They,
      however, liked it for its space and its view. They looked sideways from their windows on to
      the upper end of the lake, three thousand feet below them. Opposite, across the blue water,
      rose a grandiose rampart of mountains, the stage on which from morn till night the sun went
      through a long transformation scene of beauty. The water was marked every now and then by
      passing boats and steamers—tiny specks which served to measure the vastness of all around
      them. To right and left, spurs of green mountains shut out alike the lower lake and the icy
      splendours of the 'Valais depths profound.' What made the charm of the narrow prospect was,
      first, the sense it produced in the spectator of hanging dizzily above the lake, with infinite
      air below him, and, then, the magical effects of dawn and evening, when wreaths of mist would
      blot out the valley and the lake, and leave the eye of the watcher face to face across the
      fathomless abyss with the majestic mountain mass, and its attendant retinue of clouds, as
      though they and he were alone in the universe.
It was a peaceful September night. From the open window beside him Robert could see a world
      of high moonlight, limited and invaded on all sides by sharp black masses of shade. A few rare
      lights glimmered on the spreading alp below, and every now and then a breath of music came to
      them wafted from a military band playing a mile or two away. They had been climbing most of
      the afternoon, and Catherine was lying down, her brown hair loose about her, the thin oval of
      her face and clear line of brow just visible in the dim candlelight.
Suddenly he stretched out his hand for his Greek Testament, which was always near him,
      though there had been no common reading since that bitter day of his confession to her. The
      mark still lay in the well-worn volume at the point reached in their last reading at Murewell.
      He opened upon it, and began the eleventh chapter of St. John.
Catherine trembled when she saw him take up the book. He began without preface, treating the
      passage before him in his usual way,—that is to say, taking verse after verse in the Greek,
      translating and commenting. She never spoke all through, and at last he closed the little
      Testament, and bent towards her, his look full of feeling.
'Catherine! can't you let me—will you never let me tell you, now, how that story—how the old
      things—affect me, from the
       new point of view? You always stop me when I try. I believe you think of me as
      having thrown it all away. Would it not comfort you sometimes, if you knew that although much
      of the Gospels, this very raising of Lazarus, for instance, seem to me no longer true in the
      historical sense, still they are always full to me of an ideal, a poetical truth? Lazarus may
      not have died and come to life, may never have existed; but still to me, now as always, love
      for Jesus of Nazareth is "resurrection" and "life"?'
He spoke with the most painful diffidence, the most wistful tenderness.
There was a pause. Then Catherine said, in a rigid constrained voice,—
'If the Gospels are not true in fact, as history, as reality, I cannot see how they are true
      at all, or of any value.'
The next minute she rose, and, going to the little wooden dressing-table, she began to brush
      out and plait for the night her straight silky veil of hair. As she passed him Robert saw her
      face pale and set.
He sat quiet another moment or two, and then he went towards her and took her in his
      arms.
'Catherine,' he said to her, his lips trembling, 'am I never to speak my mind to you any
      more? Do you mean always to hold me at arm's length—to refuse always to hear what I have to
      say in defence of the change which has cost us both so much?'
She hesitated, trying hard to restrain herself. But it was of no use. She broke into
      tears—quiet but most bitter tears.
'Robert, I cannot! Oh! you must see I cannot. It is not because I am hard, but because I am
      weak. How can I stand up against you? I dare not—I dare not. If you were not yourself—not my
      husband——'
Her voice dropped. Robert guessed that at the bottom of her resistance there was an
      intolerable fear of what love might do with her if she once gave it an opening. He felt
      himself cruel, brutal, and yet an urgent sense of all that was at stake drove him on.
'I would not press or worry you, God knows!' he said, almost piteously, kissing her forehead
      as she lay against him. 'But remember, Catherine, I cannot put these things aside. I once
      thought I could—that I could fall back on my historical work, and leave religious matters
      alone as far as criticism was concerned. But I cannot. They fill my mind more and more. I feel
      more and more impelled to search them out, and to put my conclusions about them into shape.
      And all the time this is going on, are you and I to remain strangers to one another in all
      that concerns our truest life—are we, Catherine?'
He spoke in a low voice of intense feeling. She turned her face and pressed her lips to his
      hand. Both had the scene in the wood-path after her flight and return in their minds, and both
      were filled with a despairing sense of the difficulty of
       living, not through great crises, but through the detail of every day.
'Could you not work at other things?' she whispered.
He was silent, looking straight before him into the moonlit shimmer and white spectral hazes
      of the valley, his arms still round her.
'No!' he burst out at last; 'not till I have satisfied myself. I feel it burning within me,
      like a command from God, to work out the problem, to make it clearer to myself—and to others,'
      he added deliberately.
Her heart sank within her. The last words called up before her a dismal future of
      controversy and publicity, in which at every step she would be condemning her husband.
'And all this time, all these years, perhaps,' he went on—before, in her perplexity, she
      could find words,—'is my wife never going to let me speak freely to her? Am I to act, think,
      judge, without her knowledge? Is she to know less of me than a friend, less even than the
      public for whom I write or speak?'
It seemed intolerable to him, all the more that every moment they stood there together it
      was being impressed upon him that in fact this was what she meant, what she had contemplated
      from the beginning.
'Robert, I cannot defend myself against you,' she cried, again clinging to him. 'Oh, think
      for me! You know what I feel; that I dare not risk what is not mine!'
He kissed her again, and then moved away from her to the window. It began to be plain to him
      that his effort was merely futile, and had better not have been made. But his heart was very
      sore.
'Do you ever ask yourself,' he said presently, looking steadily into the night—no, I don't
      think you can, Catherine—what part the reasoning faculty, that faculty which marks us out from
      the animal, was meant to play in life? Did God give it to us simply that you might trample
      upon it and ignore it, both in yourself and me?'
She had dropped into a chair, and sat with clasped hands, her hair falling about her white
      dressing-gown, and framing the nobly-featured face blanched by the moonlight. She did not
      attempt a reply, but the melancholy of an invincible resolution, which was, so to speak, not
      her own doing, but rather was like a necessity imposed upon her from outside, breathed through
      her silence.
He turned and looked at her. She raised her arms, and the gesture reminded him for a moment
      of the Donatello figure in the Murewell library—the same delicate austere beauty, the same
      tenderness, the same underlying reserve. He took her outstretched hands and held them against
      his breast. His hotly-beating heart told him that he was perfectly right, and that to accept
      the barriers she was setting up would impoverish all their future life together. But he could
      not struggle with
       the woman on whom he had already inflicted so severe a practical trial. Moreover,
      he felt strangely as he stood there the danger of rousing in her those illimitable
      possibilities of the religious temper, the dread of which had once before risen spectre-like
      in his heart.
So once more he yielded. She rewarded him with all the charm, all the delightfulness, of
      which under the circumstances she was mistress. They wandered up the Rhone valley, through the
      St. Gothard, and spent a fortnight between Como and Lugano. During these days her one thought
      was to revive and refresh him, and he let her tend him, and lent himself to the various heroic
      futilities by which she would try—as part of her nursing mission—to make the future look less
      empty and their distress less real. Of course under all this delicate give and take both
      suffered; both felt that the promise of their marriage had failed them, and that they had come
      dismally down to a second best. But after all they were young, and the autumn was
      beautiful—and though they hurt each other, they were alone together and constantly,
      passionately, interested in each other. Italy, too, softened all things—even Catherine's
      English tone and temper. As long as the delicious luxury of the Italian autumn, with all its
      primitive pagan suggestiveness, was still round them; as long as they were still among the
      cities of the Lombard plain—that battle-ground and highway of nations, which roused all
      Robert's historical enthusiasm, and set him reading, discussing, thinking, in his old
      impetuous way, about something else than minute problems of Christian evidence,—the new-born
      friction between them was necessarily reduced to a minimum.
But with their return home, with their plunge into London life, the difficulties of the
      situation began to define themselves more sharply. In after years, one of Catherine's
      dreariest memories was the memory of their first instalment in the Bedford Square house.
      Robert's anxiety to make it pleasant and homelike was pitiful to watch. He had none of the
      modern passion for upholstery, and probably the vaguest notions of what was æsthetically
      correct. But during their furnishing days he was never tired of wandering about in search of
      pretty things—a rug, a screen, an engraving—which might brighten the rooms in which Catherine
      was to live. He would put everything in its place with a restless eagerness, and then
      Catherine would be called in, and would play her part bravely. She would smile and ask
      questions, and admire, and then when Robert had gone, she would move slowly to the window and
      look out at the great mass of the British Museum frowning beyond the little dingy strip of
      garden, with a sick longing in her heart for the Murewell cornfield, the wood-path, the
      village, the free air-bathed spaces of heath and common. Oh! this huge London, with its
      unfathomable poverty and its heartless
       wealth—how it oppressed and bewildered her! Its mere grime and squalor, its murky
      poisoned atmosphere, were a perpetual trial to the countrywoman brought up amid the dash of
      mountain streams and the scents of mountain pastures. She drooped physically for a time, as
      did the child.
But morally? With Catherine everything really depended on the moral state. She could have
      followed Robert to a London living with a joy and hope which would have completely deadened
      all these repulsions of the senses now so active in her. But without this inner glow, in the
      presence of the profound spiritual difference circumstance had developed between her and the
      man she loved, everything was a burden. Even her religion, though she clung to it with an
      ever-increasing tenacity, failed at this period to bring her much comfort. Every night it
      seemed to her that the day had been one long and dreary struggle to make something out of
      nothing; and in the morning the night, too, seemed to have been alive with conflict—All
       Thy waves and Thy storms have gone over me!
Robert guessed it all, and whatever remorseful love could do to soften such a strain and
      burden he tried to do. He encouraged her to find work among the poor; he tried in the
      tenderest ways to interest her in the great spectacle of London life which was already, in
      spite of yearning and regret, beginning to fascinate and absorb himself. But their standards
      were now so different that she was constantly shrinking from what attracted him, or painfully
      judging what was to him merely curious and interesting. He was really more and more oppressed
      by her intellectual limitations, though never consciously would he have allowed himself to
      admit them, and she was more and more bewildered by what constantly seemed to her a breaking
      up of principle, a relaxation of moral fibre.
And the work among the poor was difficult. Robert instinctively felt that for him to offer
      his services in charitable work to the narrow Evangelical, whose church Catherine had joined,
      would have been merely to invite rebuff. So that even in the love and care of the unfortunate
      they were separated. For he had not yet found a sphere of work, and, if he had, Catherine's
      invincible impulse in these matters was always to attach herself to the authorities and powers
      that be. He could only acquiesce when she suggested applying to Mr. Clarendon for some
      charitable occupation for herself.
After her letter to him, Catherine had an interview with the vicar at his home. She was
      puzzled by the start and sudden pause for recollection with which he received her name, the
      tone of compassion which crept into his talk with her, the pitying look and grasp of the hand
      with which he dismissed her. Then, as she walked home, it flashed upon her that she had seen a
      copy, some weeks old, of the Record lying on the good man's table, the very copy
      which contained Robert's name among the list of men who during the last ten years had thrown
      up the Anglican
       ministry. The delicate face flushed miserably from brow to chin. Pitied for being
      Robert's wife! Oh, monstrous!—incredible!
Meanwhile Robert, man-like, in spite of all the griefs and sorenesses of the position, had
      immeasurably the best of it. In the first place such incessant activity of mind as his is in
      itself both tonic and narcotic. It was constantly generating in him fresh purposes and hopes,
      constantly deadening regret, and pushing the old things out of sight. He was full of many
      projects, literary and social, but they were all in truth the fruits of one long experimental
      process, the passionate attempt of the reason to justify to itself the God in whom the heart
      believed. Abstract thought, as Mr. Grey saw, had had comparatively little to do with Elsmere's
      relinquishment of the Church of England. But as soon as the Christian bases of faith were
      overthrown, that faith had naturally to find for itself other supports and attachments. For
      faith itself—in God and a spiritual order—had been so wrought into the nature by years of
      reverent and adoring living that nothing could destroy it. With Elsmere, as with all men of
      religious temperament, belief in Christianity and faith in God had not at the outset been a
      matter of reasoning at all, but of sympathy, feeling, association, daily experience. Then the
      intellect had broken in, and destroyed or transformed the belief in Christianity. But after
      the crash, faith emerged as strong as ever, only craving and eager to make a fresh
      peace, a fresh compact with the reason.
Elsmere had heard Grey say long ago in one of the few moments of real intimacy he had
      enjoyed with him at Oxford, 'My interest in philosophy springs solely from the chance it
      offers me of knowing something more of God!' Driven by the same thirst he too threw himself
      into the same quest, pushing his way laboriously through the philosophical borderlands of
      science, through the ethical speculation of the day, through the history of man's moral and
      religious past. And while on the one hand the intellect was able to contribute an ever
      stronger support to the faith which was the man, on the other the sphere in him of a patient
      ignorance which abstains from all attempts at knowing what man cannot know, and substitutes
      trust for either knowledge or despair, was perpetually widening. 'I take my stand on
      conscience and the moral life!' was the upshot of it all. 'In them I find my God! As for all
      these various problems, ethical and scientific, which you press upon me, my pessimist friend,
      I, too, am bewildered; I, too, have no explanation to offer. But I trust and wait. In spite of
      them—beyond them—I have abundantly enough for faith—for hope—for action!'
We may quote a passage or two from some letters of his written at this time to that young
      Armitstead who had taken his place at Murewell, and was still there till Mowbray Elsmere
      should appoint a new man. Armitstead had been a college
       friend of Elsmere's. He was a High Churchman of a singularly gentle and delicate
      type, and the manner in which he had received Elsmere's story on the day of his arrival at
      Murewell had permanently endeared him to the teller of it. At the same time the defection from
      Christianity of a man who at Oxford had been to him the object of much hero-worship, and,
      since Oxford, an example of pastoral efficiency, had painfully affected young Armitstead, and
      he began a correspondence with Robert which was in many ways a relief to both. In Switzerland
      and Italy, when his wife's gentle inexorable silence became too oppressive to him, Robert
      would pour himself out in letters to Armitstead, and the correspondence did not altogether
      cease with his return to London. To the squire during the same period Elsmere also wrote
      frequently, but rarely or never on religious matters.
On one occasion Armitstead had been pressing the favourite Christian dilemma—Christianity or
      nothing. Inside Christianity, light and certainty; outside it, chaos. 'If it were not for the
      Gospels and the Church I should be a Positivist to-morrow. Your Theism is a mere arbitrary
      hypothesis, at the mercy of any rival philosophical theory. How, regarding our position as
      precarious, you should come to regard your own as stable, is to me incomprehensible!'
'What I conceive to be the vital difference between Theism and Christianity,' wrote Elsmere
      in reply, 'is that as an explanation of things Theism can never be disproved. At the
      worst it must always remain in the position of an alternative hypothesis, which the hostile
      man of science cannot destroy, though he is under no obligation to adopt it. Broadly speaking,
      it is not the facts which are in dispute, but the inference to be drawn from them.
'Now, considering the enormous complication of the facts, the Theistic inference will, to
      put it at the lowest, always have its place, always command respect. The man of science may
      not adopt it, but by no advance of science that I, at any rate, can foresee, can it be driven
      out of the field.
'Christianity is in a totally different position. Its grounds are not philosophical but
      literary and historical. It rests not upon all fact, but upon a special group of facts. It is,
      and will always remain, a great literary and historical problem, a question of documents
       and testimony. Hence, the Christian explanation is vulnerable in a way in which the
      Theistic explanation can never be vulnerable. The contention, at any rate, of persons in my
      position is: That to the man who has had the special training required, and in whom this
      training has not been neutralised by any overwhelming bias of temperament, it can be as
      clearly demonstrated that the miraculous Christian story rests on a tissue of mistake, as it
      can be demonstrated that the Isidorian Decretals were a forgery, or the correspondence of Paul
      and Seneca a pious fraud, or that the mediæval belief in
       witchcraft was the product of physical ignorance and superstition.'
'You say,' he wrote again, in another connection, to Armitstead from Milan, 'you say you
      think my later letters have been far too aggressive and positive. I, too, am astonished at
      myself. I do not know my own mood, it is so clear, so sharp, so combative. Is it the spectacle
      of Italy, I wonder—of a country practically without religion—the spectacle in fact of Latin
      Europe as a whole, and the practical Atheism in which it is ingulfed? My dear friend, the
      problem of the world at this moment is—how to find a religion?—some great conception
      which shall be once more capable, as the old were capable, of welding societies, and keeping
      man's brutish elements in check. Surely Christianity of the traditional sort is failing
      everywhere—less obviously with us, and in Teutonic Europe generally, but egregiously,
      notoriously, in all the Catholic countries. We talk complacently of the decline of Buddhism.
      But what have we to say of the decline of Christianity? And yet this last is infinitely more
      striking and more tragic, inasmuch as it affects a more important section of mankind. I, at
      any rate, am not one of those who would seek to minimise the results of this decline for human
      life, nor can I bring myself to believe that Positivism or "evolutional morality" will ever
      satisfy the race.
'In the period of social struggle which undeniably lies before us, both in the old and the
      new world, are we then to witness a war of classes, unsoftened by the ideal hopes, the ideal
      law, of faith? It looks like it. What does the artisan class, what does the town democracy
      throughout Europe, care any longer for Christian checks or Christian sanctions as they have
      been taught to understand them? Superstition, in certain parts of rural Europe, there is in
      plenty, but wherever you get intelligence and therefore movement, you get at once either
      indifference to, or a passionate break with, Christianity. And consider what it means, what it
      will mean, this Atheism of the great democracies which are to be our masters! The world has
      never seen anything like it; such spiritual anarchy and poverty combined with such material
      power and resource. Every society—Christian and non-Christian—has always till now had its
      ideal, of greater or less ethical value, its appeal to something beyond man. Has Christianity
      brought us to this: that the Christian nations are to be the first in the world's history to
      try the experiment of a life without faith—that life which you and I, at any rate, are agreed
      in thinking a life worthy only of the brute?
'Oh forgive me! These things must hurt you—they would have hurt me in old days—but they burn
      within me, and you bid me speak out. What if it be God Himself who is driving His painful
      lesson home to me, to you, to the world? What does it mean, this gradual growth of what we
      call infidelity, of criticism and science on the one hand, this gradual death of the old
      traditions on the other? Sin, you answer, the enmity of the
       human mind against God, the momentary triumph of Satan. And so you acquiesce,
      heavy-hearted, in God's present defeat, looking for vengeance and requital hereafter. Well, I
      am not so ready to believe in man's capacity to rebel against his Maker! Where you see ruin
      and sin, I see the urgent process of Divine education, God's steady ineluctable command "to
      put away childish things," the pressure of His spirit on ours towards new ways of worship and
      new forms of love!'
And after a while, it was with these 'new ways of worship and new forms of love' that the
      mind began to be perpetually occupied. The break with the old things was no sooner complete
      than the eager soul, incapable then, as always, of resting in negation or opposition, pressed
      passionately forward to a new synthesis, not only speculative, but practical. Before it rose
      perpetually the haunting vision of another palace of faith—another church or company of the
      faithful, which was to become the shelter of human aspiration amid the desolation and anarchy
      caused by the crashing of the old! How many men and women must have gone through the same
      strait as itself—how many must be watching with it through the darkness for the rising of a
      new City of God!
One afternoon, close upon Christmas, he found himself in Parliament Square, on his way
      towards Westminster Bridge and the Embankment. The beauty of a sunset sky behind the Abbey
      arrested him, and he stood leaning over the railings beside the Peel statue to look.
The day before he had passed the same spot with a German friend. His companion—a man of
      influence and mark in his own country, who had been brought up, however, in England, and knew
      it well—had stopped before the Abbey and had said to him with emphasis: 'I never find myself
      in this particular spot of London without a sense of emotion and reverence. Other people feel
      that in treading the Forum of Rome they are at the centre of human things. I am more thrilled
      by Westminster than Rome; your venerable Abbey is to me the symbol of a nationality to which
      the modern world owes obligations it can never repay. You are rooted deep in the past; you
      have also a future of infinite expansiveness stretching before you. Among European nations at
      this moment you alone have freedom in the true sense, you alone have religion. I would give a
      year of life to know what you will have made of your freedom and your religion two hundred
      years hence!'
As Robert recalled the words, the Abbey lay before him, wrapped in the bluish haze of the
      winter afternoon. Only the towers rose out of the mist, gray and black against the red bands
      of cloud. A pair of pigeons circled round them, as careless and free in flight as though they
      were alone with the towers and the sunset. Below, the streets were full of people; the
      omnibuses rolled to and fro; the lamps were just lit; lines of
       straggling figures, dark in the half light, were crossing the street here and
      there. And to all the human rush and swirl below, the quiet of the Abbey and the infinite red
      distances of sky gave a peculiar pathos and significance.
Robert filled his eye and sense, and then walked quickly away towards the Embankment.
      Carrying the poetry and grandeur of England's past with him, he turned his face eastward to
      the great new-made London on the other side of St. Paul's, the London of the democracy, of the
      nineteenth century, and of the future. He was wrestling with himself, a prey to one of those
      critical moments of life, when circumstance seems once more to restore to us the power of
      choice, of distributing a Yes or a No among the great solicitations which meet the human
      spirit on its path from silence to silence. The thought of his friend's reverence, and of his
      own personal debt towards the country to whose long travail of centuries he owed all his own
      joys and faculties, was hot within him.

'Here and here did England help me—how can I help England,—say!'

Ah! that vast chaotic London south and east of the great church! He already knew something
      of it. A Liberal clergyman there, settled in the very blackest, busiest heart of it, had
      already made him welcome on Mr. Grey's introduction. He had gone with this good man on several
      occasions through some little fraction of that teeming world, now so hidden and peaceful
      between the murky river mists and the cleaner light-filled grays of the sky. He had heard
      much, and pondered a good deal, the quick mind caught at once by the differences, some tragic,
      some merely curious and stimulating, between the monotonous life of his own rural folk, and
      the mad rush, the voracious hurry, the bewildering appearances and disappearances, the sudden
      ingulfments, of working London.
Moreover, he had spent a Sunday or two wandering among the East End churches. There, rather
      than among the streets and courts outside, as it had seemed to him, lay the tragedy of the
      city. Such emptiness, such desertion, such a hopeless breach between the great craving need
      outside and the boon offered it within! Here and there, indeed, a patch of bright coloured
      success, as it claimed to be, where the primitive tendency of man towards the organised
      excitement of religious ritual, visible in all nations and civilisations, had been appealed to
      with more energy and more results than usual. But in general, blank failure, or rather obvious
      want of success—as the devoted men now beating the void there were themselves the first to
      admit, with pain and patient submission to the inscrutable Will of God.
But is it not time we assured ourselves, he was always asking, whether God is still in truth
      behind the offer man is perpetually making to his brother man on His behalf? He was behind it
      once, and it had efficacy, had power. But now—what if all
       these processes of so-called destruction and decay were but the mere workings of
      that divine plastic force which is for ever moulding human society? What if these beautiful
      venerable things which had fallen from him, as from thousands of his fellows, represented, in
      the present stage of the world's history, not the props, but the hindrances, of man?
And if all these large things were true, as he believed, what should be the individual's
      part in this transition England? Surely, at the least, a part of plain sincerity of act and
      speech—a correspondence as perfect as could be reached between the inner faith and the outer
      word and deed. So much, at the least, was clearly required of him!
'Do not imagine, he said to himself, as though with a fierce dread of possible
      self-delusion, 'that it is in you to play any great, any commanding part. Shun the thought of
      it, if it were possible! But let me do what is given me to do! Here, in this human wilderness,
      may I spend whatever of time or energy or faculty may be mine, in the faithful attempt to help
      forward the new House of Faith that is to be, though my utmost efforts should but succeed in
      laying some obscure stone in still unseen foundations! Let me try and hand on to some other
      human soul, or souls, before I die, the truth which has freed, and which is now sustaining, my
      own heart. Can any man do more? Is not every man who feels any certainty in him whatever bound
      to do as much? What matter if the wise folk scoff, if even at times, and in a certain sense,
      one seems to one's self ridiculous—absurdly lonely and powerless! All great changes are
      preceded by numbers of sporadic, and as the bystander thinks, impotent efforts. But while the
      individual effort sinks, drowned perhaps in mockery, the general movement quickens, gathers
      force we know not how, and—

'While the tired wave vainly breaking,
Seems here no painful inch to gain,
Far back through creeks and inlets making,
Comes silent, flooding in the main!'

Darkness sank over the river; all the gray and purple distance with its dim edge of spires
      and domes against the sky, all the vague intervening blacknesses of street, or bridge, or
      railway station were starred and patterned with lights. The vastness, the beauty of the city
      filled him with a sense of mysterious attraction, and as he walked on with his face uplifted
      to it, it was as though he took his life in his hand and flung it afresh into the human
      gulf.
'What does it matter if one's work be raw and uncomely! All that lies outside the great
      organised traditions of an age must always look so. Let me bear my witness bravely, not
      spending life in speech, but not undervaluing speech—above all, not being ashamed or afraid of
      it, because other wise people may prefer a policy of silence. A man has but the one puny
       life, the one tiny spark of faith. Better be venturesome with both for God's sake,
      than over-cautious, over-thrifty. And—to his own Master he standeth or falleth!'
Plans of work of all kinds, literary and practical, thoughts of preaching in some bare
      hidden room to men and women orphaned and stranded like himself, began to crowd upon him. The
      old clerical instinct in him winced at some of them. Robert had nothing of the sectary about
      him by nature; he was always too deeply and easily affected by the great historic existences
      about him. But when the Oxford man or the ex-official of one of the most venerable and
      decorous of societies protested, the believer, or, if you will, the enthusiast, put the
      protest by.
And so the dream gathered substance and stayed with him, till at last he found himself at
      his own door. As he closed it behind him, Catherine came out into the pretty old hall from the
      dining-room.
'Robert, have you walked all the way?'
'Yes. I came along the Embankment. Such a beautiful evening!'
He slipped his arm inside hers, and they mounted the stairs together. She glanced at him
      wistfully. She was perfectly aware that these months were to him months of incessant travail
      of spirit, and she caught at this moment the old strenuous look of eye and brow she knew so
      well. A year ago, and every thought of his mind had been open to her—and now—she herself had
      shut them out—but her heart sank within her.
She turned and kissed him. He bent his head fondly over her. But inwardly all the ardour of
      his mood collapsed at the touch of her. For the protests of a world in arms can be withstood
      with joy, but the protest that steals into your heart, that takes love's garb and uses love's
       ways—there is the difficulty!
</div></body></text></TEI>