<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="34">
CHAPTER XXXIV
Meanwhile, as if to complete the circle of pain with which poor Catherine's life was
      compassed, it began to be plain to her that, in spite of the hard and mocking tone Rose
      generally adopted with regard to him, Edward Langham was constantly at the house in Lerwick
      Gardens, and that it was impossible he should be there so much unless in some way or other
      Rose encouraged it.
The idea of such a marriage—nay, of such a friendship—was naturally as repugnant as ever to
      her. It had been one of the bitterest moments of a bitter time when, at their first meeting
      after the crisis in her life, Langham, conscious of a sudden movement of pity for a woman he
      disliked, had pressed the hand she held out to him in a way which clearly showed her what was
      in his mind, and had then passed on to chat and smoke with Robert in the study, leaving her
      behind to realise the gulf that lay between the present and that visit of his to Murewell,
      when Robert and she had felt in unison towards him, his opinions, and his conduct to Rose, as
      towards everything else of importance in their life.
Now it seemed to her Robert must necessarily look at the matter differently, and she could
      not make up her mind to talk to him about it. In reality, his objections had never had the
      same basis as hers, and he would have given her as strong a support as ever, if she had asked
      for it. But she held her peace, and he, absorbed in other things, took no notice. Besides, he
      knew Langham too well. He had never been able to take Catherine's alarms seriously.
An attentive onlooker, however, would have admitted that this time, at any rate, they had
      their justification. Why Langham was so much in the Leyburns' drawing-room during these winter
      months was a question that several people asked—himself not least. He had not only pretended
      to forget Rose Leyburn during the eighteen months which had passed since their first
      acquaintance at Murewell—he had for all practical purposes forgotten her. It is only a small
      proportion of men and women who are capable of passion on the great scale at all; and
      certainly, as we have tried to show, Langham was not among them. He had had a passing moment
      of excitement at Murewell, soon put down, and followed by a week of extremely
       pleasant sensations, which, like most of his pleasures, had ended in reaction and
      self-abhorrence. He had left Murewell remorseful, melancholy, and ill at ease, but conscious,
      certainly, of a great relief that he and Rose Leyburn were not likely to meet again for
      long.
Then his settlement in London had absorbed him, as all such matters absorb men who have
      become the slaves of their own solitary habits, and in the joy of his new freedom, and the
      fresh zest for learning it had aroused in him, the beautiful unmanageable child who had
      disturbed his peace at Murewell was not likely to be more, but less, remembered. When he
      stumbled across her unexpectedly in the National Gallery, his determining impulse had been
      merely one of flight.
However, as he had written to Robert towards the beginning of his London residence, there
      was no doubt that his migration had made him for the time much more human, observant, and
      accessible. Oxford had become to him an oppression and a nightmare, and as soon as he had
      turned his back on it his mental lungs seemed once more to fill with air. He took his modest
      part in the life of the capital; happy in the obscurity afforded him by the crowd; rejoicing
      in the thought that his life and his affairs were once more his own, and the academical yoke
      had been slipped for ever.
It was in this mood of greater cheerfulness and energy that his fresh sight of Rose found
      him. For the moment, he was perhaps more susceptible than he ever could have been before to
      her young perfections, her beauty, her brilliancy, her provoking stimulating ways. Certainly,
      from that first afternoon onwards he became more and more restless to watch her, to be near
      her, to see what she made of herself and her gifts. In general, though it was certainly owing
      to her that he came so much, she took small notice of him. He regarded, or chose to regard,
      himself as a mere 'item'—something systematically overlooked and forgotten in the bustle of
      her days and nights. He saw that she thought badly of him, that the friendship he might have
      had was now proudly refused him, that their first week together had left a deep impression of
      resentment and hostility in her mind. And all the same he came; and she asked him! And
      sometimes, after an hour when she had been more difficult or more satirical than usual, ending
      notwithstanding with a little change of tone, a careless 'You will find us next Wednesday as
      usual; So-and-so is coming to play,' Langham would walk home in a state of feeling he did not
      care to analyse, but which certainly quickened the pace of life a good deal. She would not let
      him try his luck at friendship again, but in the strangest slightest ways did she not make him
      suspect every now and then that he was in some sort important to her, that he
      sometimes preoccupied her against her will; that her will, indeed, sometimes escaped her, and
      failed to control her manner to him?


It was not only his relations to the beauty, however, his interest in her career, or his
      perpetual consciousness of Mrs. Elsmere's cold dislike and disapproval of his presence in her
      mother's drawing-room, that accounted for Langham's heightened mental temperature this winter.
      The existence and the proceedings of Mr. Hugh Flaxman had a very considerable share in it.
'Tell me about Mr. Langham,' said Mr. Flaxman once to Agnes Leyburn, in the early days of
      his acquaintance with the family; 'is he an old friend?'
'Of Robert's,' replied Agnes, her cheerful impenetrable look fixed upon the speaker. 'My
      sister met him once for a week in the country at the Elsmeres'. My mother and I have been only
      just introduced to him.'
Hugh Flaxman pondered the information a little.
'Does he strike you as—well—what shall we say?—unusual?'
His smile struck one out of her.
'Even Robert might admit that,' she said demurely.
'Is Elsmere so attached to him? I own I was provoked just now by his tone about Elsmere. I
      was remarking on the evident physical and mental strain your brother-in-law had gone through,
      and he said with a nonchalance I cannot convey: "Yes, it is astonishing Elsmere
      should have ventured it. I confess I often wonder whether it was worth while." "Why?" said I,
      perhaps a little hotly. Well, he didn't know—wouldn't say. But I gathered that, according to
      him, Elsmere is still swathed in such an unconscionable amount of religion that the few rags
      and patches he has got rid of are hardly worth the discomfort of the change. It seemed to me
      the tone of the very cool spectator, rather than the friend. However—does your sister like
      him?'
'I don't know,' said Agnes, looking her questioner full in the face.
Hugh Flaxman's fair complexion flushed a little. He got up to go.
He is one of the most extraordinarily handsome persons I ever saw,' he remarked as he
      buttoned up his coat. 'Don't you think so?'
'Yes,' said Agnes dubiously, 'if he didn't stoop, and if he didn't in general look
      half-asleep.'
Hugh Flaxman departed more puzzled than ever as to the reason for the constant attendance of
      this uncomfortable anti-social person at the Leyburns' house. Being himself a man of very
      subtle and fastidious tastes, he could imagine that so original a suitor, with such eyes, such
      an intellectual reputation so well sustained by scantiness of speech and the most picturesque
      capacity for silence, might have attractions for a romantic and wilful girl. But
      where were the signs of it? Rose rarely talked to him, and was always ready to make him the
       target of a sub-acid raillery. Agnes was clearly indifferent to him, and Mrs.
      Leyburn equally clearly afraid of him. Mrs. Elsmere, too, seemed to dislike him, and yet there
      he was, week after week. Flaxman could not make it out.
Then he tried to explore the man himself. He started various topics with him—University
      reform, politics, music. In vain. In his most characteristic Oxford days Langham had never
      assumed a more wholesale ignorance of all subjects in heaven and earth, and never stuck more
      pertinaciously to the flattest forms of commonplace. Flaxman walked away at last boiling over.
      The man of parts masquerading as the fool is perhaps at least as exasperating as the fool
      playing at wisdom.
However, he was not the only person irritated. After one of these fragments of conversation
      Langham also walked rapidly home in a state of most irrational petulance, his hands thrust
      with energy into the pockets of his overcoat.
'No, my successful aristocrat, you shall not have everything your own way so easily with me
      or with her! You may break me, but you shall not play upon me. And as for her, I will
      see it out—I will see it out!'
And he stiffened himself as he walked, feeling life electric all about him, and a strange
      new force tingling in every vein.
Meanwhile, however, Mr. Flaxman was certainly having a good deal of his own way. Since the
      moment when his aunt, Lady Charlotte, had introduced him to Miss Leyburn—watching him the
      while with a half-smile which soon broadened into one of sly triumph—Hugh Flaxman had
      persuaded himself that country houses are intolerable even in the shooting season, and that
      London is the only place of residence during the winter for the man who aspires to govern his
      life on principles of reason. Through his influence and that of his aunt, Rose and Agnes—Mrs.
      Leyburn never went out—were being carried into all the high life that London can supply in
      November and January. Wealthy, high-born, and popular, he was gradually devoting his
      advantages in the freest way to Rose's service. He was an excellent musical amateur, and he
      was always proud to play with her; he had a fine country house, and the little rooms on
      Campden Hill were almost always filled with flowers from his gardens; he had a famous musical
      library, and its treasures were lavished on the girl violinist; he had a singularly wide
      circle of friends, and with his whimsical energy he was soon inclined to make kindness to the
      two sisters the one test of a friend's goodwill.
He was clearly touched by Rose; and what was to prevent his making an impression on her? To
      her sex he had always been singularly attractive. Like his sister, he had all sorts of bright
      impulses and audacities flashing and darting about him. He had a certain hauteur with
      men, and could play the aristocrat when he pleased, for all his philosophical radicalism. But
      with women he was the most delightful mixture of deference
       and high spirits. He loved the grace of them, the daintiness of their dress, the
      softness of their voices. He would have done anything to please them, anything to save them
      pain. At twenty-five, when he was still 'Citizen Flaxman' to his college friends, and in the
      first fervours of a poetic defiance of prejudice and convention, he had married a gamekeeper's
      pretty daughter. She had died with her child—died, almost, poor thing! of happiness and
      excitement—of the over-greatness of Heaven's boon to her. Flaxman had adored her, and death
      had tenderly embalmed a sentiment to which life might possibly have been less kind. Since then
      he had lived in music, letters, and society, refusing out of a certain fastidiousness to enter
      politics, but welcomed and considered, wherever he went, tall, good-looking, distinguished,
      one of the most agreeable and courted of men, and perhaps the richest parti in
      London.
Still, in spite of it all, Langham held his ground—Langham would see it out! And indeed
      Flaxman's footing with the beauty was by no means clear—least of all to himself. She evidently
      liked him, but she bantered him a good deal; she would not be the least subdued or dazzled by
      his birth and wealth, or by those of his friends; and if she allowed him to provide her with
      pleasures, she would hardly ever take his advice, or knowingly consult his tastes.
Meanwhile she tormented them both a good deal by the artistic acquaintance she gathered
      about her. Mrs. Pierson's world, as we have said, contained a good many dubious odds and ends,
      and she had handed them all over to Rose. The Leyburns' growing intimacy with Mr. Flaxman and
      his circle, and through them with the finer types of the artistic life, would naturally and by
      degrees have carried them away somewhat from this earlier circle if Rose would have allowed
      it. But she clung persistently to its most unpromising specimens, partly out of a natural
      generosity of feeling, but partly also for the sake of that opposition her soul loved, her
      poor prickly soul, full under all her gaiety and indifference of the most desperate doubt and
      soreness,—opposition to Catherine, opposition to Mr. Flaxman, but, above all, opposition to
      Langham.
Flaxman could often avenge himself on her—or rather on the more obnoxious members of her
      following—by dint of a faculty for light and stinging repartee which would send her, flushed
      and biting her lip, to have her laugh out in private. But Langham for a long time was
      defenceless. Many of her friends in his opinion were simply pathological curiosities—their
      vanity was so frenzied, their sensibilities so morbidly developed. He felt a doctor's interest
      in them coupled with more than a doctor's scepticism as to all they had to say about
      themselves. But Rose would invite them, would assume a quasi-intimacy with them; and
      Langham as well as everybody else had to put up with it.

Even the trodden worm, however—— And there came a time when the concentration of a
      good many different lines of feeling in Langham's mind betrayed itself at last in a sharp and
      sudden openness. It began to seem to him that she was specially bent often on
      tormenting him by these caprices of hers, and he vowed to himself finally, with an outburst of
      irritation due in reality to a hundred causes, that he would assert himself, that he would
      make an effort at any rate to save her from her own follies.
One afternoon, at a crowded musical party, to which he had come much against his will, and
      only in obedience to a compulsion he dared not analyse, she asked him in passing if he would
      kindly find Mr. MacFadden, a bass singer, whose name stood next on the programme, and who was
      not to be seen in the drawing-room.
Langham searched the dining-room and the hall, and at last found Mr. MacFadden—a fair,
      flabby, unwholesome youth—in the little study or cloak-room, in a state of collapse, flanked
      by whisky and water, and attended by two frightened maids, who handed over their charge to
      Langham and fled.
Then it appeared that the great man had been offended by a change in the programme, which
      hurt his vanity, had withdrawn from the drawing-room on the brink of hysterics, had called for
      spirits, which had been provided for him with great difficulty by Mrs. Leyburn's maids, and
      was there drinking himself into a state of rage and rampant dignity which would soon have
      shown itself in a melodramatic return to the drawing-room, and a public refusal to sing at all
      in a house where art had been outraged in his person.
Some of the old disciplinary instincts of the Oxford tutor awoke in Langham at the sight of
      the creature, and, with a prompt sternness which amazed himself, and nearly set MacFadden
      whimpering, he got rid of the man, shut the hall door on him, and went back to the
      drawing-room.
'Well?' said Rose in anxiety, coming up to him.
'I have sent him away,' he said briefly, an eye of unusual quickness and brightness looking
      down upon her; 'he was in no condition to sing. He chose to be offended, apparently, because
      he was put out of his turn, and has been giving the servants trouble.'
Rose flushed deeply, and drew herself up with a look half trouble, half defiance, at
      Langham.
'I trust you will not ask him again,' he said, with the same decision. 'And if I might say
      so there are one or two people still here whom I should like to see you exclude at the same
      time.'
They had withdrawn into the bow window out of earshot of the rest of the room. Langham's
      look turned significantly towards a group near the piano. It contained one or two men whom he
      regarded as belonging to a low type; men who, if it suited their purpose, would be quite ready
      to tell or invent malicious stories of the girl they were now flattering, and whose
       standards and instincts represented a coarser world than Rose in reality knew
      anything about.
Her eyes followed his.
'I know,' she said petulantly, 'that you dislike artists. They are not your world. They are
      mine.'
'I dislike artists? What nonsense, too! To me personally these men's ways don't matter in
      the least. They go their road and I mine. But I deeply resent any danger of discomfort and
      annoyance to you!'
He still stood frowning, a glow of indignant energy showing itself in his attitude, his
      glance. She could not know that he was at that moment vividly realising the drunken scene that
      might have taken place in her presence if he had not succeeded in getting that man safely out
      of the house. But she felt that he was angry, and mostly angry with her, and there was
      something so piquant and unexpected in his anger!
'I am afraid,' she said, with a queer sudden submissiveness, 'you have been going through
      something very disagreeable. I am very sorry. Is it my fault?' she added, with a whimsical
      flash of eye, half fun, half serious.
He could hardly believe his ears.
'Yes, it is your fault, I think!' he answered her, amazed at his own boldness. 'Not that
       I was annoyed—Heavens! what does that matter?—but that you and your mother and
      sister were very near an unpleasant scene. You will not take advice, Miss Leyburn,—you will
      take your own way in spite of what any one else can say or hint to you, and some day you will
      expose yourself to annoyance when there is no one near to protect you!'
'Well, if so, it won't be for want of a mentor,' she said, dropping him a mock curtsey. But
      her lip trembled under its smile, and her tone had not lost its gentleness.
At this moment Mr. Flaxman, who had gradually established himself as the joint leader of
      these musical afternoons, came forward to summon Rose to a quartette. He looked from one to
      the other, a little surprise penetrating through his suavity of manner.
'Am I interrupting you?'
'Not at all,' said Rose; then, turning back to Langham, she said in a hurried whisper:
      'Don't say anything about the wretched man; it would make mamma nervous. He shan't come here
      again.'
Mr. Flaxman waited till the whisper was over, and then led her off, with a change of manner
      which she immediately perceived, and which lasted for the rest of the evening.
Langham went home, and sat brooding over the fire. Her voice had not been so kind, her look
      so womanly, for months. Had she been reading Shirley, and would she have liked him to
      play Louis Moore? He went into a fit of silent convulsive laughter as the idea occurred to
      him.


Some secret instinct made him keep away from her for a time. At last, one Friday afternoon,
      as he emerged from the Museum, where he had been collating the MSS. of some obscure
      Alexandrian, the old craving returned with added strength, and he turned involuntarily
      westward.
An acquaintance of his, recently made in the course of work at the Museum, a young Russian
      professor, ran after him, and walked with him. Presently they passed a poster on the wall,
      which contained in enormous letters the announcement of Madame Desforêts's approaching visit
      to London, a list of plays, and the dates of performances.
The young Russian suddenly stopped and stood pointing at the advertisement, with shaking
      derisive finger, his eyes aflame, the whole man quivering with what looked like antagonism and
      hate.
Then he broke into a fierce flood of French. Langham listened till they had passed
      Piccadilly, passed the Park, and till the young savant turned southwards towards his
      Brompton lodgings.
Then Langham slowly climbed Campden Hill, meditating. His thoughts were an odd mixture of
      the things he had just heard, and of a scene at Murewell long ago when a girl had denounced
      him for 'calumny.'
At the door of Lerwick Gardens he was informed that Mrs. Leyburn was upstairs with an attack
      of bronchitis. But the servant thought the young ladies were at home. Would he come in? He
      stood irresolute a moment, then went in on a pretext of 'inquiry.'
The maid threw open the drawing-room door, and there was Rose sitting well into the fire—for
      it was a raw February afternoon—with a book.
She received him with all her old hard brightness. He was, indeed, instantly sorry that he
      had made his way in. Tyrant! was she displeased because he had slipped his chain for rather
      longer than usual?
However, he sat down, delivered his book, and they talked first about her mother's illness.
      They had been anxious, she said, but the doctor, who had just taken his departure, had now
      completely reassured them.
'Then you will be able probably after all to put in an appearance at Lady Charlotte's this
      evening?' he asked her.
The omnivorous Lady Charlotte of course had made acquaintance with him in the Leyburns'
      drawing-room, as she did with everybody who crossed her path, and three days before he had
      received a card from her for this evening.
'Oh yes! But I have had to miss a rehearsal this afternoon. That concert at Searle House is
      becoming a great nuisance.'
'It will be a brilliant affair, I suppose. Princes on one side of you—and Albani on the
      other. I see they have given you the most conspicuous part as violinist.'


'Yes,' she said with a little satirical tightening of the lip. 'Yes—I suppose I ought to be
      much flattered.'
'Of course,' he said, smiling, but embarrassed. 'To many people you must be at this moment
      one of the most enviable persons in the world. A delightful art—and every opportunity to make
      it tell!'
There was a pause. She looked into the fire.
'I don't know whether it is a delightful art,' she said presently, stifling a little yawn.
      'I believe I am getting very tired of London. Sometimes I think I shouldn't be very sorry to
      find myself suddenly spirited back to Burwood!'
Langham gave vent to some incredulous interjection. He had apparently surprised her in a fit
      of ennui which was rare with her.
'Oh no, not yet!' she said suddenly, with a return of animation. 'Madame Desforêts comes
      next week, and I am to see her.' She drew herself up and turned a beaming face upon him. Was
      there a shaft of mischief in her eye? He could not tell. The firelight was perplexing.
'You are to see her?' he said slowly. 'Is she coming here?'
'I hope so. Mrs. Pierson is to bring her. I want mamma to have the amusement of seeing her.
      My artistic friends are a kind of tonic to her—they excite her so much. She regards them as a
      sort of show—much as you do, in fact, only in a more charitable fashion.'
But he took no notice of what she was saying.
'Madame Desforêts is coming here?' he sharply repeated, bending forward, a curious accent in
      his tone.
'Yes!' she replied, with apparent surprise. Then with a careless smile: 'Oh, I remember when
      we were at Murewell, you were exercised that we should know her. Well, Mr. Langham, I told you
      then that you were only echoing unworthy gossip. I am in the same mind still. I have seen her,
      and you haven't. To me she is the greatest actress in the world, and an ill-used woman to
      boot!'
Her tone had warmed with every sentence. It struck him that she had wilfully brought up the
      topic—that it gave her pleasure to quarrel with him.
He put down his hat deliberately, got up, and stood with his back to the fire. She looked up
      at him curiously. But the dark regular face was almost hidden from her.
'It is strange,' he said slowly, 'very strange—that you should have told me this at this
      moment! Miss Leyburn, a great deal of the truth about Madame Desforêts I could neither tell,
      nor could you hear. There are charges against her proved in open court, again and again, which
      I could not even mention in your presence. But one thing I can speak of. Do you know the story
      of the sister at St. Petersburg?'
'I know no stories against Madame Desforêts,' said Rose
       loftily, her quickened breath responding to the energy of his tone. 'I have always
      chosen not to know them.'
'The newspapers were full of this particular story just before Christmas. I should have
      thought it must have reached you.'
'I did not see it,' she replied stiffly; 'and I cannot see what good purpose is to be served
      by your repeating it to me, Mr. Langham.'
Langham could have smiled at her petulance, if he had not for once been determined and in
      earnest.
'You will let me tell it, I hope?' he said quietly. 'I will tell it so that it shall not
      offend your ears. As it happens, I myself thought it incredible at the time. But, by an odd
      coincidence, it has just this afternoon been repeated to me by a man who was an eyewitness of
      part of it.'
Rose was silent. Her attitude was hauteur itself, but she made no further active
      opposition.
'Three months ago,' he began, speaking with some difficulty, but still with a suppressed
      force of feeling which amazed his hearer, 'Madame Desforêts was acting in St. Petersburg. She
      had with her a large company, and amongst them her own young sister, Elise Romey, a girl of
      eighteen. This girl had been always kept away from Madame Desforêts by her parents, who had
      never been sufficiently consoled by their eldest daughter's artistic success for the infamy of
      her life.'
Rose started indignantly. Langham gave her no time to speak.
'Elise Romey, however, had developed a passion for the stage. Her parents were
      respectable—and you know young girls in France are brought up strictly. She knew next to
      nothing of her sister's escapades. But she knew that she was held to be the greatest actress
      in Europe—the photographs in the shops told her that she was beautiful. She conceived a
      romantic passion for the woman whom she had last seen when she was a child of five, and
      actuated partly by this hungry affection, partly by her own longing wish to become an actress,
      she escaped from home and joined Madame Desforêts in the South of France. Madame Desforêts
      seems at first to have been pleased to have her. The girl's adoration pleased her vanity. Her
      presence with her gave her new opportunities of posing. I believe,' and Langham gave a little
      dry laugh, 'they were photographed together at Marseilles with their arms round each other's
      necks, and the photograph had an immense success. However, on the way to St. Petersburg,
      difficulties arose. Elise was pretty, in a blonde childish way, and she caught the
      attention of the jeune premier of the company, a man'—the speaker became somewhat
      embarrassed—'whom Madame Desforêts seems to have regarded as her particular property. There
      were scenes at different towns on the journey. Elise became frightened—wanted to go home. But
      the elder sister, having begun tormenting her, seems to have determined to keep her hold on
       her, as a cat keeps and tortures a mouse—mainly for the sake of annoying the man of
      whom she was jealous. They arrived at St. Petersburg in the depth of winter. The girl was worn
      out with travelling, unhappy, and ill. One night in Madame Desforêts's apartment there was a
      supper party, and after it a horrible quarrel. No one exactly knows what happened. But towards
      twelve o'clock that night Madame Desforêts turned her young sister in evening dress, a light
      shawl round her, out into the snowy streets of St. Petersburg, barred the door behind her, and
      revolver in hand dared the wretched man who had caused the fracas to follow her.'
Rose sat immovable. She had grown pale, but the firelight was not revealing.
Langham turned away from her towards the blaze, holding out his hands to it
      mechanically.
'The poor child,' he said, after a pause, in a lower voice, 'wandered about for some hours.
      It was a frightful night—the great capital was quite strange to her. She was insulted—fled
      this way and that—grew benumbed with cold and terror, and was found unconscious in the early
      morning under the archway of a house some two miles from her sister's lodgings.'
There was a dead silence. Then Rose drew a long quivering breath.
'I do not believe it!' she said passionately. 'I cannot believe it!'
'It was amply proved at the time,' said Langham drily, 'though of course Madame Desforêts
      tried to put her own colour on it. But I told you I had private information. On one of the
      floors of the house where Elise Romey was picked up, lived a young university professor. He is
      editing an important Greek text, and has lately had business at the Museum. I made friends
      with him there. He walked home with me this afternoon, saw the announcement of Madame
      Desforêts's coming, and poured out the story. He and his wife nursed the unfortunate girl with
      devotion. She lived just a week, and died of inflammation of the lungs. I never in my life
      heard anything so pitiful as his description of her delirium, her terror, her appeals, her
      shivering misery of cold.'
There was a pause.
'She is not a woman,' he said presently, between his teeth. 'She is a wild beast.'
Still there was silence, and still he held out his hand to the flame which Rose too was
      staring at. At last he turned round.
'I have told you a shocking story,' he said hurriedly. 'Perhaps I ought not to have done it.
      But, as you sat there talking so lightly, so gaily, it suddenly became to me utterly
      intolerable that that woman should ever sit here in this room—talk to you—call you by your
      name—laugh with you—touch your hand! Not even your wilfulness shall carry you so far—you
       shall not do it!'


He hardly knew what he said. He was driven on by a passionate sense of physical repulsion to
      the notion of any contact between her pure fair youth and something malodorous and corrupt.
      And there was besides a wild unique excitement in claiming for once to stay—to control
      her.
Rose lifted her head slowly. The fire was bright. He saw the tears in her eyes, tears of
      intolerable pity for another girl's awful story. But through the tears something gleamed—a
      kind of exultation—the exultation which the magician feels when he has called spirits from the
      vasty deep, and after long doubt and difficult invocation they rise at last before his
      eyes.
'I will never see her again,' she said in a low wavering voice, but she too was hardly
      conscious of her own words. Their looks were on each other; the ruddy capricious light touched
      her glowing cheeks, her straight-lined grace, her white hand. Suddenly from the gulf of
      another's misery into which they had both been looking there had sprung up, by the strange
      contrariety of human things, a heat and intoxication of feeling, wrapping them round, blotting
      out the rest of the world from them like a golden mist. 'Be always thus!' her parted lips, her
      liquid eyes were saying to him. His breath seemed to fail him; he was lost in
      bewilderment.
There were sounds outside—Catherine's voice. He roused himself with a supreme effort.
'To-night—at Lady Charlotte's?'
'To-night,' she said, and held out her hand.
A sudden madness seized him—he stooped—his lips touched it—it was hastily drawn away, and
      the door opened.
</div></body></text></TEI>