<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III
The festal tea had begun, and Mrs. Thornburgh was presiding. Opposite to her, on the vicar's
      left, sat the formidable rector's wife. Poor Mrs. Thornburgh had said to herself as she
      entered the room on the arm of Mr. Mayhew, the incumbent of the neighbouring valley of
      Shanmoor, that the first coup d'œil was good. The flowers had been arranged in the
      afternoon by Rose; Sarah's exertions had made the silver shine again; a pleasing odour of good
      food underlay the scent of the bluebells and fern; and what with the snowy table-linen, and
      the pretty dresses and bright faces of the younger people, the room seemed to be full of an
      incessant play of crisp and delicate colour.


But just as the vicar's wife was sinking into her seat with a little sigh of wearied
      satisfaction, she caught sight suddenly of an eye-glass at the other end of the table slowly
      revolving in a large and jewelled hand. The judicial eye behind the eye-glass travelled round
      the table, lingering, as it seemed to Mrs. Thornburgh's excited consciousness, on every spot
      where cream or jelly or meringue should have been and was not. When it dropped with a
      harsh little click, the hostess, unable to restrain herself, rushed into desperate
      conversation with Mr. Mayhew, giving vent to incoherencies in the course of the first act of
      the meal which did but confirm her neighbour—a grim, uncommunicative person—in his own
      devotion to a policy of silence. Meanwhile the vicar was grappling on very unequal terms with
      Mrs. Seaton. Mrs. Leyburn had fallen to young Elsmere. Catherine Leyburn was paired off with
      Dr. Baker, Agnes with Mr. Mayhew's awkward son—a tongue-tied youth, lately an unattached
      student at Oxford, but now relegated, owing to an invincible antipathy to Greek verbs, to his
      native air, till some other opening into the great world should be discovered for him.
Rose was on Robert Elsmere's right. Agnes had coaxed her into a white dress as being the
      least startling garment she possessed, and she was like a Stothard picture with her high
      waist, her blue sash ribbon, her slender neck and brilliant head. She had already cast many
      curious glances at the Thornburghs' guest. 'Not a prig, at any rate,' she thought to herself
      with satisfaction, 'so Agnes is quite wrong.'
As for the young man, who was, to begin with, in that state which so often follows on the
      long confinement of illness, when the light seems brighter and scents keener and experience
      sharper than at other times, he was inwardly confessing that Mrs. Thornburgh had not been
      romancing. The vivid creature at his elbow, with her still unsoftened angles and movements,
      was in the first dawn of an exceptional beauty; the plain sister had struck him before supper
      in the course of twenty minutes' conversation as above the average in point of manners and
      talk. As to Miss Leyburn, he had so far only exchanged a bow with her, but he was watching her
      now, as he sat opposite to her, out of his quick observant eyes.
She, too, was in white. As she turned to speak to the youth at her side, Elsmere caught the
      fine outline of the head, the unusually clear and perfect moulding of the brow, nose, and
      upper lip. The hollows in the cheeks struck him, and the way in which the breadth of the
      forehead somewhat overbalanced the delicacy of the mouth and chin. The face, though still
      quite young, and expressing a perfect physical health, had the look of having been polished
      and refined away to its foundations. There was not an ounce of superfluous flesh on it, and
      not a vestige of Rose's peach-like bloom. Her profile, as he saw it now, had the firmness, the
      clear whiteness, of a profile on a Greek gem.
She was actually making that silent, awkward lad talk!
       Robert, who, out of his four years' experience as an Oxford tutor, had an abundant
      compassion for and understanding of such beings as young Mayhew, watched her with a pleased
      amusement, wondering how she did it. What? Had she got him on carpentering,
      engineering—discovered his weak point? Water-wheels, inventors, steam-engines—and the lumpish
      lad all in a glow, talking away nineteen to the dozen. What tact, what kindness in her
      gray-blue eyes!
But he was interrupted by Mrs. Seaton, who was perfectly well aware that she had beside her
      a stranger of some prestige, an Oxford man, and a member, besides, of a well-known Sussex
      county family. She was a large and commanding person, clad in black moiré silk. She
      wore a velvet diadem, Honiton lace lappets, and a variety of chains, beads, and bangles
      bestrewn about her that made a tinkling as she moved. Fixing her neighbour with a bland
      majesty of eye, she inquired of him if he were 'any relation of Sir Mowbray Elsmere?' Robert
      replied that Sir Mowbray Elsmere was his father's cousin, and the patron of the living to
      which he had just been appointed. Mrs. Seaton then graciously informed him that long ago—'when
      I was a girl in my native Hampshire'—her family and Sir Mowbray Elsmere had been on intimate
      terms. Her father had been devoted to Sir Mowbray. 'And I,' she added, with an evident though
      lofty desire to please, 'retain an inherited respect, sir, for your name.'
Robert bowed, but it was not clear from his look that the rector's wife had made an
      impression. His general conception of his relative and patron Sir Mowbray—who had been for
      many years the family black sheep—was, indeed, so far removed from any notions of 'respect,'
      that he had some difficulty in keeping his countenance under the lady's look and pose. He
      would have been still more entertained had he known the nature of the intimacy to which she
      referred. Mrs. Seaton's father, in his capacity of solicitor in a small country town, had
      acted as electioneering agent for Sir Mowbray (then plain Mr.) Elsmere on two occasions—in
      18—, when his client had been triumphantly returned at a bye-election; and two years later,
      when a repetition of the tactics, so successful in the previous contest, led to a petition,
      and to the disappearance of the heir to the Elsmere property from parliamentary life.
Of these matters, however, he was ignorant, and Mrs. Seaton did not enlighten him. Drawing
      herself up a little, and proceeding in a more neutral tone than before, she proceeded to put
      him through a catechism on Oxford, alternately cross-examining him and expounding to him her
      own views and her husband's on the functions of Universities. She and the Archdeacon conceived
      that the Oxford authorities were mainly occupied in ruining the young men's health by
      over-examination, and poisoning their minds by free-thinking opinions. In her belief, if it
      went on, the mothers of England would refuse
       to send their sons to these ancient but deadly resorts. She looked at him sternly
      as she spoke, as though defying him to be flippant in return. And he, indeed, did his polite
      best to be serious.
But it somewhat disconcerted him in the middle to find Miss Leyburn's eyes upon him. And
      undeniably there was a spark of laughter in them, quenched, as soon as his glance crossed
      hers, under long lashes. How that spark had lit up the grave, pale face! He longed to provoke
      it again, to cross over to her and say, 'What amused you? Do you think me very young and
      simple? Tell me about these people.'
But, instead, he made friends with Rose. Mrs. Seaton was soon engaged in giving the vicar
      advice on his parochial affairs, an experience which generally ended by the appearance of
      certain truculent elements in one of the mildest of men. So Robert was free to turn to his
      girl neighbour and ask her what people meant by calling the Lakes rainy.
'I understand it is pouring at Oxford. To-day your sky here has been without a cloud, and
      your rivers are running dry.'
'And you have mastered our climate in twenty-four hours, like the tourists—isn't it?—that do
      the Irish question in three weeks?'
'Not the answer of a bread-and-butter miss,' he thought to himself, amused, 'and yet what a
      child it looks.'
He threw himself into a war of words with her, and enjoyed it extremely. Her brilliant
      colouring, her gestures as fresh and untamed as the movements of the leaping river outside,
      the mixture in her of girlish pertness and ignorance with the promise of a remarkable general
      capacity, made her a most taking, provoking creature. Mrs. Thornburgh—much recovered in mind
      since Dr. Baker had praised the pancakes by which Sarah had sought to prove to her mistress
      the superfluity of naughtiness involved in her recourse to foreign cooks—watched the young man
      and maiden with a face which grew more and more radiant. The conversation in the garden had
      not pleased her. Why should people always talk of Catherine; Mrs. Thornburgh stood in awe of
      Catherine and had given her up in despair. It was the other two whose fortunes, as possibly
      directed by her, filled her maternal heart with sympathetic emotion.
Suddenly in the midst of her satisfaction she had a rude shock. What on earth was the vicar
      doing? After they had got through better than any one could have hoped, thanks to a discreet
      silence and Sarah's makeshifts, there was the master of the house pouring the whole tale of
      his wife's aspirations and disappointment into Mrs. Seaton's ear! If it were ever allowable to
      rush upon your husband at table and stop his mouth with a dinner napkin, Mrs. Thornburgh could
      at this moment have performed such a feat. She nodded and coughed and fidgeted in vain!
The vicar's confidences were the result of a fit of nervous
       exasperation. Mrs. Seaton had just embarked upon an account of 'our charming time
      with Lord Fleckwood.' Now Lord Fleckwood was a distant cousin of Archdeacon Seaton, and the
      great magnate of the neighbourhood, not, however, a very respectable magnate. Mr. Thornburgh
      had heard accounts of Lupton Castle from Mrs. Seaton on at least half a dozen different
      occasions. Privately he believed them all to refer to one visit, an event of immemorial
      antiquity periodically brought up to date by Mrs. Seaton's imagination. But the vicar was a
      timid man, without the courage of his opinions, and in his eagerness to stop the flow of his
      neighbour's eloquence he could think of no better device, or more suitable rival subject, than
      to plunge into the story of the drunken carrier, and the pastry still reposing on the counter
      at Randall's.
He blushed, good man, when he was well in it. His wife's horrified countenance embarrassed
      him. But anything was better than Lord Fleckwood. Mrs. Seaton listened to him with the
      slightest smile on her formidable lip. The story was pleasing to her.
'At least, my dear sir,' she said when he paused, nodding her diademed head with stately
      emphasis, 'Mrs. Thornburgh's inconvenience may have one good result. You can now make an
      example of the carrier. It is our special business, as my husband always says, who are in
      authority, to bring their low vices home to these people.'
The vicar fidgeted in his chair. What ineptitude had he been guilty of now! By way of
      avoiding Lord Fleckwood he might have started Mrs. Seaton on teetotalism. Now if there was one
      topic on which this awe-inspiring woman was more awe-inspiring than another it was on the
      topic of teetotalism. The vicar had already felt himself a criminal as he drank his modest
      glass of claret under her eye.
'Oh, the drunkenness about here is pretty bad,' said Dr. Baker, from the other end of the
      table. 'But there are plenty of worse things in these valleys. Besides, what person in his
      senses would think of trying to disestablish John Backhouse? He and his queer brother are as
      much a feature of the valley as High Fell. We have too few originals left to be so very
      particular about trifles.'
'Trifles?' repeated Mrs. Seaton in a deep voice, throwing up her eyes. But she would not
      venture an argument with Dr. Baker. He had all the cheery self-confidence of the old
      established local doctor, who knows himself to be a power, and neither Mrs. Seaton nor her
      restless intriguing little husband had ever yet succeeded in putting him down.
'You must see these two old characters,' said Dr. Baker to Elsmere across the table. 'They
      are relics of a Westmoreland which will soon have disappeared. Old John, who is going on for
      seventy, is as tough an old dalesman as ever you saw. He doesn't measure his cups, but he
      would scorn to be floored by
       them. I don't believe he does drink much, but if he does there is probably no
      amount of whisky that he couldn't carry. Jim, the other brother, is about five years older. He
      is a kind of softie—all alive on one side of his brain, and a noodle on the other. A single
      glass of rum and water puts him under the table. And as he never can refuse this glass, and as
      the temptation generally seizes him when they are on their rounds, he is always getting John
      into disgrace. John swears at him and slangs him. No use. Jim sits still, looks—well, nohow. I
      never saw an old creature with a more singular gift of denuding his face of all expression.
      John vows he shall go to the "house"; he has no legal share in the business; the house and the
      horse and cart are John's. Next day you see them on the cart again just as usual. In reality
      neither brother can do without the other. And three days after, the play begins again.'
'An improving spectacle for the valley,' said Mrs. Seaton drily.
'Oh, my dear madam,' said the doctor, shrugging his shoulders, 'we can't all be so virtuous.
      If old Jim is a drunkard, he has got a heart of his own somewhere, and can nurse a dying niece
      like a woman. Miss Leyburn can tell us something about that.'
And he turned round to his neighbour with a complete change of expression, and a voice that
      had a new note in it of affectionate respect. Catherine coloured as if she did not like being
      addressed on the subject, and just nodded a little with gentle affirmative eyes.
'A strange case,' said Dr. Baker, again looking at Elsmere. 'It is a family that is original
      and old-world even in its ways of dying. I have been a doctor in these parts for
      five-and-twenty years. I have seen what you may call old Westmoreland die out—costume,
      dialect, superstitions. At least, as to dialect, the people have become bi-lingual. I
      sometimes think they talk it to each other as much as ever, but some of them won't talk it to
      you and me at all. And as to superstitions, the only ghost story I know that still has some
      hold on popular belief is the one which attaches to this mountain here, High Fell, at the end
      of this valley.'
He paused a moment. A salutary sense has begun to penetrate even modern provincial society,
      that no man may tell a ghost story without leave. Rose threw a merry glance at him. They two
      were very old friends. Dr. Baker had pulled out her first teeth and given her a sixpence
      afterwards for each operation. The pull was soon forgotten; the sixpence lived on gratefully
      in a child's warm memory.
'Tell it,' she said; 'we give you leave. We won't interrupt you unless you put in too many
      inventions.'
'You invite me to break the first law of story-telling, Miss Rose,' said the doctor, lifting
      a finger at her. 'Every man is
       bound to leave a story better than he found it. However, I couldn't tell it if I
      would. I don't know what makes the poor ghost walk; and if you do, I shall say you invent. But
      at any rate there is a ghost, and she walks along the side of High Fell at midnight every
      Midsummer day. If you see her and she passes you in silence, why you only get a fright for
      your pains. But if she speaks to you, you die within the year. Old John Backhouse is a widower
      with one daughter. This girl saw the ghost last Midsummer day, and Miss Leyburn and I are now
      doing our best to keep her alive over the next; but with very small prospect of success.'
'What is the girl dying of?—fright?' asked Mrs. Seaton harshly.
'Oh no!' said the doctor hastily, 'not precisely. A sad story; better not inquire into it.
      But at the present moment the time of her death seems likely to be determined by the strength
      of her own and other people's belief in the ghost's summons.'
Mrs. Seaton's grim mouth relaxed into an ungenial smile. She put up her eye-glass and looked
      at Catherine. 'An unpleasant household, I should imagine,' she said shortly, 'for a young lady
      to visit.'
Doctor Baker looked at the rector's wife, and a kind of flame came into his eyes. He and
      Mrs. Seaton were old enemies, and he was a quick-tempered mercurial sort of man.
'I presume that one's guardian angel may have to follow one sometimes into unpleasant
      quarters,' he said hotly. 'If this girl lives, it will be Miss Leyburn's doing; if she dies,
      saved and comforted, instead of lost in this world and the next, it will be Miss Leyburn's
      doing too. Ah, my dear young lady, let me alone! You tie my tongue always, and I won't have
      it.'
And the doctor turned his weather-beaten elderly face upon her with a look which was half
      defiance and half apology. She, on her side, had flushed painfully, laying her white
      finger-tips imploringly on his arm. Mrs. Seaton turned away with a little dry cough, so did
      her spectacled sister at the other end of the table. Mrs. Leyburn, on the other hand, sat in a
      little ecstasy, looking at Catherine and Dr. Baker, something glistening in her eyes. Robert
      Elsmere alone showed presence of mind. Bending across to Dr. Baker, he asked him a sudden
      question as to the history of a certain strange green mound or barrow that rose out of a flat
      field not far from the vicarage windows. Dr. Baker grasped his whiskers, threw the young man a
      queer glance, and replied. Thenceforward he and Robert kept up a lively antiquarian talk on
      the traces of Norse settlement in the Cumbrian valleys, which lasted till the ladies left the
      dining-room.
As Catherine Leyburn went out Elsmere stood holding the door open. She could not help
      raising her eyes upon him, eyes full of a half-timid, half-grateful friendliness. His own
      returned her look with interest.
'"A spirit, but a woman too,"' he thought to himself with a
       new-born thrill of sympathy, as he went back to his seat. She had not yet said a
      direct word to him, and yet he was curiously convinced that here was one of the most
      interesting persons, and one of the persons most interesting to him, that he had ever
      met. What mingled delicacy and strength in the hand that had lain beside her on the
      dinner-table—what potential depths of feeling in the full dark-fringed eye!
Half an hour later, when Elsmere re-entered the drawing-room, he found Catherine Leyburn
      sitting by an open French window that looked out on the lawn, and on the dim rocky face of the
      fell. Adeline Baker, a stooping red-armed maiden, with a pretty face, set off, as she
      imagined, by a vast amount of cheap finery, was sitting beside her, studying her with a timid
      adoration. The doctor's daughter regarded Catherine Leyburn, who during the last five years
      had made herself almost as distinct a figure in the popular imagination of a few Westmoreland
      valleys as Sister Dora among her Walsall miners, as a being of a totally different order from
      herself. She was glued to the side of her idol, but her shy and awkward tongue could find
      hardly anything to say to her. Catherine, however, talked away, gently stroking the while the
      girl's rough hand which lay on her knee, to the mingled pain and bliss of its owner, who was
      outraged by the contrast between her own ungainly member and Miss Leyburn's delicate
      fingers.
Mrs. Seaton was on the sofa beside Mrs. Thornburgh, amply avenging herself on the vicar's
      wife for any checks she might have received at tea. Miss Barks, her sister, an old maid with a
      face that seemed to be perpetually peering forward, light colourless hair surmounted by a cap
      adorned with artificial nasturtiums, and white-lashed eyes armed with spectacles, was having
      her way with Mrs. Leyburn, inquiring into the household arrangements of Burwood with a
      cross-examining power which made the mild widow as pulp before her.
When the gentlemen entered, Mrs. Thornburgh looked round hastily. She herself had opened
      that door into the garden. A garden on a warm summer night offers opportunities no schemer
      should neglect. Agnes and Rose were chattering and laughing on the gravel path just outside
      it, their white girlish figures showing temptingly against the dusky background of garden and
      fell. It somewhat disappointed the vicar's wife to see her tall guest take a chair and draw it
      beside Catherine—while Adeline Baker awkwardly got up and disappeared into the garden.
Elsmere felt it an unusually interesting moment, so strong had been his sense of attraction
      at tea; but like the rest of us he could find nothing more telling to start with than a remark
      about the weather. Catherine in her reply asked him if he were quite recovered from the attack
      of low fever he was understood to have been suffering from.
'Oh yes,' he said brightly, 'I am very nearly as fit as I ever
       was, and more eager than I ever was to get to work. The idling of it is the worst
      part of illness. However, in a month from now I must be at my living, and I can only hope it
      will give me enough to do.'
Catherine looked up at him with a quick impulse of liking. What an eager face it was!
      Eagerness, indeed, seemed to be the note of the whole man, of the quick eyes and mouth, the
      flexible hands and energetic movements. Even the straight, stubbly hair, its owner's passing
      torment, standing up round the high open brow, seemed to help the general impression of
      alertness and vigour.
'Your mother, I hear, is already there?' said Catherine.
'Yes. My poor mother!' and the young man smiled half sadly. 'It is a curious situation for
      both of us. This living which has just been bestowed on me is my father's old living. It is in
      the gift of my cousin, Sir Mowbray Elsmere. My great-uncle'—he drew himself together suddenly.
      'But I don't know why I should imagine that these things interest other people,' he said, with
      a little quick, almost comical, accent of self-rebuke.
'Please go on,' cried Catherine hastily. The voice and manner were singularly pleasant to
      her; she wished he would not interrupt himself for nothing.
'Really? Well then, my great-uncle, old Sir William, wished me to have it when I grew up. I
      was against it for a long time, took orders; but I wanted something more stirring than a
      country parish. One has dreams of many things. But one's dreams come to nothing. I got ill at
      Oxford. The doctors forbade the town work. The old incumbent who had held the living since my
      father's death died precisely at that moment. I felt myself booked, and gave in to various
      friends; but it is second best.'
She felt a certain soreness and discomfort in his tone, as though his talk represented a
      good deal of mental struggle in the past.
'But the country is not idleness,' she said, smiling at him. Her cheek was leaning lightly
      on her hand, her eyes had an unusual animation; and her long white dress, guiltless of any
      ornament save a small old-fashioned locket hanging from a thin old chain and a pair of hair
      bracelets with engraved gold clasps, gave her the nobleness and simplicity of a Romney
      picture.
'You do not find it so, I imagine,' he replied, bending forward to her with a
      charming gesture of homage. He would have liked her to talk to him of her work and her
      interests. He, too, mentally compared her to Saint Elizabeth. He could almost have fancied the
      dark red flowers in her white lap. But his comparison had another basis of feeling than
      Rose's.
However, she would not talk to him of herself. The way in which she turned the conversation
      brought home to his own expansive confiding nature a certain austerity and stiffness of
       fibre in her which for the moment chilled him. But as he got her into talk about
      the neighbourhood, the people and their ways, the impression vanished again, so far at least
      as there was anything repellent about it. Austerity, strength, individuality, all these words
      indeed he was more and more driven to apply to her. She was like no other woman he had ever
      seen. It was not at all that she was more remarkable intellectually. Every now and then,
      indeed, as their talk flowed on, he noticed in what she said an absence of a good many
      interests and attainments which in his ordinary south-country women friends he would have
      assumed as a matter of course.
'I understand French very little, and I never read any,' she said to him once, quietly, as
      he fell to comparing some peasant story she had told him with an episode in one of George
      Sand's Berry novels. It seemed to him that she knew her Wordsworth by heart. And her own
      mountain life, her own rich and meditative soul, had taught her judgments and comments on her
      favourite poet which stirred Elsmere every now and then to enthusiasm—so true they were and
      pregnant, so full often of a natural magic of expression. On the other hand, when he quoted a
      very well-known line of Shelley's she asked him where it came from. She seemed to him deeper
      and simpler at every moment; her very limitations of sympathy and knowledge, and they were
      evidently many, began to attract him. The thought of her ancestry crossed him now and then,
      rousing in him now wonder, and now a strange sense of congruity and harmony. Clearly she was
      the daughter of a primitive unexhausted race. And yet what purity, what refinement, what
      delicate perception and self-restraint!
Presently they fell on the subject of Oxford.
'Were you ever there?' he asked her.
'Once,' she said. 'I went with my father one summer term. I have only a confused memory of
      it—of the quadrangles, and a long street, a great building with a dome, and such beautiful
      trees!'
'Did your father often go back?'
'No; never towards the latter part of his life'—and her clear eyes clouded a little;
      'nothing made him so sad as the thought of Oxford.'
She paused, as though she had strayed on to a topic where expression was a little difficult.
      Then his face and clerical dress seemed somehow to reassure her, and she began again, though
      reluctantly.
'He used to say that it was all so changed. The young fellows he saw when he went back
      scorned everything he cared for. Every visit to Oxford was like a stab to him. It seemed to
      him as if the place was full of men who only wanted to destroy and break down everything that
      was sacred to him.'
Elsmere reflected that Richard Leyburn must have left Oxford about the beginning of the
      Liberal reaction, which followed
       Tractarianism, and in twenty years transformed the University.
'Ah!' he said, smiling gently. 'He should have lived a little longer. There is another turn
      of the tide since then. The destructive wave has spent itself, and at Oxford now many of us
      feel ourselves on the upward swell of a religious revival.'
Catherine looked up at him with a sweet sympathetic look. That dim vision of Oxford, with
      its gray, tree-lined walls, lay very near to her heart for her father's sake. And the keen
      face above her seemed to satisfy and respond to her inner feeling.
'I know the High Church influence is very strong,' she said, hesitating; 'but I don't know
      whether father would have liked that much better.'
The last words had slipped out of her, and she checked herself suddenly. Robert saw that she
      was uncertain as to his opinions, and afraid lest she might have said something
      discourteous.
'It is not only the High Church influence,' he said quickly, 'it is a mixture of influences
      from all sorts of quarters that has brought about the new state of things. Some of the factors
      in the change were hardly Christian at all, by name, but they have all helped to make men
      think, to stir their hearts, to win them back to the old ways.'
His voice had taken to itself a singular magnetism. Evidently the matters they were
      discussing were matters in which he felt a deep and loving interest. His young boyish face had
      grown grave; there was a striking dignity and weight in his look and manner, which suddenly
      roused in Catherine the sense that she was speaking to a man of distinction, accustomed to
      deal on equal terms with the large things of life. She raised her eyes to him for a moment,
      and he saw in them a beautiful, mystical light—responsive, lofty, full of soul.
The next moment, it apparently struck her sharply that their conversation was becoming
      incongruous with its surroundings. Behind them Mrs. Thornburgh was bustling about with candles
      and music-stools, preparing for a performance on the flute by Mr. Mayhew, the black-browed
      vicar of Shanmoor, and the room seemed to be pervaded by Mrs. Seaton's strident voice. Her
      strong natural reserve asserted itself, and her face settled again into the slight rigidity of
      expression characteristic of it. She rose and prepared to move farther into the room.
'We must listen,' she said to him, smiling, over her shoulder.
And she left him, settling herself by the side of Mrs. Leyburn. He had a momentary sense of
      rebuff. The man, quick, sensitive, sympathetic, felt in the woman the presence of a strength,
      a self-sufficingness which was not all attractive. His vanity, if he had cherished any during
      their conversation, was not flattered by its close. But as he leant against the window-frame
      waiting for the music to begin, he could hardly keep his eyes from her. He was a man who, by
      force of temperament, made friends
       readily with women, though except for a passing fancy or two he had never been in
      love; and his sense of difficulty with regard to this stiffly-mannered, deep-eyed country girl
      brought with it an unusual stimulus and excitement.
Miss Barks seated herself deliberately, after much fiddling with bracelets and gloves, and
      tied back the ends of her cap behind her. Mr. Mayhew took out his flute and lovingly put it
      together. He was a powerful swarthy man, who said little and was generally alarming to the
      ladies of the neighbourhood. To propitiate him, they asked him to bring his flute, and
      nervously praised the fierce music he made on it. Miss Barks enjoyed a monopoly of his
      accompaniments, and there were many who regarded her assiduity as a covert attack upon the
      widower's name and position. If so, it was Greek meeting Greek, for with all his taciturnity
      the vicar of Shanmoor was well able to defend himself.
'Has it begun?' said a hurried whisper at Elsmere's elbow, and turning he saw Rose and Agnes
      on the step of the window, Rose's cheeks flushed by the night breeze, a shawl thrown lightly
      round her head.
She was answered by the first notes of the flute, following some powerful chords in which
      Miss Barks had tested at once the strength of her wrists and the vicarage piano.
The girl made a little moue of disgust, and turned as though to fly down the steps
      again. But Agnes caught her and held her, and the mutinous creature had to submit to be drawn
      inside while Mrs. Thornburgh, in obedience to complaints of draughts from Mrs. Seaton motioned
      to have the window shut. Rose established herself against the wall, her curly head thrown
      back, her eyes half shut, her mouth expressing an angry endurance. Robert watched her with
      amusement.
It was certainly a remarkable duet. After an adagio opening in which flute and
      piano were at magnificent cross purposes from the beginning, the two instruments plunged into
      an allegro very long and very fast, which became ultimately a desperate race between
      the competing performers for the final chord. Mr. Mayhew toiled away, taxing the resources of
      his whole vast frame to keep his small instrument in a line with the piano, and taxing them in
      vain. For the shriller and the wilder grew the flute, and the greater the exertion of the dark
      Hercules performing on it, the fiercer grew the pace of the piano. Rose stamped her little
      foot.
'Two bars ahead last page,' she murmured, 'three bars this: will no one stop her!'
But the pages flew past, turned assiduously by Agnes, who took a sardonic delight in these
      performances, and every countenance in the room seemed to take a look of sharpened anxiety as
      to how the duet was to end, and who was to be victor.
Nobody knowing Miss Barks need to have been in any doubt as to that! Crash came the last
      chord, and the poor flute nearly
       half a page behind was left shrilly hanging in mid-air, forsaken and companionless,
      an object of derision to gods and men.
'Ah! I took it a little fast!' said the lady, triumphantly looking up at the discomfited
      clergyman.
'Mr. Elsmere,' said Rose, hiding herself in the window curtain beside him, that she might
      have her laugh in safety. 'Do they play like that in Oxford, or has Long Whindale a
      monopoly?'
But before he could answer, Mrs. Thornburgh called to the girl—
'Rose! Rose! Don't go out again! It is your turn next!'
Rose advanced reluctantly, her head in air. Robert, remembering something that Mrs.
      Thornburgh had said to him as to her musical power, supposed that she felt it an indignity to
      be asked to play in such company.
Mrs. Thornburgh motioned to him to come and sit by Mrs. Leyburn, a summons which he obeyed
      with the more alacrity, as it brought him once more within reach of Mrs. Leyburn's eldest
      daughter.
'Are you fond of music, Mr. Elsmere?' asked Mrs. Leyburn in her little mincing voice, making
      room for his chair beside them. 'If you are, I am sure my youngest daughter's playing will
      please you.'
Catherine moved abruptly. Robert, while he made some pleasant answer, divined that the
      reserved and stately daughter must be often troubled by the mother's expansiveness.
Meanwhile the room was again settling itself to listen. Mrs. Seaton was severely turning
      over a photograph book. In her opinion the violin was an unbecoming instrument for young
      women. Miss Barks sat upright with the studiously neutral expression which befits the artist
      asked to listen to a rival. Mr. Thornburgh sat pensive, one foot drooped over the other. He
      was very fond of the Leyburn girls, but music seemed to him, good man, one of the least
      comprehensible of human pleasures. As for Rose, she had at last arranged herself and her
      accompanist Agnes, after routing out from her music a couple of Fantasie-Stücke,
      which she had wickedly chosen as presenting the most severely classical contrast to the
      'rubbish' played by the preceding performers. She stood with her lithe figure in its
      old-fashioned dress thrown out against the black coats of a group of gentlemen beyond, one
      slim arched foot advanced, the ends of the blue sash dangling, the hand and arm, beautifully
      formed, but still wanting the roundness of womanhood, raised high for action, the lightly
      poised head thrown back with an air. Robert thought her a bewitching, half-grown thing,
      overflowing with potentialities of future brilliance and empire.
Her music astonished him. Where had a little provincial maiden learned to play with this
      intelligence, this force, this delicate command of her instrument? He was not a musician,
       and therefore could not gauge her exactly, but he was more or less familiar with
      music and its standards, as all people become nowadays who live in a highly cultivated
      society, and he knew enough at any rate to see that what he was listening to was remarkable,
      was out of the common range. Still more evident was this, when from the humorous piece with
      which the sisters led off—a dance of clowns, but clowns of Arcady—they slid into a delicate
      rippling chant d'amour, the long drawn notes of the violin rising and falling on the
      piano accompaniment with an exquisite plaintiveness. Where did a fillette, unformed,
      inexperienced, win the secret of so much eloquence—only from the natural dreams of a girl's
      heart as to 'the lovers waiting in the hidden years'?
But when the music ceased, Elsmere, after a hearty clap that set the room applauding
      likewise, turned not to the musician but the figure beside Mrs. Leyburn, the sister who had
      sat listening with an impassiveness, a sort of gentle remoteness of look, which had piqued his
      curiosity. The mother meanwhile was drinking in the compliments of Dr. Baker.
'Excellent!' cried Elsmere. 'How in the name of fortune, Miss Leyburn, if I may ask, has
      your sister managed to get on so far in this remote place?'
'She goes to Manchester every year to some relations we have there,' said Catherine quietly;
      'I believe she has been very well taught.'
'But surely,' he said warmly, 'it is more than teaching—more even than talent—there is
      something like genius in it?'
She did not answer very readily.
'I don't know,' she said at last. 'Every one says it is very good.'
He would have been repelled by her irresponsiveness but that her last words had in them a
      note of lingering, of wistfulness, as though the subject were connected with an inner debate
      not yet solved which troubled her. He was puzzled, but certainly not repelled.
Twenty minutes later everybody was going. The Seatons went first, and the other guests
      lingered awhile afterwards to enjoy the sense of freedom left by their departure. But at last
      the Mayhews, father and son, set off on foot to walk home over the moonlit mountains; the
      doctor tucked himself and his daughter into his high gig, and drove off with a sweeping
      ironical bow to Rose, who had stood on the steps teasing him to the last; and Robert Elsmere
      offered to escort the Miss Leyburns and their mother home.
Mrs. Thornburgh was left protesting to the vicar's incredulous ears that never—never as long
      as she lived—would she have Mrs. Seaton inside her doors again.
'Her manners—' cried the vicar's wife, fuming—'her manners would disgrace a Whinborough
      shop-girl. She has none—positively none!'


Then suddenly her round comfortable face brightened and broadened out into a beaming
      smile—
'But, after all, William, say what you will—and you always do say the most unpleasant things
      you can think of—it was a great success. I know the Leyburns enjoyed it. And as for Robert, I
      saw him looking—looking at that little minx Rose while she was playing as if
      he couldn't take his eyes off her. What a picture she made, to be sure!'
The vicar, who had been standing with his back to the fireplace and his hands in his
      pockets, received his wife's remarks first of all with lifted eyebrows, and then with a low
      chuckle, half scornful, half compassionate, which made her start in her chair.
'Rose?' he said impatiently. 'Rose, my dear, where were your eyes?'
It was very rarely indeed that on her own ground, so to speak, the vicar ventured to take
      the whip-hand of her like this. Mrs. Thornburgh looked at him in amazement.
'Do you mean to say,' he asked, in raised tones, 'that you didn't notice that from the
      moment you first introduced Robert to Catherine Leyburn, he had practically no attention for
      anybody else?'
Mrs. Thornburgh gazed at him—her memory flew back over the evening—and her impulsive
      contradiction died on her lips. It was now her turn to ejaculate—
'Catherine!' she said feebly. 'Catherine! how absurd!'
But she turned and, with quickened breath, looked out of [the] window after the retreating
      figures. Mrs. Thornburgh went up to bed that night an inch taller. She had never felt herself
      more exquisitely indispensable, more of a personage.
</div></body></text></TEI>