<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="35">
CHAPTER XXXV
'In the first place, my dear aunt,' said Mr. Flaxman, throwing himself back in his chair in
      front of Lady Charlotte's drawing-room fire, 'you may spare your admonitions, because it is
      becoming more and more clear to me that, whatever my sentiments may be, Miss Leyburn never
      gives a serious thought to me.'
He turned to look at his companion over his shoulder. His tone and manner were perfectly
      gay, and Lady Charlotte was puzzled by him.
'Stuff and nonsense!' replied the lady with her usual emphasis; 'I never flatter you, Hugh,
      and I don't mean to begin now, but it would be mere folly not to recognise that you have
      advantages which must tell on the mind of any girl in Miss Leyburns position.'
Hugh Flaxman rose, and, standing before the fire with his hands in his pockets, made what
      seemed to be a close inspection of his irreproachable trouser-knees.
'I am sorry for your theory, Aunt Charlotte,' he said, still
       stooping, 'but Miss Leyburn doesn't care twopence about my advantages.'
'Very proper of you to say so,' returned Lady Charlotte sharply; 'the remark, however, my
      good sir, does more credit to your heart than your head.'
'In the next place,' he went on undisturbed, 'why you should have done your best this whole
      winter to throw Miss Leyburn and me together, if you meant in the end to oppose my marrying
      her, I don't quite see.'
He looked up smiling. Lady Charlotte reddened ever so slightly.
'You know my weaknesses,' she said presently, with an effrontery which delighted her nephew.
      'She is my latest novelty, she excites me, I can't do without her. As to you, I can't remember
      that you wanted much encouragement, but, I acknowledge, after all these years of
      resistance—resistance to my most legitimate efforts to dispose of you—there was a certain
      piquancy in seeing you caught at last!'
'Upon my word!' he said, throwing back his head with a not very cordial laugh, in which,
      however, his aunt joined. She was sitting opposite to him, her powerful loosely-gloved hands
      crossed over the rich velvet of her dress, her fair large face and grayish hair surmounted by
      a mighty cap, as vigorous, shrewd, and individual a type of English middle age as could be
      found. The room behind her and the second and third drawing-rooms were brilliantly lighted.
      Mr. Wynnstay was enjoying a cigar in peace in the smoking-room, while his wife and nephew were
      awaiting the arrival of the evening's guests upstairs.
Lady Charlotte's mind had been evidently much perturbed by the conversation with her nephew
      of which we are merely describing the latter half. She was labouring under an uncomfortable
      sense of being hoist with her own petard—an uncomfortable memory of a certain warning of her
      husband's, delivered at Murewell.
'And now,' said Mr. Flaxman, 'having confessed in so many words that you have done your best
      to bring me up to the fence, will you kindly recapitulate the arguments why in your opinion I
      should not jump it?'
'Society, amusement, flirtation, are one thing,' she replied with judicial imperativeness,
      'marriage is another. In these democratic days we must know everybody; we should only marry
      our equals.'
The instant, however, the words were out of her mouth, she regretted them. Mr. Flaxman's
      expression changed.
'I do not agree with you,' he said calmly, 'and you know I do not. You could not, I imagine,
      have relied much upon that argument.'
'Good gracious, Hugh!' cried Lady Charlotte crossly; 'you talk as if I were really the old
      campaigner some people suppose me to be. I have been amusing myself—I have liked to see
       you amused. And it is only the last few weeks since you have begun to devote
      yourself so tremendously, that I have come to take the thing seriously at all. I confess, if
      you like, that I have got you into the scrape—now I want to get you out of it! I am not
      thin-skinned, but I hate family unpleasantnesses—and you know what the duke will say.'
'The duke be—translated!' said Flaxman coolly. 'Nothing of what you have said or could say
      on this point, my dear aunt, has the smallest weight with me. But Providence has been kinder
      to you and the duke than you deserve. Miss Leyburn does not care for me, and she does care—or
      I am very much mistaken—for somebody else.'
He pronounced the words deliberately, watching their effect upon her.
'What, that Oxford nonentity, Mr. Langham, the Elsmeres' friend? Ridiculous! What attraction
      could a man of that type have for a girl of hers?'
'I am not bound to supply an answer to that question,' replied her nephew. 'However, he is
      not a nonentity. Far from it! Ten years ago, when I was leaving Cambridge, he was certainly
      one of the most distinguished of the young Oxford tutors.
'Another instance of what university reputation is worth!' said Lady Charlotte scornfully.
      It was clear that even in the case of a beauty whom she thought it beneath him to marry, she
      was not pleased to see her nephew ousted by the force majeure of a rival—and that a
      rival whom she regarded as an utter nobody, having neither marketable eccentricity, nor
      family, nor social brilliance to recommend him.
Flaxman understood her perplexity and watched her with critical amused eyes.
'I should like to know,' he said presently, with a curious slowness and suavity, 'I should
      greatly like to know why you asked him here to-night?'
'You know perfectly well that I should ask anybody—a convict, a crossing-sweeper—if I
      happened to be half an hour in the same room with him!'
Flaxman laughed.
'Well, it may be convenient to-night,' he said reflectively. 'What are we to do—some
      thought-reading?'
'Yes. It isn't a crush. I have only asked about thirty or forty people. Mr. Denman is to
      manage it.'
She mentioned an amateur thought-reader greatly in request at the moment.
Flaxman cogitated for a while and then propounded a little plan to his aunt, to which she,
      after some demur, agreed.
'I want to make a few notes,' he said drily, when it was arranged; 'I should be glad to
      satisfy myself.'
When the Misses Leyburn were announced, Rose, though the younger, came in first. She always
      took the lead by a sort of
       natural right, and Agnes never dreamt of protesting. To-night the sisters were in
      white. Some soft creamy stuff was folded and draped about Rose's slim shapely figure in such a
      way as to bring out all its charming roundness and grace. Her neck and arms bore the challenge
      of the dress victoriously. Her red-gold hair gleamed in the light of Lady Charlotte's
      innumerable candles. A knot of dusky blue feathers on her shoulder, and a Japanese fan of the
      same colour, gave just that touch of purpose and art which the spectator seems to claim as the
      tribute answering to his praise in the dress of a young girl. She moved with perfect
      self-possession, distributing a few smiling looks to the people she knew as she advanced
      towards Lady Charlotte. Any one with a discerning eye could have seen that she was in that
      stage of youth when a beautiful woman is like a statue to which the master is giving the
      finishing touches. Life, the sculptor, had been at work upon her, refining here, softening
      there, planing away awkwardness, emphasising grace, disengaging as it were, week by week, and
      month by month, all the beauty of which the original conception was capable. And the process
      is one attended always by a glow and sparkle, a kind of effluence of youth and pleasure, which
      makes beauty more beautiful and grace more graceful.
The little murmur and rustle of persons turning to look, which had already begun to mark her
      entrance into a room, surrounded Rose as she walked up to Lady Charlotte. Mr. Flaxman, who had
      been standing absently silent, woke up directly she appeared, and went to greet her before his
      aunt.
'You failed us at rehearsal,' he said with smiling reproach; 'we were all at sixes and
      sevens.'
'I had a sick mother, unfortunately, who kept me at home. Lady Charlotte, Catherine couldn't
      come. Agnes and I are alone in the world. Will you chaperon us?'
'I don't know whether I will accept the responsibility to-night—in that new gown,' replied
      Lady Charlotte grimly, putting up her eyeglass to look at it and the wearer. Rose bore the
      scrutiny with a light smiling silence, even though she knew Mr. Flaxman was looking too.
'On the contrary,' she said, 'one always feels so particularly good and prim in a new
      frock.'
'Really? I should have thought it one of Satan's likeliest moments,' said Flaxman,
      laughing—his eyes, however, the while saying quite other things to her, as they finished their
      inspection of her dress.
Lady Charlotte threw a sharp glance first at him and then at Rose's smiling ease, before she
      hurried off to other guests.
'I have made a muddle as usual,' she said to herself in disgust, 'perhaps even a worse one
      than I thought!'
Whatever might be Hugh Flaxman's state of mind, however, he never showed greater
      self-possession than on this particular evening.


A few minutes after Rose's entry he introduced her for the first time to his sister Lady
      Helen. The Varleys had only just come up to town for the opening of Parliament, and Lady Helen
      had come to-night to Martin Street, all ardour to see Hugh's new adoration, and the girl whom
      all the world was beginning to talk about—both as a beauty and as an artist. She rushed at
      Rose, if any word so violent can be applied to anything so light and airy as Lady Helen's
      movements, caught the girl's hands in both hers, and, gazing up at her with undisguised
      admiration, said to her the prettiest, daintiest, most effusive things possible. Rose—who with
      all her lithe shapeliness, looked over-tall and even a trifle stiff beside the tiny bird-like
      Lady Helen—took the advances of Hugh Flaxman's sister with a pretty flush of flattered pride.
      She looked down at the small radiant creature with soft and friendly eyes, and Hugh Flaxman
      stood by, so far well pleased.
Then he went off to fetch Mr. Denman, the hero of the evening, to be introduced to her.
      While he was away, Agnes, who was behind her sister, saw Rose's eyes wandering from Lady Helen
      to the door, restlessly searching and then returning.
Presently through the growing crowd round the entrance Agnes spied a well-known form
      emerging.
'Mr. Langham! But Rose never told me he was to be here to-night, and how dreadful
      he looks!'
Agnes was so startled that her eyes followed Langham closely across the room. Rose had seen
      him at once; and they had greeted each other across the crowd. Agnes was absorbed, trying to
      analyse what had struck her so. The face was always melancholy, always pale, but to-night it
      was ghastly, and from the whiteness of cheek and brow, the eyes, the jet-black hair stood out
      in intense and disagreeable relief. She would have remarked on it to Rose, but that Rose's
      attention was claimed by the young thought-reader, Mr. Denman, whom Mr. Flaxman had brought
      up. Mr. Denman was a fair-haired young Hercules, whose tremulous agitated manner contrasted
      oddly with his athlete's looks. Among other magnetisms he was clearly open to the magnetism of
      women, and he stayed talking to Rose, staring furtively at her the while from under his heavy
      lids,—much longer than the girl thought fair.
'Have you seen any experiments in the working of this new force before?' he asked her, with
      a solemnity which sat oddly on his commonplace bearded face.
'Oh yes!' she said flippantly. 'We have tried it sometimes. It is very good fun.'
He drew himself up. 'Not fun,' he said impressively, 'not fun. Thought-reading
      wants seriousness; the most tremendous things depend upon it. If established it will
      revolutionise our whole views of life. Even a Huxley could not deny that!'
She studied him with mocking eyes. 'Do you imagine this party to-night looks very
      serious?'


His face fell.
'One can seldom get people to take it scientifically,' he admitted, sighing. Rose,
      impatiently, thought him a most preposterous young man. Why was he not cricketing or shooting
      or exploring, or using the muscles Nature had given him so amply, to some decent practical
      purpose, instead of making a business out of ruining his own nerves and other people's night
      after night in hot drawing-rooms? And when would he go away?
'Come, Mr. Denman,' said Flaxman, laying hands upon him; 'the audience is about collected, I
      think. Ah, there you are!' and he gave Langham a cool greeting. 'Have you seen anything yet of
      these fashionable dealings with the devil?'
'Nothing. Are you a believer?'
Flaxman shrugged his shoulders. 'I never refuse an experiment of any kind,' he added with an
      odd change of voice. 'Come, Denman.'
And the two went off. Langham came to a stand beside Rose, while old Lord Rupert, as jovial
      as ever, and bubbling over with gossip about the Queen's Speech, appropriated Lady Helen, who
      was the darling of all elderly men.
They did not speak. Rose sent him a ray from eyes full of a new divine shyness. He smiled
      gently in answer to it, and full of her own young emotion, and of the effort to conceal it
      from all the world, she noticed none of that change which had struck Agnes.
And all the while, if she could have penetrated the man's silence! An hour before this
      moment Langham had vowed that nothing should take him to Lady Charlotte's that night. And yet
      here he was, riveted to her side, alive like any normal human being to every detail of her
      loveliness, shaken to his inmost being by the intoxicating message of her look, of the
      transformation which had passed in an instant over the teasing difficult creature of the last
      few months.
At Murewell his chagrin had been not to feel, not to struggle, to have
      been cheated out of experience. Well, here is the experience in good earnest! And
      Langham is wrestling with it for dear life. And how little the exquisite child beside him
      knows of it, or of the man on whom she is spending her first wilful passion! She stands
      strangely exulting in her own strange victory over a life, a heart, which had defied and
      eluded her. The world throbs and thrills about her, the crowd beside her is all unreal, the
      air is full of whisper, of romance.
The thought-reading followed its usual course. A murder and its detection were given in dumb
      show. Then it was the turn of card-guessing, bank-note-finding, and the various other forms of
      telepathic hide and seek. Mr. Flaxman superintended them all, his restless eye wandering every
      other minute to the farther drawing-room in which the lights had been lowered, catching there
      always the same patch of black and white,—Rose's dress and the dark form beside her.


'Are you convinced? Do you believe?' said Rose, merrily looking up at her companion.
'In telepathy? Well—so far—I have not got beyond the delicacy and perfection of Mr.
      Denman's—muscular sensation. So much I am sure of!'
'Oh, but your scepticism is ridiculous!' she said gaily. 'We know that some people
      have an extraordinary power over others.'
'Yes, that certainly we know!' he answered, his voice dropping, an odd strained note in it.
      'I grant you that.'
She trembled deliciously. Her eyelids fell. They stood together, conscious only of each
      other.
'Now,' said Mr. Denman, advancing to the doorway between the two drawing-rooms, 'I have done
      all I can—I am exhausted. But let me beg of you all to go on with some experiments amongst
      yourselves. Every fresh discovery of this power in a new individual is a gain to science. I
      believe about one in ten has some share of it. Mr. Flaxman and I will arrange everything, if
      any one will volunteer?'
The audience broke up into groups, laughing, chatting, suggesting this and that. Presently
      Lady Charlotte's loud dictatorial voice made itself heard, as she stood eyeglass in hand
      looking round the circle of her guests.
'Somebody must venture—we are losing time.'
Then the eyeglass stopped at Rose, who was now sitting tall and radiant on the sofa, her
      blue fan across her white knees. 'Miss Leyburn—you are always public-spirited—will you be
      victimised for the good of science?'
The girl got up with a smile.
'And Mr. Langham—will you see what you can do with Miss Leyburn? Hugh—we all choose her
      task, don't we—then Mr. Langham wills?'
Flaxman came up to explain. Langham had turned to Rose—a wild fury with Lady Charlotte and
      the whole affair sweeping through him. But there was no time to demur; that judicial eye was
      on them; the large figure and towering cap bent towards him. Refusal was impossible.
'Command me!' he said with a sudden straightening of the form and a flush on the pale cheek.
      'I am afraid Miss Leyburn will find me a very bad partner.'
'Well, now then!' said Flaxman; 'Miss Leyburn, will you please go down into the library
      while we settle what you are to do!'
She went, and he held the door open for her. But she passed out unconscious of him—rosy,
      confused, her eyes bent on the ground.
'Now, then, what shall Miss Leyburn do?' asked Lady Charlotte in the same loud emphatic
      tone.
'If I might suggest something quite different from anything that has been yet tried,' said
      Mr. Flaxman, 'suppose we re
      quire Miss Leyburn to kiss the hand of the little marble statue of Hope in the far
      drawing-room. What do you say, Langham?'
'What you please!' said Langham, moving up to him. A glance passed between the two men. In
      Langham's there was a hardly sane antagonism and resentment, in Flaxman's an excited
      intelligence.
'Now then, said Flaxman coolly, 'fix your mind steadily on what Miss Leyburn is to do—you
      must take her hand—but except in thought, you must carefully follow and not lead her. Shall I
      call her?'
Langham abruptly assented. He had a passionate sense of being watched—tricked. Why were he
      and she to be made a spectacle for this man and his friends! A mad irrational indignation
      surged through him.
Then she was led in blindfolded, one hand stretched out feeling the air in front of her. The
      circle of people drew back. Mr. Flaxman and Mr. Denman prepared, note-book in hand, to watch
      the experiment. Langham moved desperately forward.
But the instant her soft trembling hand touched his, as though by enchantment, the
      surrounding scene, the faces, the lights, were blotted out from him. He forgot his anger, he
      forgot everything but her and this thing she was to do. He had her in his grasp—he was the
      man, the master—and what enchanting readiness to yield in the swaying pliant form! In the
      distance far away gleamed the statue of Hope, a child on tiptoe, one outstretched arm just
      visible from where he stood.
There was a moment's silent expectation. Every eye was riveted on the two figures—on the
      dark handsome man—on the blindfolded girl.
At last Rose began to move gently forward. It was a strange wavering motion. The breath came
      quickly through her slightly parted lips; her bright colour was ebbing. She was conscious of
      nothing but the grasp in which her hand was held—otherwise her mind seemed a blank. Her state
      during the next few seconds was not unlike the state of some one under the partial influence
      of an anæsthetic; a benumbing grip was laid on all her faculties; and she knew nothing of how
      she moved or where she was going.
Suddenly the trance cleared away. It might have lasted half an hour or five seconds, for all
      she knew. But she was standing beside a small marble statue in the farthest drawing-room, and
      her lips had on them a slight sense of chill, as though they had just been laid to something
      cold.
She pulled off the handkerchief from her eyes. Above her was Langham's face, a marvellous
      glow and animation in every line of it.
'Have I done it?' she asked in a tremulous whisper.
For the moment her self-control was gone. She was still bewildered.


He nodded, smiling.
'I am so glad,' she said, still in the same quick whisper, gazing at him. There was the most
      adorable abandon in her whole look and attitude. He could but just restrain himself
      from taking her in his arms, and for one bright flashing instant each saw nothing but the
      other.
The heavy curtain which had partially hidden the door of the little old-fashioned
      powder-closet as they approached it, and through which they had swept without heeding, was
      drawn back with a rattle.
'She has done it! Hurrah!' cried Mr. Flaxman. 'What a rush that last was, Miss Leyburn! You
      left us all behind.'
Rose turned to him, still dazed, drawing her hand across her eyes. A rush? She had known
      nothing about it!
Mr. Flaxman turned and walked back, apparently to report to his aunt, who, with Lady Helen,
      had been watching the experiment from the main drawing-room. His face was a curious mixture of
      gravity and the keenest excitement. The gravity was mostly sharp compunction. He had satisfied
      a passionate curiosity, but in the doing of it he had outraged certain instincts of breeding
      and refinement which were now revenging themselves.
'Did she do it exactly?' said Lady Helen eagerly.
'Exactly,' he said, standing still.
Lady Charlotte looked at him significantly. But he would not see her look.
'Lady Charlotte, where is my sister?' said Rose, coming up from the back room, looking now
      nearly as white as her dress.
It appeared that Agnes had just been carried off by a lady who lived on Campden Hill close
      to the Leyburns, and who had been obliged to go at the beginning of the last experiment.
      Agnes, torn between her interest in what was going on and her desire to get back to her
      mother, had at last hurriedly accepted this Mrs. Sherwood's offer of a seat in her carriage,
      imagining that her sister would want to stay a good deal later, and relying on Lady
      Charlotte's promise that she should be safely put into a hansom.
'I must go,' said Rose, putting her hand to her head. 'How tiring this is! How long did it
      take, Mr. Flaxman?'
'Exactly three minutes,' he said, his gaze fixed upon her with an expression that only Lady
      Helen noticed.
'So little! Good-night, Lady Charlotte!' and giving her hand first to her hostess then to
      Mr. Flaxman's bewildered sister, she moved away into the crowd.
'Hugh, of course you are going down with her?' exclaimed Lady Charlotte under her breath.
      'You must. I promised to see her safely off the premises.'
He stood immovable. Lady Helen with a reproachful look made a step forward, but he caught
      her arm.
'Don't spoil sport,' he said, in a tone which, amid the hum of
       discussion caused by the experiment, was heard only by his aunt and sister.
They looked at him—the one amazed, the other grimly observant—and caught a slight
      significant motion of the head towards Langham's distant figure.
Langham came up and made his farewells. As he turned his back, Lady Helen's large astonished
      eyes followed him to the door.
'Oh, Hugh!' was all she could say as they came back to her brother.
'Never mind, Nellie,' he whispered, touched by the bewildered sympathy of her look; 'I will
      tell you all about it to-morrow. I have not been behaving well, and am not particularly
      pleased with myself. But for her it is all right. Poor, pretty little thing!'
And he walked away into the thick of the conversation.
Downstairs the hall was already full of people waiting for their carriages. Langham,
      hurrying down, saw Rose coming out of the cloak-room, muffled up in brown furs, a pale
      child-like fatigue in her looks which set his heart beating faster than ever.
'Miss Leyburn, how are you going home?'
'Will you ask for a hansom, please?'
'Take my arm,' he said, and she clung to him through the crush till they reached the
      door.
Nothing but private carriages were in sight. The street seemed blocked, a noisy tumult of
      horses and footmen and shouting men with lanterns. Which of them suggested, 'Shall we walk a
      few steps?' At any rate, here they were, out in the wind and the darkness, every step carrying
      them farther away from that moving patch of noise and light behind.
'We shall find a cab at once in Park Lane,' he said. 'Are you warm?'
'Perfectly.'
A fur hood fitted round her face, to which the colour was coming back. She held her cloak
      tightly round her, and her little feet, fairly well shod, slipped in and out on the dry frosty
      pavement.
Suddenly they passed a huge unfinished house, the building of which was being pushed on by
      electric light. The great walls, ivory white in the glare, rose into the purply-blue of the
      starry February sky, and as they passed within the power of the lamps, each saw with noonday
      distinctness every line and feature in the other's face. They swept on—the night, with its
      alternations of flame and shadow, an unreal and enchanted world about them. A space of
      darkness succeeded the space of daylight. Behind them in the distance was the sound of hammers
      and workmen's voices; before them the dim trees of the park. Not a human being was in sight.
      London seemed to exist to be the mere dark friendly shelter of this wandering of theirs.


A blast of wind blew her cloak out of her grasp. But before she could close it again, an arm
      was flung around her. She could not speak or move, she stood passive, conscious only of the
      strangeness of the wintry wind, and of this warm breast against which her cheek was laid.
'Oh, stay there!' a voice said close to her ear. 'Rest there—pale tired child—pale tired
      little child!'
That moment seemed to last an eternity. He held her close, cherishing and protecting her
      from the cold—not kissing her—till at length she looked up with bright eyes, shining through
      happy tears.
'Are you sure at last?' she said, strangely enough, speaking out of the far depths of her
      own thought to his.
'Sure!' he said, his expression changing. 'What can I be sure of? I am sure that I am not
      worth your loving, sure that I am poor, insignificant, obscure, that if you give yourself to
      me you will be miserably throwing yourself away!'
She looked at him, still smiling, a white sorceress weaving spells about him in the
      darkness. He drew her lightly gloved hand through his arm, holding the fragile fingers close
      in his, and they moved on.
'Do you know,' he repeated—a tone of intense melancholy replacing the tone of passion,—'how
      little I have to give you?'
'I know,' she answered, her face turned shyly away from him, her words coming from under the
      fur hood which had fallen forward a little. 'I know that—that—you are not rich, that you
      distrust yourself, that——'
'Oh, hush,' he said, and his voice was full of pain. 'You know so little; let me paint
      myself. I have lived alone, for myself, in myself, till sometimes there seems to be hardly
      anything left in me to love or be loved; nothing but a brain, a machine that exists only for
      certain selfish ends. My habits are the tyrants of years; and at Murewell, though I loved you
      there, they were strong enough to carry me away from you. There is something paralysing in me,
      which is always forbidding me to feel, to will. Sometimes I think it is an actual physical
      disability—the horror that is in me of change, of movement, of effort. Can you bear with me?
      Can you be poor? Can you live a life of monotony? Oh, impossible!' he broke out, almost
      putting her hand away from him. 'You, who ought to be a queen of this world, for whom
      everything bright and brilliant is waiting if you will but stretch out your hand to it. It is
      a crime—an infamy—that I should be speaking to you like this!'
Rose raised her head. A passing light shone upon her. She was trembling and pale again, but
      her eyes were unchanged.
'No, no,' she said wistfully; 'not if you love me.'
He hung above her, an agony of feeling in the fine rigid face, of which the beautiful
      features and surfaces were already worn and blanched by the life of thought. What possessed
      him was not so much distrust of circumstance as doubt, hideous doubt,
       of himself, of this very passion beating within him. She saw nothing, meanwhile,
      but the self-depreciation which she knew so well in him, and against which her love in its
      rash ignorance and generosity cried out.
'You will not say you love me!' she cried, with hurrying breath. 'But I know—I know—you
      do.'
Then her courage sinking, ashamed, blushing, once more turning away from him—'At least, if
      you don't, I am very—very—unhappy.'
The soft words flew through his blood. For an instant he felt himself saved, like
      Faust,—saved by the surpassing moral beauty of one moment's impression. That she should need
      him, that his life should matter to hers! They were passing the garden wall of a great house.
      In the deepest shadow of it, he stooped suddenly and kissed her.
</div></body></text></TEI>