<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of Robert Elsmere, by Mrs. Humphry
     Ward.</title><author>Ward, Humphry, Mrs. (1851-1920)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1888</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="47">
CHAPTER XLVII
Meanwhile the Leyburns were at Burwood again. Rose's summer, indeed, was much varied by
      visits to country houses—many of them belonging to friends and acquaintances of the Flaxman
      family—by concerts, and the demands of several new and exciting artistic friendships. But she
      was seldom loth to come back to the little bare valley and the gray-walled house. Even the
      rain which poured down in August, quite unabashed by any consciousness of fine weather
      elsewhere, was not as intolerable to her as in past days.
The girl was not herself; there was visible in her not only that general softening and
      deepening of character which had been the consequence of her trouble in the spring, but a
      painful ennui she could hardly disguise, a longing for she knew not what. She was
      beginning to take the homage paid to her gift and her beauty with a quiet dignity, which was
      in no sense false modesty, but implied a certain clearness of vision, curious and disquieting
      in so young and dazzling a creature. And when she came home from her travels she would develop
      a taste for long
       walks, breasting the mountains in rain or sun, penetrating to their austerest
      solitudes alone, as though haunted by that profound saying of Obermann, 'Man is not made for
      enjoyment only—la tristesse fait aussi partie de ses vastes besoins.'
What, indeed, was it that ailed her? In her lonely moments, especially in those moments
      among the high fells, beside some little tarn or streamlet, while the sheets of mist swept by
      her, or the great clouds dappled the spreading sides of the hills, she thought often of
      Langham—of that first thrill of passion which had passed through her, delusive and abortive,
      like one of those first thrills of spring which bring out the buds, only to provide victims
      for the frost. Now with her again 'a moral east wind was blowing.' The passion was gone. The
      thought of Langham still roused in her a pity that seemed to strain at her heartstrings. But
      was it really she, really this very Rose, who had rested for that one intoxicating instant on
      his breast? She felt a sort of bitter shame over her own shallowness of feeling. She must
      surely be a poor creature, else how could such a thing have befallen her and have left so
      little trace behind?
And then, her hand dabbling in the water, her face raised to the blind friendly mountains,
      she would go dreaming far afield. Little vignettes of London would come and go on the inner
      retina; smiles and sighs would follow one another.
'How kind he was that time! how amusing this!'
Or, 'How provoking he was that afternoon! how cold that evening!'
Nothing else—the pronoun remained ambiguous.
'I want a friend!' she said to herself once as she was sitting far up in the bosom of High
      Fell, 'I want a friend badly. Yet my lover deserts me, and I send away my friend!'
One afternoon Mrs. Thornburgh, the vicar, and Rose were wandering round the churchyard
      together, enjoying a break of sunny weather after days of rain. Mrs. Thornburgh's personal
      accent, so to speak, had grown perhaps a little more defined, a little more emphatic even,
      than when we first knew her. The vicar, on the other hand, was a trifle grayer, a trifle more
      submissive, as though on the whole, in the long conjugal contest of life, he was getting
      clearly worsted as the years went on. But the performance through which his wife was now
      taking him tried him exceptionally, and she only kept him to it with difficulty. She had had
      an attack of bronchitis in the spring, and was still somewhat delicate—a fact which to his
      mind gave her an unfair advantage of him. For she would make use of it to keep constantly
      before him ideas which he disliked, and in which he considered she took a morbid and
      unbecoming pleasure. The vicar was of opinion that when his latter end overtook him he should
      meet it on the whole as courageously as other men. But he was altogether averse to dwelling
      upon it, or the adjuncts of it, beforehand. Mrs. Thornburgh, however, since her illness had
      awoke to that inquisitive affectionate
       interest in these very adjuncts which many women feel. And it was extremely
      disagreeable to the vicar.
At the present moment she was engaged in choosing the precise spots in the little churchyard
      where it seemed to her it would be pleasant to rest. There was one corner in particular which
      attracted her, and she stood now looking at it with measuring eyes and dissatisfied mouth.
'William, I wish you would come here and help me!'
The vicar took no notice, but went on talking to Rose.
'William!' imperatively.
The vicar turned unwillingly.
'You know, William, if you wouldn't mind lying with your feet that way, there would
      be just room for me. But, of course, if you will have them the other way——' The
      shoulders in the old black silk mantle went up, and the gray curls shook dubiously.
The vicar's countenance showed plainly that he thought the remark worse than irrelevant.
'My dear,' he said crossly, 'I am not thinking of those things, nor do I wish to think of
      them. Everything has its time and place. It is close on tea, and Miss Rose says she must be
      going home.'
Mrs. Thornburgh again shook her head, this time with a disapproving sigh.
'You talk, William,' she said severely, 'as if you were a young man, instead of being turned
      sixty-six last birthday.'
And again she measured the spaces with her eye, checking the results aloud. But the vicar
      was obdurately deaf. He strolled on with Rose, who was chattering to him about a visit to
      Manchester, and the little church gate clicked behind them. Hearing it, Mrs. Thornburgh
      relaxed her measurements. They were only really interesting to her after all when the vicar
      was by. She hurried after them as fast as her short squat figure would allow, and stopped
      midway to make an exclamation.
'A carriage!' she said, shading her eyes with a very plump hand, 'stopping at
      Greybarns!'
The one road of the valley was visible from the churchyard, winding along the bottom of the
      shallow green trough, for at least two miles. Greybarns was a farmhouse just beyond Burwood,
      about half a mile away.
Mrs. Thornburgh moved on, her matronly face aglow with interest.
'Mary Jenkinson taken ill!' she said. 'Of course, that's Doctor Baker! Well, it's to be
      hoped it won't be twins this time. But, as I told her last Sunday, "It's
      constitutional, my dear." I knew a woman who had three pairs! Five o'clock now. Well, about
       seven it'll be worth while sending to inquire.'
When she overtook the vicar and his companion, she began to whisper certain particulars into
      the ear that was not on Rose's side. The vicar, who, like Uncle Toby, was possessed of
       a fine natural modesty, would have preferred that his wife should refrain from
      whispering on these topics in Rose's presence. But he submitted lest opposition should provoke
      her into still more audible improprieties; and Rose walked on a step or two in front of the
      pair, her eyes twinkling a little. At the vicarage gate she was let off without the customary
      final gossip. Mrs. Thornburgh was so much occupied in the fate hanging over Mary Jenkinson
      that she, for once, forgot to catechise Rose as to any marriageable young men she might have
      come across in a recent visit to a great country-house of the neighbourhood; an operation
      which formed the invariable pendant to any of Rose's absences.
So, with a smiling nod to them both, the girl turned homewards. As she did so she became
      aware of a man's figure walking along the space of road between Greybarns and Burwood, the
      western light behind it.
Dr. Baker? But even granting that Mrs. Jenkinson had brought him five miles on a false
      alarm, in the provoking manner of matrons, the shortest professional visit could not be over
      in this time.
She looked again, shading her eyes. She was nearing the gate of Burwood, and involuntarily
      slackened step. The man who was approaching, catching sight of the slim girlish figure in the
      broad hat and pink and white cotton dress, hurried up. The colour rushed to Rose's cheek. In
      another minute she and Hugh Flaxman were face to face.
She could not hide her astonishment.
'Why are you not in Scotland?' she said after she had given him her hand. 'Lady Helen told
      me last week she expected you in Ross-shire.'
Directly the words left her mouth she felt she had given him an opening. And why had Nature
      plagued her with this trick of blushing?
'Because I am here!' he said smiling, his keen dancing eyes looking down upon her. He was
      bronzed as she had never seen him. And never had he seemed to bring with him such an
      atmosphere of cool pleasant strength. 'I have slain so much since the first of July that I can
      slay no more. I am not like other men. The Nimrod in me is easily gorged, and goes to sleep
      after a while. So this is Burwood?
He had caught her just on the little sweep leading to the gate, and now his eye swept
      quickly over the modest old house, with its trim garden, its overgrown porch and open casement
      windows. She dared not ask him again why he was there. In the properest manner she invited him
      'to come in and see mamma.'
'I hope Mrs. Leyburn is better than she was in town? I shall be delighted to see her. But
      must you go in so soon? I left my carriage half a mile below, and have been revelling in the
      sun and air. I am loth to go indoors yet awhile. Are you
       busy? Would it trouble you to put me in the way to the head of the valley? Then, if
      you will allow me, I will present myself later.'
Rose thought his request as little in the ordinary line of things as his appearance. But she
      turned and walked beside him, pointing out the crags at the head, the great sweep of High
      Fell, and the pass over to Ullswater, with as much sangfroid as she was mistress
      of.
He, on his side, informed her that on his way to Scotland he had bethought himself that he
      had never seen the Lakes, that he had stopped at Whinborough, was bent on walking over the
      High Fell pass to Ullswater, and making his way thence to Ambleside, Grasmere, and
      Keswick.
'But you are much too late to-day to get to Ullswater?' cried Rose incautiously.
'Certainly. You see my hotel,' and he pointed, smiling, to a white farmhouse standing just
      at the bend of the valley, where the road turned towards Whinborough. 'I persuaded the good
      woman there to give me a bed for the night, took my carriage a little farther, then, knowing I
      had friends in these parts, I came on to explore.'
Rose angrily felt her flush getting deeper and deeper.
'You are the first tourist,' she said coolly, 'who has ever stayed in Whindale.'
'Tourist! I repudiate the name. I am a worshipper at the shrine of Wordsworth and Nature.
      Helen and I long ago defined a tourist as a being with straps. I defy you to discover a strap
      about me, and I left my Murray in the railway carriage.'
He looked at her laughing. She laughed too. The infection of his strong sunny presence was
      irresistible. In London it had been so easy to stand on her dignity, to remember whenever he
      was friendly that the night before he had been distant. In these green solitudes it was not
      easy to be anything but natural—the child of the moment!
'You are neither more practical nor more economical than when I saw you last,' she said
      demurely. 'When did you leave Norway?'
They wandered on past the vicarage talking fast. Mr. Flaxman, who had been joined for a
      time, on his fishing tour, by Lord Waynflete, was giving her an amusing account of the
      susceptibility to titles shown by the primitive democrats of Norway. As they passed a gap in
      the vicarage hedge, laughing and chatting. Rose became aware of a window and a gray head
      hastily withdrawn. Mr. Flaxman was puzzled by the merry flash, instantly suppressed, that shot
      across her face.
Presently they reached the hamlet of High Close, and the house where Mary Backhouse died,
      and where her father and the poor bedridden Jim still lived. They mounted the path behind it,
      and plunged into the hazel plantation which had sheltered Robert and Catherine on a memorable
      night. But
       when they were through it, Rose turned to the right along a scrambling path leading
      to the top of the first great shoulder of High Fell. It was a steep climb, though a short one,
      and it seemed to Rose that when she had once let him help her over a rock her hand was never
      her own again. He kept it an almost constant prisoner on one pretext or another till they were
      at the top.
Then she sank down on a rock out of breath. He stood beside her, lifting his brown wideawake
      from his brow. The air below had been warm and relaxing. Here it played upon them both with a
      delicious life-giving freshness. He looked round on the great hollow bosom of the fell, the
      crags buttressing it on either hand, the winding greenness of the valley, the white sparkle of
      the river.
'It reminds me a little of Norway. The same austere and frugal beauty—the same bare valley
      floors. But no pines, no peaks, no fiords!'
'No!' said Rose scornfully, 'we are not Norway, and we are not Switzerland. To prevent
      disappointment, I may at once inform you that we have no glaciers, and that there is perhaps
      only one place in the district where a man who was not an idiot could succeed in killing
      himself.'
He looked at her, calmly smiling.
'You are angry,' he said, 'because I make comparisons. You are wholly on a wrong scent. I
      never saw a scene in the world that pleased me half as much as this bare valley, that gray
      roof'—and he pointed to Burwood among its trees—'and this knoll of rocky ground.'
His look travelled back to her, and her eyes sank beneath it. He threw himself down on the
      short grass beside her.
'It rained this morning,' she still had the spirit to murmur under her breath.
He took not the smallest heed.
'Do you know,' he said—and his voice dropped—'can you guess at all why I am here
      to-day?'
'You had never seen the Lakes,' she repeated in a prim voice, her eyes still cast down, the
      corners of her mouth twitching. 'You stopped at Whinborough, intending to take the pass over
      to Ullswater, thence to make your way to Ambleside and Keswick—or was it to Keswick and
      Ambleside?'
She looked up innocently. But the flashing glance she met abashed her again.
'Taquine!' he said, 'but you shall not laugh me out of countenance. If I said all
      that to you just now, may I be forgiven. One purpose, one only, brought me from Norway,
      forbade me to go to Scotland, drew me to Whinborough, guided me up your valley—the purpose of
      seeing your face!'
It could not be said at that precise moment that he had attained it. Rather she seemed bent
      on hiding that face quite away from him. It seemed to him an age before, drawn by the
       magnetism of his look, her hands dropped, and she faced him, crimson, her breath
      fluttering a little. Then she would have spoken, but he would not let her. Very tenderly and
      quietly his hand possessed itself of hers as he knelt beside her.
'I have been in exile for two months—you sent me. I saw that I troubled you in London. You
      thought I was pursuing you—pressing you. Your manner said "Go!" and I went. But do you think
      that for one day, or hour, or moment I have thought of anything else in those Norway woods but
      of you and of this blessed moment when I should be at your feet, as I am now?'
She trembled. Her hand seemed to leap in his. His gaze melted, enwrapped her. He bent
      forward. In another moment her silence would have so answered for her that his covetous arms
      would have stolen about her for good and all. But suddenly a kind of shiver ran through her—a
      shiver which was half memory, half shame. She drew back violently, covering her eyes with her
      hand.
'Oh no, no!' she cried, and her other hand struggled to get free, 'don't, don't talk to me
      so—I have a—a—confession.'
He watched her, his lips trembling a little, a smile of the most exquisite indulgence and
      understanding dawning in his eyes. Was she going to confess to him what he knew so well
      already? If he could only force her to say it on his breast.
But she held him at arm's length.
'You remember—you remember Mr. Langham?'
'Remember him!' echoed Mr. Flaxman fervently.
'That thought-reading night at Lady Charlotte's, on the way home, he spoke to me. I said I
      loved him. I did love him; I let him kiss me!'
Her flush had quite faded. He could hardly tell whether she was yielding or defiant as the
      words burst from her.
An expression, half trouble, half compunction, came into his face.
'I knew,' he said very low; 'or rather, I guessed.' And for an instant it occurred to him to
      unburden himself, to ask her pardon for that espionage of his. But no, no; not till he had her
      safe. 'I guessed, I mean, that there had been something grave between you. I saw you were sad.
      I would have given the world to comfort you.'
Her lip quivered childishly.
'I said I loved him that night. The next morning he wrote to me that it could never be.'
He looked at her a moment embarrassed. The conversation was not easy. Then the smile broke
      once more.
'And you have forgotten him as he deserved. If I were not sure of that I could wish him all
      the tortures of the Inferno! As it is, I cannot think of him; I cannot let you think
      of him. Sweet, do you know that ever since I first saw you the one thought of my days, the
      dream of my nights, the purpose of my
       whole life, has been to win you? There was another in the field; I knew it. I stood
      by and waited. He failed you—I knew he must in some form or other. Then I was hasty, and you
      resented it. Little tyrant, you made yourself a Rose with many thorns! But, tell me, tell me,
      it is all over—your pain, my waiting. Make yourself sweet to me! unfold to me at last?'
An instant she wavered. His bliss was almost in his grasp. Then she sprang up, and Flaxman
      found himself standing by her, rebuffed and surprised.
'No, no!' she cried, holding out her hands to him though all the time. 'Oh, it is too soon!
      I should despise myself, I do despise myself. It tortures me that I can change and forget so
      easily; it ought to torture you. Oh, don't ask me yet to—to——'
'To be my wife,' he said calmly, his cheek a little flushed, his eye meeting hers with a
      passion in it that strove so hard for self-control it was almost sternness.
'Not yet!' she pleaded, and then, after a moment's hesitation, she broke into the most
      appealing smiles, though the tears were in her eyes, hurrying out the broken, beseeching
      words. 'I want a friend so much—a real friend. Since Catherine left I have had no one. I have
      been running riot. Take me in hand. Write to me, scold me, advise me, I will be your pupil, I
      will tell you everything. You seem to me so fearfully wise, so much older. Oh, don't be vexed.
      And—and—in six months——'
She turned away, rosy as her name. He held her still, so rigidly, that her hands were almost
      hurt. The shadow of the hat fell over her eyes; the delicate outlines of the neck and
      shoulders in the pretty pale dress were defined against the green hill background. He studied
      her deliberately, a hundred different expressions sweeping across his face. A debate of the
      most feverish interest was going on within him. Her seriousness at the moment, the chances of
      the future, her character, his own—all these knotty points entered into it, had to be weighed
      and decided with lightning rapidity. But Hugh Flaxman was born under a lucky star, and the
      natal charm held good.
At last he gave a long breath; he stooped and kissed her hands.
'So be it. For six months I will be your guardian, your friend, your teasing implacable
      censor. At the end of that time I will be—well, never mind what. I give you fair warning.'
He released her. Rose clasped her hands before her and stood drooping. Now that she had
      gained her point, all her bright mocking independence seemed to have vanished. She might have
      been in reality the tremulous timid child she seemed. His spirits rose; he began to like the
      rôle she had assigned to him. The touch of unexpectedness, in all she said and did, acted with
      exhilarating force on his fastidious romantic sense.
'Now, then,' he said, picking up her gloves from the grass, 'you have given me my rights; I
      will begin to exercise them at once. I must take you home, the clouds are coming up
       again, and on the way will you kindly give me a full, true, and minute account of
      these two months during which you have been so dangerously left to your own devices?'
She hesitated, and began to speak with difficulty, her eyes on the ground. But by the time
      they were in the main Shanmoor path again, and she was not so weakly dependent on his physical
      aid, her spirits too returned. Pacing along with her hands behind her, she began by degrees to
      throw into her accounts of her various visits and performances plenty of her natural
      malice.
And after a bit, as that strange storm of feeling which had assailed her on the mountain-top
      abated something of its bewildering force, certain old grievances began to raise very lively
      heads in her. The smart of Lady Fauntleroy's ball was still there; she had not yet forgiven
      him all those relations; and the teasing image of Lady Florence woke up in her.
'It seems to me,' he said at last dryly, as he opened a gate for her not far from Burwood,
      'that you have been making yourself agreeable to a vast number of people. In my new capacity
      of censor I should like to warn you that there is nothing so bad for the character as
      universal popularity.'
'I have not got a thousand and one important cousins!' she exclaimed, her lip
      curling. 'If I want to please, I must take pains, else "nobody minds me."'
He looked at her attentively, his handsome face aglow with animation.
'What can you mean by that?' he said slowly.
But she was quite silent, her head well in air.
'Cousins?' he repeated. 'Cousins? And clearly meant as a taunt at me! Now when did you see
      my cousins? I grant that I possess a monstrous and indefensible number. I have it. You think
      that at Lady Fauntleroy's ball I devoted myself too much to my family, and too little
      to——'
'Not at all!' cried Rose hastily, adding, with charming incoherence, while she twisted a
      sprig of honeysuckle in her restless fingers, 'Some cousins of course are
      pretty.'
He paused an instant: then a light broke over his face, and his burst of quiet laughter was
      infinitely pleasant to hear. Rose got redder and redder. She realised dimly that she was
      hardly maintaining the spirit of their contract, and that he was studying her with eyes
      inconveniently bright and penetrating.
'Shall I quote to you,' he said, 'a sentence of Sterne's? If it violate our contract I must
      plead extenuating circumstances. Sterne is admonishing a young friend as to his manners in
      society: "You are in love," he says. "Tant mieux. But do not imagine that the fact
      bestows on you a licence to behave like a bear towards all the rest of the world.
       Affection may surely conduct thee through an avenue of women to her who possesses thy
       heart without tearing the flounces of any of their petticoats"—
      not even those of little cousins of seventeen! I say this, you will observe, in the
      capacity you have assigned me. In another capacity I venture to think I could justify myself
      still better.'
'My guardian and director,' cried Rose, 'must not begin his functions by misleading and
      sophistical quotations from the classics!'
He did not answer for a moment. They were at the gate of Burwood, under a thick screen of
      wild cherry trees. The gate was half open, and his hand was on it.
'And my pupil,' he said, bending to her, 'must not begin by challenging the prisoner whose
      hands she has bound, or he will not answer for the consequences!'
His words were threatening, but his voice, his fine expressive face, were infinitely sweet.
      By a kind of fascination she never afterwards understood, Rose for answer startled him and
      herself. She bent her head; she laid her lips on the hand which held the gate, and then she
      was through it in an instant. He followed her in vain. He never overtook her till at the
      drawing-room door she paused with amazing dignity.
'Mamma,' she said, throwing it open, 'here is Mr. Flaxman. He is come from Norway, and is on
      his way to Ullswater. I will go and speak to Margaret about tea.'
</div></body></text></TEI>