
VII.—A Protestor, but not a Protestant.
The infant Ambrosius and his conductors could scarcely reach the convent in safety. The
            building showed few windows to the street, but they were all broken. What might have
            happened in a few days, but that Ginx's Baby took the matter into his own hands, none
            can say.
The treatment to which the little saint was subjected soured his temper. His kind
            nurses had choked him twice a day with incense, and now he had inhaled for seven hours
            the air of the Queen's Bench. On his return to the convent he was hastily fed, and
            carried to the chapel to give thanks for the victory of the day. Wrapped in a handsome
            chasuble, they laid him on the steps of the altar. In the most solemn part of the
            service he coughed, and grew sick. The chasuble was bespattered. When the officiating
            priest, to save that garment, took the child in his arms, he nefariously polluted the
            sacerdotal vestments and the altar steps. Then he kicked toward the altar itself, roared
            lustily, and finally went into convulsions in Sister Suspiciosa's arms. Like most women,
            the Lady Superior required her enthusiasm to be fed with success. She began to think
            that she had been cozened: Ginx's Baby was too evidently a spiritual miscarriage. He
            must, like the rest of his family, be, indeed, “Protestant to the backbone.” Father
            Certificatus agreed with her. His robes and best chasuble were befouled.
“Let us not risk a repetition of this conduct,” said he; “let the child be given up. He
            is baptized, and cannot be severed from the Church. He will return after many days.”
Next morning the solicitors of the Protestant Detectoral Association received a letter
            from their opponents. In this they said that—presuming Messrs. Roundhead, Roundhead, and
            Lollard, intended to apply to the Master of the Rolls, the authorities of the convent
            had decided, after having vindicated themselves in the Queen's Bench, to give up the
            child, which would be, for twenty-four hours, at the order and disposal of the
            Association, and afterwards of his parents. “We are instructed by our clients,” they
            added, “to ask you to bear in mind that the child has been admitted, and is a member of
            the Catholic Church, owing allegiance to the Holy Father at Rome, a bond from which only
            the Papal excommunication can absolve him.”
