
VII.—Malthus and Man.
Two gentlemen, who had been observing the excitement, here came forward.
FIRST GENTLEMAN. This is our problem again, Mr. Philosopher.
Mr. PHILOSOPHER (to Ginx). You don't know what to do with your infant, my friend, and
            you think the State ought to provide for it? I understand you to say this is your
            thirteenth child. How came you to have so many?
This question, though put with profound and even melancholy gravity, disconcerted Ginx,
            Officer, and Chorus, who united in a hearty outburst of laughter.
GINX. Haw, Haw, Haw! How came I to have so many? Why my old woman's a good un and——
In fact, after searching his mind for some clever way of putting a comical rejoinder,
            Ginx laughed boisterously. There are two aspects of a question.
PHILOSOPHER. I am serious, my friend. Did it never occur to you that you had no right
            to bring children into the world unless you could feed and clothe and educate them?
CHORUS. Laws a' mercy!
GINX. I'd like to know how I could help it, naabor. I'm a married man.
PHILOSOPHER. Well, I will go further and say you ought not to have married without a
            fair prospect of being able to provide for any contingent increase of family.
CHORUS. Laws a' mercy!
PHILOSOPHER (waxing warm). What right had you to marry a poor woman, and then both of
            you, with as little forethought as two—a—dogs, or other brutes—to produce between you
            such a multitudinous progeny—
GINX. Civil words, naabor; don't call my family hard names.
PHILOSOPHER. Then let me say, such a monstrous number of children as thirteen? You
            knew, as you said just now, that wages were wages and did not vary much. And yet you
            have gone on subdividing your resources by the increase of what must become a degenerate
            offspring. (To the Chorus) All you workpeople are doing it. Is it not time to think
            about these things and stop the indiscriminate production of human beings, whose lives
            you cannot properly maintain? Ought you not to act more like reflective creatures and
            less like brutes? As if breeding were the whole object of life! How much better for you,
            my friend, if you had never married at all, than to have had the worry of a wife and
            children all these years.
The philosopher had gone too far. There were some angry murmurs among the women and
            Ginx's face grew dark. He was thinking of “all those years” and the poor creature that
            from morning to night and Sunday to Sunday, in calm and storm, had clung to his rough
            affections: and the bright eyes, and the winding arms so often trellised over his
            tremendous form, and the coy tricks and laughter that had cheered so many tired hours.
            He may have been much of a brute, but he felt that, after all, that sort of thing was
            denied to dogs and pigs. Before he could translate his thoughts into words or acts a
            shrewd-looking, curly-haired stonemason, who stood by with his tin on his arm, cut into
            the discussion.
STONEMASON. Your doctrines won't go down here, Mr. Philosopher. I've 'eard of them
            before. I'd just like to ask you what a man's to do and what a woman's to do if they
            don't marry: and if they do, how can you honestly hinder them from having any
            children?
The stonemason had rudely struck out the cardinal issues of the question.
PHILOSOPHER. Well, to take the last point first, there are physical and ethical
            questions involved in it, which it is hard to discuss before such an audience as
            this.
STONEMASON. But you must discuss 'em, if you wish us to change our ways, and stop
            breeding.
PHILOSOPHER. Very well: perhaps you are right. But, again, I should first have to
            establish a basis for my arguments, by showing that the conception of marriage
            entertained by you all is a low one. It is not simply a breeding matter. The beauty and
            value of the relation lies in its educational effects—the cultivation of mutual
            sentiments and refinements of great importance to a community.
STONEMASON. Ay! Very beautiful and refining to Mr. and Mrs. Philosopher, but I'd like
            to know where the country would have been if our fathers had held to that view of
            matrimony? Why, ain't it in natur' for all beings to pair, and have young? an' you say
            we ain't to do it! I think a statesman ought to make something out of what's nateral to
            human beings, and not try to change their naturs. Besides, ain't there good of another
            kind to be got out of the relation of parents and children? Did you ever have a child
            yourself?
GINX (contemplating the Philosopher's physique). HE have a youngster! He couldn't.
CHORUS. Ha! Ha! Ha!
STONEMASON. I don't believe in yer humbuggin' notions. They lead to lust and crime;—I'm
            told they do in France. If you yourself haven't the human natur in you to know it, I'll
            tell you, and we can all tell you that as a rule if the healthy desires of natur ain't
            satisfied in a honest way, they will be in another. You can't stop eating by passin' an
            act of Parleyment to stop it. And as for yer eddication and cultivation, that makes no
            difference. We know something here about yer eddicated men;—more than they think. Who is
            it we meet about the streets late at night, goin' to the gay houses? Some of 'em stand
            near as high as you, but that don't alter their natur. They have their passions like
            other men; and eddication don't keep 'em down. Well, if that's the case, how can you ask
            people of our sort to put on the curb, or make us do it? Are we to live more like beasts
            than we are now, or do what's worse than murder? I don't see no other way. Among us I
            tell you, sir, three-fourths of our eddication, is eddication of the heart. We have to
            learn to be human, kind, self-denyin', and I think this makes better men, as a rule,
            than head-larnin'; tho' I don't despise that, neither. But you don't suppose
            head-citizens would fight for their country like men with wives and children behind 'em;
            why they don't even at home work for daily food like a man with wife and babies to
            provide for!
The stonemason was above his class—one of those shrewd men that “the people called
            Methodists” get hold of, and use among the lower orders, under the name of “local
            preachers;” men who learn to think and speak better than their fellows. The Philosopher
            testified some admiration by listening attentively, and was about to reply, but the
            Chorus was tired, and the women would not hear him.
CHORUS. Best get out o' this. We don't want any o' yer filhosophy. Go and get childer'
            of yer own, etc., etc.
The Philosopher and his friend departed, carrying with them unsolved the problem they
            had brought.
