<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>III.—Work and Ideas.</t:head>
<t:p>I return again to Ginx's menace to his wife, who was suckling her infant at the time on
            the bed. For her he had an animal affection that preserved her from unkindness, even in
            his cups. His hand had never unmanned itself by striking her, and rarely indeed did it
            injure any one else. He wrestled not against flesh and blood, or powers, or
            principalities, or wicked spirits in high places. He struggled with clods and stones,
            and primeval chaos. His hands were horny with the fight, and his nature had perhaps
            caught some of the dull ruggedness of the things wherewith he battled. Hard and with a
            will had he worked through the years of wedded life, and, to speak him fair, he had
            acted honestly, within the limits of his knowledge and means, for the good of his
            family. How narrow were those limits! Every week he threw into the lap of Mrs. Ginx the
            eighteen or twenty shillings which his strength and temperance enabled him continuously
            to earn, less sixpence reserved for the public-house, whither he retreated on Sundays
            after the family dinner. A dozen children overrunning the space in his rooms was then a
            strain beyond the endurance of Ginx. Nor had he the heart to try the common plan, and
            turn his children out of doors on the chance of their being picked up in a raid of
            Sunday School teachers. So he turned out himself to talk with the humbler spirits of the
            “Dragon,” or listen sleepily while alehouse demagogues prescribed remedies for State
            abuses.</t:p>
<t:p>Our friend was nearly as guiltless of knowledge as if Eve had never rifled the tree
            whereon it grew. Vacant of policies were his thoughts; innocent he of ideas of
            state-craft. He knew there was a Queen; he had seen her. Lords and Commons were to him
            vague deities possessing strange powers. Indeed, he had been present when some of his
            better-informed companions had recognized with cheers certain gentlemen,—of whom Ginx's
            estimate was expressed by a reference to his test of superiority to himself in that
            which he felt to be greatest within him—“I could lick 'em with my little finger”—as the
            Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Prime Minister. Little recked he of their uses or
            abuses. The functions of Government were to him Asian mysteries. He only felt that it
            ought to have a strong arm, like the brawny member wherewith he preserved order in his
            domestic kingdom, and therefore generally associated Government with the Police. In his
            view these were to clear away evil-doers and leave every one else alone. The higher
            objects of Government were, if at all, outlined in the shadowiest form in his
            imagination. Government imposed taxes—that he was obliged to know. Government maintained
            the parks; for that he thanked it. Government made laws, but what they were, or with
            what aim or effects made, he knew not, save only that by them something was done to
            raise or depress the prices of bread, tea, sugar, and other necessaries. Why they should
            do so he never conceived—I am not sure that he cared. Legislation sometimes pinched him,
            but darkness so hid from him the persons and objects of the legislators that he could
            not criticise the theories which those powerful beings were subjecting to experiment at
            his cost. I must, at any risk, say something about this in a separate chapter.</t:p>
</t:div>