
IV.—Without prejudice to any one but the Guardians.
The Court of Queen's Bench, after hearing an elaborate statement from the
            Attorney-General, granted a rule nisi for a mandamus. This rule was entered for argument
            in a paper called “The Special Paper,” and, the list being a heavy one, nearly a year
            elapsed before it was reached. It was then again postponed several times “for the
            convenience of counsel.”
The Board of St. Bartimeus chafed under the law's delay. They became morbidly sensitive
            to the incubus of Ginx's Baby, especially as the press had been reviewing some of their
            recent acts with great bitterness. The Guardians were defiant. Having served their
            notices, they were induced by Mr. Stink to resolve not to maintain the infant. The poor
            child was threatened with dissolution. Thus, no doubt, many difficulties in parochial
            administration are solved—the subject vanishes away. The baby was kept provisionally in
            a room at the workhouse. On the outside of the door was a notice in fair
            round-hand:—
NOTICE. DOLL'S FOUNDLING.
Pending the legal inquiry into the facts concerning the above infant, and a decision as
            to its settlement, all officials, assistants, and servants of the workhouse are
            forbidden to enter the room in which it is deposited, or to render it any service or
            assistance, on pain of dismissal. No food is to be supplied to it from the workhouse
            kitchen.
N.B. This is not intended to prevent persons other than officials, etc., from having
            access to the infant, or assisting it.
BY ORDER OF THE BOARD.
That any body of human beings, other than Patagonians, could have coolly contemplated
            such a result as must have followed upon the strict performance of this order, would be
            incredible except in the instance of the Guardians of St. Bartimeus. There was nothing
            they could not do—or leave undone. Fortunately for Ginx's Baby, the order was disobeyed.
            Occasionally lady visitors went to look at him and give him some food—he was toddling
            about the room on unsteady legs—but charity seemed to be appalled by the official
            questions hanging about this child. The master, Snigger, whose business it was every day
            to ascertain whether the cause of the great parochial quarrel was in, or out of,
            existence, became a traitor to the Board. When the child grew hungry and dangerously
            thin, he brought bottles of pap prepared by Mrs. Snigger, and administered it to him. No
            conclusions to the disfavor of the Board were to be drawn from this conduct, for Snigger
            was particular to say to the boy in a loud voice, each time he fed him:—
“Now, youngster, this is without prejudice, remember! I give you due notice—without
            prejudice.”
Who, in Master Ginx's situation, would have had any prejudices to such action, or have
            expressed them even if they were entertained? He took no objection as he took the pap;
            while Snigger was glad to be able to do an unusual kindness without compromising the
            parish.
Thus things had gone on for many months, when one day an eye of that Argus monster, the
            Public, was set upon Ginx's Baby. A well-known nobleman, calling at the workhouse to see
            a little girl whom he had saved from infamy, as he passed down a corridor was arrested
            by the notice on the door of our hero's room. Curiosity took him in, and horror chained
            him there for some time. Had he not entered, Ginx's Baby, spite of Snigger, would in
            twenty-four hours have ceased to supply facts to history. He was suffering from low
            fever, and his condition was as sensationally shocking as any reporter could have
            wished. Out rushed the peer for a doctor, took a cab to a magistrate and detailed the
            whole case, to be repeated in next morning's papers. Penny-a-liners ran to the spot,
            wrote vivid descriptions of the baby and the room, and transcribed the notice. The
            Guardians were drubbed in trenchant leaders and indignant letters. They, instead of
            bending to the storm, strove to confront it, and passed angry resolutions of a childish
            and grotesque character. The few of them who possessed any sense of propriety were
            railed at in the meetings till they ceased to attend. The uproar outside increased. Why
            did not the President of the Poor-Law Board interfere? At last he did interfere: that
            is, instead of visiting the scene himself, and satisfying his own eyes as to the truth
            of what his ears had heard, a process that would have taken a couple of hours, he
            appointed a gentleman to hold an inquiry. The Guardians became furious. The reports of
            their proceedings read like the vagaries of a lunatic asylum or the deliberations of the
            American Senate. They discharged Snigger for breach of orders, substituting a relative
            of Mr. Stink. They put a lock on the door, and passed food to the Baby by a stick. A
            committee was appointed to see him fed, and they forwarded a memorial to the Poor-Law
            Board, stating that “he daily had more food than he could possibly eat, and was in
            admirable condition.” They refused to allow any doctor but one employed by themselves to
            see him. They procured from him a certificate that the noble busybody and his physician
            had made a mistake, and that all the functions of life in the infant appeared to be in
            perfect order. Then came the gentleman, and the inquiry, and his report, and a letter
            from the Poor-Law Board, and further discussions and more letters, until the bewildered
            public gnashed its teeth at the Minister, the Guardians, and the law, and wished them
            all at Land's End or beyond it.
