<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>II.—Home, sweet Home!</t:head>
<t:p>The day on which Ginx uttered his awful threat was that next to the one wherein number
            twelve had drawn his first breath. His wife lay on the bed which, at the outset of
            wedded life, they had purchased secondhand in Strutton Ground for the sum of nine
            shillings and sixpence. SECOND-HAND! It had passed through, at least, as many hands as
            there were afterwards babies born upon it. Twelfth or thirteenth hand, a vagabond,
            botched bedstead, type of all the furniture in Ginx's rooms, and in numberless houses
            through the vast city. Its dimensions were 4 feet 6 inches by 6 feet. When Ginx, who was
            a stout navvy, and Mrs. Ginx, who was, you may conceive, a matronly woman, were in it,
            there was little vacant space about them. Yet, as they were forced to find
            resting-places for all the children, it not seldom happened that at least one infant was
            perilously wedged between the parental bodies; and latterly they had been so pressed for
            room in the household that two younglings were nestled at the foot of the bed. Without
            foot-board or pillows, the lodgment of these infants was precarious, since any fatuous
            movement of Ginx's legs was likely to expel them head-first. However they were safe, for
            they were sure to fall on one or other of their brothers or sisters.</t:p>
<t:p>I shall be as particular as a valuer, and describe what I have seen. The family
            sleeping-room measured 13 feet 6 inches by 14 feet.</t:p>
<t:p>Opening out of this, and again on the landing of the third-floor, was their kitchen and
            sitting-room; it was not quite so large as the other. This room contained a press, an
            old chest of drawers, a wooden box once used for navvy's tools, three chairs, a stool,
            and some cooking utensils. When, therefore, one little Ginx had curled himself up under
            a blanket on the box, and three more had slipped beneath a tattered piece of carpet
            under the table, there still remained five little bodies to be bedded. For them an old
            straw mattress, limp enough to be rolled up and thrust under the bed, was at night
            extended on the floor. With this, and a patchwork quilt, the five were left to pack
            themselves together as best they could. So that, if Ginx, in some vision of the night,
            happened to be angered, and struck out his legs in navvy fashion, it sometimes came to
            pass that a couple of children tumbled upon the mass of infantile humanity below.</t:p>
<t:p>Not to be described are the dinginess of the walls, the smokiness of the ceilings, the
            grimy windows, the heavy, ever-murky atmosphere of these rooms. They were 8 feet 6
            inches in height, and any curious statist can calculate the number of cubic feet of air
            which they afforded to each person.</t:p>
<t:p>The other side of the street was 14 feet distant. Behind, the backs of similar
            tenements came up black and cowering over the little yard of Number Five. As rare, in
            the well thus formed, was the circulation of air as that of coin in the pockets of the
            inhabitants. I have seen the yard; let me warn you, if you are fastidious, not to enter
            it. Such of the filth of the house as could not, at night, be thrown out of the front
            windows, was there collected, and seldom, if ever, removed. What became of it? What
            becomes of countless such accretions in like places? Are a large proportion of these
            filthy atoms absorbed by human creatures living and dying, instead of being carried away
            by scavengers and inspectors? The forty-five big and little lodgers in the house were
            provided with a single office in the corner of the yard. It had once been capped by a
            cistern, long since rotted away—</t:p>
<t:p>The street was at one time the prey of the gas company; at another, of the drainage
            contractors. They seemed to delight in turning up the fetid soil, cutting deep trenches
            through various strata of filth, and piling up for days or weeks matter that reeked with
            vegetable and animal decay. One needs not affirm that Rosemary Street was not so called
            from its fragrance. If the Ginxes and their neighbors preserved any semblance of health
            in this place, the most popular guardian on the board must own it a miracle. They, poor
            people, knew nothing of “sanitary reform,” “sanitary precautions,” “zymotics,”
            “endemics,” “epidemics,” “deodorizers,” or “disinfectants.” They regarded disease with
            the apathy of creatures who felt it to be inseparable from humanity, and with the
            fatalism of despair.</t:p>
<t:p>Gin was their cardinal prescription, not for cure, but for oblivion: “Sold everywhere.”
            A score of palaces flourished within call of each other in that dismal district—garish,
            rich-looking dens, drawing to the support of their vulgar glory the means, the lives,
            the eternal destinies of the wrecked masses about them. Veritable wreckers they who
            construct these haunts, viler than the wretches who place false beacons and plunder
            bodies on the beach. Bring down the real owners of these places, and show them their
            deadly work! Some of them leading Philanthropists, eloquent at Missionary meetings and
            Bible Societies, paying tribute to the Lord out of the pockets of dying drunkards,
            fighting glorious battles for slaves, and manfully upholding popular rights. My rich
            publican—forgive the pun—before you pay tithes of mint and cummin, much more before you
            claim to be a disciple of a certain Nazarene, take a lesson from one who restored
            fourfold the money he had wrung from honest toil, or reflect on the case of the man to
            whom it was said, “Go sell all thou hast, and give to the poor.” The lips from which
            that counsel dropped offered some unpleasant alternatives, leaving out one, however,
            which nowadays may yet reach you—the contempt of your kind.</t:p>
</t:div>