<t:div type="chapter">
<t:head>V.-An Ungodly Jungle.</t:head>
<t:p>The case of the Guardians of St. Bartimeus against the Guardians of St. Simon Magus was
            at length reached. The argument lasted for two days. There is a grim work, the short
            title whereof is “Burns's Justice,” in five fat volumes, from which the legal Dryasdust
            turns aghast. In one of these portentous books, title “Poor,” pp. 1200, the inquisitive
            may find a code unrivalled by the most malignant ingenuity of former or contemporary
            nations: a code wherein, by gradual accretion, has been framed a system of relief to
            poverty and distress so impolitic, so unprincipled, that none but the driest, mustiest,
            most petrified parish official could be expected to lift up his voice to defend it; so
            complicated that no man under heaven knows its length or breadth or height or depth; yet
            it stands to this hour a monument of English stolidity—a marvel of lazy or ignorant
            statesmanship. Imagine, if you please, a Lord Chief Justice and three Puisnes, all keen,
            practical men, alive to public policy and the common weal, eager to extricate the truth
            and do the right, plunging into this “ungodly jungle,” thwarted at every turn, in search
            of justice for Ginx's Baby. With all his patient industry and lightning quickness of
            apprehension, the Chief Justice found it hard to reconcile past and present, or evolve
            from the vast confusion anything consistent with his moral instincts.—Clear the board,
            gentlemen. True regenerative legislation will begin by drawing away the rubbish. Reform
            means more than repair. Mend, patch, take down a little here, prop up some tottering
            nuisance there, fill in gaping chinks with patent legislative cement, coat old facades
            with bright paint, hide decay beneath a gloze of novelty, titivate, decorate,
            furbish—and after all your house is not a new one, but a whited sepulchre shaking to
            decay. Repair? There is a Repair party, intermediating between Tories and
            Reformers—Radicals or Rooters let us call these latter if you like—who cling to “vested
            interests” and all other sorts of antique nuisances, yet say they are willing to improve
            them. REFORM, which means, Pull down with bold statesman's hand, and with like hand
            REBUILD, is no darling of your political Repairer. Call the party and the men by their
            right names: and give me for utility in legislation or administrative action an Old Tory
            and Obstructive party rather than this middling, meddling, muddling Repairer—</t:p>
<t:quote><t:l> “Eager to change yet fearful to destroy.” </t:l></t:quote>
<t:p>Just now all Social Reformation, in its noblest aims and attempts, is fettered by the
            Repair party. What is termed Sanitary Reform is enfeebled, and the vigor withdrawn from
            it, by this party. “Vested rights,” “the Liberty of the people,” “Interference with
            personal freedom,” “EXPENSE,”—these are the watchwords of the Repairer in opposition to
            him who, pointing to the pallor and fever of a hundred neighborhoods, calls upon a
            ministry to cleanse them with imperial force.</t:p>
<t:p>A comprehensive scheme of National Education is seized and half-throttled by the Repair
            party. “Oh! utilize what there is; improve on and tack to the denominational system;
            avail yourself of the jealousy of sects; see what a grand building that has already
            erected! True, it is not large enough; true, it is badly built; but repair that, and add
            wings. It will cost you ever so much to rebuild—Repair!”</t:p>
<t:p>The methods of relief to the Poor are old, cumbrous, unequal, as stupid as those who
            administer them. Forth steps the Reformer, and cries out—“Clear this wrack away! Get rid
            of your antiquated Bumbledom, your parochial and non-parochial distinctions, your
            complicated map of local authorities; re-distribute the kingdom on some more practical
            system, redress the injustice of unequal rating, improve the machinery and spirit of
            relief, and so on.” You have the Repair party shouting its Non possumus as loudly as any
            other arch-obstructive: “Heaven forbid! Queen Elizabeth and the Poor Laws for ever! To
            the rescue of Local Government and Vested Interests! Repair!”</t:p>
<t:p>Some one with a long head and a divinely-warmed heart, searching vainly for help to
            thousands in the packed alleys of his English Home, sends his quick glance across seas
            to rich lands that daily cry to heaven for strong arms that wield the plough and spade.
            “Ho!” he shouts, “Labor to Land—starvation to production—death unto life!” and he calls
            upon every statesman and patriot to help the good work, and give their energies to frame
            an Emigration Scheme. Then the Repair party foams: “Send away the Labor, the source of
            our wealth? No. Mend the condition of the laborer; give him the sop of political
            rights—free breakfasts—the ballot. Give State funds to alter social conditions? No.
            Improve the methods of local assistance to Emigration; it is a temporary
            remedy—Repair!”</t:p>
<t:p>Thus, according to the gospel of this party, everything must be subject of restoration
            only. Like antiquarians, they utter groans over the abolition of anything, however ugly
            it may be, however unfitted for human uses, and with however so elegant a piece of
            artistry you desire to displace it. For them a Gilbert-Scott politician, reverential
            restorer of bygone styles, enthusiastic to conserve and amend the grotesque Gothic
            policies of the past, rather than some Brunel or Stephenson statesman, engineering in
            novel mastery of circumstances—not fearful to face and conquer even the antique
            impediments of Nature. Give me a trenchant statesman, or I pray you leave legislation
            alone. Better things as they are than patched to distraction.</t:p>
<t:p>At length, by means of some delicate legal adjustments, the judges saw their way to
            affirming that Ginx's Baby's parish was that of St. Bartimeus, and refused the rule for
            a mandamus.</t:p>
</t:div>