
CHAPTER XXII
The two following days dragged themselves uneventfully away. Sylvia did her best to be kind
     to Bill Chester, but she felt ill at ease, and could not help showing it.
And then she missed the excitement and interest of the Casino. Bill had not suggested that
     they should go there, and she would not be the one to do so.
The long motoring expeditions they took each afternoon gave her no pleasure. Her heart was
     far away, in Brittany; in imagination she was standing by a grave surrounded by a shadowy group
     of men and women, mourning the old Marquise who had left Count Paul the means to become once
     more a self-respecting and respected member of the world to which he belonged by right of
     birth....
Had it not been for the Wachners, these two days of dual solitude with Chester would have
     been dreary indeed, but Madame Wachner was their companion on more than one long excursion and
     wherever Madame Wachner went there reigned a kind of jollity and sense of cheer.
Sylvia wondered if the Comte de Virieu was indeed coming back as he had said he would do. And
     yet she knew that were he to return now, at once, to his old ways, his family, those who loved
     him, would have the right to think him incorrigible.
As is the way with a woman when she loves, Sylvia did not consider herself as a factor
     affecting his return to Lacville. Nay, she was bitterly hurt that he had not written her a line
     since he had left.
And now had come the evening of the day when Count Paul had meant to come back. But M.
     Polperro said no word of his return. Still, it was quite possible that he would arrive late,
     and Sylvia did not wish to see him when in the company, not only of Bill Chester, but also of
     the Wachners.
Somehow or other, she had fallen into the habit each evening of asking the Wachners to
     dinner. She did so to-day, but suggested dining at a restaurant.
"Yes, if this time, dear Sylvia, the host is L'Ami Fritz!" said Madame Wachner decidedly. And
     after a slight demur Sylvia consented.
They dined at the hotel which is just opposite the Casino. After the pleasant meal was over,
     for it had been pleasant, and the cheerful hostess had taken special pains over the menu,
     Sylvia weary at the thought of another long, dull evening in the drawing-room of the Villa du
     Lac, was secretly pleased to hear Madame Wachner exclaim coaxingly:
"And now, I do 'ope, Mr. Chester, that you will come over and spend this evening at the
     Casino! I know you do not approve of the play that goes on there, but still, believe me, it is
     the only thing to do at Lacville. Lacville would be a very dull place were it not for the
     Casino!"
Chester smiled.
"You think me far more particular than I am really," he said, lightly. "I don't in the least
     mind going to the Casino." Why should he be a spoil-sport? "But I confess I cannot understand
     the kind of attraction play has for some minds. For instance, I cannot understand the
     extraordinary fascination it seems to exercise over such an intelligent man as is that Comte de
     Virieu."
Madame Wachner looked at the speaker significantly.
"Ah!" she said. "The poor Count! 'E is what you call 'confirmed'—a confirmed gambler. And 'e
     will now be able to play more than ever, for I 'ear a fortune 'as been left to 'im!"
Sylvia was startled. She wondered how the Wachners could have come to know of the Count's
     legacy. She got up, with a nervous, impatient gesture.
How dull, how long, how intolerable had been the last two days spent by her in the company of
     Bill Chester, varied by that of talkative Madame Wachner and the silent, dour Ami Fritz!
Her heart felt very sore. During that last hour she and Count Paul had spent together in the
     garden, she had begged him to stay away—to spend the rest of the summer with his sister.
     Supposing he took her at her word—supposing he never came back to Lacville at all? Sylvia tried
     to tell herself that in that case she would be glad, and that she only wanted her friend to do
     the best, the wisest thing for himself.
Such were her thoughts—her painful thoughts—as she walked across from the restaurant to the
     entrance of the Casino. Two whole days had gone by since she had been there last, and oh! how
     long each hour of those days had seemed!
The two oddly-assorted couples passed through into the hall, and so up to the closely-guarded
     doors of the Club.
The Baccarat Room was very full, fuller than usual, for several parties of merry, rather
     boisterous young men had come out from Paris to spend the evening.
She heard the words that were now so familiar, solemnly shouted out at the further table:
      "La Banque est aux enchères. Qui prend la Banque?"
There was a pause, and there fell on Sylvia's ears the murmur of two voices—the voice of the
     official who represented the Casino authorities, and the deep, low voice which had become so
     dear to her—which thrilled her heart each time she heard it.
Then Count Paul had come back? He had not followed her advice? And instead of being sorry, as
     she ought to have been, she was glad—glad! Not glad to know that he was here in the
     Casino—Sylvia was sorry for that—but glad that he was once more close to her. Till this moment
     she had scarcely realised how much his mere presence meant to her.
She could not see Paul de Virieu, for there was a crowd—a noisy, chattering crowd of
     over-dressed men, each with a gaudily-dressed feminine companion—encompassing her on every
     side.
"Vingt mille francs en Banque! Une fois, deux fois, messieurs?" A pause—then the
     words repeated. "Vingt mille francs en Banque!"
Monsieur Wachner leant his tall, lean form over Sylvia. She looked up surprised, L'Ami Fritz
     very seldom spoke to her, or for the matter of that to anyone.
"You must play to-night, Madame!" he said imperiously. "I have a feeling that to-night you
     will bring us luck, as you did that first time you played."
She looked at him hesitatingly. His words made her remember the friend to whom she so seldom
     gave a thought nowadays.
"Do you remember how pleased poor Anna was that night?" she whispered.
Monsieur Wachner stared at her, and a look of fear, almost of terror, came over his drawn,
     hatchet face.
"Do not speak of her," he exclaimed harshly. "It might bring us ill-luck!"
And then Chester broke in, "Sylvia, do play if you want to play!" he cried rather
     impatiently. It angered him to feel that she would not do in his presence what she would most
     certainly have done were he not there.
And then Sylvia suddenly made up her mind that she would play. Count Paul was holding the
     Bank. He was risking—how much was it?—twenty thousand francs. Eight hundred pounds of his
     legacy? That was madness, absolute madness on his part! Well, she would gamble too! There came
     across her a curious feeling—one that gave her a certain painful joy—the feeling that they two
     were one. While he was risking his money, she would try to win his money. Were he in luck
     to-night, she would be glad to know that it would be her money he would win.
M. Wachner officiously made room for her at the table; and, as she sat down, the Comte de
     Virieu, looking round, saw who had come there, and he flushed and looked away, straight in
     front of him.
"A Madame la main," said Monsieur Wachner eagerly indicating Sylvia. And the
     croupier, with a smile, pushed the two fateful cards towards the fair young Englishwoman.
Sylvia took up the two cards. She glanced down at them. Yes, L'Ami Fritz had been right. She
     was in luck to-night! In a low voice she uttered the welcome words—in French, of course—the
     words "Nine" and "The King," as she put the cards, face upwards, on the green cloth.
And then there came for her and for those who backed her, just as there had done on that
     first fateful evening at the Casino, an extraordinary run of good fortune.
Again and again the cards were dealt to Sylvia, and again and again she turned up a Nine, a
     Queen, a King, an Eight—. Once more the crowd excitedly followed her luck, staring at her with
     grateful pleasure, with fascinated interest, as she brought them temporary wealth.
The more she won, the more she made other people win, the more miserable Sylvia felt, and as
     she saw Count Paul's heap of notes and gold diminishing, she grew unutterably wretched. Eight
     hundred pounds? What an enormous lot of money to risk in an evening!
Then there came a change. For a few turns of the game luck deserted her, and Sylvia breathed
     more freely. She glanced up into Count Paul's impassive face. He looked worn and tired, as well
     he might be after his long journey from Brittany.
Then once more magic fortune came back. It seemed as if only good cards—variations on the
     fateful eights and nines—could be dealt her.
Suddenly she pushed her chair back and got up. Protesting murmurs rose on every side.
"If Madame leaves, the luck will go with her!" she heard one or two people murmur
     discontentedly.
Chester was looking at her with amused, sarcastic, disapproving eyes.
"Well!" he exclaimed. "I don't wonder you enjoy gambling, Sylvia! Are you often taken this
     way? How much of that poor fellow's money have you won?"
"Ninety pounds," she answered mechanically.
"Ninety pounds! And have you ever lost as much as that, may I ask, in an evening?" he was
     still speaking with a good deal of sarcasm in his voice. But still, "money talks," and even
     against his will Chester was impressed. Ninety pounds represents a very heavy bill of costs in
     a country solicitor's practice.
Sylvia looked dully into his face.
"No," she said slowly. "No, the most I ever lost in one evening was ten pounds. I always left
     off playing when I had lost ten pounds. That is the one advantage the player has over the
     banker—he can stop playing when he has lost a small sum."
"Oh! I see!" exclaimed Chester drily.
And then they became silent, for close by where they now stood, a little apart from the
     table, an angry altercation was going on between Monsieur and Madame Wachner. It was the first
     time Sylvia had ever heard the worthy couple quarrelling in public the one with the other.
"I tell you I will not go away!" L'Ami Fritz was saying between his teeth. "I feel
     that to-night I am in luck, in great luck! What I ask you to do, Sophie, is to go away
     yourself, and leave me alone. I have made a thousand francs this evening, and at last I have an
     opportunity of trying my new system. I am determined to try it now, to-night! No—it is no use
     your speaking to me, no use reminding me of any promise I made to you. If I made such a
     promise, I mean to break it!"
Sylvia looked round, a good deal concerned. Madame Wachner's face was red, and she was
     plainly very angry and put out. But when she saw that she and her husband had attracted the
     attention of their English friends, she made a great effort to regain her self-control and good
     humour.
"Very well," she said, "Very well, Fritz! Do not speak to me as if I were an ogress or a
     dragon. I am your wife; it is my duty to obey you. But I will not stay to see you lose the good
     money you have made with the help of our kind friend, Madame Sylvia. Yes, I will go away and
     leave you, my poor Fritz."
And suiting her action to her words, she put her arm familiarly through Sylvia's and together
     they walked out of the Baccarat Room, followed by Chester.
When they were in the vestibule Madame Wachner turned to him with a rueful smile:
"It is a pity," she said, "that Fritz did not come away with us! 'E 'as made a thousand
     francs. It is a great deal of money for us to make—or to lose. I do not believe 'e will keep
     it, for, though you bring 'im luck, my dear"—she turned to Sylvia—"that Count always brings 'im
     bad luck. It 'as been proved to me again and again. Just before you arrived at Lacville with
     poor Madame Wolsky, Fritz 'ad a 'eavy loss!—a very 'eavy loss, and all because the Comte de
     Virieu 'eld the Bank!"
"Perhaps the Count will not hold the Bank again to-night," said Sylvia slowly.
"Of course, 'e will do so!" the other spoke quite crossly, "Did I not tell you, Sylvia, that
     our day servant heard from M. Polperro's wife, whose sister is cook to the Duchesse d'Eglemont,
     that the Comte de Virieu 'as been left an immense fortune by 'is godmother? Well, it is a
     fortune that will soon melt"—she chuckled, as if the thought was very pleasant to her. "But I
     do not think that any of it is likely to melt into Fritz's pocket—though, to be sure, we 'ave
     been very lucky, all of us, to-night," she looked affectionately at Sylvia.
"Even you, Sir"—Madame Wachner turned to Chester with a broad smile—"even you must be pleased
     that we came to the Casino to-night. What a pity it is you did not risk something! Even one
     pound! You might 'ave made quite a nice lot of money to take back to England with you—"
"—Or to spend in Switzerland!" said Chester, laughing. "It is to Switzerland I am going,
     Madame! I shall leave here the day after to-morrow."
"And will you not come back again?" asked Madame Wachner inquisitively.
"I may come back again if Mrs. Bailey is still here; but I do not suppose she will be, for I
     intend to spend at least a fortnight in Switzerland."
The three were now approaching the gates of the Villa du Lac.
"Well, Sylvia," cried Chester. "I suppose I must now say good-night? I do not envy you your
     ill-gotten gains!" He spoke lightly, but there was an undercurrent of reproach in his voice, or
     so Sylvia fancied.
"Good-night!" she said, and her voice was tremulous.
As she held out her hand the little fancy bag which held all her winnings, the bundle of
     notes and loose pieces of gold, fell to the ground.
Madame Wachner stooped down and picked it up. "How 'eavy it is!" she exclaimed, enviously.
     "Good gracious, Sylvia! What a lot you must 'ave made to-night?"
"And the notes don't weigh much," said Sylvia. "It's only the gold that is heavy!"
But she was not thinking of what she was saying. Her heart was full of anguish. How could
     Paul de Virieu have been so mad as to risk such an immense sum, a tenth part of the fortune—for
     fortune it was—which had just been left to him?
Sylvia hated herself for having contributed to his losses. She knew that it was absurd that
     she should feel this, for the same cards would certainly have been dealt to whoever had
     happened to take them from the croupier. But still, superstition is part of the virus
     which fills the gambler's blood, and she had certainly won a considerable part of the money
     Count Paul had lost to-night.
"May I see you back to your house?" asked Chester of Madame Wachner.
"Oh no, Monsieur, I must go back to the Casino and look after Fritz! 'E is a child—quite a
     child as regards money." Madame Wachner sighed heavily. "No, no, you go 'ome to bed in the
     Pension Malfait."
"I shouldn't think of doing such a thing!" he said kindly. "I will come back with you to the
     Casino, and together we will persuade Monsieur Wachner to go home. He has had time to make or
     lose a good deal of money in the last few minutes."
"Yes, indeed he 'as—" again Madame Wachner sighed, and Chester's heart went out to her. She
     was a really nice old woman—clever and intelligent, as well as cheerful and brave. It seemed a
     great pity that she should be cursed with a gambler for a husband.
As they went back into the Casino they could hear the people round them talking of the Comte
     de Virieu, and of the high play that had gone on at the club that evening.
"No, he is winning now," they heard someone say. And Madame Wachner looked anxious. If Count
     Paul were winning, then her Fritz must be losing.
And alas! her fears were justified. When they got up into the Baccarat Room they found L'Ami
     Fritz standing apart from the tables, his hands in his pockets, staring abstractedly out of a
     dark window on to the lake.
"Well?" cried Madame Wachner sharply, "Well, Fritz?"
"I have had no luck!" he shook his head angrily. "It is all the fault of that cursed system!
     If I had only begun at the right, the propitious moment—as I should have done if you had not
     worried me and asked me to go away—I should probably have made a great deal of money," he
     looked at her disconsolately, deprecatingly.
Chester also looked at Madame Wachner. He admired the wife's self-restraint. Her red face got
     a little redder. That was all.
"It cannot be helped," she said a trifle coldly, and in French. "I knew how it would be, so I
     am not disappointed. Have you anything left? Have you got the five louis I gave you at the
     beginning of the evening?"
Monsieur Wachner shook his head gloomily.
"Well then, it is about time we went home." She turned and led the way out.
