
CHAPTER IV A NECESSARY DEVELOPMENT
The few friends who have read the first part of my autobiography may perhaps
     remember that in my younger days I had engaged myself to a girl named Ellen, from whom
     afterwards I parted.  After some two or three years she was left an orphan, and came into the
     possession of a small property, over which unfortunately she had complete power.  She was
     attractive and well-educated, and I heard long after I had broken with her, and had ceased to
     have intercourse with Butts, that the two were married.  He of course, living so near her, had
     known her well, and he found her money useful.  How they agreed I knew not save by report, but
     I was told that after the first child was born, the only child they ever had, Butts grew
     indifferent to her, and that she, to use my friend’s expression, “went off,” by which I suppose
     he meant that she faded.  There happened in those days to live near Butts a small squire,
     married, but with no family.  He was a lethargic creature, about five-and-thirty years old,
     farming eight hundred acres of his own land.  He did not, however, belong to the farming
     class.  He had been to Harrow, was on the magistrates’ bench, and associated with the small
     aristocracy of the country round.  He was like every other squire whom I remember in my native
     county, and I can remember scores of them.  He read no books and tolerated the usual
     conventional breaches of the moral law, but was an intense worshipper of respectability, and
     hated a scandal.  On one point he differed from his neighbours.  He was a Whig and they were
     all Tories.  I have said he read no books, and this, on the whole, is true, but nevertheless he
     did know something about the history of the early part of the century, and he was rather fond
     at political gatherings of making some allusion to Mr. Fox.  His father had sat in the House of
     Commons when Fox was there, and had sternly opposed the French war.  I don’t suppose that
     anybody not actually in it—no Londoner certainly—can understand the rigidity of the
     bonds which restricted county society when I was young, and for aught I know may restrict it
     now.  There was with us one huge and dark exception to the general uniformity.  The earl had
     broken loose, had ruined his estate, had defied decorum and openly lived with strange women at
     home and in Paris, but this black background did but set off the otherwise universal adhesion
     to the Church and to authorised manners, an adhesion tempered and rendered tolerable by port
     wine.  It must not, however, be supposed that human nature was different from the human nature
     of to-day or a thousand years ago.  There were then, even as there were a thousand years ago,
     and are to-day, small, secret doors, connected with mysterious staircases, by which access was
     gained to freedom; and men and women, inmates of castles with walls a yard thick, and
     impenetrable portcullises, sought those doors and descended those stairs night and day.  But
     nobody knew, or if we did know, the silence was profound.  The broad-shouldered, yellow-haired
     Whig squire, had a wife who was the opposite of him.  She came from a distant part of the
     country, and had been educated in France.  She was small, with black hair, and yet with blue
     eyes.  She spoke French perfectly, was devoted to music, read French books, and, although she
     was a constant attendant at church, and gave no opportunity whatever for the slightest
     suspicion, the matrons of the circle in which she moved were never quite happy about her.  This
     was due partly to her knowledge of French, and partly to her having no children.  Anything more
     about her I do not know.  She was beyond us, and although I have seen her often enough I never
     spoke to her.  Butts, however, managed to become a visitor at the squire’s house.  Fancy
      my going to the squire’s!  But Butts did, was accepted there, and even dined there
     with a parson, and two or three half-pay officers.  The squire never called on Butts.  That was
     an understood thing, nor did Mrs. Butts accompany her husband.  That also was an understood
     thing.  It was strange that Butts could tolerate and even court such a relationship.  Most men
     would scorn with the scorn of a personal insult an invitation to a house from which their wives
     were expressly excluded.  The squire’s lady and Clem became great friends.  She discovered that
     his mother was a Frenchwoman, and this was a bond between them.  She discovered also that Clem
     was artistic, that he was devotedly fond of music, that he could draw a little, paint a little,
     and she believed in the divine right of talent wherever it might be found to assert a claim of
     equality with those who were better born.  The women in the country-side were shy of her; for
     the men she could not possibly care, and no doubt she must at times have got rather weary of
     her heavy husband with his one outlook towards the universal in the person of George James Fox,
     and the Whig policy of 1802.  I am under some disadvantage in telling this part of my story,
     because I was far away from home, and only knew afterwards at second hand what the course of
     events had been; but I learned them from one who was intimately concerned, and I do not think I
     can be mistaken on any essential point.  I imagine that by this time Mrs. Butts must have
     become changed into what she was in later years.  She had grown older since she and I had
     parted; she had seen trouble; her child had been born, and although she was not exactly
     estranged from Clem, for neither he nor she would have admitted any coolness, she had learned
     that she was nothing specially to him.  I have often noticed what an imperceptible touch, what
     a slight shifting in the balance of opposing forces, will alter the character.  I have observed
     a woman, for example, essentially the same at twenty and thirty—who is there who is not always
     essentially the same?—and yet, what was a defect at twenty, has become transformed and
     transfigured into a benignant virtue at thirty; translating the whole nature from the human to
     the divine.  Some slight depression has been wrought here, and some slight lift has been given
     there, and beauty and order have miraculously emerged from what was chaotic.  The same thing
     may continually be noticed in the hereditary transmission of qualities.  The redeeming virtue
     of the father palpably present in the son becomes his curse, through a faint diminution of the
     strength of the check which caused that virtue to be the father’s salvation.  The propensity,
     too, which is a man’s evil genius, and leads him to madness and utter ruin, gives vivid reality
     to all his words and thoughts, and becomes all his strength, if by divine assistance it can
     just be subdued and prevented from rising in victorious insurrection.  But this is a
     digression, useful, however, in its way, because it will explain Mrs. Butts when we come a
     little nearer to her in the future.
For a time Clem’s visits to the squire’s house always took place when the squire was at home,
     but an amateur concert was to be arranged in which Clem was to take part together with the
     squire’s lady.  Clem consequently was obliged to go to the Hall for the purpose of practising,
     and so it came to pass that he was there at unusual hours and when the master was afield. 
     These morning and afternoon calls did not cease when the concert was over.  Clem’s wife did not
     know anything about them, and, if she noticed his frequent absence, she was met with an
     excuse.  Perhaps the worst, or almost the worst effect of relationships which we do not like to
     acknowledge, is the secrecy and equivocation which they beget.  From the very first moment when
     the intimacy between the squire’s wife and Clem began to be anything more than harmless, he was
     compelled to shuffle and to become contemptible.  At the same time I believe he defended
     himself against himself with the weapons which were ever ready when self rose against self
     because of some wrong-doing.  He was not as other men.  It was absurd to class what he did with
     what an ordinary person might do, although externally his actions and those of the ordinary
     person might resemble one another.  I cannot trace the steps by which the two sinners drew
     nearer and nearer together, for the simple reason that this is an autobiography, and not a
     novel.  I do not know what the development was, nor did anybody except the person concerned. 
     Neither do I know what was the mental history of Mrs. Butts during this unhappy period.  She
     seldom talked about it afterwards.  I do, however, happen to recollect hearing her once say
     that her greatest trouble was the cessation, from some unknown cause, of Clem’s attempts—they
     were never many—to interest and amuse her.  It is easy to understand how this should be.  If a
     man is guilty of any defection from himself, of anything of which he is ashamed, everything
     which is better becomes a farce to him.  After he has been betrayed by some passion, how can he
     pretend to the perfect enjoyment of what is pure?  The moment he feels any disposition to rise,
     he is stricken through as if with an arrow, and he drops.  Not until weeks, months, and even
     years have elapsed, does he feel justified in surrendering himself to a noble emotion.  I have
     heard of persons who have been able to ascend easily and instantaneously from the mud to the
     upper air, and descend as easily; but to me at least they are incomprehensible.  Clem, less
     than most men, suffered permanently, or indeed in any way from remorse, because he was so
     shielded by his peculiar philosophy; but I can quite believe that when he got into the habit of
     calling at the Hall at mid-day, his behaviour to his wife changed.
One day in December the squire had gone out with the hounds.  Clem, going on from bad to
     worse, had now reached the point of planning to be at the Hall when the squire was not at
     home.  On that particular afternoon Clem was there.  It was about half-past four o’clock, and
     the master was not expected till six.  There had been some music, the lady accompanying, and
     Clem singing.  It was over, and Clem, sitting down beside her at the piano, and pointing out
     with his right hand some passage which had troubled him, had placed his left arm on her
     shoulder, and round her neck, she not resisting.  He always swore afterwards that never till
     then had such a familiarity as this been permitted, and I believe that he did not tell a lie. 
     But what was there in that familiarity?  The worst was already there, and it was through a mere
     accident that it never showed itself.  The accident was this.  The squire, for some unknown
     reason, had returned earlier than usual, and dismounting in the stable-yard, had walked round
     the garden on the turf which came close to the windows of the ground floor.  Passing the
     drawing-room window, and looking in by the edge of the drawn-down blind, he saw his wife and
     Clem just at the moment described.  He slipped round to the door, took off his boots so that he
     might not be heard, and as there was a large screen inside the room he was able to enter it
     unobserved.  Clem caught sight of him just as he emerged from behind the screen, and started up
     instantly in great confusion, the lady, with greater presence of mind, remaining perfectly
     still.  Without a word the squire strode up to Clem, struck out at him, caught him just over
     the temple, and felled him instantaneously.  He lay for some time senseless, and what passed
     between husband and wife I cannot say.  After about ten minutes, perhaps, Clem came to himself;
     there was nobody to be seen; and he managed to get up and crawl home.  He told his wife he had
     met with an accident; that he would go to bed, and that she should know all about it when he
     was better.  His forehead was dressed, and to bed he went.  That night Mrs. Butts had a
     letter.  It ran as follows:—
“Madam,—It may at first sight seem a harsh thing for me to write and tell you
      what I have to say, but I can assure you I do not mean to be anything but kind to you, and I
      think it will be better, for reasons which I will afterwards explain, that I should
      communicate with you rather than with your husband.  For some time past I have suspected that
      he was too fond of my wife, and last night I caught him with his arms round her neck.  In a
      moment of not unjustifiable anger I knocked him down.  I have not the honour of knowing you
      personally, but from what I have heard of you I am sure that he has not the slightest reason
      for playing with other women.  A man who will do what he has done will be very likely to
      conceal from you the true cause of his disaster, and if you know the cause you may perhaps be
      able to reclaim him.  If he has any sense of honour left in him, and of what is due to you, he
      will seek your pardon for his baseness, and you will have a hold on him afterwards which you
      would not have if you were in ignorance of what has happened.  For him I do not care a straw,
      but for you I feel deeply, and I believe that my frankness with you, although it may cause you
      much suffering now, will save you more hereafter.  I have only one condition to make.  Mr.
      Butts must leave this place, and never let me see his face again.  He has ruined my peace. 
      Nothing will be published through me, for, as far as I can prevent it, I will have no public
      exposure.  If Mr. Butts were to remain here it would be dangerous for us to meet, and probably
      everything, by some chance, would become common property.—Believe me to be, Madam, with many
      assurances of respect, truly yours,—.”
I cannot distinguish the precise proportion of cruelty in this letter.  Did the writer
     designedly torture Butts by telling his wife, or did he really think that she would in the end
     be happier because Butts would not have a secret reserved from her,—a temptation to lying—and
     because with this secret in her possession, he might perhaps be restrained in future?  Nobody
     knows.  All we know is that there are very few human actions of which it can be said that this
     or that taken by itself produced them.  With our inborn tendency to abstract, to separate
     mentally the concrete into factors which do not exist separately, we are always disposed to
     assign causes which are too simple, and which, in fact, have no being in rerum
     natura.  Nothing in nature is propelled or impeded by one force acting alone.  There is no
     such thing, save in the brain of the mathematician.  I see no reason why even motives
     diametrically opposite should not unite in one resulting deed, and think it very probable that
     the squire was both cruel and merciful to the same person in the letter; influenced by exactly
     conflicting passions, whose conflict ended so.
As to the squire and his wife, they lived together just as before.  I do not think, that,
     excepting the four persons concerned, anybody ever heard a syllable about the affair, save
     myself a long while afterwards.  Clem, however, packed up and left the town, after selling his
     business.  He had a reputation for restlessness; and his departure, although it was sudden, was
     no surprise.  He betook himself to Australia, his wife going with him.  I heard that they had
     gone, and heard also that he was tired of school-keeping in England, and had determined to try
     his fortune in another part of the world.  Our friendship had dwindled to nothing, and I
     thought no more about him.  Mrs. Butts never uttered one word of reproach to her husband.  I
     cannot say that she loved him as she could have loved, but she had accepted him, and she said
     to herself that as perhaps it was through her lack of sympathy with him that he had strayed, it
     was her duty more and more to draw him to herself.  She had a divine disposition, not
     infrequent amongst women, to seek in herself the reason for any wrong which was done to her. 
     That almost instinctive tendency in men, to excuse, to transfer blame to others, to be angry
     with somebody else when they suffer from the consequences of their own misdeeds, in her did not
     exist.
During almost the whole of her married life, before this affair between the squire and Clem,
     Mrs. Butts had had much trouble, although her trouble was, perhaps, rather the absence of joy
     than the presence of any poignant grief.  She was much by herself.  She had never been a great
     reader, but in her frequent solitude she was forced to do something in order to obtain relief,
     and she naturally turned to the Bible.  It would be foolish to say that the Bible alone was to
     be credited with the support she received.  It may only have been the occasion for a revelation
     of the strength that was in her.  Reading, however, under such circumstances, is likely to be
     peculiarly profitable.  It is never so profitable as when it is undertaken in order that a
     positive need may be satisfied or an inquiry answered.  She discovered in the Bible much that
     persons to whom it is a mere literature would never find.  The water of life was not merely
     admirable to the eye; she drank it, and knew what a property it possessed for quenching
     thirst.  No doubt the thought of a heaven hereafter was especially consolatory.  She was able
     to endure, and even to be happy because the vision of lengthening sorrow was bounded by a
     better world beyond.  “A very poor, barbarous gospel,” thinks the philosopher who rests on his
     Marcus Antoninus and Epictetus.  I do not mean to say, that in the shape in which she believed
     this doctrine, it was not poor and barbarous, but yet we all of us, whatever our creed may be,
     must lay hold at times for salvation upon something like it.  Those who have been plunged up to
     the very lips in affliction know its necessity.  To such as these it is idle work for the
     prosperous and the comfortable to preach satisfaction with the life that now is.  There are
     seasons when it is our sole resource to recollect that in a few short years we shall be at
     rest.  While upon this subject I may say, too, that some injustice has been done to the
     Christian creed of immortality as an influence in determining men’s conduct.  Paul preached the
     imminent advent of Christ and besought his disciples, therefore, to watch, and we ask ourselves
     what is the moral value to us of such an admonition.  But surely if we are to have any reasons
     for being virtuous, this is as good as any other.  It is just as respectable to believe that we
     ought to abstain from iniquity because Christ is at hand, and we expect to meet Him, as to
     abstain from it because by our abstention we shall be healthier or more prosperous.  Paul had a
     dream—an absurd dream let us call it—of an immediate millennium, and of the return of his
     Master surrounded with divine splendour, judging mankind and adjusting the balance between good
     and evil.  It was a baseless dream, and the enlightened may call it ridiculous.  It is anything
     but that, it is the very opposite of that.  Putting aside its temporary mode of expression, it
     is the hope and the prophecy of all noble hearts, a sign of their inability to concur in the
     present condition of things.
Going back to Clem’s wife; she laid hold, as I have said, upon heaven.  The thought wrought
     in her something more than forgetfulness of pain or the expectation of counterpoising bliss. 
     We can understand what this something was, for although we know no such heaven as hers, a new
     temper is imparted to us, a new spirit breathed into us; I was about to say a new hope bestowed
     upon us, when we consider that we live surrounded by the soundless depths in which the stars
     repose.  Such a consideration has a direct practical effect upon us, and so had the future upon
     the mind of Mrs. Butts.  “Why dost thou judge thy brother,” says Paul, “for we shall all stand
     before the judgment-seat of God.”  Paul does not mean that God will punish him and that we may
     rest satisfied that our enemy will be turned into hell fire.  Rather does he mean, what we,
     too, feel, that, reflecting on the great idea of God, and upon all that it involves, our
     animosities are softened, and our heat against our brother is cooled.
One or two reflections may perhaps be permitted here on this passage in Mrs. Butts’
     history.
The fidelity of Clem’s wife to him, if not entirely due to the New Testament, was in a great
     measure traceable to it.  She had learned from the Epistle to the Corinthians that charity
     beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things; and she
     interpreted this to mean, not merely charity to those whom she loved by nature, but charity to
     those with whom she was not in sympathy, and who even wronged her.  Christianity no doubt does
     teach such a charity as this, a love which is to be: independent of mere personal likes and
     dislikes, a love of the human in man.  The natural man, the man of this century, uncontrolled
     by Christianity, considers himself a model of what is virtuous and heroic if he really loves
     his friends, and he permits all kinds of savage antipathies to those of his fellow creatures
     with whom he is not in harmony.  Jesus on the other hand asks with His usual perfect
     simplicity, “If ye love them which love you, what reward have ye?  Do not even the publicans
     the same?”  It would be a great step in advance for most of us to love anybody, and the
     publicans of the time of Jesus must have been a much more Christian set than most Christians of
     the present day; but that we should love those who do not love us is a height never scaled now,
     except by a few of the elect in whom Christ still survives.  In the gospel of Luke, also, Mrs.
     Butts read that she was to hope for nothing again from her love, and that she was to be
     merciful, as her Father in heaven is merciful.  That is really the expression of the
      idea in morality, and incalculable is the blessing that our great religious teacher
     should have been bold enough to teach the idea, and not any limitation of it.  He always taught
     it, the inward born, the heavenly law towards which everything strives.  He always trusted it;
     He did not deal in exceptions; He relied on it to the uttermost, never despairing.  This has
     always seemed to me to be the real meaning of the word faith.  It is permanent confidence in
     the idea, a confidence never to be broken down by apparent failure, or by examples by which
     ordinary people prove that qualification is necessary.  It was precisely because Jesus taught
     the idea, and nothing below it, that He had such authority over a soul like my friend’s, and
     the effect produced by Him could not have been produced by anybody nearer to ordinary
     humanity.
It must be admitted, too, that the Calvinism of those days had a powerful influence in
     enabling men and women to endure, although I object to giving the name of Calvin to a
     philosophy which is a necessity in all ages.  “Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and
     one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father.”  This is the last word which can
     be said.  Nothing can go beyond it, and at times it is the only ground which we feel does not
     shake under our feet.  All life is summed up, and due account is taken of it, according to its
     degree.  Mrs. Butts’ Calvinism, however, hardly took the usual dogmatic form.  She was too
     simple to penetrate the depths of metaphysical theology, and she never would have dared to set
     down any of her fellow creatures as irrevocably lost.  She adapted the Calvinistic creed to
     something which suited her.  For example, she fully understood what St. Paul means when he
     tells the Thessalonians that because they were called, therefore they were to
     stand fast.  She thought with Paul that being called; having a duty plainly laid upon her;
     being bidden as if by a general to do something, she ought to stand fast; and she
     stood fast, supported against all pressure by the consciousness of fulfilling the special
     orders of One who was her superior.  There is no doubt that this dogma of a personal calling is
     a great consolation, and it is a great truth.  Looking at the masses of humanity, driven this
     way and that way, the Christian teaching is apt to be forgotten that for each individual soul
     there is a vocation as real as if that soul were alone upon the planet.  Yet it is a fact.  We
     are blinded to it and can hardly believe it, because of the impotency of our little intellects
     to conceive a destiny which shall take care of every atom of life on the globe: we are
     compelled to think that in such vast crowds of people as we behold, individuals must elude the
     eye of the Maker, and be swept into forgetfulness.  But the truth of truths is that the mind of
     the universe is not our mind, or at any rate controlled by our limitations.
This has been a long digression which I did not intend; but I could not help it.  I was
     anxious to show how Mrs. Butts met her trouble through her religion.  The apostle says that
      “they drank of that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was
      Christ.”  That was true of her.  The way through the desert was not annihilated; the path
     remained stony and sore to the feet, but it was accompanied to the end by a sweet stream to
     which she could turn aside, and from which she could obtain refreshment and strength.
Just about the time that we began our meetings near Drury Lane, I heard that Clem was dead;
     that he had died abroad.  I knew nothing more; I thought about him and his wife perhaps for a
     day, but I had parted from both long ago, and I went on with my work.
