
CHAPTER XVI.
Isaura had, as we have seen, been hitherto saved by the siege and its consequences from the
      fulfilment of her engagement to Gustave Rameau; and since he had quitted his father’s house
      she had not only seen less of him, but a certain chill crept into his converse in the visits
      he paid to her. The compassionate feeling his illness had excited, confirmed by the unwonted
      gentleness of his mood, and the short-lived remorse with which he spoke of his past faults and
      follies, necessarily faded away in proportion as he regained that kind of febrile strength
      which was his normal state of health, and with it the arrogant self-assertion which was
      ingrained in his character. But it was now more than ever that she became aware of the
      antagonism between all that constituted his inner life and her own. It was not that he
      volunteered in her presence the express utterance of those opinions, social or religious,
      which he addressed to the public in the truculent journal to which, under a nom de plume, he
      was the most inflammatory contributor. Whether it was that he shrank from insulting the ears
      of the pure virgin whom he had wooed as wife with avowals of his disdain of marriage bonds, or
      perhaps from shocking yet more her womanly humanity and her religious faith by cries for the
      blood of anti-republican traitors and the downfall of Christian altars; or whether he yet
      clung, though with relapsing affection, to the hold which her promise had imposed on him, and
      felt that that hold would be for ever gone, and that she would recoil from his side in terror
      and dismay, if she once learned that the man who had implored her to be his saving angel from
      the comparatively mild errors of youth, had so belied his assurance, so mocked her credulity,
      as deliberately to enter into active warfare against all that he knew her sentiments regarded
      as noble and her conscience received as divine: despite the suppression of avowed doctrine on
      his part, the total want of sympathy between these antagonistic natures made itself felt by
      both—more promptly felt by Isaura. If Gustave did not frankly announce to her in that terrible
      time (when all that a little later broke out on the side of the Communists was more or less
      forcing ominous way to the lips of those who talked with confidence to each other, whether to
      approve or to condemn) the associates with whom he was leagued, the path to which he had
      committed his career—still for her instincts for genuine Art—which for its development needs
      the serenity of peace, which for its ideal needs dreams that soar into the Infinite—Gustave
      had only the scornful sneer of the man who identifies with his ambition the violent upset of
      all that civilisation has established in this world, and the blank negation of all that
      patient hope and heroic aspiration which humanity carries on into the next.
On his side, Gustave Rameau, who was not without certain fine and delicate attributes in a
      complicated nature over which the personal vanity and the mobile temperament of the Parisian
      reigned supreme, chafed at the restraints imposed on him. No matter what a man’s doctrines may
      be—however abominable you and I may deem them—man desires to find, in the dearest fellowship
      he can establish, that sympathy in the woman his choice singles out from her sex-deference to
      his opinions, sympathy with his objects, as man. So, too, Gustave’s sense of honour and
      according to his own Parisian code that sense was keen—became exquisitely stung by the thought
      that he was compelled to play the part of a mean dissimulator to the girl for whose opinions
      he had the profoundest contempt. How could these two, betrothed to each other, not feel,
      though without coming to open dissension, that between them had flowed the inlet of water by
      which they had been riven asunder? What man, if he can imagine himself a Gustave Rameau, can
      blame the revolutionist absorbed in ambitious projects for turning the pyramid of society
      topsy-turvy, if he shrank more and more from the companionship of a betrothed with whom he
      could not venture to exchange three words without caution and reserve? And what woman can
      blame an Isaura if she felt a sensation of relief at the very neglect of the affianced whom
      she had compassionated and could never love?
Possibly the reader may best judge of the state of Isaura’s mind at this time by a few brief
      extracts from an imperfect fragmentary journal, in which, amid saddened and lonely hours, she
      held converse with herself.
“One day at Enghien I listened silently to a conversation between M. Savarin and the
      Englishman, who sought to explain the conception of duty in which the German poet has given
      such noble utterance to the thoughts of the German philosopher—viz., that moral aspiration has
      the same goal as the artistic,—the attainment to the calm delight wherein the pain of effort
      disappears in the content of achievement. Thus in life, as in art, it is through discipline
      that we arrive at freedom, and duty only completes itself when all motives, all actions, are
      attuned into one harmonious whole, and it is not striven for as duty, but enjoyed as
      happiness. M. Savarin treated this theory with the mockery with which the French wit is ever
      apt to treat what it terms German mysticism. According to him, duty must always be a hard and
      difficult struggle; and he said laughingly, ‘Whenever a man says, “I have done my duty,” it is
      with a long face and a mournful sigh.’
“Ah, how devoutly I listened to the Englishman! how harshly the Frenchman’s irony jarred
      upon my ears! And yet now, in the duty that life imposes on me, to fulfil which I strain every
      power vouchsafed to my nature, and seek to crush down every impulse that rebels, where is the
      promised calm, where any approach to the content of achievement? Contemplating the way before
      me, the Beautiful even of Art has vanished. I see but cloud and desert. Can this which I
      assume to be duty really be so? Ah, is it not sin even to ask my heart that question?
“Madame Rameau is very angry with her son for his neglect both of his parents and of me. I
      have had to take his part against her. I would not have him lose their love. Poor Gustave! But
      when Madame Rameau suddenly said to-day: ‘I erred in seeking the union between thee and
      Gustave. Retract thy promise; in doing so thou wilt be justified,’—oh, the strange joy that
      flashed upon me as she spoke. Am I justified? Am I? Oh, if that Englishman had never crossed
      my path! Oh, if I had never loved! or if in the last time we met he had not asked for my love,
      and confessed his own! Then, I think, I could honestly reconcile my conscience with my
      longings, and say to Gustave, ‘We do not suit each other; be we both released!’ But now-is it
      that Gustave is really changed from what he was, when in despondence at my own lot, and in
      pitying belief that I might brighten and exalt his, I plighted my troth to him? or is it not
      rather that the choice I thus voluntarily made became so intolerable a thought the moment I
      knew I was beloved and sought by another; and from that moment I lost the strength I had
      before,—strength to silence the voice at my own heart? What! is it the image of that other one
      which is persuading me to be false?—to exaggerate the failings, to be blind to the merits of
      him who has a right to say, ‘I am what I was when thou didst pledge thyself to take me for
      better or for worse’?
“Gustave has been here after an absence of several days. He was not alone. The good Abbe
      Vertpre and Madame de Vandemar, with her son, M. Raoul, were present. They had come on matters
      connected with our ambulance. They do not know of my engagement to Gustave; and seeing him in
      the uniform of a National Guard, the Abbe courteously addressed to him some questions as to
      the possibility of checking the terrible increase of the vice of intoxication, so alien till
      of late to the habits of the Parisians, and becoming fatal to discipline and bodily
      endurance,—could the number of the cantines on the ramparts be more limited? Gustave answered
      with rudeness and bitter sarcasm, ‘Before priests could be critics in military matters they
      must undertake military service themselves.’
“The Abbe replied with unalterable good-humour, ‘But, in order to criticise the effects of
      drunkenness, must one get drunk one’s self?’ Gustave was put out, and retired into a corner of
      the room, keeping sullen silence till my other visitors left.
“Then before I could myself express the pain his words and manner had given me, he said
      abruptly, ‘I wonder how you can tolerate the tartuferie which may amuse on the comic stage,
      but in the tragedy of these times is revolting.’ This speech roused my anger, and the
      conversation that ensued was the gravest that had ever passed between us.
“If Gustave were of stronger nature and more concentrated will, I believe that the only
      feelings I should have for him would be antipathy and dread. But it is his very weaknesses and
      inconsistencies that secure to him a certain tenderness of interest. I think he could never be
      judged without great indulgence by women; there is in him so much of the child,—wayward,
      irritating one moment, and the next penitent, affectionate. One feels as if persistence in
      evil were impossible to one so delicate both in mind and form. That peculiar order of genius
      to which he belongs seems as if it ought to be so estranged from all directions, violent or
      coarse. When in poetry he seeks to utter some audacious and defying sentiment, the substance
      melts away in daintiness of expression, in soft, lute-like strains of slender music. And when
      he has stung, angered, revolted my heart the most, suddenly he subsides into such pathetic
      gentleness, such tearful remorse, that I feel as if resentment to one so helpless, desertion
      of one who must fall without the support of a friendly hand, were a selfish cruelty. It seems
      to me as if I were dragged towards a precipice by a sickly child clinging to my robe.
“But in this last conversation with him, his language in regard to subjects I hold most
      sacred drew forth from me words which startled him, and which may avail to save him from that
      worst insanity of human minds,—the mimicry of the Titans who would have dethroned a God to
      restore a Chaos. I told him frankly that I had only promised to share his fate on my faith in
      his assurance of my power to guide it heavenward; and that if the opinions he announced were
      seriously entertained, and put forth in defiance of heaven itself, we were separated for ever.
      I told him how earnestly, in the calamities of the time, my own soul had sought to take refuge
      in thoughts and hopes beyond the earth; and how deeply many a sentiment that in former days
      passed by me with a smile in the light talk of the salons, now shocked me as an outrage on the
      reverence which the mortal child owes to the Divine Father. I owned to him how much of
      comfort, of sustainment, of thought and aspiration, elevated beyond the sphere of Art in which
      I had hitherto sought the purest air, the loftiest goal, I owed to intercourse with minds like
      those of the Abbe de Vertpre; and how painfully I felt as if I were guilty of ingratitude when
      he compelled me to listen to insults on those whom I recognised as benefactors.
“I wished to speak sternly; but it is my great misfortune, my prevalent weakness, that I
      cannot be stern when I ought to be. It is with me in life as in art. I never could on the
      stage have taken the part of a Norma or a Medea. If I attempt in fiction a character which
      deserves condemnation, I am untrue to poetic justice. I cannot condemn and execute; I can but
      compassionate and pardon the creature I myself have created. I was never in the real world
      stern but to one; and then, alas! it was because I loved where I could no longer love with
      honour; and I, knowing my weakness, had terror lest I should yield.
“So Gustave did not comprehend from my voice, my manner, how gravely I was in earnest. But,
      himself softened, affected to tears, he confessed his own faults—ceased to argue in order to
      praise; and—and—uttering protestations seemingly the most sincere, he left me bound to him
      still—bound to him still—woe is me!”
It is true that Isaura had come more directly under the influence of religion than she had
      been in the earlier dates of this narrative. There is a time in the lives of most of us, and
      especially in the lives of women, when, despondent of all joy in an earthly future, and
      tortured by conflicts between inclination and duty, we transfer all the passion and fervour of
      our troubled souls to enthusiastic yearnings for the Divine Love; seeking to rebaptise
      ourselves in the fountain of its mercy, taking thence the only hopes that can cheer, the only
      strength that can sustain us. Such a time had come to Isaura. Formerly she had escaped from
      the griefs of the work-a-day world into the garden-land of Art. Now, Art had grown unwelcome
      to her, almost hateful. Gone was the spell from the garden-land; its flowers were faded, its
      paths were stony, its sunshine had vanished in mist and rain. There are two voices of Nature
      in the soul of the genuine artist,—that is, of him who, because he can create, comprehends the
      necessity of the great Creator. Those voices are never both silent. When one is hushed, the
      other becomes distinctly audible. The one speaks to him of Art, the other of Religion.
At that period several societies for the relief and tendance of the wounded had been formed
      by the women of Paris,—the earliest, if I mistake not, by ladies of the highest rank—amongst
      whom were the Comtesse de Vandemar and the Contessa di Rimini—though it necessarily included
      others of stations less elevated. To this society, at the request of Alain de Rochebriant and
      of Enguerrand, Isaura had eagerly attached herself. It occupied much of her time; and in
      connection with it she was brought much into sympathetic acquaintance with Raoul de
      Vandemar—the most zealous and active member of that Society of St. Francois de Sales, to which
      belonged other young nobles of the Legitimist creed. The passion of Raoul’s life was the
      relief of human suffering. In him was personified the ideal of Christian charity. I think all,
      or most of us, have known what it is to pass under the influence of a nature that is so far
      akin to ours that it desires to become something better and higher than it is—that desire
      being paramount in ourselves—but seeks to be that something in ways not akin to, but remote
      from, the ways in which we seek it. When this contact happens, either one nature, by the mere
      force of will, subjugates and absorbs the other, or both, while preserving their own
      individuality, apart and independent, enrich themselves by mutual interchange, and the
      asperities which differences of taste and sentiment in detail might otherwise provoke melt in
      the sympathy which unites spirits striving with equal earnestness to rise nearer to the unseen
      and unattainable Source, which they equally recognise as Divine.
Perhaps, had these two persons met a year ago in the ordinary intercourse of the world,
      neither would have detected the sympathy of which I speak. Raoul was not without the prejudice
      against artists and writers of romance, that is shared by many who cherish the persuasion that
      all is vanity which does not concentrate imagination and intellect in the destinies of the
      soul hereafter; and Isaura might have excited his compassion, certainly not his reverence.
      While to her, his views on all that seeks to render the actual life attractive and
      embellished, through the accomplishments of Muse and Grace, would have seemed the
      narrow-minded asceticism of a bigot. But now, amid the direful calamities of the time, the
      beauty of both natures became visible to each. To the eyes of Isaura tenderness became
      predominant in the monastic self-denial of Raoul. To the eyes of Raoul, devotion became
      predominant in the gentle thoughtfulness of Isaura. Their intercourse was in ambulance and
      hospital-in care for the wounded, in prayer for the dying. Ah! it is easy to declaim against
      the frivolities and vices of Parisian society as they appear on the surface; and, in
      revolutionary times, it is the very worst of Paris that ascends in scum to the top. But
      descend below the surface, even in that demoralising suspense of order, and nowhere on earth
      might the angel have beheld the image of humanity more amply vindicating its claim to the
      heritage of heaven.
