
CHAPTER III.
MEANWHILE the young Marquis pursued his way thoughtfully through the streets, and entered
      the Champs Elysees. Since we first, nay, since we last saw him, he is strikingly improved in
      outward appearances. He has unconsciously acquired more of the easy grace of the Parisian in
      gait and bearing. You would no longer detect the Provincial—perhaps, however, because he is
      now dressed, though very simply, in habiliments that belong to the style of the day. Rarely
      among the loungers in the Champs Elysees could be seen a finer form, a comelier face, an air
      of more unmistakable distinction.
The eyes of many a passing fair one gazed on him, admiringly or coquettishly. But he was
      still so little the true Parisian that they got no smile, no look in return. He was wrapped in
      his own thoughts; was he thinking of M. Louvier?
He had nearly gained the entrance of the Bois de Boulogne, when he was accosted by a voice
      behind, and turning round saw his friend Lemercier arm-in-arm with Graham Vane.
“Bonjour, Alain,” said Lemercier, hooking his disengaged arm into Rochebriant’s. “I suspect
      we are going the same way.”
Alain felt himself change countenance at this conjecture, and replied coldly, “I think not;
      I have got to the end of my walk, and shall turn back to Paris;” addressing himself to the
      Englishman, he said with formal politeness, “I regret not to have found you at home when I
      called some weeks ago, and no less so to have been out when you had the complaisance to return
      my visit.”
“At all events,” replied the Englishman, “let me not lose the opportunity of improving our
      acquaintance which now offers. It is true that our friend Lemercier, catching sight of me in
      the Rue de Rivoli, stopped his coupe and carried me off for a promenade in the Bois. The
      fineness of the day tempted us to get out of his carriage as the Bois came in sight. But if
      you are going back to Paris I relinquish the Bois and offer myself as your companion.”
Frederic (the name is so familiarly English that the reader might think me pedantic did I
      accentuate it as French) looked from one to the other of his two friends, half amused and half
      angry.
“And am I to be left alone to achieve a conquest, in which, if I succeed, I shall change
      into hate and envy the affection of my two best friends? Be it so.

 “’ Un veritable amant ne connait point d’amis.’” 
“I do not comprehend your meaning,” said the Marquis, with a compressed lip and a slight
      frown.
“Bah!” cried Frederic; “come, franc jeu; cards on the table. M. Gram Varn was going into the
      Bois at my suggestion on the chance of having another look at the pearl-coloured angel; and
      you, Rochebriant, can’t deny that you were going into the Bois for the same object.”
“One may pardon an enfant terrible,” said the Englishman, laughing, “but an ami terrible
      should be sent to the galleys. Come, Marquis, let us walk back and submit to our fate. Even
      were the lady once more visible, we have no chance of being observed by the side of a Lovelace
      so accomplished and so audacious!”
“Adieu, then, recreants: I go alone. Victory or death.” The Parisian beckoned his coachman,
      entered his carriage, and with a mocking grimace kissed his hand to the companions thus
      deserting or deserted.
Rochebriant touched the Englishman’s arm, and said, “Do you think that Lemercier could be
      impertinent enough to accost that lady?”
“In the first place,” returned the Englishman, “Lemercier himself tells me that the lady has
      for several weeks relinquished her walks in the Bois, and the probability is, therefore, that
      he will not have the opportunity to accost her. In the next place, it appears that when she
      did take her solitary walk, she did not stray far from her carriage, and was in reach of the
      protection of her laquais and coachman. But to speak honestly, do you, who know Lemercier
      better than I, take him to be a man who would commit an impertinence to a woman unless there
      were viveurs of his own sex to see him do it?”
Alain smiled. “No. Frederic’s real nature is an admirable one, and if he ever do anything
      that he ought to be ashamed of, ‘twill be from the pride of showing how finely he can do it.
      Such was his character at college, and such it still seems at Paris. But it is true that the
      lady has forsaken her former walk; at least I—I have not seen her since the day I first beheld
      her in company with Frederic. Yet—yet, pardon me, you were going to the Bois on the chance of
      seeing her. Perhaps she has changed the direction of her walk, and—and—”
The Marquis stopped short, stammering and confused.
The Englishman scanned his countenance with the rapid glance of a practised observer of men
      and things, and after a short pause said: “If the lady has selected some other spot for her
      promenade, I am ignorant of it; nor have I ever volunteered the chance of meeting with her,
      since I learned—first from Lemercier, and afterwards from others—that her destination is the
      stage. Let us talk frankly, Marquis. I am accustomed to take much exercise on foot, and the
      Bois is my favourite resort: one day I there found myself in the allee which the lady we speak
      of used to select for her promenade, and there saw her. Something in her face impressed me;
      how shall I describe the impression? Did you ever open a poem, a romance, in some style wholly
      new to you, and before you were quite certain whether or not its merits justified the interest
      which the novelty inspired, you were summoned away, or the book was taken out of your hands?
      If so, did you not feel an intellectual longing to have another glimpse of the book? That
      illustration describes my impression, and I own that I twice again went to the same allee. The
      last time I only caught sight of the young lady as she was getting into her carriage. As she
      was then borne away, I perceived one of the custodians of the Bois; and learned, on
      questioning him, that the lady was in the habit of walking always alone in the same allee at
      the same hour on most fine days, but that he did not know her name or address. A motive of
      curiosity—perhaps an idle one—then made me ask Lemercier, who boasts of knowing his Paris so
      intimately, if he could inform me who the lady was. He undertook to ascertain.”
“But,” interposed the Marquis, “he did not ascertain who she was; he only ascertained where
      she lived, and that she and an elder companion were Italians;—whom he suspected, without
      sufficient ground, to be professional singers.”
“True; but since then I ascertained more detailed particulars from two acquaintances of mine
      who happen to know her,—M. Savarin, the distinguished writer, and Mrs. Morley, an accomplished
      and beautiful American lady, who is more than an acquaintance. I may boast the honour of
      ranking among her friends. As Savarin’s villa is at A———, I asked him incidentally if he knew
      the fair neighbour whose face had so attracted me; and Mrs. Morley being present, and
      overhearing me, I learned from both what I now repeat to you.
“The young lady is a Signorina Cicogna,—at Paris, exchanging (except among particular
      friends), as is not unusual, the outlandish designation of Signorina for the more conventional
      one of Mademoiselle. Her father was a member of the noble Milanese family of the same name,
      therefore the young lady is well born. Her father has been long dead; his widow married again
      an English gentleman settled in Italy, a scholar and antiquarian; his name was Selby. This
      gentleman, also dead, bequeathed the Signorina a small but sufficient competence. She is now
      an orphan, and residing with a companion, a Signora Venosta, who was once a singer of some
      repute at the Neapolitan Theatre, in the orchestra of which her husband was principal
      performer; but she relinquished the stage several years ago on becoming a widow, and gave
      lessons as a teacher. She has the character of being a scientific musician, and of unblemished
      private respectability. Subsequently she was induced to give up general teaching, and
      undertake the musical education and the social charge of the young lady with her. This girl is
      said to have early given promise of extraordinary excellence as a singer, and excited great
      interest among a coterie of literary critics and musical cognoscenti. She was to have come out
      at the Theatre of Milan a year or two ago, but her career has been suspended in consequence of
      ill-health, for which she is now at Paris under the care of an English physician, who has made
      remarkable cures in all complaints of the respiratory organs. ———, the great composer, who
      knows her, says that in expression and feeling she has no living superior, perhaps no equal
      since Malibran.”
“You seem, dear Monsieur, to have taken much pains to acquire this information.”
“No great pains were necessary; but had they been I might have taken them, for, as I have
      owned to you, Mademoiselle Cicogna, while she was yet a mystery to me, strangely interested my
      thoughts or my fancies. That interest has now ceased. The world of actresses and singers lies
      apart from mine.”
“Yet,” said Alain, in a tone of voice that implied doubt, “if I understand Lemercier aright,
      you were going with him to the Bois on the chance of seeing again the lady in whom your
      interest has ceased.”
“Lemercier’s account was not strictly accurate. He stopped his carriage to speak to me on
      quite another subject, on which I have consulted him, and then proposed to take me on to the
      Bois. I assented; and it was not till we were in the carriage that he suggested the idea of
      seeing whether the pearly-robed lady had resumed her walk in the allee. You may judge how
      indifferent I was to that chance when I preferred turning back with you to going on with him.
      Between you and me, Marquis, to men of our age, who have the business of life before them, and
      feel that if there be aught in which noblesse oblige it is a severe devotion to noble objects,
      there is nothing more fatal to such devotion than allowing the heart to be blown hither and
      thither at every breeze of mere fancy, and dreaming ourselves into love with some fair
      creature whom we never could marry consistently with the career we have set before our
      ambition. I could not marry an actress,—neither, I presume, could the Marquis de Rochebriant;
      and the thought of a courtship which excluded the idea of marriage to a young orphan of name
      unblemished, of virtue unsuspected, would certainly not be compatible with ‘devotion to noble
      objects.’”
Alain involuntarily bowed his head in assent to the proposition, and, it may be, in
      submission to an implied rebuke.
The two men walked in silence for some minutes, and Graham first spoke, changing altogether
      the subject of conversation. “Lemercier tells me you decline going much into this world of
      Paris, the capital of capitals, which appears so irresistibly attractive to us
      foreigners.”
“Possibly; but, to borrow your words, I have the business of life before me.”
“Business is a good safeguard against the temptations to excess in pleasure, in which Paris
      abounds. But there is no business which does not admit of some holiday, and all business
      necessitates commerce with mankind. A propos, I was the other evening at the Duchese de
      Tarascon’s,—a brilliant assembly, filled with ministers, senators, and courtiers. I heard your
      name mentioned.”
“Mine?”
“Yes; Duplessis, the rising financier—who rather to my surprise was not only present among
      these official and decorated celebrities, but apparently quite at home among them—asked the
      Duchess if she had not seen you since your arrival at Paris. She replied, ‘No; that though you
      were among her nearest connections, you had not called on her;’ and bade Duplessis tell you
      that you were a monstre for not doing so. Whether or not Duplessis will take that liberty I
      know not; but you must pardon me if I do. She is a very charming woman, full of talent; and
      that stream of the world which reflects the stars, with all their mythical influences on
      fortune, flows through her salons.”
“I am not born under those stars. I am a Legitimist.”
“I did not forget your political creed; but in England the leaders of opposition attend the
      salons of the Prime Minister. A man is not supposed to compromise his opinions because he
      exchanges social courtesies with those to whom his opinions are hostile. Pray excuse me if I
      am indiscreet, I speak as a traveller who asks for information: but do the Legitimists really
      believe that they best serve their cause by declining any mode of competing with its
      opponents? Would there not be a fairer chance of the ultimate victory of their principles if
      they made their talents and energies individually prominent; if they were known as skilful
      generals, practical statesmen, eminent diplomatists, brilliant writers? Could they
      combine,—not to sulk and exclude themselves from the great battle-field of the world, but in
      their several ways to render themselves of such use to their country that some day or other,
      in one of those revolutionary crises to which France, alas! must long be subjected, they would
      find themselves able to turn the scale of undecided councils and conflicting jealousies.”
“Monsieur, we hope for the day when the Divine Disposer of events will strike into the
      hearts of our fickle and erring countrymen the conviction that there will be no settled repose
      for France save under the sceptre of her rightful kings. But meanwhile we are,—I see it more
      clearly since I have quitted Bretagne,—we are a hopeless minority.”
“Does not history tell us that the great changes of the world have been wrought by
      minorities,—but on the one condition that the minorities shall not be hopeless? It is almost
      the other day that the Bonapartists were in a minority that their adversaries called hopeless,
      and the majority for the Emperor is now so preponderant that I tremble for his safety. When a
      majority becomes so vast that intellect disappears in the crowd, the date of its destruction
      commences; for by the law of reaction the minority is installed against it. It is the nature
      of things that minorities are always more intellectual than multitudes, and intellect is ever
      at work in sapping numerical force. What your party want is hope; because without hope there
      is no energy. I remember hearing my father say that when he met the Count de Chambord at Ems,
      that illustrious personage delivered himself of a belle phrase much admired by his partisans.
      The Emperor was then President of the Republic, in a very doubtful and dangerous position.
      France seemed on the verge of another convulsion. A certain distinguished politician
      recommended the Count de Chambord to hold himself ready to enter at once as a candidate for
      the throne. And the Count, with a benignant smile on his handsome face, answered, ‘All wrecks
      come to the shore: the shore does not go to the wrecks.’”
“Beautifully said!” exclaimed the Marquis.
“Not if ‘Le beau est toujours le vrai.’ My father, no inexperienced nor unwise politician,
      in repeating the royal words, remarked: ‘The fallacy of the Count’s argument is in its
      metaphor. A man is not a shore. Do you not think that the seamen on board the wrecks would be
      more grateful to him who did not complacently compare himself to a shore, but considered
      himself a human being like themselves, and risked his own life in a boat, even though it were
      a cockleshell, in the chance of saving theirs?”
Alain de Rochebriant was a brave man, with that intense sentiment of patriotism which
      characterizes Frenchmen of every rank and persuasion, unless they belong to the
      Internationalists; and, without pausing to consider, he cried, “Your father was right.”
The Englishman resumed: “Need I say, my dear Marquis, that I am not a Legitimist? I am not
      an Imperialist, neither am I an Orleanist nor a Republican. Between all those political
      divisions it is for Frenchmen to make their choice, and for Englishmen to accept for France
      that government which France has established. I view things here as a simple observer. But it
      strikes me that if I were a Frenchman in your position, I should think myself unworthy my
      ancestors if I consented to be an insignificant looker-on.”
“You are not in my position,” said the Marquis, half mournfully, half haughtily, “and you
      can scarcely judge of it even in imagination.”
“I need not much task my imagination; I judge of it by analogy. I was very much in your
      position when I entered upon what I venture to call my career; and it is the curious
      similarity between us in circumstances, that made me wish for your friendship when that
      similarity was made known to me by Lemercier, who is not less garrulous than the true Parisian
      usually is. Permit me to say that, like you, I was reared in some pride of no inglorious
      ancestry. I was reared also in the expectation of great wealth. Those expectations were not
      realized: my father had the fault of noble natures,—generosity pushed to imprudence: he died
      poor and in debt. You retain the home of your ancestors; I had to resign mine.”
The Marquis had felt deeply interested in this narrative, and as Graham now paused, took his
      hand and pressed it. “One of our most eminent personages said to me about that time, ‘Whatever
      a clever man of your age determines to do or to be, the odds are twenty to one that he has
      only to live on in order to do or to be it.’ Don’t you think he spoke truly? I think so.”
“I scarcely know what to think,” said Rochebriant; “I feel as if you had given me so rough a
      shake when I was in the midst of a dull dream, that I am not yet quite sure whether I am
      asleep or awake.”
Just as he said this, and towards the Paris end of the Champs Elysees, there was a halt, a
      sensation among the loungers round them; many of them uncovered in salute.
A man on the younger side of middle age, somewhat inclined to corpulence, with a very
      striking countenance, was riding slowly by. He returned the salutations he received with the
      careless dignity of a Personage accustomed to respect, and then reined in his horse by the
      side of a barouche, and exchanged some words with a portly gentleman who was its sole
      occupant. The loungers, still halting, seemed to contemplate this parley—between him on
      horseback and him in the carriage—with very eager interest. Some put their hands behind their
      ears and pressed forward, as if trying to overhear what was said.
“I wonder,” quoth Graham, “whether, with all his cleverness, the Prince has in any way
      decided what he means to do or to be.”
“The Prince!” said Rochebriant, rousing himself from revery; “what Prince?”
“Do you not recognize him by his wonderful likeness to the first Napoleon,—him on horseback
      talking to Louvier, the great financier.”
“Is that stout bourgeois in the carriage Louvier,—my mortgagee, Louvier?”
“Your mortgagee, my dear Marquis? Well, he is rich enough to be a very lenient one upon
      pay-day.”
“Hein!—I doubt his leniency,” said Alain. “I have promised my avoue to meet him at dinner.
      Do you think I did wrong?”
“Wrong! of course not; he is likely to overwhelm you with civilities. Pray don’t refuse if
      he gives you an invitation to his soiree next Saturday; I am going to it. One meets there the
      notabilities most interesting to study,—artists, authors, politicians, especially those who
      call themselves Republicans. He and the Prince agree in one thing; namely, the cordial
      reception they give to the men who would destroy the state of things upon which Prince and
      financier both thrive. Hillo! here comes Lemercier on return from the Bois.”
Lemercier’s coupe stopped beside the footpath. “What tidings of the Belle Inconnue?” asked
      the Englishman. “None; she was not there. But I am rewarded: such an adventure! a dame of the
      haute volee; I believe she is a duchess. She was walking with a lap-dog, a pure Pomeranian. A
      strange poodle flew at the Pomeranian, I drove off the poodle, rescued the Pomeranian,
      received the most gracious thanks, the sweetest smile: femme superbe, middle aged. I prefer
      women of forty. Au revoir, I am due at the club.”
Alain felt a sensation of relief that Lemercier had not seen the lady in the pearl-coloured
      dress, and quitted the Englishman with a lightened heart.
