<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAP. VII. THE JUPITER.</head>
<p>Though Eleanor Harding rode off from John Bold on a high
                                        horse, it must not be supposed that her heart was so elate
                                        as her demeanour. In the first place, she had a natural
                                        repugnance to losing her lover; and in the next, she was not
                                        quite so sure that she was in the right as she pretended to
                                        be. Her father had told her, and that now repeatedly, that
                                        Bold was doing nothing unjust or ungenerous, and why then
                                        should she rebuke him, and throw him off, when she felt
                                        herself so ill able to bear his loss?— but such is human
                                        nature, and young-lady-nature especially. As she walked off
                                        from him beneath the shady elms of the close, her look, her
                                        tone, every motion and gesture of her body, belied her
                                        heart; she would have given the world to have taken him by
                                        the hand, to have reasoned with him, persuaded him, cajoled
                                        him, coaxed him out of his project; to have overcome him
                                        with all her female artillery, and to have redeemed her
                                        father at the cost of herself; <pb n="106"/> but pride would
                                        not let her do this, and she left him without a look of love
                                        or a word of kindness.</p>
<p>Had Bold been judging of another lover and of another lady he
                                        might have understood all this as well as we do; but in
                                        matters of love men do not see clearly in their own affairs.
                                        They say that faint heart never won fair lady; and it is
                                        amazing to me how fair ladies are won, so faint are often
                                        men's hearts! Were it not for the kindness of their nature,
                                        that seeing the weakness of our courage they will
                                        occasionally descend from their impregnable fortresses, and
                                        themselves aid us in effecting their own defeat, too often
                                        would they escape unconquered if not unscathed, and free of
                                        body if not of heart.</p>
<p>Poor Bold crept off quite crest-fallen; he felt that as regarded
                                        Eleanor Harding his fate was sealed, unless he could consent
                                        to give up a task to which he had pledged himself, and which
                                        indeed it would not be easy for him to give up. Lawyers were
                                        engaged, and the question had to a certain extent been taken
                                        up by the public; besides, how could a high-spirited girl
                                        like Eleanor Harding really learn to love a man for
                                        neglecting a duty which he assumed! Could she allow her
                                        affection to be purchased at the cost of his own
                                        self-respect?</p>
<p>As regarded the issue of his attempt at reformation <pb n="107"/>
                                        in the hospital, Bold had no reason hitherto to be
                                        discontented with his success. All Barchester was by the
                                        ears about it. The bishop, the archdeacon, the warden, the
                                        steward, and several other clerical allies, had daily
                                        meetings, discussing their tactics, and preparing for the
                                        great attack. Sir Abraham Haphazard had been consulted, but
                                        his opinion was not yet received: copies of Hiram's will,
                                        copies of warden's journals, copies of leases, copies of
                                        accounts, copies of everything that could be copied, and of
                                        some that could not, had been sent to him; and the case was
                                        assuming most creditable dimensions. But above all, it had
                                        been mentioned in the daily Jupiter. That all powerful organ
                                        of the press in one of its leading thunderbolts launched at
                                        St. Cross, had thus remarked: 'Another case, of smaller
                                        dimensions indeed, but of similar import, is now likely to
                                        come under public notice. We are informed that the warden or
                                        master of an old almshouse attached to Barchester Cathedral
                                        is in receipt of twenty-five times the annual income
                                        appointed for him by the will of the founder, while the sum
                                        yearly expended on the absolute purposes of the charity has
                                        always remained fixed. In other words, the legatees under
                                        the founder's will have received no advantage from the
                                        increase in the value of the property during the <pb n="108"/> last four centuries, such increase having been absorbed
                                        by the so-called warden. It is impossible to conceive a case
                                        of greater injustice. It is no answer to say that some six
                                        or nine or twelve old men receive as much of the goods of
                                        this world as such old men require. On what foundation,
                                        moral or divine, traditional or legal, is grounded the
                                        warden's claim to the large income he receives for doing
                                        nothing? The contentment of these almsmen, if content they
                                        be, can give him no title to this wealth! Does he ever ask
                                        himself, when he stretches wide his clerical palm to receive
                                        the pay of some dozen of the working clergy, for what
                                        service he is so remunerated? Does his conscience ever
                                        entertain the question of his right to such subsidies? Or is
                                        it possible that the subject never so presents itself to his
                                        mind; that he has received for many years, and intends,
                                        should God spare him, to receive for years to come, these
                                        fruits of the industrious piety of past ages, indifferent as
                                        to any right on his own part, or of any injustice to others!
                                        We must express an opinion that nowhere but in the Church of
                                        England, and only there among its priests, could such a
                                        state of moral indifference be found.'</p>
<p>I must for the present leave my readers to imagine the state of
                                        Mr. Harding's mind after reading the <pb n="109"/> above
                                        article. They say that forty thousand copies of the Jupiter
                                        are daily sold, and that each copy is read by five persons
                                        at the least. Two hundred thousand readers then would hear
                                        this accusation against him; two hundred thousand hearts
                                        would swell with indignation at the griping injustice, the
                                        bare-faced robbery of the warden of Barchester Hospital! And
                                        how was he to answer this? How was he to open his inmost
                                        heart to this multitude, to these thousands, the educated,
                                        the polished, the picked men of his own country; how show
                                        them that he was no robber, no avaricious lazy priest
                                        scrambling for gold, but a retiring humble-spirited man who
                                        had innocently taken what had innocently been offered to
                                        him?</p>
<p>"Write to the Jupiter," suggested the bishop.</p>
<p>"Yes," said the archdeacon, more worldly wise than his father,
                                        "yes, and be smothered with ridicule; tossed over and over
                                        again with scorn; shaken this way and that, as a rat in the
                                        mouth of a practised terrier. You will leave out some word
                                        or letter in your answer, and the ignorance of the cathedral
                                        clergy will be harped upon; you will make some small
                                        mistake, which will be a falsehood, or some admission, which
                                        will be self-condemnation; you will find yourself to have
                                        been vulgar, ill-tempered, <pb n="110"/> irreverend, and
                                        illiterate, and the chances are ten to one, but that being a
                                        clergyman you will have been guilty of blasphemy! A man may
                                        have the best of causes, the best of talents, and the best
                                        of tempers; he may write as well as Addison, or as strongly
                                        as Junius; but even with all this he cannot successfully
                                        answer, when attacked by the Jupiter. In such matters it is
                                        omnipotent. What the Czar is in Russia, or the mob in
                                        America, that the Jupiter is in England. Answer such an
                                        article! No, warden; whatever you do, don't do that. We were
                                        to look for this sort of thing you know; but we need not
                                        draw down on our heads more of it than is necessary."</p>
<p>The article in the Jupiter, while it so greatly harassed our poor
                                        warden, was an immense triumph to some of the opposite
                                        party. Sorry as Bold was to see Mr. Harding attacked so
                                        personally, it still gave him a feeling of elation to find
                                        his cause taken up by so powerful an advocate: and as to
                                        Finney, the attorney, he was beside himself. What! to be
                                        engaged in the same cause and on the same side with the
                                        Jupiter; to have the views he had recommended seconded, and
                                        furthered, and battled for by the Jupiter! Perhaps to have
                                        his own name mentioned as that of the learned gentleman
                                        whose efforts had been so successful on behalf of the poor
                                                <pb n="111"/> of Barchester! He might be examined
                                        before committees of the House of Commons, with heaven knows
                                        how much a day for his personal expenses—he might be engaged
                                        for years on such a suit! There was no end to the glorious
                                        golden dreams which this leader in the Jupiter produced in
                                        the soaring mind of Finney.</p>
<p>And the old bedesmen, they also heard of this article, and had a
                                        glimmering, indistinct idea of the marvellous advocate which
                                        had now taken up their cause. Abel Handy limped hither and
                                        thither through the rooms, repeating all that he understood
                                        to have been printed, with some additions of his own which
                                        he thought should have been added. He told them how the
                                        Jupiter had declared that their warden was no better than a
                                        robber, and that what the Jupiter said was acknowledged by
                                        the world to be true. How the Jupiter had affirmed that each
                                        one of them— "each one of us, Jonathan Crumple, think of
                                        that," —had a clear right to a hundred a year; and that if
                                        the Jupiter had said so, it was better than a decision of
                                        the Lord Chancellor; and then he carried about the paper,
                                        supplied by Mr. Finney, which, though none of them could
                                        read it, still afforded in its very touch and aspect
                                        positive corroboration of what was told them, and Jonathan
                                        Crumple pondered deeply <pb n="112"/> over his returning
                                        wealth; and Job Skulpit saw how right he had been in signing
                                        the petition, and said so many scores of times; and Spriggs
                                        leered fearfully with his one eye; and Moody, as he more
                                        nearly approached the coming golden age, hated more deeply
                                        than ever those who still kept possession of what he so
                                        coveted. Even Billy Gazy and poor bedridden Bell became
                                        active and uneasy, and the great Bunce stood apart with
                                        lowering brow, with deep grief seated in his heart, for he
                                        perceived that evil days were coming.</p>
<p>It had been decided, the archdeacon advising, that no
                                        remonstrance, explanation, or defence should be addressed
                                        from the Barchester conclave to the Editor of the Jupiter,
                                        but hitherto that was the only decision to which they had
                                        come.</p>
<p>Sir Abraham Haphazard was deeply engaged in preparing a bill for
                                        the mortification of papists, to be called the "Convent
                                        Custody Bill," the purport of which was to enable any
                                        protestant clergyman over fifty years of age to search any
                                        nun whom he suspected of being in possession of treasonable
                                        papers, or jesuitical symbols: and as there were to be a
                                        hundred and thirty-seven clauses in the bill, each clause
                                        containing a separate thorn for the side of the papist, and
                                        as it was known the bill would be fought inch <pb n="113"/>
                                        by inch, by fifty maddened Irishmen, the due construction
                                        and adequate dovetailing of it did consume much of Sir
                                        Abraham's time. The bill had all its desired effect. Of
                                        course it never passed into law; but it so completely
                                        divided the ranks of the Irish members, who had bound
                                        themselves together to force on the ministry a bill for
                                        compelling all men to drink Irish whisky, and all women to
                                        wear Irish poplins, that for the remainder of the session
                                        the Great Poplin and Whisky League was utterly harmless.</p>
<p>Thus it happened that Sir Abraham's opinion was not at once
                                        forthcoming, and the uncertainty, the expectation, and
                                        suffering of the folk of Barchester was maintained at a high
                                        pitch.</p>
<pb n="114"/>
</div>