
CHAP. III. THE BISHOP OF BARCHESTER.
Bold at once repaired to the hospital. The day was now
                                        far advanced, but he knew that Mr. Harding dined in the
                                        summer at four, that Eleanor was accustomed to drive in the
                                        evening, and that he might therefore probably find Mr.
                                        Harding alone. It was between seven and eight when he
                                        reached the slight iron gate leading into the precentor's
                                        garden, and though, as Mr. Chadwick observed, the day had
                                        been cold for June, the evening was mild, and soft, and
                                        sweet. The little gate was open. As he raised the latch he
                                        heard the notes of Mr. Harding's violoncello from the far
                                        end of the garden, and, advancing before the house and
                                        across the lawn, he found him playing: and not without an
                                        audience. The musician was seated in a garden-chair just
                                        within the summer-house, so as to allow the violoncello
                                        which he held between his knees to rest upon the dry stone
                                        flooring; before him stood a rough music desk, on which was
                                        open a page of that dear sacred  book, that
                                        much-laboured and much-loved volume of church music, which
                                        had cost so many guineas; and around sat, and lay, and
                                        stood, and leaned, ten of the twelve old men who dwelt with
                                        him beneath old John Hiram's roof. The two reformers were
                                        not there. I will not say that in their hearts they were
                                        conscious of any wrong done or to be done to their mild
                                        warden, but latterly they had kept aloof from him, and his
                                        music was no longer to their taste.
It was amusing to see the positions, and eager listening faces of
                                        these well-to-do old men. I will not say that they all
                                        appreciated the music which they heard, but they were intent
                                        on appearing to do so; pleased at being where they were,
                                        they were determined, as far as in them lay, to give
                                        pleasure in return; and they were not unsuccessful. It
                                        gladdened the precentor's heart to think that the old
                                        bedesmen whom he loved so well, admired the strains which
                                        were to him so full of almost ecstatic joy; and he used to
                                        boast that such was the air of the hospital, as to make it a
                                        precinct specially fit for the worship of St. Cecilia.
Immediately before him, on the extreme corner of the bench which
                                        ran round the summer-house, sat one old man, with his
                                        handkerchief smoothly lain upon his knees, who did enjoy the
                                        moment, or acted  enjoyment well. He was one on
                                        whose large frame many years, for he was over eighty, had
                                        made small havoc,—he was still an upright, burly, handsome
                                        figure, with an open, ponderous brow, round which clung a
                                        few, though very few, thin grey locks. The coarse black gown
                                        of the hospital, the breeches, and buckled shoes became him
                                        well; and as he sat with his hands folded on his staff, and
                                        his chin resting on his hands, he was such a listener as
                                        most musicians would be glad to welcome.
This man was certainly the pride of the hospital. It had always
                                        been the custom that one should be selected as being to some
                                        extent in authority over the others; and though Mr. Bunce,
                                        for such was his name, and so he was always designated by
                                        his inferior brethren, had no greater emoluments than they,
                                        he had assumed, and well knew how to maintain, the dignity
                                        of his elevation. The precentor delighted to call him his
                                        sub-warden, and was not ashamed, occasionally, when no other
                                        guest was there, to bid him sit down by the same parlour
                                        fire, and drink the full glass of port which was placed near
                                        him. Bunce never went without the second glass, but no
                                        entreaty ever made him take a third.
"Well, well, Mr. Harding; you're too good, much too good," he'd
                                        always say, as the second glass  was filled; but
                                        when that was drunk, and the halfhour over, Bunce stood
                                        erect, and with a benediction which his patron valued,
                                        retired to his own abode. He knew the world too well to risk
                                        the comfort of such halcyon moments, by prolonging them till
                                        they were disagreeable.
Mr. Bunce, as may be imagined, was most strongly opposed to
                                        innovation. Not even Dr. Grantly had a more holy horror of
                                        those who would interfere in the affairs of the hospital; he
                                        was every inch a churchman, and though he was not very fond
                                        of Dr. Grantly personally, that arose from there not being
                                        room in the hospital for two people so much alike as the
                                        doctor and himself, rather than from any dissimilarity in
                                        feeling. Mr. Bunce was inclined to think that the warden and
                                        himself could manage the hospital without further
                                        assistance; and that, though the bishop was the
                                        constitutional visitor, and as such entitled to special
                                        reverence from all connected with John Hiram's will, John
                                        Hiram never intended that his affairs should be interfered
                                        with by an archdeacon.
At the present moment, however, these cares were off his mind,
                                        and he was looking at his warden, as though he thought the
                                        music heavenly, and the musician hardly less so.

As Bold walked silently over the lawn, Mr. Harding did not at
                                        first perceive him, and continued to draw his bow slowly
                                        across the plaintive wires; but he soon found from his
                                        audience that some stranger was there, and looking up, began
                                        to welcome his young friend with frank hospitality.
"Pray, Mr. Harding; pray don't let me disturb you," said Bold;
                                        "you know how fond I am of sacred music."
"Oh! it's nothing," said the precentor, shutting up the book, and
                                        then opening it again as he saw the delightfully imploring
                                        look of his old friend Bunce. Oh, Bunce, Bunce, Bunce, I
                                        fear that after all thou art but a flatterer. "Well, I'll
                                        just finish it then; it's a favourite little bit of
                                        Bishop's; and then, Mr. Bold, we'll have a stroll and a chat
                                        till Eleanor comes in and gives us tea." And so Bold sat
                                        down on the soft turf to listen, or rather to think how,
                                        after such sweet harmony, he might best introduce a theme of
                                        so much discord, to disturb the peace of him who was so
                                        ready to welcome him kindly.
Bold thought that the performance was soon over, for he felt that
                                        he had a somewhat difficult task, and he almost regretted
                                        the final leave-taking of the last of the old men, slow as
                                        they were in going through their adieus.

Bold's heart was in his mouth, as the precentor made some
                                        ordinary but kind remark as to the friendliness of the
                                        visit.
"One evening call," said he, "is worth ten in the morning. It's
                                        all formality in the morning; real social talk never begins
                                        till after dinner. That's why I dine early, so as to get as
                                        much as I can of it."
"Quite true, Mr. Harding," said the other; "but I fear I've
                                        reversed the order of things, and I owe you much apology for
                                        troubling you on business at such an hour; but it is on
                                        business that I have called just now."
Mr. Harding looked blank and annoyed; there was something in the
                                        tone of the young man's voice, which told him that the
                                        interview was intended to be disagreeable, and he shrank
                                        back at finding his kindly greeting so repulsed.
"I wish to speak to you about the hospital," continued Bold.
"Well, well, anything I can tell you I shall be most happy—"
"It's about the accounts."
"Then, my dear fellow, I can tell you nothing, for I'm as
                                        ignorant as a child. All I know is, that they pay me 800
                                                l. a year. Go to Chadwick, he 
                                        knows all about the accounts; and now tell me, will poor
                                        Mary Jones ever get the use of her limb again?"
"Well, I think she will, if she's careful; but, Mr. Harding, I
                                        hope you won't object to discuss with me what I have to say
                                        about the hospital."
Mr. Harding gave a deep, long-drawn sigh. He did object, very
                                        strongly object, to discuss any such subject with John Bold;
                                        but he had not the business tact of Mr. Chadwick, and did
                                        not know how to relieve himself from the coming evil; he
                                        sighed sadly, but made no answer.
"I have the greatest regard for you, Mr. Harding," continued
                                        Bold; "the truest respect, the most sincere—"
"Thank ye, thank ye, Mr. Bold," interjaculated the precentor
                                        somewhat impatiently; "I'm much obliged, but never mind
                                        that; I'm as likely to be in the wrong as another man—quite
                                        as likely."
"But, Mr. Harding, I must express what I feel, lest you should
                                        think there is personal enmity in what I'm going to do."
"Personal enmity! Going to do! Why you're not going to cut my
                                        throat, nor put me into the Ecclesiastical Court—"
Bold tried to laugh, but he could n't. He was  quite
                                        in earnest, and determined in his course, and could n't make
                                        a joke of it. He walked on awhile in silence before he
                                        recommenced his attack, during which Mr. Harding, who had
                                        still the bow in his hand, played rapidly on an imaginary
                                        violoncello. "I fear there is reason to think that John
                                        Hiram's will is not carried out to the letter, Mr. Harding,"
                                        said the young man at last; "and I have been asked to see
                                        into it."
"Very well, I've no objection on earth; and now we need not say
                                        another word about it."
"Only one word more, Mr. Harding. Chadwick has referred me to Cox
                                        and Cummins, and I think it my duty to apply to them for
                                        some statement about the hospital. In what I do I may appear
                                        to be interfering with you, and I hope you will forgive me
                                        for doing so."
"Mr. Bold," said the other, stopping, and speaking with some
                                        solemnity, "if you act justly, say nothing in this matter
                                        but the truth, and use no unfair weapons in carrying out
                                        your purposes, I shall have nothing to forgive. I presume
                                        you think I am not entitled to the income I receive from the
                                        hospital, and that others are entitled to it. Whatever some
                                        may do, I shall never attribute to you base motives because
                                        you hold an opinion opposed to my  own, and
                                        adverse to my interests: pray do what you consider to be
                                        your duty; I can give you no assistance, neither will I
                                        offer you any obstacle. Let me, however, suggest to you,
                                        that you can in no wise forward you views nor I mine, by any
                                        discussion between us. Here comes Eleanor and the ponies,
                                        and we'll go in to tea."
Bold, however, felt that he could not sit down at ease with Mr.
                                        Harding and his daughter after what had passed, and
                                        therefore excused himself with much awkward apology; and
                                        merely raising his hat and bowing as he passed Eleanor and
                                        the poney chair, left her in disappointed amazement at his
                                        departure.
Mr. Harding's demeanour certainly impressed Bold with a full
                                        conviction, that the warden felt that he stood on strong
                                        grounds, and almost made him think that he was about to
                                        interfere without due warrant in the private affairs of a
                                        just and honourable man; but Mr. Harding himself was
                                        anything but satisfied with his own view of the case.
In the first place, he wished for Eleanor's sake to think well of
                                        Bold and to like him, and yet he could not but feel
                                        disgusted at the arrogance of his conduct. What right had he
                                        to say that John  Hiram's will was not fairly
                                        carried out? But then the question would arise within his
                                        heart, Was that will fairly acted on? Did John Hiram mean
                                        that the warden of his hospital should receive considerably
                                        more out of the legacy than all the twelve old men together
                                        for whose behoof the hospital was built? Could it be
                                        possible that John Bold was right, and that the reverend
                                        warden of the hospital had been for the last ten years and
                                        more the unjust recipient of an income legally and equitably
                                        belonging to others? What if it should be proved before the
                                        light of day that he, whose life had been so happy, so
                                        quiet, so respected, had absorbed 8000 l ., to
                                        which he had no title, and which he could never repay? I do
                                        not say that he feared that such was really the case; but
                                        the first shade of doubt now fell across his mind, and from
                                        this evening, for many a long, long day, our good, kind,
                                        loving warden was neither happy nor at ease.
Thoughts of this kind, these first moments of much misery,
                                        oppressed Mr. Harding as he sat sipping his tea, absent and
                                        ill at ease. Poor Eleanor felt that all was not right, but
                                        her ideas as to the cause of the evening's discomfort did
                                        not go beyond her lover, and his sudden and uncivil
                                        departure: she thought there must have been some  quarrel between Bold and her father, and she was half
                                        angry with both, though she did not attempt to explain to
                                        herself why she was so.
Mr. Harding thought long and deeply over these things, both
                                        before he went to bed, and after it, as he lay awake,
                                        questioning within himself the validity of his claim to the
                                        income which he enjoyed. It seemed clear at any rate that,
                                        however unfortunate he might be at having been placed in
                                        such a position, no one could say that he ought either to
                                        have refused the appointment first, or to have rejected the
                                        income afterwards. All the world—meaning the ecclesiastical
                                        world as confined to the English church —knew that the
                                        wardenship of the Barchester Hospital was a snug sinecure,
                                        but no one had ever been blamed for accepting it. To how
                                        much blame, however, would he have been open had he rejected
                                        it! How mad would he have been thought had he declared, when
                                        the situation was vacant and offered to him, that he had
                                        scruples as to receiving 800 l . a year from John
                                        Hiram's property, and that he had rather some stranger
                                        should possess it! How would Dr. Grantly have shaken his
                                        wise head, and have consulted with his friends in the close
                                        as to some decent retreat for the coming insanity of the
                                        poor minor canon! If he was right in accepting the place, it
                                                 was clear to him also that he would be
                                        wrong in rejecting any part of the income attached to it.
                                        The patronage was a valuable appanage of the bishopric; and
                                        surely it would not be his duty to lessen the value of that
                                        preferment which had been bestowed on himself; surely he was
                                        bound to stand by his order.
But somehow these arguments, though they seemed logical, were not
                                        satisfactory. Was John Hiram's will fairly carried out? that
                                        was the true question: and if not, was it not his especial
                                        duty to see that this was done,—his especial duty, whatever
                                        injury it might do to his order,—however ill such duty might
                                        be received by his patron and his friends? At the idea of
                                        his friends, his mind turned unhappily to his son-in-law: he
                                        knew well how strongly he would be supported by Dr. Grantly,
                                        if he could bring himself to put his case into the
                                        archdeacon's hands, and to allow him to fight the battle;
                                        but he knew also that he would find no sympathy there for
                                        his doubts, no friendly feeling, no inward comfort. Dr.
                                        Grantly would be ready enough to take up his cudgel against
                                        all comers on behalf of the church militant, but he would do
                                        so on the distasteful ground of the church's infallibility.
                                        Such a contest would give no comfort to Mr. Harding's
                                        doubts; he  was not so anxious to prove himself
                                        right, as to be so.
I have said before that Dr. Grantly was the working man of the
                                        diocese, and that his father the bishop was somewhat
                                        inclined to an idle life: so it was; but the bishop, though
                                        he had never been an active man, was one whose qualities had
                                        rendered him dear to all who knew him. He was the very
                                        opposite to his son; he was a bland and a kind old man,
                                        opposed by every feeling to authoritative demonstrations and
                                        episcopal ostentation. It was perhaps well for him, in his
                                        situation, that his son had early in life been able to do
                                        that which he could not well do when he was younger, and
                                        which he could not have done at all now that he was over
                                        seventy. The bishop knew how to entertain the clergy of his
                                        diocese, to talk easy small talk with the rectors' wives,
                                        and put curates at their ease; but it required the strong
                                        hand of the archdeacon to deal with such as were refractory
                                        either in their doctrines or their lives.
The bishop and Mr. Harding loved each other warmly. They had
                                        grown old together, and had together spent many, many years
                                        in clerical Pursuits and clerical conversation. When one of
                                        them was a bishop and the other only a minor canon they were
                                                 even then much together; but since
                                        their children had married, and Mr. Harding had become
                                        warden and precentor, they were all in all to each other. I
                                        will not say that they managed the diocese between them, but
                                        they spent much time in discussing the man who did, and in
                                        forming little plans to mitigate his wrath against church
                                        delinquents, and soften his aspirations for church
                                        dominion.
Mr. Harding determined to open his mind, and confess his doubts
                                        to his old friend; and to him he went on the morning after
                                        John Bold's uncourteous visit.
Up to this period no rumour of these cruel proceedings against
                                        the hospital had reached the bishop's ears. He had doubtless
                                        heard that men existed who questioned his right to present
                                        to a sinecure of 800 l . a year, as he had heard
                                        from time to time of some special immorality or disgraceful
                                        disturbance in the usually decent and quiet city of
                                        Barchester: but all he did, and all he was called on to do,
                                        on such occasions, was to shake his head, and to beg his
                                        son, the great dictator, to see that no harm happened to the
                                        church.
It was a long story that Mr. Harding had to tell before he made
                                        the bishop comprehend his own view of the case; but we need
                                        not follow him through the  tale. At first the
                                        bishop counselled but one step, recommended but one remedy,
                                        had but one medicine in his whole pharmacopeia strong enough
                                        to touch so grave a disorder—he prescribed the archdeacon.
                                        "Refer him to the archdeacon," he repeated, as Mr. Harding
                                        spoke of Bold and his visit. "The archdeacon will set you
                                        quite right about that," he kindly said, when his friend
                                        spoke with hesitation of the justness of his cause. "No man
                                        has got up all that so well as the archdeacon;" but the
                                        dose, though large, failed to quiet the patient; indeed it
                                        almost produced nausea.
But, bishop," said he, "did you ever read John Hiram's will?"
The bishop thought probably he had, thirty-five years ago, when
                                        first instituted to his see, but could not state positively:
                                        however, he very well knew that he had the absolute right to
                                        present to the wardenship, and that the income of the warden
                                        had been regularly settled.
"But, bishop, the question is, who has the power to settle it?
                                        If, as this young man says, the will provides that the
                                        proceeds of the property are to be divided into shares, who
                                        has the power to alter these provisions?" The bishop had an
                                        indistinct idea that they altered themselves by the lapse of
                                        years; that a  kind of ecclesiastical statute of
                                        limitation barred the rights of the twelve bedesmen to any
                                        increase of income arising from the increased value of
                                        property. He said something about tradition; more of the
                                        many learned men who by their practice had confirmed the
                                        present arrangement; then went at some length into the
                                        propriety of maintaining the due difference in rank and
                                        income between a beneficed clergyman, and certain poor old
                                        men who were dependent on charity; and concluded his
                                        argument by another reference to the archdeacon.
The precentor sat thoughtfully gazing at the fire, and listening
                                        to the good-natured reasoning of his friend. What the bishop
                                        said had a sort of comfort in it, but it was not a
                                        sustaining comfort. It made Mr. Harding feel that many
                                        others—indeed, all others of his own order—would think him
                                        right; but it failed to prove to him that he truly was
                                        so.
"Bishop," said he, at last, after both had sat silent for a
                                        while, "I should deceive you and myself too, if I did not
                                        tell you that I am very unhappy about this. Suppose that I
                                        cannot bring myself to agree with Dr. Grantly!—that I find,
                                        after inquiry, that the young man is right, and that I am
                                        wrong—what then?"
The two men were sitting near each other—so  near,
                                        that the bishop was able to lay his hand upon the other's
                                        knee, and he did so with a gentle pressure. Mr. Harding well
                                        knew what that pressure meant. The bishop had no further
                                        argument to adduce; he could not fight for the cause as his
                                        son would do; he could not prove all the precentor's doubts
                                        to be groundless; but he could sympathise with his friend,
                                        and he did so; and Mr. Harding felt that he had received
                                        that for which he came. There was another period of silence,
                                        after which, the bishop asked with a degree of irritable
                                        energy, very unusual with him, whether this "pestilent
                                        intruder" (meaning John Bold) had any friends in
                                        Barchester.
Mr. Harding had fully made up his mind to tell the bishop
                                        everything; to speak of his daughter's love, as well as his
                                        own troubles; to talk of John Bold in his double capacity of
                                        future son-in-law and present enemy; and though he felt it
                                        to be sufficiently disagreeable, now was his time to do
                                        it.
"He is very intimate at my own house, bishop." The bishop stared;
                                        he was not so far gone in orthodoxy and church-military as
                                        his son, but still he could not bring himself to understand
                                        how so declared an enemy of the establishment could be
                                        admitted on terms of intimacy into the house, not only  of so firm a pillar as Mr. Harding, but one
                                        so much injured as the warden of the hospital.
"Indeed, I like Mr. Bold much, personally," continued the
                                        disinterested victim; "and to tell you the 'truth,' "—he
                                        hesitated as he brought out the dreadful tidings,—"I have
                                        sometimes thought it not improbable that he would be my
                                        second son-in-law." The bishop did not whistle; we believe
                                        that they lose the power of doing so on being consecrated;
                                        and that in these days one might as easily meet a corrupt
                                        judge as a whistling bishop; but he looked as though he
                                        would have done so, but for his apron.
What a brother-in-law for the archdeacon! what an alliance for
                                        Barchester close! what a connexion for even the episcopal
                                        palace! The bishop, in his simple mind, felt no doubt that
                                        John Bold, had he so much power, would shut up all
                                        cathedrals, and probably all parish churches; distribute all
                                        tithes among Methodists, Baptists, and other savage tribes;
                                        utterly annihilate the sacred bench, and make shovel hats
                                        and lawn sleeves as illegal as cowls, sandals, and
                                        sackcloth! Here was a nice man to be initiated into the
                                        comfortable arcana of ecclesiastical snuggeries; one who
                                        doubted the integrity of parsons, and probably disbelieved
                                        the Trinity!
Mr. Harding saw what an effect his communication  had
                                        made, and almost repented the openness of his disclosure;
                                        he, however, did what he could to moderate the grief of his
                                        friend and patron. "I did not say that there is any
                                        engagement between them. Had there been, Eleanor would have
                                        told me: I know her well enough to be assured that she would
                                        have done so; but I see that they are fond of each other;
                                        and as a man and a father, I have had no objection to urge
                                        against their intimacy."
"But, Harding," said the bishop, "how are you to oppose him, if
                                        he is your son-in-law?"
"I don't mean to oppose him; it is he who opposes me: if anything
                                        is to be done in defence, I suppose Chadwick will do it. I
                                        suppose—"
"Oh, the archdeacon will see to that: were the young man twice
                                        his brother-in-law, the archdeacon will never be deterred
                                        from doing what he feels to be right."
Mr. Harding reminded the bishop that the archdeacon and the
                                        reformer were not yet brothers, and very probably never
                                        would be; exacted from him a promise that Eleanor's name
                                        should not be mentioned in any discussion between the father
                                        bishop and son archdeacon respecting the hospital; and then
                                        took his departure, leaving his poor old friend bewildered,
                                        amazed, and confounded.

