
CHAP. XIX. THE WARDEN RESIGNS.
The party met the next morning at breakfast; and a very
                                        sombre affair it was—very unlike the breakfasts at Plumstead
                                        Episcopi.
There were three thin, small, dry bits of bacon, each an inch
                                        long, served up under a huge old plated cover; there were
                                        four three-cornered bits of dry toast, and four square bits
                                        of buttered toast; there was a loaf of bread, and some
                                        oily-looking butter; and on the sideboard there were the
                                        remains of a cold shoulder of mutton. The archdeacon,
                                        however, had not come up from his rectory to St. Paul's
                                        Churchyard to enjoy himself, and therefore nothing was said
                                        of the scanty fare.
The guests were as sorry as the viands—hardly anything was said
                                        over the breakfast table. The archdeacon munched his toast
                                        in ominous silence, turning over bitter thoughts in his deep
                                        mind. The warden tried to talk to his daughter, and she
                                        tried to answer him; but they both failed. There were no  feelings at present in common between
                                        them. The warden was thinking only of getting back to
                                        Barchester, and calculating whether the archdeacon would
                                        expect him to wait for him; and Mrs. Grantly was preparing
                                        herself far a grand attack which she was to make on her
                                        father, as agreed upon between herself and her husband
                                        during their curtain confabulation of that morning.
When the waiter had creaked out of the room with the last of the
                                        teacups, the archdeacon got up and went to the window, as
                                        though to admire the view. The room looked out on a narrow
                                        passage which runs from St. Paul's Churchyard to Paternoster
                                        Row; and Dr. Grantly patiently perused the names of the
                                        three shopkeepers whose doors were in view. The warden still
                                        kept his seat at the table, and examined the pattern of the
                                        table-cloth; and Mrs. Grantly, seating herself on the sofa,
                                        began to knit.
After awhile the warden pulled his Bradshaw out of his pocket,
                                        and began laboriously to consult it. There was a train for
                                        Barchester at 10 A.M. That was out of the question, for it
                                        was nearly ten already. Another at 3 P.M. ; another, the
                                        night-mail train, at 9 P.M. The three o'clock train would
                                        take him home to tea, and would suit very well.

"My dear," said he, "I think I shall go back home at three
                                        o'clock to-day. I shall get home at half-past eight. I don't
                                        think there's anything to keep me in London."
"The archdeacon and I return by the early train to-morrow, papa;
                                        won't you wait and go back with us?"
"Why, Eleanor will expect me to-night; and I've so much to do;
                                        and—"
"Much to do!" said the archdeacon sotto voce; but the
                                        warden heard him.
"You'd better wait for us, papa."
"Thank ye, my dear! I think I'll go this afternoon." The tamest
                                        animal will turn when driven too hard, and even Mr. Harding
                                        was beginning to fight for his own way.
"I suppose you won't be back before three?" said the lady,
                                        addressing her husband.
"I must leave this at two," said the warden.
"Quite out of the question," said the archdeacon, answering his
                                        wife, and still reading the shopkeepers' names; "I don't
                                        suppose I shall be back till five."
There was another long pause, during which Mr. Harding continued
                                        to study his "Bradshaw."
"I must go to Cox and Cumming," said the archdeacon at last.

"Oh, to Cox and Cumming," said the warden. It was quite a matter
                                        of indifference to him where his son-in-law went. The names
                                        of Cox and Cumming had now no interest in his ears. What had
                                        he to do with Cox and Cumming further, having already had
                                        his suit finally adjudicated upon in a court of conscience,
                                        a judgment without power of appeal fully registered, and the
                                        matter settled so that all the lawyers in London could not
                                        disturb it. The archdeacon could go to Cox and Cumming,
                                        could remain there all day in anxious discussion; but what
                                        might be said there was no longer matter of interest to him,
                                        who was so soon to lay aside the name of warden of
                                        Barchester Hospital.
The archdeacon took up his shining new clerical hat, and put on
                                        his black new clerical gloves, and looked heavy,
                                        respectable, decorous, and opulent, a decided clergyman of
                                        the Church of England, every inch of him. "I suppose I shall
                                        see you at Barchester the day after to-morrow," said he.
The warden supposed he would.
"I must once more beseech you to take no further steps till you
                                        see my father; if you owe me nothing," and the archdeacon
                                        looked as though he thought a great deal were due to him,
                                        "at least you owe so much to my father;" and, without
                                        waiting for a  reply, Dr. Grantly wended his
                                        way to Cox and Cumming.
Mrs. Grantly waited till the last fall of her husband's foot was
                                        heard, as he turned out of the court into St. Paul's
                                        Churchyard, and then commenced her task of talking her
                                        father over.
"Papa," she began, "this is a most serious business."
"Indeed it is," said the warden, ringing the bell.
"I greatly feel the distress of mind you must have endured."
"I am sure you do, my dear;" and he ordered the waiter to bring
                                        him pen, ink, and paper.
"Are you going to write, papa?"
"Yes, my dear—I am going to write my resignation to the
                                        bishop."
"Pray, pray, papa, put it off till our return,— pray put it off
                                        till you have seen the bishop,—dear papa! for my sake, for
                                        Eleanor's!—"
"It is for your sake and Eleanor's that I do this. I hope, at
                                        least, that my children may never have to be ashamed of
                                        their father."
"How can you talk about shame, papa?" and she stopped while the
                                        waiter creaked in with the paper, and then slowly creaked
                                        out again; "how  can you talk about shame? you
                                        know what all your friends think about this question."
The warden spread his paper on the table, placing it on the
                                        meagre blotting-book, which the hotel afforded, and sat
                                        himself down to write.
"You won't refuse me one request, papa?" continued his daughter;
                                        "you won't refuse to delay your letter for two short
                                        days?—two days can make no possible difference."
"My dear," said he naïvely, "if I waited till I got to
                                        Barchester, I might, perhaps, be prevented."
"But surely you would not wish to offend the bishop?" said
                                        she.
"God forbid! The bishop is not apt to take offence, and knows me
                                        too well to take in bad part anything that I may be called
                                        on to do."
"But, papa—"
"Susan," said he, "my mind on this subject is made up; it is not
                                        without much repugnance that I act in opposition to the
                                        advice of such men as Sir Abraham Haphazard and the
                                        archdeacon; but in this matter I can take no advice, I
                                        cannot alter the resolution to which I have come."
"But two days, papa—"
"No,—nor can I delay it. You may add to my present unhappiness by
                                        pressing me, but you cannot  change my purpose;
                                        it will be a comfort to me if you will let the matter rest:"
                                        and, dipping his pen into the inkstand, he fixed his eyes
                                        intently on the paper.
There was something in his manner which taught his daughter to
                                        perceive that he was in earnest; she had at one time ruled
                                        supreme in her father's house, but she knew that there were
                                        moments when, mild and meek as he was, he would have his
                                        way, and the present was an occasion of the sort. She
                                        returned, therefore, to her knitting, and very shortly after
                                        left the room.
The warden was now at liberty to compose his letter, and, as it
                                        was characteristic of the man, it shall be given at full
                                        length. The official letter, which, when written, seemed to
                                        him to be too formally cold to be sent alone to so dear a
                                        friend, was accompanied by a private note; and both are here
                                        inserted.
The letter of resignation ran as follows:—
'Chapter Hotel, St. Paul's,
'London,—August, 18—
'My Lord Bishop,
It is with the greatest pain that I feel myself constrained to
                                        resign into your Lordship's hands the wardenship of the
                                        hospital at Barchester which you so kindly conferred upon
                                        me, now nearly twelve years since.
I need not explain the circumstances which have 
                                        made this step appear necessary to me. You are aware that a
                                        question has arisen as to the right of the warden to the
                                        income which has been allotted to the wardenship; it has
                                        seemed to me that this right is not well made out, and I
                                        hesitate to incur the risk of taking an income to which my
                                        legal claim appears doubtful.
The office of precentor of the cathedral is, as your Lordship is
                                        aware, joined to that of the warden; that is to say, the
                                        precentor has for many years been the warden of the
                                        hospital; there is, however, nothing to make the junction of
                                        the two offices necessary, and, unless you or the dean and
                                        chapter object to such an arrangement, I would wish to keep
                                        the precentorship. The income of this office will now be
                                        necessary to me; indeed, I do not know why I should be
                                        ashamed to say that I should have difficulty in supporting
                                        myself without it.
Your Lordship, and such others as you may please to consult on
                                        the matter, will at once see that my resignation of the
                                        wardenship need offer not the slightest bar to its
                                        occupation by another person. I am thought in the wrong by
                                        all those whom I have consulted in the matter; I have very
                                        little but an inward and an unguided conviction of my own to
                                        bring me to this step, and I shall, indeed, be hurt to find
                                        that any slur is thrown on the preferment which your
                                        kindness bestowed on me, by my resignation of it. I, at any
                                        rate for one, shall look on any successor whom you may
                                        appoint as enjoying a clerical situation of the highest
                                        respectability, and one to which your Lordship's nomination
                                        gives an indefeasible right.

I cannot finish this official letter without again thanking your
                                        Lordship for all your great kindness, and I beg to
                                        subscricbe myself
'Your Lordship's most obedient servant,
' Septimus Harding ,
'Warden of Barchester Hospital, and Precentor of the
                                        cathedral.'
He then wrote the following private note:—
'My dear Bishop,
I cannot send you the accompanying official letter without a
                                        warmer expression of thanks for all your kindness than would
                                        befit a document which may to a certain degree be made
                                        public. You, I know, will understand the feeling, and,
                                        perhaps, pity the weakness which makes me resign the
                                        hospital. I am not made of calibre strong enough to
                                        withstand public attack. Were I convinced that I stood on
                                        ground perfectly firm, that I was certainly justified in
                                        taking eight hundred a year under Hiram's will, I should
                                        feel bound by duty to retain the position, however
                                        unendurable might be the nature of the assault; but, as I do
                                        not feel this conviction, I cannot believe that you will
                                        think me wrong in what I am doing.
I had at one time an idea of keeping only some moderate portion
                                        of the income; perhaps three hundred a year, and of
                                        remitting the remainder to the trustees; but it occurred to
                                        me, and I think with reason, that by so doing I should place
                                        my successors in an invidious position, and greatly damage
                                        your patronage.

My dear friend, let me have a line from you to say that you do
                                        not blame me for what I am doing, and that the officiating
                                        vicar of Crabtree Parva will be the same to you as the
                                        warden of the hospital.
I am very anxious about the precentorship; the archdeacon thinks
                                        it must go with the wardenship; I think not, and that,
                                        having it, I cannot be ousted. I will, however, be guided by
                                        you and the dean. No other duty will suit me so well, or
                                        come so much within my power of adequate performance.
I thank you from my heart for the preferment which I am now
                                        giving up, and for all your kindness, and am, dear bishop,
                                        now as always,
'Yours most sincerely,
" Septimus Harding.
'London,—August, 18—.'
Having written these letters and made a copy of the former one
                                        for the benefit of the archdeacon, Mr. Harding, whom we must
                                        now cease to call the warden, he having designated himself
                                        so for the last time, found that it was nearly two o'clock,
                                        and that he must prepare for his journey. Yes, from this
                                        time he never again admitted the name by which he had been
                                        so familiarly known, and in which, to tell the truth, he had
                                        rejoiced. The love of titles is common to all men, and a
                                        vicar or fellow is as pleased at becoming Mr. Archdeacon or
                                        Mr. Provost, as a lieutenant at getting his captaincy, or a
                                        city tallow-chandler  in becoming Sir John on
                                        the occasion of a Queen's visit to a new bridge. But warden
                                        he was no longer, and the name of precentor, though the
                                        office was to him so dear, confers in itself no sufficient
                                        distinction; our friend, therefore, again became Mr.
                                        Harding.
Mrs. Grantly had gone out; he had, therefore, no one to delay him
                                        by further entreaties to postpone his journey; he had soon
                                        arranged his bag, and paid his bill, and, leaving a note for
                                        his daughter, in which he put the copy of his official
                                        letter, he got into a cab and drove away to the station with
                                        something of triumph in his heart.
Had he not cause for triumph? Had he not been supremely
                                        successful? Had he not for the first time in his life held
                                        his own purpose against that of his son-in-law, and manfully
                                        combated against great odds,—against the archdeacon's wife
                                        as well as the archdeacon? Had he not gained a great
                                        victory, and was it not fit that he should step into his cab
                                        with triumph?
He had not told Eleanor when he would return, but she was on the
                                        look out for him by every train by which he could arrive,
                                        and the pony carriage was at the Barchester station when the
                                        train drew up at the platform.

"My dear," said he, sitting beside her, as she steered her little
                                        vessel to one side of the road to make room for the
                                        clattering omnibus as they passed from the station into the
                                        town; "I hope you'll be able to feel a proper degree of
                                        respect for the vicar of Crabtree."
"Dear papa," said she, "I am so glad."
There was great comfort in returning home to that pleasant house,
                                        though he was to leave it so soon, and in discussing with
                                        his daughter all that he had done, and all that he had to
                                        do. It must take some time to get out of one house into
                                        another; the curate at Crabtree could not be abolished under
                                        six months, that is, unless other provision could be made
                                        for him; and then the furniture—the most of that must be
                                        sold to pay Sir Abraham Haphazard for sitting up till twelve
                                        at night. Mr. Harding was strangely ignorant as to lawyers'
                                        bills; he had no idea, from twenty pounds to two thousand,
                                        as to the sum in which he was in indebted for legal
                                        assistance. True, he had called in no lawyer himself; true,
                                        he had been no consenting party to the employment of either
                                        Cox and Cumming, or Sir Abraham; he had never been consulted
                                        on such matters;—the archdeacon had managed all this
                                        himself, never for a moment suspecting that Mr. Harding
                                        would take upon him to end the  matter in a way
                                        of his own. Had the lawyers' bills been ten thousand pounds,
                                        Mr. Harding could not have helped it; but he was not on that
                                        account disposed to dispute his own liability. The question
                                        never occurred to him; but it did occur to him that he had
                                        very little money at his banker's, that he could receive
                                        nothing further from the hospital, and that the sale of the
                                        furniture was his only resource.
"Not all, papa," said Eleanor, pleadingly.
"Not quite all, my dear," said he; "that is, if we can help it.
                                        We must have a little at Crabtree— but it can only be a
                                        little; we must put a bold front on it, Nelly; it is n't
                                        easy to come down from affluence to poverty."
And so they planned their future mode of life; the father taking
                                        comfort from the reflection that his daughter would soon be
                                        freed from it, and she resolving that her father would soon
                                        have in her own house a ready means of escape from the
                                        solitude of the Crabtree vicarage.
When the archdeacon left his wife and father-in-law at the
                                        Chapter Coffee House to go to Messrs. Cox and Cumming, he
                                        had no very defined idea of what he had to do when he got
                                        there. Gentlemen when at law, or in any way engaged in
                                        matters requiring legal assistance, are very apt to go to
                                                 their lawyers without much absolute
                                        necessity;— gentlemen when doing so, are apt to describe
                                        such attendance as quite compulsory, and very disagreeable.
                                        The lawyers, on the other hand, do not at all see the
                                        necessity, though they quite agree as to the disagreeable
                                        nature of the visit;—gentlemen when so engaged are usually
                                        somewhat gravelled at finding nothing to say to their
                                        learned friends; they generally talk a little politics, a
                                        little weather, ask some few foolish questions about their
                                        suit, and then withdraw, having passed half an hour in a
                                        small, dingy waiting-room, in company with some junior
                                        assistant-clerk, and ten minutes with the members of the
                                        firm; the business is then over for which the gentleman has
                                        come up to London, probably a distance of a hundred and
                                        fifty miles. To be sure he goes to the play, and dines at
                                        his friend's club, and has a bachelor's liberty and
                                        bachelor's recreation for three or four days; and he could
                                        not probably plead the desire of such gratifications as a
                                        reason to his wife for a trip to London.
Married ladies, when your husbands find they are positively
                                        obliged to attend their legal advisers, the nature of the
                                        duty to be performed is generally of this description.
The archdeacon would not have dreamt of leaving 
                                        London without going to Cox and Cumming; and yet he had
                                        nothing to say to them. The game was up; he plainly saw that
                                        Mr. Harding in this matter was not to be moved; his only
                                        remaining business on this head was to pay the bill and have
                                        done with it: and I think it may be taken for granted, that
                                        whatever the cause may be that takes a gentleman to a
                                        lawyer's chambers, he never goes there to pay his bill.
Dr. Grantly, however, in the eyes of Messrs. Cox and Cumming
                                        represented the spiritualities of the diocese of Barchester,
                                        as Mr. Chadwick did the temporalities, and was, therefore,
                                        too great a man to undergo the half-hour in the clerks'
                                        room. It will not be necessary that we should listen to the
                                        notes of sorrow in which the archdeacon bewailed to Mr. Cox
                                        the weakness of his father-in-law, and the end of all their
                                        hopes of triumph; nor need we repeat the various
                                        exclamations of surprise with which the mournful
                                        intelligence was received. No tragedy occurred, though Mr.
                                        Cox, a short and somewhat bull-necked man, was very near a
                                        fit of apoplexy when he first attempted to ejaculate that
                                        fatal word—resign!
Over and over again did Mr. Cox attempt to enforce on the
                                        archdeacon the propriety of urging  on Mr.
                                        Warden the madness of the deed he was about to do.
"Eight hundred a-year!" said Mr. Cox.
"And nothing whatever to do!" said Mr. Cumming, who had joined
                                        the conference.
"No private fortune, I believe," said Mr. Cox.
"Not a shilling," said Mr. Cumming, in a very low voice, shaking
                                        his head.
"I never heard of such a case in all my experience," said Mr.
                                        Cox.
"Eight hundred a-year, and as nice a house as any gentleman could
                                        wish to hang up his hat in," said Mr. Cumming.
"And an unmarried daughter, I believe," said Mr. Cox, with much
                                        moral seriousness in his tone. The archdeacon only sighed as
                                        each separate wail was uttered, and shook his head,
                                        signifying that the fatuity of some people was past
                                        belief.
"I'll tell you what he might do," said Mr. Cumming, brightening
                                        up. "I'll tell you how you might save it—let him
                                        exchange."
"Exchange where?" said the archdeacon.
"Exchange for a living. There's Quiverful, of Puddingdale; he has
                                        twelve children, and would be delighted to get the hospital.
                                        To be sure Puddingdale is only four hundred, but that would
                                                 be saving something out of the fire:
                                        Mr. Harding would have a curate, and still keep three
                                        hundred or three hundred and fifty."
The archdeacon opened his ears and listened; he really thought
                                        the scheme might do.
"The newspapers," continued Mr. Cumming, "might hammer away at
                                        Quiverful every day for the next six months without his
                                        minding them."
The archdeacon took up his hat, and returned to his hotel,
                                        thinking the matter over deeply: at any rate he would sound
                                        Quiverful; a man with twelve children would do much to
                                        double his income.

