
CHAP. VIII. PLUMSTEAD EPISCOPI.
The reader must now be requested to visit the rectory of
                                        Plumstead Episcopi; and as it is as yet still early morning,
                                        to ascend again with us into the bedroom of the archdeacon.
                                        The mistress of the mansion was at her toilet; on which we
                                        will not dwell with profane eyes, but proceed into a small
                                        inner room, where the doctor dressed and kept his boots and
                                        sermons; and here we will take our stand premising that the
                                        door of the room was so open as to admit of a conversation
                                        between our reverend Adam and his valued Eve.
"It's all your own fault, archdeacon," said the latter; "I told
                                        you from the beginning how it would end, and papa has no one
                                        to thank but you."
"Good gracious, my dear," said the doctor, appearing at the door
                                        of his dressing-room, with his face and head enveloped in
                                        the rough towel which he was violently using; "how can you
                                        say so? I am doing my very best."

"I wish you had never done so much," said the lady, interrupting
                                        him; "if you'd just have let John Bold come and go there, as
                                        he and papa liked, he and Eleanor would have been married by
                                        this time, and we should not have heard one word about all
                                        this affair."
"But, my dear—"
"Oh, it's all very well, archdeacon, and of course you're right;
                                        I don't for a moment think you'll ever admit that you could
                                        be wrong; but the fact is, you've brought this young man
                                        down upon papa by huffing him as you have done."
"But, my love—"
"And all because you did n't like John Bold for a brother-in-law.
                                        How is she ever to do better? papa has n't got a shilling;
                                        and though Eleanor is well enough, she has not at all a
                                        taking style of beauty. I'm sure I don't know how she's to
                                        do better than marry John Bold, or as well indeed," added
                                        the anxious sister, giving the last twist to her last
                                        shoestring.
Dr. Grantly felt keenly the injustice of this attack; but what
                                        could he say? He certainly had huffed John Bold; he
                                        certainly had objected to him as a brother-in-law, and a
                                        very few months ago the very idea had excited his wrath: but
                                        now matters were changed;  John Bold had shown
                                        his power, and, though he was as odious as ever to the
                                        archdeacon, power is always respected, and the reverend
                                        dignitary began to think that such an alliance might not
                                        have been imprudent. Nevertheless, his motto was still "no
                                        surrender;" he would still fight it out; he still believed
                                        confidently in Oxford, in the bench of bishops, in Sir
                                        Abraham Haphazard, and in himself; and it was only when
                                        alone with his wife that doubts of defeat ever beset him. He
                                        once more tried to communicate this confidence to Mrs.
                                        Grantly, and for the twentieth time began to tell her of Sir
                                        Abraham.
"Oh, Sir Abraham!" said she, collecting all her house keys into
                                        her basket before she descended; "Sir Abraham won't get
                                        Eleanor a husband; Sir Abraham won't get papa another income
                                        when he has been worreted out of the hospital. Mark what I
                                        tell you, archdeacon: while you and Sir Abraham are
                                        fighting, papa will lose his preferment; and what will you
                                        do then with him and Eleanor on your hands? besides, who's
                                        to pay Sir Abraham? I suppose he won't take the case up for
                                        nothing?" And so the lady descended to family worship among
                                        her children and servants, the pattern of a good and prudent
                                        wife.
Dr. Grantly was blessed with a happy, thriving family. There
                                        were, first, three boys, now at home  from
                                        school for the holidays. They were called, respectively,
                                        Charles James, Henry, and Samuel. The two younger (there
                                        were five in all) were girls; the elder, Florinda, bore the
                                        name of the Archbishop of York's wife, whose godchild she
                                        was; and the younger had been christened Grizzel, after a
                                        sister of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The boys were all
                                        clever, and gave good promise of being well able to meet the
                                        cares and trials of the world; and yet they were not alike
                                        in their dispositions, and each had his individual
                                        character, and each his separate admirers among the doctor's
                                        friends.
Charles James was an exact and careful boy; he never committed
                                        himself; he well knew how much was expected from the eldest
                                        son of the Archdeacon of Barchester, and was therefore
                                        mindful not to mix too freely with other boys. He had not
                                        the great talents of his younger brothers, but he exceeded
                                        them in judgment and propriety of demeanour; his fault, if
                                        he had one, was an over-attention to words instead of
                                        things; there was a thought too much finesse about
                                        him, and, as even his father sometimes told him, he was too
                                        fond of a compromise.
The second was the archdeacon's favourite son, and Henry was
                                        indeed a brilliant boy. The versatility of his genius was
                                        surprising, and the visitors at Plumstead 
                                        Episcopi were often amazed at the marvellous manner in which
                                        he would, when called on, adapt his capacity to apparently
                                        most uncongenial pursuits. He appeared once before a large
                                        circle as Luther the reformer, and delighted them with the
                                        perfect manner in which he assumed the character; and within
                                        three days he again astonished them by acting the part of a
                                        Capuchin friar to the very life. For this last exploit his
                                        father gave him a golden guinea, and his brothers said the
                                        reward had been promised beforehand in the event of the
                                        performance being successful. He was also sent on a tour
                                        into Devonshire; a treat which the lad was most anxious of
                                        enjoying. His father's friends there, however, did not
                                        appreciate his talents, and sad accounts were sent home of
                                        the perversity of his nature. He was a most courageous lad,
                                        game to the backbone. It was soon known, both at home, where
                                        he lived, and within some miles of Barchester Cathedral, and
                                        also at Westminster, where he was at school, that young
                                        Henry could box well and would never own himself beat; other
                                        boys would fight while they had a leg to stand on, but he
                                        would fight with no leg at all. Those backing him would
                                        sometimes think him crushed by the weight of blows and faint
                                        with loss of blood, and his friends would endeavour to
                                        withdraw him from the contest; but no, Henry 
                                        never gave in, was never weary of the battle. The ring was
                                        the only element in which he seemed to enjoy himself; and
                                        while other boys were happy in the number of their friends,
                                        he rejoiced most in the multitude of his foes.
His relations could not but admire his pluck, but they sometimes
                                        were forced to regret that he was inclined to be a bully;
                                        and those not so partial to him as his father was, observed
                                        with pain that, though he could fawn to the masters and the
                                        archdeacon's friends, he was imperious and masterful to the
                                        servants and the poor.
But perhaps Samuel was the general favourite; and dear little
                                        Soapy, as he was familiarly called, was as engaging a child
                                        as ever fond mother petted. He was soft and gentle in his
                                        manners, and attractive in his speech; the tone of his voice
                                        was melody, and every action was a grace; unlike his
                                        brothers, he was courteous to all, he was affable to the
                                        lowly, and meek even to the very scullery maid. He was a boy
                                        of great promise, minding his books and delighting the
                                        hearts of his masters. His brothers, however, were not
                                        particularly fond of him; they would complain to their
                                        mother that Soapy's civility all meant something; they
                                        thought that his voice was too often listened to at
                                        Plumstead Episcopi, and evidently  feared that,
                                        as he grew up, he would have more weight in the house than
                                        either of them; there was, therefore, a sort of agreement
                                        among them to put young Soapy down. This, however, was not
                                        so easy to be done; Samuel, though young, was sharp; he
                                        could not assume the stiff decorum of Charles James, nor
                                        could he fight like Henry; but he was a perfect master of
                                        his own weapons, and contrived, in the teeth of both of
                                        them, to hold the place which he had assumed. Henry declared
                                        that he was a false, cunning creature; and Charles James,
                                        though he always spoke of him as his dear brother Samuel,
                                        was not slow to say a word against him when opportunity
                                        offered. To speak the truth, Samuel was a cunning boy, and
                                        those even who loved him best could not but own that for one
                                        so young, he was too adroit in choosing his words, and too
                                        skilled in modulating his voice.
The two little girls Florinda and Grizzel were nice little girls
                                        enough, but they did not possess the strong sterling
                                        qualities of their brothers; their voices were not often
                                        heard at Plumstead Episcopi; they were bashful and timid by
                                        nature, slow to speak before company even when asked to do
                                        so; and though they looked very nice in their clean white
                                        muslin frocks and pink sashes, they were but little noticed
                                        by the archdeacon's visitors.

Whatever of submissive humility may have appeared in the gait and
                                        visage of the archdeacon during his colloquy with his wife
                                        in the sanctum of their dressing-rooms, was dispelled as he
                                        entered his breakfast-parlour with erect head and powerful
                                        step. In the presence of a third person he assumed the lord
                                        and master; and that wise and talented lady too well knew
                                        the man to whom her lot for life was bound, to stretch her
                                        authority beyond the point at which it would be borne.
                                        Strangers at Plumstead Episcopi, when they saw the imperious
                                        brow with which he commanded silence from the large circle
                                        of visitors, children, and servants who came together in the
                                        morning to hear him read the word of God, and watched how
                                        meekly that wife seated herself behind her basket of keys
                                        with a little girl on each side, as she caught that
                                        commanding glance; strangers, I say, seeing this, could
                                        little guess that some fifteen minutes since she had stoutly
                                        held her ground against him, hardly allowing him to open his
                                        mouth in his own defence. But such is the tact and talent of
                                        women!
And now let us observe the well-furnished breakfast-parlour at
                                        Plumstead Episcopi, and the comfortable air of all the
                                        belongings of the rectory. Comfortable they certainly were,
                                        but neither gorgeous  nor even grand; indeed,
                                        considering the money that had been spent there, the eye and
                                        taste might have been better served; there was an air of
                                        heaviness about the rooms which might have been avoided
                                        without any sacrifice of propriety; colours might have been
                                        better chosen and lights more perfectly diffused: but
                                        perhaps in doing so the thorough clerical aspect of the
                                        whole might have been somewhat marred; at any rate, it was
                                        not without ample consideration that those thick, dark,
                                        costly carpets were put down; those embossed, but sombre
                                        papers hung up; those heavy curtains draped so as to
                                        half-exclude the light of the sun: nor were these
                                        old-fashioned chairs, bought at a price far exceeding that
                                        now given for more modern goods, without a purpose. The
                                        breakfast-service on the table was equally costly and
                                        equally plain; the apparent object had been to spend money
                                        without obtaining brilliancy or splendour. The urn was of
                                        thick and solid silver, as were also the tea-pot,
                                        coffee-pot, cream-ewer, and sugar-bowl; the cups were old,
                                        dim dragon china, worth about a pound a piece, but very
                                        despicable in the eyes of the uninitiated. The silver forks
                                        were so heavy as to be disagreeable to the hand, and the
                                        bread-basket was of a weight really formidable to any but
                                        robust persons. The tea consumed was the very best, the
                                        coffee the  very blackest, the cream the very
                                        thickest; there was dry toast and buttered toast, muffins
                                        and crumpets; hot bread and cold bread, white bread and
                                        brown bread, home-made bread and bakers' bread, wheaten
                                        bread and oaten bread, and if there be other breads than
                                        these, they were there; there were eggs in napkins, and
                                        crispy bits of bacon under silver covers; and there were
                                        little fishes in a little box, and devilled kidneys
                                        frizzling on a hot-water dish; which, by the bye, were
                                        placed closely contiguous to the plate of the worthy
                                        archdeacon himself. Over and above this, on a snow-white
                                        napkin, spread upon the sideboard, was a huge ham and a huge
                                        sirloin; the latter having laden the dinner table on the
                                        previous evening. Such was the ordinary fare at Plumstead
                                        Episcopi.
And yet I have never found the rectory a pleasant house. The fact
                                        that man shall not live by bread alone seemed to be somewhat
                                        forgotten; and noble as was the appearance of the host, and
                                        sweet and good-natured as was the face of the hostess,
                                        talented as were the children, and excellent as were the
                                        viands and the wines, in spite of these attractions, I
                                        generally found the rectory somewhat dull. After breakfast
                                        the archdeacon would retire, of course to his clerical
                                        pursuits. Mrs. Grantly, I presume, inspected her  kitchen, though she had a first-rate housekeeper, with
                                        sixty pounds a year; and attended to the lessons of Florinda
                                        and Grizzel, though she had an excellent governess with
                                        thirty pounds a year: but at any rate she disappeared: and I
                                        never could make companions of the boys. Charles James,
                                        though he always looked as though there was something in
                                        him, never seemed to have much to say; and what he did say
                                        he would always unsay the next minute. He told me once, that
                                        he considered cricket, on the whole, to be a gentleman-like
                                        game for boys, provided they would play without running
                                        about; and that fives, also, was a seemly game, so that
                                        those who played it never heated themselves. Henry once
                                        quarrelled with me for taking his sister Grizzel's part, in
                                        a contest between them as to the best mode of using a
                                        watering-pot for the garden flowers; and from that day to
                                        this he has not spoken to me, though he speaks at me often
                                        enough. For half an hour or so I certainly did like Sammy's
                                        gentle speeches; but one gets tired of honey, and I found
                                        that he preferred the more admiring listeners whom he met in
                                        the kitchen-garden and back precincts of the establishment;
                                        besides, I think I once caught Sammy fibbing.
On the whole, therefore, I found the rectory a dull 
                                        house, though it must be admitted that everything there was
                                        of the very best.
After breakfast, on the morning of which we are writing, the
                                        archdeacon, as usual, retired to his study, intimating that
                                        he was going to be very busy, but that he would see Mr.
                                        Chadwick if he called. On entering this sacred room he
                                        carefully opened the paper case on which he was wont to
                                        compose his favourite sermons, and spread on it a fair sheet
                                        of paper, and one partly written on; he then placed his
                                        inkstand, looked at his pen, and folded his blotting-paper;
                                        having done so, he got up again from his seat, stood with
                                        his back to the fire-place, and yawned comfortably,
                                        stretching out vastly his huge arms, and opening his burly
                                        chest. He then walked across the room and locked the door;
                                        and having so prepared himself, he threw himself into his
                                        easy chair, took from a secret drawer beneath his table a
                                        volume of Rabelais, and began to amuse himself with the
                                        witty mischief of Panurge; and so passed the archdeacon's
                                        morning on that day.
He was left undisturbed at his studies for an hour or two, when a
                                        knock came to the door, and Mr. Chadwick was announced.
                                        Rabelais retired into the secret drawer, the easy chair
                                        seemed knowingly to betake itself off, and when the
                                        archdeacon quickly  undid his bolt, he was
                                        discovered by the steward working, as usual, for that church
                                        of which he was so useful a pillar. Mr. Chadwick had just
                                        come from London, and was, therefore, known to be the bearer
                                        of important news.
"We've got Sir Abraham's opinion at last," said Mr. Chadwick, as
                                        he seated himself.
"Well, well, well!" exclaimed the archdeacon impatiently.
"Oh, it's as long as my arm," said the other; "it can't be told
                                        in a word, but you can read it;" and he handed him a copy,
                                        in heaven knows how many spun-out folios, of the opinion
                                        which the attorney-general had managed to cram on the back
                                        and sides of the case as originally submitted to him.
"The upshot is," said Chadwick, "that there's a screw loose in
                                        their case, and we had better do nothing. They are
                                        proceeding against Mr. Harding and myself, and Sir Abraham
                                        holds that, under the wording of the will, and subsequent
                                        arrangements legally sanctioned, Mr. Harding and I are only
                                        paid servants. The defendants should have been either the
                                        Corporation of Barchester, or possibly the chapter or your
                                        father."
"W—hoo," said the archdeacon; "so Master Bold is on a wrong
                                        scent, is he?"

"That's Sir Abraham's opinion; but any scent almost would be a
                                        wrong scent. Sir Abraham thinks that if they'd taken the
                                        corporation, or the chapter, we could have baffled them. The
                                        bishop, he thinks, would be the surest shot; but even there
                                        we could plead that the bishop is only visitor, and that he
                                        has never made himself a consenting party to the performance
                                        of other duties."
"That's quite clear," said the archdeacon.
"Not quite so clear," said the other. "You see the will says, 'My
                                        lord, the bishop, being graciously pleased to see that due
                                        justice be done.' Now, it may be a question whether, in
                                        accepting and administering the patronage, your father has
                                        not accepted also the other duties assigned. It is doubtful,
                                        however; but even if they hit that nail—and they are far off
                                        from that yet,—the point is so nice, as Sir Abraham says,
                                        that you would force them into fifteen thousand pounds' cost
                                        before they could bring it to an issue! and where's that sum
                                        of money to come from?"
The archdeacon rubbed his hands with delight; he had never
                                        doubted the justice of his case, but he had begun to have
                                        some dread of unjust success on the part of his enemies. It
                                        was delightful to him thus to hear that their cause was
                                        surrounded with such rocks and shoals; such causes of
                                        shipwreck unseen by the  landsman's eye, but
                                        visible enough to the keen eyes of practical law mariners.
                                        How wrong his wife was to wish that Bold should marry
                                        Eleanor! Bold! why, if he should be ass enough to persevere,
                                        he would be a beggar before he knew whom he was at law
                                        with!
"That's excellent, Chadwick—that's excellent! I told you Sir
                                        Abraham was the man for us;" and he put down on the table
                                        the copy of the opinion, and patted it fondly.
"Don't you let that be seen, though, archdeacon."
"Who?—I!—not for worlds," said the doctor.
"People will talk, you know, archdeacon."
"Of course, of course," said the doctor.
"Because, if that gets abroad, it would teach them how to fight
                                        their own battle."
"Quite true," said the doctor.
"No one here in Barchester ought to see that but you and I,
                                        archdeacon."
"No, no, certainly no one else," said the archdeacon, pleased
                                        with the closeness of the confidence; "no one else
                                        shall."
"Mrs. Grantly is very interested in the matter, I know," said Mr.
                                        Chadwick.
Did the archdeacon wink, or did he not? I am inclined to think he
                                        did not quite wink; but that without such, perhaps, unseemly
                                        gesture he communicated  to Mr. Chadwick, with
                                        the corner of his eye, intimation that, deep as was Mrs.
                                        Grantly's interest in the matter, it should not procure for
                                        her a perusal of that document; and at the same time he
                                        partly opened the small drawer, above spoken of, deposited
                                        the paper on the volume of Rabelais, and showed to Mr.
                                        Chadwick the nature of the key which guarded these hidden
                                        treasures. The careful steward then expressed himself
                                        contented. Ah! vain man! he could fasten up his Rabelais,
                                        and other things secret, with all the skill of Bramah or of
                                        Chubb; but where could he fasten up the key which solved
                                        these mechanical mysteries? It is probable to us that the
                                        contents of no drawer in that house were unknown to its
                                        mistress, and we think, moreover, that she was entitled to
                                        all such knowledge.
"But," said Mr. Chadwick, "we must, of course, tell your father
                                        and Mr. Harding so much of Sir Abraham's opinion as will
                                        satisfy them that the matter is doing well."
"Oh, certainly,—yes, of course," said the doctor.
"You had better let them know that Sir Abraham is of opinion that
                                        there is no case at any rate against Mr. Harding; and that
                                        as the action is worded at present, it must fall to the
                                        ground; they must be nonsuited if they carry it on; you had
                                        better tell  Mr. Harding, that Sir Abraham is
                                        clearly of opinion that he is only a servant, and as such,
                                        not liable— or if you like it, I'll see Mr. Harding
                                        myself."
"Oh, I must see him to-morrow, and my father too, and I'll
                                        explain to them exactly so much,—you won't go before lunch,
                                        Mr. Chadwick: well, if you will, you must, for I know your
                                        time is precious;" and he shook hands with the diocesan
                                        steward, and bowed him out.
And the archdeacon had again recourse to his drawer, and twice
                                        read through the essence of Sir Abraham Haphazard's
                                        law-enlightened and law-bewildered brains. It was very clear
                                        that to Sir Abraham, the justice of the old men's claim or
                                        the justice of Mr. Harding's defence were ideas that had
                                        never presented themselves. A legal victory over an opposing
                                        party was the service for which Sir Abraham was, as he
                                        imagined, to be paid; and that he, according to his lights,
                                        had diligently laboured to achieve, and with probable hope
                                        of success. Of the intense desire which Mr. Harding felt to
                                        be assured on fit authority, that he was wronging no man,
                                        that he was entitled in true equity to his income, that he
                                        might sleep at night without pangs of conscience, that he
                                        was no robber, no spoiler of the poor; that he and all the
                                        world might be openly  convinced that he was
                                        not the man which the Jupiter had described him to be; of
                                        such longings on the part of Mr. Harding, Sir Abraham was
                                        entirely ignorant; nor, indeed, could it be looked on as
                                        part of his business to gratify such desires. Such was not
                                        the system on which his battles were fought, and victories
                                        gained. Success was his object, and he was generally
                                        successful. He conquered his enemies by their weakness
                                        rather than by his own strength, and it had been found
                                        almost impossible to make up a case, in which Sir Abraham,
                                        as an antagonist, would not find a flaw.
The archdeacon was delighted with the closeness of the reasoning.
                                        To do him justice, it was not a selfish triumph that he
                                        desired; he would personally lose nothing by defeat, or at
                                        least what he might lose did not actuate him; but neither
                                        was it love of justice which made him so anxious, nor even
                                        mainly solicitude for his father-in-law. He was fighting a
                                        part of a never-ending battle against a never-conquered
                                        foe—that of the church against its enemies.
He knew Mr. Harding could not pay all the expense of these
                                        doings; for these long opinions of Sir Abraham's, these
                                        causes to be pleaded, these speeches to be made, these
                                        various courts through which the case was, he presumed, to
                                        be dragged.  He knew that he and his father
                                        must at least bear the heavier portion of this tremendous
                                        cost; but to do the archdeacon justice, he did not recoil
                                        from this. He was a man fond of obtaining money, greedy of a
                                        large income, but open-handed enough in expending it, and it
                                        was a triumph to him to foresee the success of this measure,
                                        although he might be called on to pay so dearly for it
                                        himself.

