
CHAPTER TWELVE
Chesterford did not let Dodo see how strongly he had felt on the subject of the ball. He
      argued to himself that it would do no good. Dodo would not understand, or, understanding,
      would misunderstand the strength of his feeling, and he did not care that she should know that
      he thought her heartless. He was quite conscious that matters were a little strained between
      them, though Dodo apparently was sublimely unaware, of it. She had a momentary nervousness
      when they met at breakfast, on the morning after the ball, that Chesterford was going to make
      a fuss, and she could not quite see what it would end in, if the subject was broached. But he
      came in looking as usual. He told her how matters had gone with him on the previous day, and
      had recounted, with a certain humour, a few sharp words which an old lady in his railway
      carriage had addressed to him, because he didn't help her to hand out two large cages of
      canaries which she was taking home.
Dodo welcomed all this as a sign of grace, and was only too happy to meet her husband
      half-way. He had been a trifle melodramatic on the previous evening, but we are all liable to
      make mountains out of molehills at times, she thought. Personally her inclination was to make
      molehills out of mountains, but that was only a difference in temperament; both implied a
      judgment at fault, and she was quite willing to forgive and forget. In a word, she was
      particularly nice to him, and when breakfast was over she took his arm, and led him away to
      her room.
"Sit down in that very big chair, old boy," she said, "and twiddle your thumbs while I write
      some notes. I'm going to see Mrs. Vivian this morning, and your lordship may come in my
      ladyship's carriage if it likes. Is lordship masculine, feminine, or neuter, Chesterford?
      Anyhow, it's wrong to say your lordship may come in your carriage, because lordship is the
      nominative to the sentence, and is in the third person—what was I saying? Oh, yes, you may
      come if it likes, and drop me there, and then go away for about half an hour, and then come
      back, and then we'll have lunch together at home."
"I've got to go to some stupid committee at the club," said Chesterford, "but that's not
      till twelve. I'll send your carriage back for you, but I sha'n't be able to be in at
      lunch."
"Oh, very good," remarked Dodo. "I'm sorry I married you. I might be a lone lorn widdy for
      all you care. He prefers lunching at his club," she went on, dramatically, addressing the
      black virgin, "to having his chop at home with the wife of his bosom. How sharper than a
      serpent's tooth to have a thankless Chesterford!".
Dodo proceeded to write her notes, and threw them one by one at her husband as he sat
      contentedly by the window, in the very big chair that Dodo had indicated.
Dodo's correspondence was as varied as the collection of photographs on her mantelpiece. The
      first note was to her groom at Winston, telling him to have another riding-horse sent up at
      once, as her own particular mare had gone lame. It missed Chesterford's head, and fell with an
      ominous clatter among some bric-à-brac and china.
"That'll be a bill for you to pay, darling," said Dodo sweetly. "Why didn't you put your
      silly old head in the light?"
The next was a slightly better shot, and fell right side upwards on to Chesterford's knee,
      but with the address upside down to him. He looked at it vaguely.
"His Serene Highness who?" he asked, spelling it out.
"That's not grammar," said Dodo. "It's only to Prince Waldenech. He is Serene, isn't he? He
      looks it, anyhow. He was at the Brettons' last night. Austrian but amiable."
Chesterford was fingering the envelope.
"He's an unmitigated blackguard," he said, after a little consideration. "I wish you'd let
      me tear it up, Dodo. What on earth have you got to say to him?"
"I shall have to write it again, dear, if you do," said she, conscious of bridling a rising
      irritation.
"He really is an awful brute," he repeated.
"Oh, my dear Chesterford, what does that matter?" asked Dodo, impatiently tapping the floor
      with the toe of her shoe. "It isn't my business to go raking up the character of people I'm
      introduced to."
"You mean you don't mind what a man's character is as long as he's agreeable."
"It isn't my business to be court inquisitor," she said. "Half of what one hears about
      people isn't true, and the other half—well, all you can say is, that it isn't exactly
      false."
Dodo could lose her temper very quickly on occasions, especially when she was in a hurry, as
      she was now.
"My dear Dodo, do you happen to know the story of—"
"No, I don't," she said vehemently. "Shall I seem rude if I say I don't want to? I really
      think you might find something better to do than tell scandalous stories about people you
      don't know."
"I know all I want to know about Prince Waldenech," said Chesterford, rising.
"You'll know more about him soon," remarked Dodo, "because I've asked him to stay at
      Winston. I suppose you think I wanted to make a secret about it. I have no such intention, I
      assure you."
"Is this note to ask him to come?" he inquired.
"Certainly it is," said Dodo defiantly.
"I may as well tear it up," said he. "I don't mean him to be asked, Dodo. I don't wish to
      have him in the house."
Dodo had lost her temper thoroughly.
"His being asked to Winston is immaterial," she said, with scorn in her voice. "You
      certainly have the power to prevent his coming to your house. Your power I must regard, your
      wishes I shall not. I can see him in London with perfect ease."
"You mean you attach no weight to my wishes in this matter?" said Chesterford.
"None."
"Will no knowledge of what the man is really like, stop you holding further intercourse with
      him?" he asked.
"None whatever, now!"
"I don't wish it to be known that my wife associates with such people," he said.
"Your wife does not regard it in that light," replied Dodo. "I have no intention of
      proclaiming the fact from the housetops."
To do Chesterford justice he was getting angry too.
"It's perfectly intolerable that there should be this sort of dispute between you and me,
      Dodo," he said.
"That is the first point on which we have not differed."
"You entirely decline to listen to reason?"
"To your reason, you mean," said Dodo.
"To mine or any honest man's."
Dodo burst out into a harsh, mirthless laugh.
"Ah, you're beginning to be jealous," she said. "It is very bourgeois to be jealous."
Chesterford coloured, angrily.
"That is an insult, Dodo," he said. "Remember that there is a courtesy due even from a wife
      to her husband. Besides that, you know the contrary."
"Really, I know nothing of the sort," she remarked. "Your whole conduct, both last night and
      this morning, has been so melodramatic, that I begin to suspect all sorts of latent virtues in
      you."
"We are wandering from the point," said he. "Do you mean that nothing will deter you from
      seeing this Austrian?"
"He is received in society," said Dodo; "he is presentable, he is even amusing. Am I to tell
      him that my husband is afraid he'll corrupt my morals? If people in general cut him, I don't
      say that I should continue to cultivate his acquaintance. It is absurd to run amuck of such
      conventions. If you had approached me in a proper manner, I don't say that I mightn't have
      seen my way to meeting your wishes."
"I don't feel I am to blame in that respect," said he.
"That shows you don't know how far we are apart," she replied.
He was suddenly frightened. He came closer to her.
"Far apart, Dodo? We?"
"It seems to me that this interview has revealed some astonishing differences of opinion
      between us," she said. "I don't wish to multiply words. You have told me what you think on the
      subject, and I have told you what I think. You have claimed the power a husband certainly
      possesses, and I claim the liberty that my husband cannot deprive me of. Or perhaps you wish
      to lock me up. We quite understand one another. Let us agree to differ. Give me that note,
      please. I suppose you can trust me not to send it. I should like to keep it. It is interesting
      to count the milestones."
Dodo spoke with the recklessness of a woman's anger, which is always much more unwanton than
      that of a man. A man does not say cruel things when he is angry, because they are cruel, but
      because he is angry. Dodo was cruel because she wished to be cruel. He gave her the note, and
      turned to leave the room. Dodo's last speech made it impossible for him to say more. The only
      thing he would not sacrifice to his love was his honour or hers. But Dodo suddenly saw the
      horrible impossibility of the situation. She had not the smallest intention of living on bad
      terms with her husband. They had quarrelled, it was a pity, but it was over. A storm may only
      clear the air; it is not always the precursor of bad weather. The air wanted clearing, and
      Dodo determined that it should not be the prelude of rain and wind. To her, of course, the
      knowledge that she did not love her husband had long been a commonplace, but to him the truth
      was coming in fierce, blinding flashes, and by their light he could see that a great flood had
      come down into his happy valley, carrying desolation before it, and between him and Dodo
      stretched a tawny waste of water. But Dodo had no intention of quarrelling with him, or
      maintaining a dignified reserve in their daily intercourse. That would be quite unbearable,
      and she wished there to be no misunderstanding on that point.
"Chesterford," she said, "we've quarrelled, and that's a pity. I hardly ever quarrel, and it
      was stupid of me. I am sorry. But I have no intention of standing on my dignity, and I sha'n't
      allow you to stand on yours. I shall pull you down, and you'll go flop. You object to
      something which I propose to do, you exert your rights, as far as having him in the house
      goes, and I exert mine by going to see him. I shall go this afternoon. Your veto on his coming
      to Winston seems quite as objectionable to me, as my going to see him does to you. That's our
      position; accept it. Let us understand each other completely. C'est aimer." As she
      spoke she recovered her equanimity, and she smiled serenely on him. Scenes like this left no
      impression on her. The tragedy passed over her head; and, though it was written in the lines
      of her husband's face, she did not trouble to read it. She got up from her chair and went to
      him. He was standing with his hands clasped behind him near the door. She laid her hands on
      his shoulder, and gave him a little shake.
"Now, Chesterford, I'm going to make it up," she said. "Twenty minutes is heaps of time for
      the most quarrelsome people to say sufficient nasty things in, and time's up. I'm going to
      behave exactly as usual. I hate quarrelling, and you don't look as if it agreed with you. Kiss
      me this moment. No, not on the top of my head. That's better. My carriage ought to be ready by
      this time, and you are coming with me as far as Prince's Gate."
