
CHAPTER TEN
That same evening Edith Staines and Miss Grantham were seated together in a box at the
      opera. The first act was just over, and Edith, who had mercilessly silenced every remark Miss
      Grantham had made during it, relaxed a little. Miss Grantham's method of looking at an opera
      was to sit with her hack to the stage, so as to command a better view of the house, and talk
      continuously. But Edith would not stand that. She had before her a large quarto containing the
      full score, and she had a pencil in her hand with which she entered little corrections, and
      now and then she made comments to herself.
"I shall tell Mancinelli of that," she murmured. "The whole point of the motif is that rapid
      run with the minim at the end, and he actually allowed that beast to make a rallentando."
But the act was over now, and she shut the book with a bang.
"Come outside, Grantie," she said, "it's so fearfully hot. I had to hurry over dinner in
      order to get here in time. The overture is one of the best parts. It isn't like so many
      overtures that give you a sort of abstract of the opera, but it hints at it all, and leaves
      you to think it out."
"Oh, I didn't hear the overture," said Miss Grantham. "I only got here at Mephistopheles'
      appearance. I think Edouard is such a dear. He really looks a very attractive devil. I suppose
      it's not exactly the beauty of holiness, but extremes meet, you know."
"I must open the door," said Edith. "I want to sit in a draught."
"There's Mr. Broxton," remarked Miss Grantham. "I think he sees us. I hope he'll come up. I
      think it's simply charming, to see how devoted he still is to Dodo. I think he is what they
      call faithful."
"I think it's scandalous," said Edith hotly. "He's got no business to hang about like that.
      It's very weak of him—I despise weak people. It's no use being anything, unless you're strong
      as well; it's as bad as being second-rate. You may be of good quality, but if you're watered
      down, it's as bad as being inferior."
Jack meantime had made his way up to the box.
"We've just been saying all sorts of nice things about you," remarked Miss Grantham sweetly.
      "Have you seen Dodo to-day?"
"Haven't you heard?" asked Jack.
Edith frowned.
"No; what?" she asked.
"Their baby died this morning," he said.
Edith's score fell to the ground with a crash.
"Good heavens! is it true?" she asked. "Who told you?"
"I was riding with Dodo this morning," said he, "and Mrs. Vivian met Dodo and told her. I
      knew something had happened, so I went to inquire. No one has seen either of them again."
"Did you try and see her?" said Edith severely.
"Yes, I went this evening."
"Ah!" Edith frowned again. "How does he take it?" she asked.
"I don't know," he said; "no one has seen them since."
Edith picked up her score.
"Good-night, Grantie," she said. "Good-night, Mr. Broxton. I must go."
Miss Grantham looked up in astonishment. Edith was folding her opera cloak round her. Jack
      offered to help her.
"Thanks, I can do it," she said brusquely.
"What are you going for?" asked Miss Grantham, in surprise.
"It's all right," said Edith. "I've got to see someone. I shall come back, probably."
The door closed behind her.
"Of course it's awfully sad," remarked Miss Grantham, "but I don't see why Edith should go
      like that. I wonder where she's gone. Don't you adore the opera, Mr. Broxton? I think it's
      simply lovely. It's so awfully sad about Marguerite, isn't it? I wish life was really like
      this. It would be so nice to sing a song whenever anything important happened. It would smooth
      things so. Oh, yes, this is the second act, isn't it? It's where Mephisto sings that song to
      the village people. It always makes me feel creepy. Poor Dodo!"
"I am more sorry for him," said Jack; "you know he was simply wrapped up in the baby."
"Dodo certainly finds consolation quickly," said Miss Grantham. "I think she's sensible. It
      really is no use crying over spilt milk. I suppose she won't go out again this season. Dear
      me, it's Lady Bretton's ball the week after next, in honour of Lucas's coming of age. Dodo was
      to have led the cotillion with Lord Ledgers. That was a good note. Isn't the scene
      charming?"
"I don't know what Dodo will do," said Jack. "I believe they will leave London,
      only—only—"
Miss Grantham looked at him inquiringly.
"You see Dodo has to be amused," said Jack. "I don't know what she would do, if she was to
      have to shut herself up again. She was frightfully bored after the baby's birth."
Miss Grantham was casting a roving London eye over the occupants of the stalls.
"There's that little Mr. Spencer, the clergyman at Kensington," she said. "I wonder how his
      conscience lets him come to see anything so immoral. Isn't that Maud next him? Dear me, how
      interesting. Bring them up here after the act, Mr. Broxton. I suppose Maud hasn't heard?"
"I think she's been with her father somewhere in Lancashire," said Jack. "She can only have
      come back to-day. There is Mrs. Vane, too. Dodo can't have telegraphed to them."
"Oh, that's so like Dodo," murmured Miss Grantham; "it probably never occurred to her. Dear
      me, this act is over. I am afraid we must have missed the 'Virgo.' What a pity. Do go, and ask
      them all to come up here."
"So charmed,", murmured Mrs. Vane, as she rustled into the box. "Isn't it a lovely night?
      Dear Prince Waldenech met me in the hall, and he asked so affectionately after Dodo. Charming,
      wasn't it? Yes. And do you know Mr. Spencer, dear Miss Grantham? Shall we tell Miss Grantham
      and Mr. Broxton our little secret, Maud? Cupid has been busy here," she whispered, with a rich
      elaborateness to Miss Grantham. "Isn't it charming? We are delighted. Yes, Mr. Spencer, Miss
      Grantham and Mr. Broxton, of course—Mr. Spencer."
Mr. Spencer bowed and smiled, and conducted himself as he should. He was a fashionable
      rector in a rich parish, who had long felt that the rich deserved as much looking after as the
      poor, and had been struck with Maud's zeal for the latter, and thought it would fit in very
      well with his zeal for the former, had won Maud's heart, and now appeared as the happy
      accepted lover.
Mrs. Vane was anxious to behave in the way it was expected that she should, and, finding
      that Miss Grantham sat with her back to the stage and talked, took up a corresponding attitude
      herself. Miss Grantham quickly decided that she did not know about the death of Dodo's baby,
      and determined not to tell her. In the first place, it was to be supposed that she did not
      know either, and in the second, she was amused by the present company, and knew that to
      mention it was to break up the party.
Mr. Spencer had a little copy of the words, with the English on one side and the Italian on
      the other. When he came to a passage that he thought indelicate, he turned his attention to
      the Italian. Maud sat between him and Miss Grantham.
"I am so delighted, Maud," Miss Grantham was saying, "and I am sure Dodo will be charmed.
      She doesn't know yet, I suppose? When is it to be?"
"Oh, I don't quite know," said Maud confusedly. "Algy, that is Mr. Spencer, is going to
      leave London, you know, and take a living at Gloucester. I shall like that. There is a good
      deal of poverty at Gloucester."
Miss Grantham smiled sympathetically.
"How sweet of you," she said; "and you will go and work among the poor, and give them soup
      and prayer-books, won't you? I should love to do that. Mrs. Vivian will tell you all about
      those things, I suppose?"
"Oh, she took me to an awful slum before we left London," said Maud, in a sort of
      rapture—"you know we have been away at Manchester for a week with my father—and I gave them
      some things I had worked. I am doing a pair of socks for Dodo's baby."
Miss Grantham turned her attention to the stage.
"The Jewel song is perfectly lovely," she remarked. "I wish Edith was here. Don't you think
      that girl sings beautifully? I wonder who she is."
At that moment the door of the box opened, and Edith entered. She grasped the situation at
      once, and felt furiously angry with Miss Grantham and Jack. She determined to put a stop to
      it.
"Dear Mrs. Vane, you can't have heard. I only knew this evening, and I suppose Mrs. Vivian's
      note has missed you somehow. I have just left her, and she told me she had written to you. You
      know Dodo's baby has been very ill, quite suddenly, and this morning—yes, yes—"
Mrs. Vane started up distractedly.
"Oh, my poor Dodo," she cried, "I never knew! And here I am enjoying myself, when she—Maud,
      did you hear? Dodo's baby—only this morning. My poor Dodo!"
She began crying in a helpless sort of way.
Maud turned round with a face full of horror.
"How awful! Poor Dodo! Come, mother, we must go."
Mr. Spencer dropped his English and Italian version.
"Let me see you to your carriage," he said. "Let me give you an arm, Mrs. Vane."
Maud turned to Jack, and for once showed some of Dodo's spirit.
"Mr. Broxton," she said, "I have an idea you knew. Perhaps I am wrong. If I am, I beg your
      pardon; if not, I consider you have behaved in a way I didn't expect of you, being a friend of
      Dodo's. I think—" she broke off, and followed the others. Jack felt horribly
      uncomfortable.
He and Edith and Miss Grantham stood in silence for a moment.
"It was horrible of you, Grantie," said Edith, "to let them sit here, and tell them nothing
      about it."
"My dear Edith, I could do nothing else," said Miss Grantham, in an even, calm voice. "There
      would have been a scene, and I can't bear scenes. There has been a scene as it is, but you are
      responsible for that. You are rather jumpy to-night. Where have you been?"
"I have been to see Mrs. Vivian," said Edith. "I wanted to know about this. I told her I was
      coming back here, and she gave me this for you, Mr. Broxton."
She handed him a note. Then she picked up her big score, and sat down again with her
      pencil.
The note contained only two lines, requesting Mr. Broxton to come and see her in the
      morning. Jack read it and tore it up. He felt undecided how to act. Edith was buried in her
      score, and gave no sign. Miss Grantham had resumed her place, and was gazing languidly, at the
      box opposite. He picked up his hat, and turned to leave. Edith looked up from her score.
"I think I ought to tell you," she said, "that Mrs. Vivian and I talked about you, and that
      note is the result. I don't care a pin what you think."
Jack opened his eyes in astonishment. Edith had always struck him as being rather queer; and
      this statement seemed to him very queer indeed. Her manner was not conciliatory.
He bowed.
"I feel complimented by being the subject of your conversation," he replied with well-bred
      insolence, and closed the door behind him.
Miss Grantham laughed. A scene like this pleased her; it struck her as pure comedy.
"Really, Edith, you are very jumpy; I don't understand you a bit. You are unnecessarily
      rude. Why did you say you did not care a pin what he thought?"
"You won't understand, Grantie," said Edith. "Don't you see how dangerous it is all
      becoming? I don't care the least whether I am thought meddlesome. Jack Broxton is awfully in
      love with Dodo, anyone can see that, and Dodo evidently cares for him; and that poor, dear,
      honest fool Chesterford is completely blind to it all. It was bad enough before, but the
      baby's death makes it twice as bad. Dodo will want to be amused; she will hate this
      retirement, and she will expect Mr. Broxton to amuse her. Don't you see she is awfully bored
      with her husband, and she will decline to be entirely confined to his company. While she could
      let off steam by dancing and riding and so on, it was safe; she only met Mr. Broxton among
      fifty other people. But decency, even Dodo's, will forbid her to meet those fifty other people
      now. And each time she sees him, she will return to her husband more wearied than before. It
      is all too horrible. I don't suppose she is in love with Jack Broxton, but she finds him
      attractive, and he knows it, and he is acting disgracefully in letting himself see her so
      much. Everyone knows he went abroad to avoid her—everyone except Dodo, that is, and she must
      guess. I respected him for that, but now he is playing the traitor to Chesterford. And Mrs.
      Vivian quite agrees with me."
"Oh, it's awfully interesting if you're right," said Miss Grantham reflectively; "but I
      think you exaggerate. Jack is not a cad. He doesn't mean any harm. Besides, he is a great
      friend of Chesterford's."
"Well, he's got no business to play with fire," said Edith. "His sense of security only
      increases the real danger. If Chesterford knew exactly how matters stood it would be
      different, but he is so simple-hearted that he is only charmed to see Jack Broxton, and
      pleased that Dodo likes him."
"Oh, it's awfully interesting," murmured Miss Grantham.
"I could cry when I think of Chesterford," said Edith. "The whole thing is such a fearful
      tragedy. If only they can get over this time safely, it may all blow over. I wish Dodo could
      go out again to her balls and concerts. She finds such frantic interest in everything about
      her, that she doesn't think much of any particular person. But it is this period, when she is
      thrown entirely on two or three people, that is so dangerous. She really is a frightful
      problem. Chesterford was a bold or a blind man to marry her. Oh, I can't attend to this opera
      to-night. I shall go home. It's nearly over. Faust is singing hopelessly out of tune."
She shut her book, and picked up her fan and gloves.
"Dear Edith," said Miss Grantham languidly, "I think you mean very well, but you are rather
      over-drawing things. Are you really going? I think I shall come too."
Jack meantime was finding his way home in a rebellious and unchristian frame of mind. In the
      first place, he had just lost his temper, which always seemed to him to be a most misdirected
      effort of energy; in the second place, he resented Edith's interference with all his heart and
      soul; and in the third, he did not feel so certain that she was wrong. Of course he guessed
      what Mrs. Vivian's wish to see him meant, for it had occurred to him very vividly what
      consequences the death of the baby would have on him and Dodo: and he anticipated another
      period like that which had followed the birth. Jack could hardly dare to trust himself to
      think of that time. He knew it had been very pleasant to him, and that he had enjoyed Dodo's
      undisturbed company during many days in succession, but it was with a certain tingling of the
      ears that he thought of the events of the morning, and his mad confession to her. "I have a
      genius for spoiling things," thought Jack to himself. "Everything was going right; I was
      seeing Dodo enough to keep me happy, and free from that hateful feeling of last autumn, and
      then I spoilt it all by a stupid remark that could do no good, nor help me in any conceivable
      way. How will Dodo have taken it?"
But he was quite sure of one thing—he would not go and see Mrs. Vivian. He was, he felt,
      possessed of all the facts of the case, and he was competent to form a judgment on them—at any
      rate Mrs. Vivian was not competent to do it for him. No, he would give it another chance. He
      would again reason out the pros and cons of the case, he would be quite honest, and he would
      act accordingly.
That he should arrive at the same conclusion was inevitable. The one thing in the world that
      no man can account for, or allow for, is change in himself. If Jack had been able to foresee,
      when he went abroad, that he would be acting thus with regard to Dodo, he would have thought
      himself mad, and it would have been as impossible for him to act thus then, as it was
      inevitable for him to act thus now. If we judge by our own standards, and our own standards
      alter, we cannot expect our verdicts to remain invariable. Under a strong attachment a man
      drifts, and he cannot at any one moment allow for, or feel the force of the current, for he is
      moving in it, though he thinks himself at rest. The horrible necessities of cause and effect
      work in us, as well as around us. As Edith had said, his sense of security was his danger, for
      his standard of security was not the same as it had been.
He sat down and wrote a note to Mrs. Vivian, saying that he regretted being unable to call
      on her to-morrow, and purposely forebore to give any reason. He had considerable faith in her
      power of reading between the lines, and the fact, baldly stated, was an unnecessary affront to
      her intellect.
Mrs. Vivian read the note with very little surprise, but with a good deal of regret. She was
      genuinely sorry for him, but she had other means at her disposal, though they were not so
      pleasant to use. They involved a certain raking up of old dust-heaps, and a certain awakening
      of disagreeable memories. But it never occurred to her to draw back. Naturally enough she went
      to see Dodo next morning, and found her alone. Mrs. Vivian had her lesson by heart, and she
      was only waiting for Dodo to tell her to begin, so to speak. Dodo hailed her with warmth; she
      had evidently found matters a little tedious.
"Dear Vivy," she said, "I'm so glad you've come; and Chesterford told me to ask you to see
      him, before you went away, in case you called. So you will, won't you? But I must have you for
      a long time first."
"How is he?" asked Mrs. Vivian.
"Oh, he's quite well," said Dodo, "but he feels it frightfully. But he is fortunate, he has
      spiritual consolation as his aid. I haven't, not one atom. It's a great nuisance, I know, but
      I don't see how to help it. Can the Ethiopian change his skin?"
"Ah, Dodo," said she, with earnestness in her tone, "you have a great opportunity—I don't
      think you realise how great."
"Why, what do you mean?" said Dodo.
"Of course I know what you feel," said Mrs. Vivian, "and it is necessary that with your
      grief there must be mixed up a great deal of vexation and annoyance. Isn't it so?"
"Yes, yes," said Dodo. "You don't despise me for feeling that?"
"Despise you!" said Mrs. Vivian. "You know me better than that. But you must not dwell on
      it. There is something more important than the cancelling of your smaller engagements. You
      have a big engagement, you know, which must not be cancelled."
Dodo rose from her chair with wide eyes.
"Ah, Vivy," she said, "you have guessed it, have you? It is quite true. Let me tell you all
      about it. It is just that which bothers me. These days when I only see Chesterford bore me
      more than I can say. I don't know why I tell you this; it isn't want of loyalty to him, but I
      want help. I don't know how to deal with him.. Yes, he bores me. I always foresaw this, but I
      hoped I shouldn't mind. I was wrong and Jack was right. He warned me of it, but he must never
      know he was right. Of course you see why. I think I did not expect that Chesterford's love for
      me would last. I thought he would cease being my lover, and I am terribly wrong. It gets
      stronger and stronger. He told me so last night, and I felt a brute. But I comforted him and
      deceived him again. Ah, what could I do? I don't love him. I would give anything to do so. I
      think I felt once what love was, but only once, and not for him."
Mrs. Vivian looked up inquiringly.
"No, I shan't tell you about that," said Dodo, speaking rapidly and excitedly; "it would be
      a sort of desecration. There is something divine about Chesterford's feeling for me. I know
      it, but it doesn't really touch me. I am not capable of it, and what happens is that I
      continue to amuse myself on my own lines, and all that goes over my head. But I make him
      believe I understand. It makes him happy. And I know, I know, that when I am out of this, I
      shall go on just as usual, except that I shall feel like a prisoner escaped, and revel in my
      liberty. I know I shall. Sometimes I almost determine to make some sacrifice for him in a
      blind sort of way, like a heathen sacrificing to what he fears, yes, fears, but then that mood
      passes and I go on as usual. I long to get away from him. Sometimes I am afraid of hating him,
      if I see him too much or too exclusively."
"Yes, Dodo, I know, I know," said Mrs. Vivian. "I don't see how you are to learn it, unless
      it comes to you; but what you can do, is to act as if you felt it, not only in little tiny
      ways, like calling him an 'old darling,' but in living for him more."
"Ah, those are only words," said Dodo impatiently. "I realise it all, but I can't do
      it."
There was a long silence. Then Mrs. Vivian said,—
"Dodo, I am going to tell you what I have never told anyone before, and that is the story of
      my marriage. I know the current version very well, that I married a brute who neglected me.
      That he neglected me is true, but that is not all. Like you, I married without love, without
      even liking. There were reasons for it, which I need not trouble you with. I used to see a
      good deal of a man with whom I was in love, when I married Mr. Vivian. He interested me and
      made my life more bearable. My husband grew jealous of him, almost directly after my marriage.
      I saw it, and, God forgive me, it amused me, and I let it go on—in fact, I encouraged it. That
      was my mistake, and I paid dearly for it. I believe he loved me at first; it was my fault that
      he did not continue to do so. Then my baby was born, and, a month afterwards, somehow or other
      we quarrelled, and he said things to me which no woman ever forgets. He said it was not his
      child. I never forgot it, and it is a very short time ago that I forgave it. For two years
      after his death, as you know, I travelled abroad, and I fought against it, and I believe,
      before God, that I have forgiven him. Then I came back to London. But after that day when he
      said those things to me, we grew further and further apart. I interested myself in other
      things, in the poor, and so on, and he took to drinking. That killed him. He was run over in
      the street, as he came back from somewhere where he had been dining. But he was run over
      because he was dead drunk at the time. When I was abroad I came under the influence of a
      certain Roman Catholic priest. He did not convert me, nor did he try to, but he helped me very
      much; and one day, I remember the day very well, I was almost in despair, because I could not
      forgive the wrong my dead husband had done me, somehow a change began in me. I can tell you no
      more than that a change comes, and it is there. It is the grace of God. There, Dodo, that is
      my history, and there is this you may learn from it, that you must be on your guard against
      making a mistake. You must never let Chesterford know how wide the gulf is between you. It
      will be a constant effort, I know, but it is all you can do. Set a watch on yourself; let your
      indifference be your safeguard, your warning."
Mrs. Vivian stood up. Her eyes were full of tears, and she laid her hands on Dodo's
      shoulders. Dodo felt comfort in the presence of this strong woman, who had wrestled and
      conquered.
Dodo looked affectionately at her, and, with one of those pretty motions that came so
      naturally to her, she pressed her back into her chair, and knelt beside her.
"Dear Vivy," she said, "my little troubles have made you cry. I am so sorry, dear. You are
      very good to me. But I want to ask you one thing. About that man your husband was jealous
      of—"
"No, no," said Mrs. Vivian quickly; "that was only one of the incidents which I had to tell
      you to make the story intelligible."
Dodo hesitated.
"You are sure you aren't thinking of anyone in my case—of Jack, for instance?" she suddenly
      said.
Mrs. Vivian did not answer for a moment. Then she said,—
"Dodo, I am going to be very frank with you. He is an instance—in a way. I don't mean to
      suppose for a moment that Chesterford is jealous of him, in fact, I know he can't be—it isn't
      in him; but he is a good instance of the sort of thing that makes you tend to neglect your
      husband."
"But you don't think he is an instance in particular?" demanded Dodo. "I don't mean to bind
      myself in any way, but I simply want to know."
Mrs. Vivian went straight to the point:
"That is a question which you can only decide for yourself," she said. "I cannot pretend to
      judge."
Dodo smiled.
"Then I will decide for myself," she said. "You see, Jack is never dull. I daresay you may
      think him so, but I don't. He always manages to amuse me, and, on the whole, the more I am
      amused the less bored I get in the intervals. He tides me over the difficult places. I allow
      they are difficult."
"Ah, that is exactly what you mustn't allow," said Mrs. Vivian. "You don't seem to realise
      any possible deficiency in yourself."
"Oh, yes, I do," said Dodo, as if she was announcing the most commonplace fact in the world.
      "I know I am deficient. I don't appreciate devotion, I don't appreciate the quality that makes
      one gaze and gaze, as it says in the hymn. It is rather frog-like that gazing; what do you
      call it—batrachian. Now, Maud is batrachian. I daresay it is a very high quality, but I don't
      quite live up to it. There are, of course, heaps of excellent things one doesn't live up to,
      like the accounts of the Stock Exchange in the Times. I fully understand that the
      steadiness of stockings makes a difference to somebody, only it doesn't make any difference to
      me."
"Dodo, you are incorrigible," said Mrs. Vivian, laughing in spite of herself. "I give you
      up—only, do the best you can. I believe, in the main, you agree with me. And now I must be
      off. You said Lord Chesterford wished to see me. I suppose he is downstairs."
"I think I shall come too," said Dodo.
So they went down together. Lord Chesterford was in his study.
"Do you know what Mrs. Vivian has been saying to me?" remarked Dodo placidly, as she laid
      her hand on his shoulder. "She has been telling me I do not love you enough—isn't she
      ridiculous?"
Mrs. Vivian for the moment was nonplussed, but she recovered herself quickly.
"Dodo is very naughty to-day," she said. "She misconstrues everything I say."
"I don't think it's likely you said that," said he, capturing Dodo's hand, "because it isn't
      true."
"I am certainly de trop," murmured Mrs. Vivian, turning to go.
Dodo's hand lay unresistingly in his.
"She has been so good and brave," said Lord Chesterford to Mrs. Vivian, "she makes me feel
      ashamed."
Mrs. Vivian felt an immense admiration for him.
"I said you deserved a very great deal," she said, putting out her hand to him. "I must go,
      my carriage has been waiting an hour."
He retained Dodo's hand, and they saw her to the door.
The footman met them in the hall.
"Mr. Broxton wants to know whether you can see him, my lady," he said to Dodo.
"Would you like to see Jack?" she asked Chesterford.
"I would rather you told him you can't," he said.
"Of course I will," she answered. She turned to the footman. "Say I am engaged, but he may
      come again to-morrow and I will see him. You don't mind my seeing him, do you,
      Chesterford?"
"No, no, dear," he said.
Dodo and Chesterford turned back to the drawing-room. Jack was on the steps.
"I thought you were engaged at this hour," Mrs. Vivian said to him.
"So I was," he answered. "Dodo asked me to come and see her."
