
CHAPTER FIVE
It was a perfect winter's day, and when, two hours afterwards, Dodo and the others drove off
      to meet the shooting-party, the grass in the shadow was still crisp with the light, hoar
      frost, but where the sun had touched it, the fields were covered with a moist radiance. It had
      just begun to melt the little pieces of ice that hung from the bare, pendulous twigs of the
      birch-trees, and send them, shivering to the ground. Through the brown bracken you could hear
      the startled scuttle of the rabbit, or the quick tapping of a pheasant, who had realised that
      schemes were on foot against him. A night of hard frost had turned the wheel-ruts into little
      waves and billows of frozen mud, which the carriage wheels levelled as they passed over
      them.
They caught up the shooting party shortly before lunch, and, as it was cold, Edith and Dodo
      got out, leaving Miss Grantham, who preferred being cold to walking under any circumstances,
      to gather up the extra rugs round her.
"See that there's a good fire, Grantie," called Dodo after her, "and tell them to have the
      champagne opened."
The sight of abundant game was too much for Edith, and, as Lord Chesterford fell out of line
      to join Dodo, she asked him if she might have a couple of shots.
The keeper's face expressed some reasonable surprise when he observed Edith snapping the
      cartridges into her gun with a practised hand. His previous views with regard to women in
      connection with guns were based upon the idea that most women screamed, when they saw a gun,
      and considered it a purely unaccountable weapon, which might go off without the least
      encouragement or warning, and devastate the country for miles round. He was still more
      surprised when he saw her pick off a couple of pheasants with precision and deadliness of aim.
      She gave her gun back to Lord Chesterford as they neared the lodge, and volunteered to join
      them after lunch for an hour, if they didn't mind. Chesterford stole an appealing glance, at
      Dodo, who, however, only gave him a half-amused, half-pitying look, and nodded assent.
"The worst of it is," said Edith, "I care for such lots of things. There's my music, and
      then there's any sort of game—have you ever seen me play tennis?—and there isn't time for
      everything. I am a musician, and a good shot, and an excellent rider, and a woman, and heaps
      of other things. It isn't conceit when I say so—I simply know it."
Dodo laughed.
"Well, you know, Edith, you're not modest. Your worst enemies don't accuse you of that. I
      don't mean to say that I am, for that matter. Did you ever play, the game of marking people
      for beauty, and modesty, and cleverness, and so on? We played it here the night before you
      came, and you didn't get a single mark from anybody for modesty. I only got eleven, and five
      of those were from Chesterford, and six from myself. But I don't believe your husband will
      ever give you five. You see, Bertie didn't give you any, if you're thinking of marrying
      him."
"Oh, I'm not going to marry anybody," said Edith. "You know I get frightfully attached to
      someone about three times a week, and after that never think of any of them again. It isn't
      that I get tired of them, but somebody else turns up, and I want to know him too. There are
      usually several good points about everyone, and they show those to new acquaintances first;
      after that, you find something in them you don't like, so the best thing is to try somebody
      else."
"Oh, that depends on the people," said Dodo, meditatively. "Some people wear well, you know,
      and those improve on acquaintance. Now I don't. The first time a man sees me, he usually
      thinks I'm charming, and sympathetic, and lively. Well, so I am, to do myself justice. That
      remains all through. But it turns out that I've got a bad temper, that I smoke and swear, and
      only amuse myself. Then they begin to think they rated me too high at first, and if they
      happen to be people who wear well themselves, it is just then that you begin to like them,
      which is annoying. So one goes on, disgusting the people one wants to like, and pleasing
      people whom one doesn't like at all. It's fate, I suppose."
Dodo plucked a piece of dead bracken, and pulled it to bits with a somewhat serious air.
"You oughtn't to complain, Dodo," said Edith. "You're married to a man who, I am sure, wears
      well, as you call it, though it's a dreadfully coarse expression, and he doesn't seem to get
      tired of you. I always wonder if it's really worth while trotting oneself out or analysing
      one's nature in this way. I don't think it is. It makes one feel small and stupid."
"Ah, but it's better to do it yourself, than to feel that other people think you small and
      stupid," said Dodo. "That's disagreeable, if you like. Wait till Mrs. Vivian comes, and she'll
      do it for you. She's the only person who makes me feel really cheap—about three-halfpence a
      dozen, including the box."
"Oh, but she won't make me feel small," said Edith coolly, "because I'm not small really.
      It's only myself that makes me feel small."
"I don't think I should call you morbidly modest," said Dodo. "But here's the keeper's
      cottage. I'm awfully hungry. I hope they've brought some pâté, Don't you like
       pâté? Of course one's very sorry for the poor, diseased goose with a bad inside, but
      there are so many other things to think about besides diseased geese, that it doesn't signify
      much. Come on, Chesterford, they can count the dead things afterwards. Grantie's waiting.
      Jack, pick up that pheasant by you. Have you shot well? Look at the sun through those
      fir-trees—isn't it lovely? Edith, why aren't we two nice, little simple painters who could sit
      down, and be happy to paint that, instead of turning ourselves inside out? But, after all, you
      know, one is much more interesting than anybody or anything else, at least I am. Aren't you?
      What a blessing it is one didn't happen to be born a fool!"
Dodo was sitting alone late in the afternoon. The shooting-party had come back, and
      dispersed to their rooms to wash and dress. "You all look remarkably dirty and funny," Dodo
      had said when they came in, "and you had better have tea sent up to you. Does shooting bring
      on the inspiration, Edith? Take a bath."
Edith had gone up to her room, after insisting on having two of Dodo's bottles of
      eau-de-cologne in her hot bath. "There is nothing so refreshing," she said, "and you come out
      feeling like a goddess." Certainly Edith looked anything but a goddess just now. Her hat was
      pushed rakishly on to the side of her head, there was a suggestion of missing hair-pins about
      her hair; she wafted with her about the room a fine odour of tobacco and gunpowder; she had
      burned her dress with a fusee head that had fallen off; her boots were large and unlaced, and
      curiously dirty, and her hands were black with smoke and oil, and had a sort of trimming in
      the way of small feathers and little patches of blood. Decidedly, if she came out feeling or
      looking like a goddess, the prescription ought to want no more convincing testimonial. But she
      insisted she had never enjoyed herself so much, she talked, and screamed, and laughed as if
      nothing serious had occurred since breakfast. As Dodo sat in the drawing-room, opening a few
      letters and skipping all except the shortest paragraphs in the Times, she heard the
      noise of wheels outside, and hurried into the hall to meet Mrs. Vivian. Somehow she looked
      forward to Mrs. Vivian's coming with a good deal of pleasure and interest. She was aware that
      another strain in the house might be advisable. Bertie and Jack, and Miss Grantham and Edith,
      were all somewhat on the same lines. Personally, she very much preferred those lines; and it
      was chiefly for her husband's sake that she wanted the new arrival. Lord Chesterford had done
      his duty nobly, but Dodo's observant eye saw how great an effort it was to him; at lunch he
      had been silent, at tea even more so. Dodo acknowledged that Edith had relieved the party from
      any sense of the necessity of supporting conversation, but it was obvious to her that
      Chesterford was hopelessly out of his element, and she felt a keen desire to please him. She
      had sat by him after lunch, as they smoked and talked, before resuming the shooting, and Dodo
      had patted his hand and called him a "dear old darling" when nobody happened to be listening,
      but she had a distinct sense of effort all day in attending to him, and enjoying the company
      of the others as much as she wished. There was certainly a want of balance in the party, and
      Mrs. Vivian's weight would tend to keep things even. Dodo had even aroused herself to a
      spasmodic interest in the new curate, but Lord Chesterford had exhibited such unmistakable
      surprise at this new departure, that she at once fell back on the easier and simpler expedient
      of blowing smoke rings at him, and drinking out of the same glass by mistake.
Mrs. Vivian was extremely gracious, and apparently very much pleased to see Dodo. She kissed
      her on both cheeks, and shook both her hands, and said what a pleasant drive she had had with
      dear Maud, and she hoped Lord Chesterford was as well and happy as Dodo appeared to be, and
      they both deserved to be.
"And you must have a great talk with me, Dodo," she said, "and tell me all about your
      honeymoon."
Dodo was pleased and rather flattered. Apparently Mrs. Vivian had left off thinking she was
      very small. Anyhow, it was a good thing to have her. Lord Chesterford would be pleased to see
      her, and he was building some charming almshouses for old women, who appeared to Dodo to be
      supremely uninteresting and very ugly. Dodo had a deep-rooted dislike for ugly things, unless
      they amused her very much. She could not bear babies. Babies had no profiles, which seemed to
      her a very lamentable deficiency, and they were not nearly so nice to play with as kittens,
      and they always howled, unless they were eating or sleeping. But Mrs. Vivian seemed to revel
      in ugly things. She was always talking to drunken cabmen, or workhouse people, or dirty little
      boys who played in the gutter. Dodo's cometic interest in the East End had been entirely due
      to her. That lady had a masterly and efficient way of managing, that won Dodo's immediate
      admiration, and had overcome for the moment her distaste for the necessary ugliness. Anything
      masterly always found a sympathetic audience in Dodo. Success was of such paramount importance
      in her eyes, that even a successful organiser of days in the country for match-girls was to be
      admired, and even copied, provided the other circumstances of success were not too
      expensive.
Mrs. Vivian was a complete and immediate success on this occasion. Dodo made a quantity of
      mental notes on the best way to behave, when you have the misfortune to become middle-aged and
      rather plain. Everyone who already knew her seemed to consider her arrival as the last drop in
      their cup of happiness. Lord Chesterford, on entering the room, had said, "My dear Mrs.
      Vivian, this is too delightful of you. We are all charmed to see you," and he had sat down by
      her, and quite seemed to forget that Dodo was sitting on the other side of the fire. Jack also
      had, so to speak, flown into her arms. Dodo immediately resolved to make a friend of her; a
      person who could be as popular among the aristocracy as she was among cabmen was distinctly a
      person to cultivate. She decidedly wanted the receipt.
"It is so good of you, Dodo, to ask me like this," said Mrs. Vivian, when Dodo went and sat
      by her. "It always seems to me a great compliment to ask people quietly to your house when
      only a few friends are there. If you have a great houseful of people, it does not matter much
      whom you ask, but I mean to take this as a sign that you consider me an old friend."
Dodo was always quick at seeing what was required of her.
"Of course I do," she answered. "Who are my old friends if you are not?"
"That is so nice of you," said Mrs. Vivian. "I want to have a long talk with you, and learn
      all about you. I am going to stay with your mother next week, and she will never forgive me
      unless I give a full and satisfactory account of you. Satisfactory it cannot help being." She
      looked across to Lord Chesterford, who was talking to Miss Grantham, and laughing politely at
      her apostolic jokes. "Oh, Dodo, you ought to be very happy!"
Dodo felt that this was rather like the ten minutes before dinner. She had a vague idea of
      telling Chesterford to sound the gong, but she was skilled at glances with meaning, and she
      resorted to this method.
"Lord Chesterford tells me you have Miss Staines with you," continued Mrs. Vivian. "I am so
      anxious to meet her. She has a wonderful gift for music, I hear."
At this moment the sound of hurrying feet was heard in the hall. The drawing-room door flew
      open and Edith entered. Dodo laughed inwardly and hopelessly. Edith began to talk at the top
      of her voice, before, she was fairly inside the room.
"Dodo, Dodo," she screamed, "we must settle about the service at once. I have heard from
      Herr Truffen, and he, will be here by twelve; and we must have everything ready, and we'd
      better do my Mass in G flat; on the whole it's the easiest. I suppose you couldn't hire four
      or five French horns in the village. If you could, we might do the one in A; but we must have
      them for the Gloria. We must have a practice to-night. Have you got any musical footmen or
      housemaids?"
"Mrs. Vivian, Miss Edith Staines," remarked Dodo sweetly.
There was a moment's silence, and then Dodo broke down.
"Oh, Edith, you are a good chap; isn't she, Mrs. Vivian? Mrs. Vivian was just talking about
      you, and you came in so opportunely that, until you began talking about Masses, I really
      thought you must be the other thing. Oh, Chesterford, I haven't told you. We're going to have
      a delicious little service in the drawing-room to-morrow morning, and we are going to sing a
      Mass. Grantie can't possibly go to church in this weather, and Jack and Bertie are not as good
      about it as they might be, so you see it would be really removing the temptation of not going
      to church if we have church here, and can you sing, Mrs. Vivian? Will you come, Chesterford?
      You might go to church first, and then come in here afterwards; that will be two services. How
      dreadfully unbearably conceited you will be all the afternoon. You might read the second
      lesson for us; no, I think I shall read both. Yes, Edith, I'll come in a few minutes. I don't
      know of any musical footmen. You might have them up one by one and make them sing scales, and
      Jack can try the housemaids' voices. I'm awfully glad Herr Truffen is coming. He's a
      tremendous German swell, Mrs. Vivian, and conducts at the Crystal Palace, and St. James's, and
      St. Paul's and everywhere."
"That will be charming," said Mrs. Vivian. "I shall certainly avail myself of it, Dodo, if I
      may, only I think I shall go to church first with Lord Chesterford. He has promised to show me
      all his schemes for the village. I think Maud means to go too. But if you will let me, I will
      go to my room, and write a few letters, and then you will be free to practise. It will be a
      great pleasure to hear your Mass, Miss Staines; I am very fortunate in coming just in
      time."
"Really, Dodo," said Edith, "you ought to cultivate the musical talents of your
      establishment. Last winter I was in the Pyrenees, and there was only an old sexton, who was
      also a charcoal burner, and my maid, and Charlie and his valet and his wife, but we had
      magnificent music, and a midnight service on New Year's Eve. Charlie took tenor, and Sybil
      treble, and I alto, and the sexton bass. You have no idea of the trouble it was to get the
      sexton to learn his part. I had to hunt him up in those little brutal sheds, and thrust the
      book into his hand, and forbid him to eat chestnuts, and force him to drink porter and Spanish
      liquorice. Come on; let's begin."
The practice went off satisfactorily, and Edith expressed herself as pleased. She and Dodo
      then had a talk to arrange what Dodo called the "Play-bill." Dodo had arranged to read the
      lessons, and wished to make a small selection of prayers, but there Edith put her foot
      down.
"No, Dodo," she said, "you're taking a wrong idea of it. I don't believe you're serious. Now
      I am. I want to do this Mass because I believe we can do it well, but I haven't the least
      confidence in your reading prayers well, or caring at all about them. I am rather in doubt
      about the lessons, but I suppose we can have those."
It was distinctly news to Dodo that Edith was serious. For herself she had only wished to
      have a nice little amusement for Sunday morning, which, in Dodo's experience, was rather a
      tiresome time if you stopped at home, but on the whole preferable there than at a country
      church. But Edith was really in earnest whatever she did, whether it was shooting, or music,
      or playing lawn-tennis. Frivolity, was the one charge she could not brook for a moment. Her
      amusements might, indeed, be frivolous, but she did them with all her heart. So the service
      was arranged to consist of a lesson, a Mass, and another lesson. The choice of lessons was
      left to Dodo. Accordingly, next morning Lord Chesterford and Mrs. Vivian drove off with Maud
      to eleven o'clock church, leaving the others still at breakfast. After that meal was over Dodo
      announced she was going to get the drawing-room ready.
"We must move all the sofas out of the room, because they don't look religious," she said;
      "and I shall cover up the picture of Venus and Adonis. I have got the sweetest little
      praying-table upstairs, and a skull. Do you think we'd better have the skull, Edith? I think
      it makes one feel Sunday-like. I shall put the praying-table in the window, and shall read the
      lessons from there. Perhaps the skull might frighten old Truffler. I have found two dreadfully
      nice lessons. I quite forgot the Bible was such a good book. I think I shall go on with it.
      One of them is about the bones in Ezekiel, which were very dry—you know it—and the other is
      out of the Revelation. I think——"
"Dodo," broke in Edith, "I don't believe you're a bit serious. You think it will be rather
      amusing, and that's all. If you're not serious I sha'n't come."
"Dear Edith," said Dodo demurely, "I'm perfectly serious. I want it all to be just as nice
      as it can be. Do you think I should take all the trouble with the praying-table and so on, if
      I wasn't?"
"You want to make it dramatic," said Edith decidedly. "Now, I mean to be religious. You are
      rather too dramatic at times, you know, and this isn't an occasion for it. You can be dramatic
      afterwards, if you like. Herr Truffen is awfully religious. I used to go with him to Roman
      Catholic services, and once to confession. I nearly became a Roman Catholic."
"Oh, I should like to be a nice little nun," said Dodo; "those black and white dresses are
      awfully becoming, with a dear trotty rosary, you know, on one side, and a twisty cord round
      one's waist, and an alms-box. But I must go and arrange the drawing-room. Tell me when your
      conductor comes. I hope he isn't awfully German. Would he like some beer first? I think the
      piano is in tune. I suppose he'll play, won't he? Make him play a voluntary, when we come in.
      I'm afraid we can't have a procession though. That's a pity. Oh, I'm sorry, Edith. I'm really
      going to be quite serious. I think it will be charming."
Dodo completed her arrangements in good time, and forebore to make any more frivolous
      allusions to the service. She was sitting in the drawing-room, regarding her preparations with
      a satisfied air, when Herr Truffen was announced. Dodo greeted him in the hall as if it was
      the most natural thing in the world that he should be called upon to accompany Edith's
      Mass.
"We're going to have service directly, if you're ready. We want you to accompany Miss
      Staines's Mass in G flat, but you mustn't take the Kyrie too quick, if you don't mind. Bertie
      Arbuthnot's singing tenor, and he's not very quick—are you, Bertie? Oh, by the way, this is
      Bertie. His other name is Mr. Arbuthnot."
Herr Truffen was most gratified by so charming an arrangement, and so great a musical treat.
      When Edith came down she greeted him effusively.
"My dear Professor, this is delightful," she said. "It's quite like old times, isn't it?
      We're going to do the Mass in G flat. I wanted the one in A, only there are no French horns in
      the village—isn't that benighted? And would you believe it, Lady Chesterford has positively
      got not one musical footman."
Herr Truffen was a large, spectacled German, who made everyone else look unnecessarily
      undersized.
He laughed and fitted his fingers together with great nicety.
"Are we to begin at once?" he asked. "The congregation—haf they arrived?"
"Oh, there's no congregation," explained Dodo; "we are all performers. It is only a
      substitute for going to church. I hope you aren't shocked; it was such a disgusting
      morning."
"Lady Chesterford is surely a congregation in herself," remarked Herr Truffen, with
      elephantine elegance.
"Lord Chesterford is coming by-and-by," continued Dodo. "He has gone to church. I don't know
      whether he will be in time for the Mass."
"Then you haf all the service in a little chapel here, no doubt," said the Professor.
"Oh, no," said Dodo; "we're going to have two lessons and the Mass, and there isn't a
      chapel, it's only in the drawing-room. I'm going to read the lessons."
Herr Truffen bowed with undiminished composure, and Dodo led the way back into the
      drawing-room.
Miss Grantham and Jack were introduced, and Dodo took her place at the praying-table, and
      Herr Truffen at the piano. Dodo gave out the lesson, and read the chapter through..
"Oh, it is nice!" she exclaimed. "Sha'n't I go on to the next chapter? No, I think I
      won't."
"It would spoil the delightful impression of the very dry bones?" interrogated Herr Truffen
      from the piano. "Ah, that is splendid; but you should hear it in the Fatherland tongue."
"Now, Dodo, come here," said Edith. "We must go on with this. You can discuss it afterwards.
      On the third beat. Will you give us the time, Professor?"
The Mass had scarcely begun when Lord Chesterford came in, followed by Mrs. Vivian and Maud.
      The Professor, who evidently did not quite understand that he was merely a sort of organist,
      got up and shook hands all round with laboured cordiality. Edith grew impatient.
"Come," she said, "you mustn't do that. Remember you are practically in church, Professor.
      Please begin again."
"Ah, I forgot for the moment," remarked the Professor; "this beautiful room made me not
      remember. Come—one, two. We must begin better than that. Now, please."
This time the start was made in real earnest. Edith's magnificent voice, and the Professor's
      playing, would alone have been sufficient to make it effective. The four performers knew their
      parts well, and when it was finished, there followed that silence which is so much more
      appreciative than applause. Then Herr Truffen turned to Edith.
"Ah, how you have improved," he said. "Who taught you this? It is beyond me. Perhaps you
      prayed and fasted, and then it came to you."
As Edith had chiefly written the Mass while smoking cigarettes after a hearty breakfast she
      merely said,—
"How does anything come to anyone? It is part of oneself, as much as one's arms and legs.
      But the service is not over yet."
Dodo meanwhile had gone back to the praying-table.
"I can't find it," she said, in a distracted whisper. "It's a chapter in the Revelation
      about a grey horse and a white horse."
"Dodo," said Edith, in an awful voice.
"Yes, dear," said Dodo. "Ah, here it is."
Dodo read the chapter with infinite feeling in her beautiful clear, full voice.
Chesterford was charmed. He had not seen this side of Dodo before. After she had finished,
      he came and sat by her side, while the others got up and began talking among themselves.
"Dodo," he said, "I never knew you cared about these things. What an unsympathetic brute I
      must seem to you. I never talked to you about such things, because I thought you did not care.
      Will you forgive me?"
"I don't think you need forgiveness much," said
Dodo softly. "If you only knew——" She stopped and finished her sentence by a smile.
"Dodo," he said again, "I've often wanted to suggest something to you, but I didn't quite
      like to. Why don't we have family prayers here? I might build a little chapel."
Dodo felt a sudden inclination to laugh. Her æsthetic pleasure in the chapter of Revelation
      was gone. She felt annoyed and amused at this simple-minded man, who thought her so perfect,
      and ascribed such fatiguingly high interpretations to all her actions. He really was a little
      stupid and tiresome. He had broken up all her little pleasant thoughts.
"Oh, family prayers always strike me as rather ridiculous," she said, with a half yawn. "A
      row of gaping servants is not conducive to the emotions."
She got up and joined the other groups, and then suddenly became aware that, for the first
      time, she had failed in her part. Jack was watching her, and saw what had happened.
      Chesterford had remained, seated at the window, pulling his long, brown moustache, with a very
      perceptible shade of annoyance on his face. Dodo felt a sudden impulse of anger with herself
      at her stupidity. She went back to Chesterford.
"Dear old boy," she said, "I don't know why I said that. I was thinking of something else. I
      don't know that I like family prayers very much. We used to have them at home, when my father
      was with us, and it really was a trial to hear him read the Litany. I suppose it is that which
      has made me rather tired of them. Come and talk to the Professor."
Then she went across to Jack.
"Jack," she said, in a low voice, "don't look as if you thought you were right."
