<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="47">
CHAPTER V.
THE sudden revelation of her cousin’s feeling was more than a shock, it was a blow
      to Anne. In her loneliness, in her dreary waiting for the hour of sacrifice, Richard Brown’s
      friendship had, almost without her knowing it, been her great consolation and support. It had
      given her a sense of safety and repose to think that, in the midst of all the morbid passion
      and fantastic vanity which seemed to surround her, there was a possibility of honest
      companionship, of affection which meant merely reciprocal esteem and sympathy in the objects
      of life; wholesome prose in the middle of unhealthy poetry. This was now gone: Richard Brown
      loved her, wanted her; it was the old nauseous story over again; the sympathy, the
       comradeship, the quiet brotherly and sisterly affection had
      all been a sham, a sham for her and for himself. Was Mrs Macgregor right, and was there, of
      really genuine and vital in the world, only the desire of the man for the woman and of the
      woman for the man, with all its brood of vanity and baseness, and all its trappings of poetry
      and sympathy and self‐sacrifice? Anne looked round her, and she saw men like Chough and
      Dennistoun and Lewis, base or doing their best to become it; Hamlin, her girlish ideal of
      poetical love, had gone the same way; and now the one man who had remained to her as an object
      of friendship and respect, her cousin Dick, had preached against selfish æstheticism, had
      talked her into his positivistic philanthropy—had conjured her to respect her nobler nature,
      her soul, her generous instincts—had supplicated her not to degrade herself,—nay, had quibbled
      with right and wrong, had urged her to break her trust,—what for? that he might satisfy his
      whim of possessing her. The solitude and the
       chilliness around Anne had increased; she wished for good,
      but she disbelieved in its existence. Add to this that she felt she was now no longer at
      liberty to see so much of Dick as she had formerly done; instead of a consolation and a
      support, his presence seemed to her now more of a danger and an insult. So she waited,
      hopeless and solitary, for the hour of the sacrifice to strike; for Hamlin to claim her. To
      fulfil that debt, to suffer that moral death‐blow, seemed to her now the one certainty, the
      one aim of her life.
Such was the bulk of Miss Brown’s condition; but there were streakings of another colour
      which made it, on the whole, only more gloomy. The possibility, the vision which had for a
      moment been projected on to her mind, of becoming Richard Brown’s wife, of sharing in all
      those thoughts and endeavours which were her highest ideal, would return to her every now and
      then in strange sudden gleams. And this possibility, or rather this which was an
      impossibility, made the
       real necessity of her life only the gloomier for the
      contrast. Anne had vaguely aspired after a life of nobler sympathies and stronger aims, but
      she had never gone so far as to dream of sharing the life of her cousin; and she thought that,
      had matters been different, had she been free, had Hamlin not claimed her, had Richard not
      loved her (for his love, his selfish tempting her away from her duty, seemed to her a sort of
      dishonour to him and her), she would have had the fulfilment of her most far‐fetched desires
      within her grasp,—merely increased moral numbness, the sullen pain of resignation, towards a
      fate which was too slow in coming.
Anne did not pay much heed to Hamlin and his doings: it seemed to her, whose life in the
      last months had appeared like years, that it was always the same monotony; Hamlin was waiting
      for her to fall in love with him, watching whether she was not in love already; offering her,
      in those vague, Platonic, elegiac speeches of his about the necessity of
       a higher life of which he no longer had much hope, of a pure
      passion which he feared he was unworthy to experience, an opportunity for saying “I will teach
      you how to love.” Veiled in Dantesque mysticism, muffled in Shakespearian obscurity, such was,
      to her who understood and was expected to understand, the gist of all the poems which he
      wrote. The day would come, Anne saw it clearly, when some trifling quarrel, some trifling
      jealousy, some rebuff to his vanity, or some sense of more than usual vacuity, would get the
      better of Hamlin’s patience, and when he would say to Anne that he loved her and that her love
      was his life. She had gone over it all so often in fancy, with the bitter sarcasm of
      understanding that whole, to her so tragic, little comedy. But had she been a person more
      observant and penetrating than she was (for her long delusion about her cousin Richard plainly
      shows that she was neither), or had she been less engrossed in her own conception of events,
      Miss Brown might have noticed,
       as spring turned into summer, that certain slight changes
      were taking place in Hamlin. He had, without any intentional rupture, taken to seeing much
      less of Chough and Dennistoun; he scarcely ever visited his old master, Mrs Spencer, or any
      others of the school; he refused invitations to parties, or if he had accepted, found them too
      great a bore at the last moment; the only house, except that at Hammersmith, which he
      frequented, was Madame Elaguine’s. He used to attend all her spiritualistic séances, and alternate between finding spiritualism a vulgar fraud
      and a mystic possibility; he used to quarrel with Edmund Lewis, and at the same time to seek
      his company more than any other man’s. He would vacillate also between the most extreme
      opinions about his cousin Sacha. One day he would entertain Anne by the hour about her
      virtues, her talents, her persecution; the next he would be captiously fault‐finding, accusing
      Madame Elaguine of being a brainless little flirt, a mere ordinary Russian, who
       cared only for excitement and being perpetually en scène.
“What is the use of asking people to be intense when it is not their nature?” Anne would
      ask, not without bitterness in her own heart. “If you find a pleasant friend, be satisfied and
      thankful for your good luck.”
Be it as it may, Hamlin was restless, subject to strange ups and downs of humour, sometimes
      in a state of vague unaccountable cheerfulness, sometimes horribly depressed. To any one but
      Anne it would have occurred that there must be some novelty in his life. But Anne did not see;
      indeed, from a sort of instinct, she observed Hamlin as little as possible: she had loved him
      when she had not known him; the less she saw, except his gentle, chivalric, poetic, idealising
      surface, the better.
But one day—it might be a fortnight after the memorable walk home from Richmond’s
      lecture—Anne found among her letters one, evidently delivered by hand or dropped into the
      letterbox
      , the address upon which. puzzled her considerably. It was
      not merely that the handwriting was unknown to her, but that it was so utterly unlike any
      human handwriting that could be conceived; it was like a child’s elaborate copy of print, but
      executed with a precision, and at the same time a certain artistic chic, of which a child is incapable. Had she been in Italy, Anne would have
      expected to find within that envelope one of those marvellously written out and illuminated
      sonnets which certain needy individuals, counts and marquises fallen into bad circumstances
      and anxious to redeem their only bed from the pawnbroker’s, serve up at regular intervals to
      English and Americans, “the many illustrious qualities of whose mind and heart, as well known
      as their noble family,” are supposed to include munificence to beggars. To Anne’s astonishment
      the letter which she found actually was in Italian. But it was Italian of Stratford‐atte‐Bow,
      and her first impulse was to burst out laughing. But the
       next moment she reddened with surprise and indignation.
“MADONNA MIA,” began this epistle, which had evidently been concocted
      with a ‘Decameron’ and a Baedeker’s travelling phrase‐book, and which sounded like English
      written by a German waiter who should have taken to Spenser after the first dozen
      lessons,—“Inasmuch as it always is the duty of the honest to warn the unsuspecting, and the
      most honourable are always those who suspect least, your true friend and well‐wisher desires
      you may keep an eye upon the machinations of a base woman; and be on your guard against the
      friendship [underlined] of cousins.”
Anne turned the note round and round, and read and re‐read it, her heart beating as if she
      had received a slap in the face. “The friendship of cousins.” Her first thought
      was that this was an allusion to herself and Richard Brown; some one had understood what she
      had not, and was suspecting what was not true. But then her mind picked up that other
       mysterious phrase, “the machinations of a base woman.” The
      cousins were not herself and Dick, but Hamlin and Sacha Elaguine, and that was the base woman
      alluded to. It was as if a great light had shone in Anne’s face; she was dazzled, dazed. The
      friendship of two cousins! Was there, then, more than friendship between them? Did Hamlin love
      Sacha, or Sacha Hamlin? Anne gave a great sigh; but it was a sigh of relief,—the sigh of the
      drowning wretch who is dragged on shore—the sigh of the hunted fugitive who sees his pursuers
      turn back. The friendship of cousins? Why, then, she was saved, she was free! But her
      excitement lasted only a minute. Was she to believe an anonymous letter, evidently malicious,
      evidently intended to slander an innocent woman, to sow discord or to ruin her own happiness?
      It was evidently from an enemy of Madame Elaguine’s; it could not be from a friend of her own;
      for a friend would have spoken to her clearly and openly, or would have spared her what, in
      the eyes of the world,
       which regarded her as Hamlin’s affianced bride, must have
      been a horrible revelation. It was an infamous or ridiculous calumny. From whom did it come?
      Anne thought for a long time; she counted up her own enemies and Madame Elaguine’s. At one
      moment she suspected Edmund Lewis, at another Mrs Spencer; but she was too honest to credit
      any one of them with such a piece of treachery. Madame Elaguine’s mysterious enemies—yes, it
      must be they! thought Anne; it must be a new trick of theirs, a device for alienating her from
      her new friends. Anne’s heart sank. Why must such terrible temptations be put upon her?
Miss Brown meditated for some time upon what she ought to do. She felt indignant with the
      mysterious author of the letter; and she felt that, as it contained a slander, it was her duty
      to let those whom it accused know the whole matter. Should she show that paper to Hamlin? Once
      in her life, Anne gave way to a movement of cowardice. That letter,
       shown by her to Hamlin, would, she knew, bring the
      catastrophe. Hamlin would be furious and delighted; he would think she was jealous and
      unhappy; he would on the spot declare that he loved her, and ask her to be his wife. This
      consummation of her sacrifice, which, in the dull apathy of the last fortnight, she had almost
      prayed for, now terrified her. When it came, she was ready; but to hasten it—to bring it down
      untimely on herself—to do that, Anne had not the heart. After all, it concerned Madame
      Elaguine most, and she would doubtless have some clue to the writer of the letter, and
      consequently take the matter less to heart. Anne determined to show the letter to her. She
      thought she would go to her at once, or write; but a faint, faint, almost unconscious instinct
      of self‐preservation bade her wait awhile; wait till she should have an opportunity of seeing
      Madame Elaguine in the natural course of events.
Miss Brown had made up her mind that the mysterious letter had no sort of truth in it; yet
      despite this decision, which lay, cut and
       dry, on the surface of her consciousness, a hidden
      imperceptible movement was going on within her. She seemed suddenly to remember things which
      she had not at the time noticed, to see things which had not before existed, and must still
      have been there yesterday as well as to‐day. Things which had been meaningless acquired a
      meaning; things which had seemed without connection began to group themselves. A change had
      taken place of late in Hamlin; he had become solitary and morose, and more than usually up and
      down in spirits—he had seen only Sacha and her. How much had he seen of Sacha? Anne did not
      know, but she imagined a great deal. Then she remembered how he had taken to finding fault
      with the little woman, to running her down systematically to himself and to Anne. Could it be
      that he felt himself tempted to break his engagement? Anne knew Hamlin too well by this time
      to credit him with that. If such a thing should happen,—if, finding insensibly that
       Anne was not what he had imagined, disappointed with her
      coldness, hurt by her censoriousness, and attracted by a woman who was everything that she was
      not—Hamlin should ever come to feel for Sacha more than mere friendship, it was not in his
      nature to perceive his danger and to struggle; he would let himself go to sleep in the
      pleasantness of a new sensation, he would drift on vaguely, and start up in surprise.
A new love was for him the most poignant of temptations,—a new love in its still
      half‐unconscious, Platonic, vague condition; and he was not a man to resist such a temptation;
      indeed he had gone through life with the philosophy that a poet may dally with any emotion,
      however questionable, as long as he does not actually commit a dishonourable action. Oh no,
      Hamlin’s ups and downs could not be struggles or remorse; so Anne decided that it was all
      fancy, all calumny. And she determined to give the letter to Sacha on the first
      opportunity.

Madame Elaguine at last made up her mind that her little Helen ought to learn something; and
      with the impulsiveness of her nature, she determined that she, whom she had always kept under
      her own eyes, should go to school. Why there should be such a swing of the pendulum, and why
      Madame Elaguine should not rather hire a governess to teach the child in her own house, Miss
      Brown could not explain, except by the capriciousness, the tendency always to be in extremes,
      of Hamlin’s cousin. Anyhow, Sacha had determined that Helen must soon go to school, and she
      had written to Anne begging her, before the child went, to permit her to share for a week or
      two the lessons which Miss Brown was giving the little Choughs. “I know,” she wrote, “that my
      poor little child is not fit to be turned loose among other children yet; I know she is too
      ignorant, too sensitive, too much accustomed to life with her elders. To learn with Mr
      Chough’s children, to play with them, will take the keen edge off; and also, I know, my
       dearest Anne, that if anything can make this (I fear, alas!
      alas! to my shame) over‐sensitive and self‐willed little savage more human, more desirous of
      being good, and of raising herself, it will be your influence. I have often felt what it would
      have been for me to have had a friend like you, and I feel what it will be for my child.”
Anne was touched by this letter. Poor Madame Elaguine, although she did care too much for
      Baudelaire and Gautier, and did tell too many anecdotes about married women’s lovers and
      married men’s cocottes for Anne’s taste, was yet a good and
      brave little woman; and she must be helped, if one could help her. And Anne was doubly
      indignant about that anonymous letter she put in her pocket, and went to call on Hamlin’s
      cousin.
Madame Elaguine was in one of her unstrung moments. Anne found her lying on a sofa, a heap
      of books about her, reading none, fidgety and vacant. She brightened up for a moment on Miss
      Brown’s entry, and
       received her with a kind of rapturous gratitude, quite out
      of all proportion; but she speedily relapsed into her depressed condition. Anne thought it
      better not to introduce the business at once.
“I want to know,” she said, “why you are suddenly so anxious to send your little Helen to
      school, when you said, only a few days ago, that you could not bear even that a stranger
      should have any influence upon her.”
Madame Elaguine hesitated. “Oh, dear Anne,” she suddenly exclaimed, “I am a poor, weak,
      vacillating creature, always in excesses. You must have pity on me. I suppose it
      is just because I was so horribly selfish about my child that I have been crushed suddenly
      with the necessity of sacrificing my feelings completely. It comes home to me—and oh, you
      cannot think what it means to me!—that I am ruining my child, that she will turn out merely
      another myself—another wretched, weak, unhappy creature, with just morality enough to make her
      utterly
       miserable, and just common‐sense enough to make her feel her
      own silliness. It is a terrible thing for a mother to say; but it is true, and I must say it:
      I am not fit to bring up my own child—I am not worthy to do it.”
Anne looked at the Russian, who had raised herself on her sofa convulsively, and thatched
      and torn to pieces a flower which was lying on her, with a great look of pity.
“I am not bad!” cried Sacha—“I am not bad! I want to be good; but I can’t. Oh, and I can’t
      teach my child anything, not even the multiplication table,” and she suddenly burst out
      laughing.
Anne did not know whether to cry or to laugh.
“I quite understand your wishing that Helen should get the habit of work, and should learn
      something,” she said, in her business‐like way; “but I cannot see the advantage of sending her
      to school. She is far too nervous and delicate, and far too much accustomed to indulgence, to
      get anything but harm from a
       school. Were she a mere strong, sturdy, spoilt child, it
      would do her an immense deal of good; but a child, you admit it yourself, so morbidly and
      almost physically sensitive, would only be miserable at school, and probably be terrified by
      unaccustomed discipline and want of sympathy. Don’t you think it would be wiser to get Helen a
      thoroughly good governess, so that she could learn something, and yet be in your house?”
“I won’t have a governess; they are all good‐for‐nothings. I won’t have spies in the house!”
      exclaimed Madame Elaguine, vehemently.
“Nonsense!” said Anne; “how can you talk like that? You know that governesses are just as
      good as schoolmistresses; and for you and Helen such a plan would be in every way
      preferable.”
“I won’t have any one in the house to pry into my affairs!” repeated Sacha, hotly. “Helen
       must go to school.”
Anne felt angry with the little woman.

“Of course it is for you to choose,” she said; “but I confess I can’t see why you should not
      have a governess any more than other people.” She felt as if there were something wrong
      here.
“And do you forget what my life is?” cried Sacha; “do you forget that I am the daily, hourly
      victim of unseen enemies? Would you have me admit some one to my house, that she might play
      into their hands, or, at all events, pry into my misfortune?”
Anne had forgotten that. How unjust she was!
“True,” she said; “I think we might find a governess who, even under your circumstances,
      might be safely admitted into the house. But I can understand your unconquerable aversion to
      the idea, so we had better look out for a school, and, till one is found, I shall be delighted
      if you will send Helen to me. I fear I can’t do much for her, but at all events she will meet
      the Choughs, who are very good little girls.”
Madame Elaguine rose, and, to Anne’s immeasurable
       surprise, she flung herself on her neck, and began to
      sob.
“Oh Anne, dearest Anne,” she said, “you are so good to me—so good, so very good—and I don’t
      deserve it at all—indeed I know I don’t.”
“Nonsense; you are unwell and unstrung about Helen, and you are just making yourself
      miserable. Do try and be quiet, and reflect that there is nothing whatever to be miserable
      about.”
Somehow or other Miss Brown, for all her good‐nature, always had a harsh instinct whenever
      she saw Sacha in such a condition as this—an instinct that the Russian could prevent it—that
      such fits of tears and abjectness were mere self‐indulgence, and self‐indulgence which was
      utterly incompatible with Anne’s idea of self‐respect.
But Madame Elaguine could not be reined in. She fell back in an arm‐chair in an agony of
      hysterical sobbing, mixed with ghastly laughing.

“It is not nonsense; it is true—it is true; I don’t deserve it. I deserve that you should
      hate me. Oh Anne, you must hate me; but it is not my fault. I hate him! I have always hated
      him! I have told him so; but he won’t believe. Oh, indeed it is not my fault. But of course
      you hate me, you . . .” and she suddenly burst out laughing.
Anne was very white. She had heard and she had understood; but she had no right to have
      heard or to have understood.
Suddenly Sacha started up and looked strangely about her.
“What! you are here?” she asked, with a start as if of terror. “Oh, what have I been talking
      about? Oh, I am sure I have been talking nonsense!”
“Poor little woman!” said Anne; “yes, you have been talking nonsense; you are
      afraid of having a governess for Helen, lest—”
“Ah!” cried Madame Elaguine, with a sigh of relief. “Oh, you don’t know what it is to have
      such a fit. One feels one is talking lies,
       and yet that one must go on. I never had any such things
      before they began to persecute me. It is almost the worst part of my misfortune. Fancy seeing,
      feeling one’s self becoming day by day more abject, and being unable to stop it. Oh, I still
      feel so frightened! something dreadful must have happened while I had that fit just now. Do
      call for some tea, Anne, darling; I feel so shaken, as if something had happened.”
“You will feel all right when you have had some tea,” said Anne. “Tell me, have they, have
      those people been frightening you of late?”
Madame Elaguine nodded. “Only last night; you don’t know what happened. I didn’t intend
      telling you—look here—but it is that that has put me into such a state,” and opening the door
      of her bedroom, Sachs pointed to the wall opposite.
Over Madame Elaguine’s bed hung a painted portrait of little Helen; but where the face
      should have been was a dark spot.

“Good heavens! what have they done?” cried Anne.
“Oh, they have only cut out Mademoiselle Hélène’s face,” said the Swiss maid, who was
      sitting in the room, with a shrug. “For my part, I am accustomed to such tricks, and so, I
      should think, must be Madame also.”
Something cynical and insolent in the woman struck Anne very much.
“How horrible!” she said, leading Sacha back to the drawing‐room. “I can quite understand
      your being excited to‐day, and feeling anxious about Helen.”
“It is because of that,” said Sacha, with clenched teeth, “that I want to send Helen to
      school. She will be safer there than here. If things go on as now, I shall have to send Helen
      to a convent; I am no protection to her.”
“You must marry, and have a husband to take care of you,” said Anne, quietly.
Madame Elaguine turned scarlet. Was she
       afraid of having let out her secret? But to Anne’s surprise,
      instead of looking anxious, a sudden look of triumphant amusement passed over her face, a
      strange brazen look, and she burst out laughing—
“Ah yes, marry!—that would be a fine idea!—and whom, pray? Perhaps Lewis or Chough. True—I
      forgot—he has a wife! Ah no, a rolling stone like me must always be solitary.”
“You need not always be a rolling stone,” said Anne, gently. “But I must go—good‐bye, dear
      Madame Elaguine.”
At the door she met Hamlin. It seemed to her that he looked guilty, and coloured.
“I have been to see your cousin; she has had another horrid trick played to her. Go up to
      her, it will do her good to see you; she is very lonely, poor little woman.”
Hamlin was unnerved by the allusion to the persecution. He stood silent for a moment, with a
      long lingering look on Anne, like a man making a mental comparison.

“You are very good, Miss Brown,” he said, slowly; “there is no other woman in the world like
      you.”
“Sacha has been more tried than I,” answered Anne. And Hamlin went up and Miss Brown went
      out.
</div></body></text></TEI>