<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="43">
CHAPTER I.
THE notion that a man was waiting, thirsting for her love, would have been enough
      for many a woman in Anne’s position—many a woman more gifted than Anne, and more conscious of
      her gifts, especially if the man who thus tacitly implored her to love and kindle love in him,
      were, like Hamlin, the former object of passionate worship. But with Anne Brown it was
      different. Some few women seem to be born to have been men, or at least not to have been
      women. To them love, if it come, will be an absorbing passion, but a passion only of brief
      duration, the mere momentary diversion into a personal and individual channel of a force which
      constitutes the whole moral and intellectual existence, whose object is an unattainable
       ideal of excellence, and whose field is the whole of the
      world in which there is injustice, and callousness, and evil. Such women may be very happy if
      they love a man with their eyes open—love him as a mere secondary concern, as a mere trusty
      companion in the struggle after the ideal; but if they love in a man what momentarily seems to
      be that ideal, if they love with all the force of their nature, a terrible reaction of vacuity
      and despair must soon come. As with their lovers and husbands, so also with their children:
      they cannot blissfully concentrate all their passion upon them; such love will soon become
      narrow and bitter for them. They are indeed sent into the world (if any of us is ever sent for
      any purpose) to be its Joans of Arc—to kindle from their pure passion a fire of enthusiasm as
      passionate, but purer than it is given to men to kindle: they are not intended to be, except
      as a utilisation of what is fatally wasted, either wives or mothers. Masculine women, mere men
      in disguise, they are not: the very
       strength and purity of their nature, its intensity as of
      some undiluted spirit, is dependent upon their cleaner and narrower woman’s nature, upon their
      narrowness and obstinacy of woman’s mind; they are, and can only be, true women; but women
      without woman’s instincts and wants, sexless—women made not for man but for humankind. Anne
      Brown was one of these. She had no idea that she was of this strange, rare stuff of heroines;
      she had no notion that she was at all superior to the ordinary run of her sex; indeed it was
      her perfect ignorance of her own exceptional nature which caused most of her wretchedness,
      making her at once more impatient with the weakness of others, and more impatient with her own
      difficulty of being satisfied. Love, therefore, was not for her a happiness, nor an ideal, nor
      even a compensation. In an intensely earnest nature like hers, a few years are worth a
      lifetime: everything is understood, endured much sooner; all that can be felt, for pleasure or
      pain, is rapidly exhausted, and the character remains
       early, with all its human lusts and vanities burnt out like
      the gases in green wood, ready to become the fuel for unindividual ideal passion. So at
      twenty‐three, Anne had, so to speak, loved out her love, her passionate adoring love, as she
      had dreamed out the dreams of her life; anything that might still come would be but a faint
      momentary flicker of sentiment, a detail in her life, and no more.
So when Hamlin had, in his veiled way, made her to understand what he hoped, what he
      desired, what he expected, what (she could not help saying to herself) he had bargained for,
      of her,—the thought of this love, which she could no longer feel, and which she was expected
      to give—of this love which was to be merely the highest selfish pleasure, the most precious
      (because the most refined), æsthetic lust of a selfish æsthetic voluptuary, Anne experienced a
      sense of horror and self‐debasement. So this was what Hamlin was waiting for—this which made
      him play that comedy of respectful distant adoration, of freedom of
       choice in her, of absence of all rights in himself—this
      that her solid mass of soul should slowly take fire, and smoulder, and, leaping up in
      inextinguishable flame, set him also ablaze.
Hitherto Anne had been unhappy from her isolation, from her gradual discovery that the man
      whom she had loved as an ideal of nobility must be scorned as a mere weak‐spirited and
      morbid‐minded artistic automaton,—a mind creating beautiful things from sheer blind necessity,
      as a violin gives out beautiful sounds, but soulless, like the mere instrument of wood and
      string. She had been unhappy because she was alone, terribly alone; but now she was unhappy
      because she had discovered that she was in bondage, surrounded by walls, a slave. And now that
      she yearned for the icy sense of isolation with which she had lived a few weeks back, as a
      prisoner in a fortress might yearn for the desert, she found also that she could no longer
      drift on indifferent, enduring the present, and hoping for the future. She could no longer
      vaguely say to
       herself, as she had so often said before, that Hamlin might
      be redeemed, that he might yet become once more an object of her love: for it had become plain
      to her that her future was settled; that whatever Hamlin was, he was her master, her
      proprietor; and that, lovable or not lovable to her nature, he expected, counted upon her
      love.
This new feeling made Anne’s life—that life which was so completely a life of the world
      within, not of the world without—insupportable in a new way. Isolated she could live, but not
      caged. Her whole soul sickened; she no longer thought of trying to influence Hamlin, of trying
      to help others; all her energies were concentrated upon helping, upon freeing herself.
“There is something the matter with Anne Brown,” said Sacha one day to her cousin. “What is
      it?”
“Miss Brown always looks very serious,” answered Hamlin, affecting indifference. “She has a
      tragic sort of face even when she is quite
       happy. It is one of her great peculiarities, and to me her
      charms; but for some time I could not realise that she was really happy.”
“That’s not it,” cried Madame Elaguine, impatiently. “I know Anne when she’s happy and Anne
      when she’s unhappy. She doesn’t look merely grave and tragic as she used to—she looks
      perplexed, and pained, and worried; she’s not happy in her life.”
“Miss Brown,” said Edmund Lewis, in his drawling, clammy voice, fixing his conquering eyes
      on Madame Elaguine with a quiet, insolent smile—“Miss Brown is a woman, although she looks
      like a goddess; and even goddesses, you know, could not help being women too.”
The Russian laughed. “Always the fatuity of these men!” she cried, and turned contemptuously
      on her heel.
Hamlin did not answer, but a feeling of satisfaction came over him. Anne was unhappy; and in
      a nature like hers, he said to himself, love must be unhappiness. But when he saw Lewis and
      his cousin alone he felt
       annoyed; and he fell upon their spiritualistic practices
      with a perfect rabidness of scorn.
Anne little knew that she was watched; she did not care what might or might not be thought
      of her by Sacha Elaguine, by Chough, by Edmund Lewis, by any of these people whom she
      despised; and as to Hamlin, an instinct told her that he would never guess what it was that
      troubled her. So Anne kept her pain to herself; but sometimes the despair of being thus
      enslaved became too strong for endurance, and she longed for some one to whom to confide it.
      Every word, every look, every piece of attention, every show of indifference on Hamlin’s part,
      seemed to mean the same thing: that he expected her to love him—everything seemed to allude
      and point to that. The only women with whom she was at all really intimate were the Leighs;
      but Anne could not say a word to them, could not ask their advice. She could never, she
      thought, make either of these girls enter into her situation, comprehend her feelings, make
       her understand that she was not ungrateful, and that Hamlin
      was not ungenerous. Yet she felt the terrible need of some one to counsel her—to take some of
      the frightful responsibility either of ingratitude or of degradation from off her—to show her
      either how to get out of the situation, or how to submit to it. Such a person there was—a
      person who might help her, who might even understand her; but something told Anne that she
      must not have recourse to him, to her cousin Dick. Perhaps it was vanity, perhaps a knowledge
      that Richard Brown would triumph over this miserable ending to what he had always opposed; a
      fear lest he might misunderstand Hamlin, and bespatter what was the one beautiful thing in his
      life—his raising up of Anne. For it was a curious point that, contemptible as Hamlin had
      become to Anne, and unworthy in her own eyes of her love, she could not endure the idea of any
      one else understanding this, of any one else attacking Hamlin. None of them, she felt, could
      understand what
       Hamlin had done for her; what he had been—nay, what, as a
      beloved piece of the past, he still was—to her; only she could measure what she owed to him,
      and only she, therefore, might weigh the bad in him against the good. For even when she was
      most overcome with the sense of the moral prison which was closing round her, to cripple her
      life and break her spirit, Anne could not wish that the past had been otherwise—that she had
      never met Hamlin, never contracted a debt towards him, never loved him. Bleak and dark as
      might be the present, she would not ever have given up that past,—that sudden flaming up of
      her life, that one spell of hope and trustfulness, and admiration and love, which must serve
      her for all her existence: to have had that was always sweet, to have been given it was always
      a reason for gratitude. Moreover, Anne could not now contemplate what she would have been had
      she never met Hamlin. To her stern and idealising nature, to have remained without knowledge,
      without
       responsibility, without sympathy, without sense of right or
      wrong, morally only half developed, only half alive, as she had been during her earlier
      girlhood, was unendurable. She would not, for all the pain and humiliation which it might cost
      her, have forfeited the finer fibre, the clearer vision which had shown her that she was
      indebted therefor to a man whom she despised. No; she could not, even in thought, relinquish
      the past. But what of the future? The question laid hold of Anne’s mind, and for some weeks
      rode it like an incubus. How many of us have thus let a hopeless problem get hold of our whole
      nature, and make it move, day after day, week after week, in the frightful treadmill of its
      vicious circle?
Every night Anne lay down to sleep with her doubts half solved, her mind half made up, only
      to wake up the next day with all her doubts reinforced and all her resolutions scattered. Such
      a condition is not due to weakness or indecision of character; nay, it is
       probably only the earnest minds, the most capable of
      serious decisions, who can thus go on living in suspense, resisting the temptation of a
      decision, enduring the monotonous recurrence of a struggle of motives and of thought; it is
      the effort, this frightful mental instability, at retaining moral life where life would easily
      be extinguished; it is the weary tramp up and down with cold cramped limbs of the prisoner who
      knows that were he to stop, were he to lie down, he would have rest, but also death. Almost
      unintentionally Anne kept asking herself what steps she could take to be free. She used, in
      moments of weakness and weariness of heart, to go over schemes of independence, to indulge in
      day‐dreams of self‐supporting liberty. She who, a few months ago, had dreamed of raising the
      lower classes, of spreading higher knowledge and ideals among them, of awakening the more
      fortunate parts of society to their sense of responsibility,—she whose whole energy had been
      taken up in silent projects for bettering, no matter how
       little, the world, bettering the poor by making them think
      and enjoy, bettering the rich by making them feel; giving the shop‐girls of the Women’s Club a
      glimpse into the world of imagination, and giving Hamlin a glimpse into the world of
      reality,—she was now thinking of how she might earn her bread, how she might live as a teacher
      or a governess. Talking with the Leighs and her cousin, she used shyly, and with a desire to
      deceive very foreign to her, to put questions, seemingly purely abstract, as to what a poor
      girl with a certain amount of education could best do—as to what was required of a
      schoolmistress or a governess. And, while telling herself that it was all useless—that she was
      bound by the past, however much she might try and cut herself loose from the present—Anne
      mechanically gave her time to studying, no longer to be more worthy of Hamlin, or more useful
      in the world, but to enable herself to gain a livelihood if . . . Ah! well, when she asked
      herself plainly what that “if” meant,
       she had to answer that she scarcely knew: if the
      slave‐owner should say to his slave,“ Go—I am tired of you;” if the man who had bought the
      precious statue or picture should weary of it and wish to exchange it. And Anne had to admit
      to herself that Hamlin was not the man to feel or act like this. Nay sometimes, when she had
      indulged in a day‐dream of freedom—when she had let herself go to the vain belief that Hamlin
      would one day awaken to the sense that this woman was not his ideal, as she had awakened to
      the sense that he was not hers—when she had worked out the details of her half‐starving life
      of independence, her return to her old drudgery (but with a freer spirit), her hard struggle
      as a teacher of little children, or a shop‐girl, or at best a schoolmistress,—the recollection
      of the past would suddenly overpower her—the recollection of what she had been, what she had
      hoped—the recollection of her love of that debt which she was now devising a means of paying
      off,—and poor Anne would burst into tears. But that debt, she
       felt, could not be paid off. She might support herself in
      the future, but how could she get rid of the past? If she lived on dry bread for the rest of
      her life, Hamlin would still have done for her what she believed that no other man had ever
      done for a woman; if she could save up every penny of earnings and place before him all that
      he had ever spent for her education, would it not be the basest, vilest mockery and cheat, and
      could she repay the love which he had felt, the trustfulness which he had shown? Repay it she
      never could; for love and trustfulness she could not give in return; and she must ever remain
      in his debt, remain his to do his bidding. And yet at times the question arose in her, What
      right had she to pay a debt at the price of her honour? To become Hamlin’s wife when she did
      not love him, to pretend love which she did not feel, this was in Anne’s eyes, measured by her
      stern measure of right and wrong, a prostitution; and could it be honourable to let herself be
      dishonoured? But Anne cast
       this thought behind her; Hamlin, by binding only himself
      and leaving her free, had by his chivalrous generosity really bound her; if to possess her,
      and as much of her life and love as she could give, would make Hamlin happy, he had a right to
      it.
The strain, Anne felt, was becoming too much for her; this question of her own future, of
      her own dignity and undignity, was swallowing up her whole nature, neither more nor less than
      the nature of Hamlin and his friend was swallowed up by their æsthetical feelings. Anne
      recognised, with terror, that she was deteriorating; that she was beginning to care nothing
      for others in this preoccupation about herself; and that such a thing should happen—that she
      too should lose her more generous feelings—was a greater degradation than any other which
      could come over her. This shame and this misfortune alone it was in her power to prevent, and
      she determined to prevent it. She did her best to put aside all questions of her own future,
      to accustom herself to wait for
       what might happen, what she might be summoned to do, and
      she threw herself with more ardour than ever (trying to escape from the contamination, not
      merely, as before, of the selfishness of others, but of her own) into such studies and
      questions as concerned wider interests than her own.
Anne’s earnest nature, lacking the happy faculty of being absorbed by present feelings, had
      always been very subject to a dull moral pain at the evil in the world, storms from the great
      Sahara of misery which would lower over her own oasis of happiness, clogging its atmosphere
      and blighting its greenness. But now her efforts not to brood over her own unhappiness,
      resulted merely in her brooding almost unceasingly over the unhappiness of others. And
      gradually, to the sense of the misery of the world, became superadded the terrible sense of
      the injustice of that world’s arrangements: from being indignant with the callousness of men,
      Anne became indignant, with the same cold and sombre indignation,
       at the callousness of God. She felt herself alone,
      isolated, separated not only from the men and women surrounding her, but separated in spirit
      from the whole scheme of things. And to her, the greater part of whose life was in her
      aspirations, this gradual removal of anything to which to aspire, this gradual destruction of
      every ideal with which to sympathise, such a condition of moral loneliness was, as Anne once
      said to her cousin, worse than death.
Richard Brown had somehow, that day, been more sympathising with Anne than usual. Had she
      not been too much engrossed, she might have noticed that he watched her face, listened to her
      words, not merely now with gentleness and friendliness, but with a kind of suppressed
      admiration and wonder.
“Nothing is so bad as death,” answered Richard; “because, once dead, we can no longer feel,
      we can no longer judge, or sympathise, or strive.”
Anne looked up from the frock which she
       was making for one of the little Choughs, whose wardrobe
      was getting into a lamentable condition.
“I don’t mean that we are so useful when we are dead, but we are less unhappy. You talk of
      feeling, and sympathising, and judging, and striving: what can we feel, and sympathise with,
      and judge, except the miserableness of men, and their weakness and badness, and the horrible
      arrangement of the world which makes them such? and after what can we strive, except vainly to
      release ourselves from that abominable order of the world?”
Richard Brown looked at Anne for a moment in silence. He was a singularly unæsthetic man,
      and confusing beauty with mere utility, he had never well understood the beauty which artistic
      people chose to see in this strange, uncommon, sombre face, so unlike that of any one else,
      and which seemed to have no prototype either in man or woman. But now he felt that Anne was
      beautiful, and very beautiful.

“All mankind is gradually releasing itself from what you call this evil arrangement of the
      world,” he answered; “or rather, the very perception that such an arrangement is evil is
      teaching mankind,—I mean all that much of mankind which makes the rest move on, to rearrange
      the world, and out of the bad to make the good.”
Anne shrugged her shoulders contemptuously.
“Why was the arrangement made if it was evil?” she asked.
“Because,” said her cousin, watching her face as he let his words drop—“because there was no
      sense of good and evil at the beginning; because it is only man who has conceived that the
      pleasure of others is good, and the pain of others is evil; and because, therefore, only man
      can be expected to reorganise the world so that the good of others be sought and the evil of
      others avoided. It is only man living with men, and feeling their miseries in his own, and
      their happiness in his own, who can be
       anxious for justice and impatient of injustice. How can you
      expect it of nature?”
Anne did not answer, but remained for a moment with her hands folded over her work, looking
      out of the window. Outside there was only yellow fog, and leafless spectral branches; yet her
      onyx‐grey eyes opened slowly, as if she were taking in some faint but glorious vision.
“What right have you to expect such feelings except from men and women?” went on Brown; “the
      gods, you know, have other things to do. I suppose,” he added bitterly, “that they had a
      godlike life like their representatives, the poets and artists, on earth, creating only for
      their amusement, and keeping every disagreeable sight, or sound, or feeling, or suspicion away
      from them.”
Anne was accustomed to such hits at Hamlin; they were too true to be refuted, and too
      spiteful to be accepted; and now she was too much absorbed to notice any of them.
“I don’t know exactly what you are driving
       at, Dick,” she said. “I don’t understand your theory about
      man and God, and right and wrong; it is misty to me. But still it seems—I don’t know how—as
      if, could I only understand it, it would make a great difference to me.”
“It must make a great difference to every honest person. You have no religion, Anne.”
“No. I thought religion was all bosh; merely a sort of silly pretty delusion, like love and
      all that;” and Anne thought bitterly how her own only religion, her love for Hamlin, her
      desire to become worthy of his goodness, had lamentably betrayed her.
“Without religion life is death,” said Brown, with his positivistic solemnity.
Anne looked at him contemptuously; she had so often heard people talk solemnly like that.
      Did not Hamlin talk in that way about the religion of beauty, and Dennistoun about the
      religion of love, by which he meant lust?
“It is all very fine; but I don’t much believe
       in religions. There is nothing worth worshipping; all is
      fetish, at best half silver and half clay.”
“You don’t believe in any religion, Anne, because you have never tried to find one.”
“I have looked in the Gospel, and in the ‘Imitation of Christ,’ and in my own heart, Dick;
      and what I have found there is ignored in the scheme on which the world is made; because I
      have read there of love and justice and mercy, and I have not found the love and justice and
      mercy which presided over creation.”
“I told you that the world was not made by man, and that it is man who has conceived good
      and evil. I always told you, Anne, that it was a great pity that you should read only books
      upon details of science, like political economy and so forth, and refuse to get general ideas
      of what is and what is not the belief of our age.”
“Detail knowledge—I mean knowledge of political economy and physiology and so forth—is
      useful; it can be applied, it can serve to
       make people a little less wretched. What is the use of your
      general ideas? Oh, I know; the religion of truth, the worship of ideas, etc., etc. I
      don’t see that it is a bit nobler to worship truth than to worship beauty; your religion of
      science is only another form of selfish æstheticism: your friends hanker after knowledge, as
      my friends hanker after beautiful pictures, and music, and poetry, and women; and as my people
      dignify their appetites with the name of religion of beauty, so do yours sanctify theirs as
      the worship of truth. All that merely makes the world more cold and black in my eyes.”
“These general ideas,” answered Brown, “are what prevent me from being as wretched as you
      are. Do you call that useless?”
“That is just what Mr Hamlin says about beauty, and Chough about the Eternal Feminine. But I
      don’t see that the world gains by this devotion.”
“I know nothing of Hamlin’s or Chough’s
       opinions,” interrupted Brown, impatiently; “but I know that
      if you permit yourself to continue in this kind of pessimism you will enervate your soul,
      Anne. It seems very noble and austere, and all that sort of bosh; but there is just the same
      fascination in it as there is in any morbid excitement, and just the same debasement of the
      individual in indulging therein.”
His words seemed to go through Anne. Was she becoming selfish, weak, self‐indulgent? The
      terror of it sickened her. And was everything, however noble it seemed—love, beauty, nay, even
      her indignation at the world’s evil—only a snare?
“Will you teach me, Dick?” she said, after a moment. “I don’t much believe in your
      religion—positivism, I suppose it is—for all religions seem to me to turn out, oh, so empty,
      after promising so much. But if you will tell me, or give me books to read, you know I will do
      my best to understand.”
“You are a noble girl, Anne,” said Brown
       half audibly, fixing his eyes on Anne’s. “I did not think
      there was a woman so strong, and truthful, and fair‐minded as you—well—in the whole
      world.”
“You always think people base, Dick,” she answered sadly. “It is a wretched mistake, but not
      so bad a one for yourself as always to think them noble.”
Richard Brown lent Anne a number of books, and he often came of an evening when Hamlin was
      gone to Madame Elaguine’s spiritual séances (for despite his
      scepticism he found himself attracted by the mysticism with which Edmund Lewis had easily
      infected his cousin), and talked them over with her. He took her also to hear the lectures of
      a friend of his, a red‐haired young man of genius, dying of consumption, who had for truth and
      righteousness a passion such as other men may have for sport, and who was the chief preacher
      of the secular and scientific religion with which Brown was imbued, and with which he was
      seeking to imbue Anne. Anne
       was not so quick in being converted as her cousin had
      expected; she was slow of thought, and her earnestness, her honesty, perhaps also a painful
      remembrance of so many other deluded hopes, made her sceptical. But, little by little, Anne
      was converted; and, as her cousin had foretold, she was happier. The world and its
      contradictions became simpler in her eyes, and she became once more confident of good.
      Moreover, what Brown never guessed, her new faith in the triumph of right, her new belief in
      the necessity of doing one’s duty for the sake of mankind and of progress, had at once given
      her a more serene determination to accomplish her duty towards Hamlin; and, what was more
      important, it had taken away her thoughts a little from her own position of impotence and
      isolation and probable degradation. And perhaps, unconsciously also to Anne, she felt less
      isolated now: she felt as if in this rough, brutal, vain philanthropist, who was so honest,
      for all his petty vanity, and who was so desirous
       of her good, despite all his former contemptuousness, she
      had gained what she had never had, and had yet always vaguely wanted,—some one for her to
      understand and to understand her, to help and be helped by—not an ideal being to adore as she
      had adored Hamlin, but a good, wholesome, strong reality whom she could love as a brother.
“I owe a great deal to you, dear old Dick,” she said one day, taking his hand; “I am so glad
      I would not let you continue to despise me.”
Brown flushed, and his cynical smile failed him. “Despise you? Oh Anne, how could I—” he
      exclaimed. But suddenly he checked himself.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
</div></body></text></TEI>