<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="59">
CHAPTER X.
BY an effort of manœuvring which was not very natural to her, Miss Brown induced
      Melton Perry to take himself off after breakfast and go and see some studios, an expedition
      which would keep him out of the way till lunch. She would have Hamlin all to herself. When
      Perry was gone, Anne sat down to write to Mary Leigh, who was in the country. There was
      absolutely no reason why she should write to Mary, nor had she anything whatever to tell her;
      but she was devoured by a restlessness—by a vague desire to talk to some one who cared for
      her. She told Mary Leigh nothing of what was passing through her mind, nor of the event which
      was pending: there was not, in her letter, a word to suggest
       anything of the sort; but there was in it the expression,
      vague and without motives, of the great emotion which occupied her soul. “I want to tell you,
      dear Mary,” wrote Anne, “how grateful I am for the affection which you and Marjory have shown
      towards me lately. If I had died of that illness, it would have been a great consolation to
      know that you cared for me so much.” She did not know why, the tone of the whole letter, with
      all these expressions of gratitude, had the solemnity of a farewell, as if written by a woman
      who expected to die soon. And Anne really felt as if her life were coming to an end.
When she had finished writing, she went down to Hamlin’s studio. He would come soon, and she
      would wait for him here.
It was still drizzling, and the room opening on to the garden, with its silk blinds drawn
      down, was full of a kind of twilight. Anne walked up and down for a minute or two, looking
      vaguely round her. A drowsy scent of faded flowers, of cigarette‐smoke, of she
       knew not what scent, made her feel weak and dreamy, and
      reminded her, with a movement of disgust, of Sacha Elaguine’s rooms. She had not been in the
      studio of late, except for a few minutes at a time. Everything seemed to her untidy and
      dusty—easels and boards thrown about in a way which was not usual with Hamlin. She looked
      vaguely at the various things,—at the drawings by Rossetti and Burne Jones on the walls, the
      books in cases, the terra cottas and bits of carving on brackets, the piano with the brocade
      cover thrown back, and the score of Wagner’s Tristram still on the desk. She looked at the
      score and played a few notes, but stopped. She loathed that music which Hamlin and Sacha so
      admired—that music, with its strange, insidious faintings and sobbings, its hot, enervating
      gusts of passion. On the mantelpiece, among the Japanese jars, the bronze lamps, and other
      similar properties, her eye caught a small bottle of blue glass. She took it up: it was not
      labelled, or the label was removed, but it
       left a sort of sickly‐smelling stickiness on her fingers.
      So Perry was right; Hamlin had returned to his old practice of taking opium. She put the
      bottle back, and walked up and down once more. Then her eye fell upon an unfinished portrait
      of herself, or what was intended to be herself, which stood in the shadow. A solemn sombre
      woman in green, with very blue peaks and glaciers in the distance, twisting the faded green
      leaves of a palm‐branch. It was the picture which Hamlin had begun long, long ago in Florence;
      and her mind went back to that other rainy day, as gloomy as this one, seemingly centuries
      ago, when she had stood in the tower studio, about to take leave of Hamlin, as she thought,
      for the last time. Was she really as sombre as that picture? thought Anne. On a table, gritty
      with dust, lay an open sketch‐book; Anne took it up listlessly. The sheet was scrawled with
      several versions of an allegorical design, feebly drawn, scarcely more than outlined, and, as
      it seemed, in a moment of weariness.
       A beautiful naked youth was clutched by a huge, haggard
      woman, her torn dress licking his body like flames, her lips greedily advancing to his
      delicate face, which shrank back, like a flower withering in the heat of a furnace. There were
      several versions, crossing and recrossing each other oddly, but always the same flower‐like
      winged boy writhing in the terrible breath of this embrace, always that fainting beautiful
      face, and those burning lips with the suction of flame. Beneath one of the versions was
      scrawled, “Amor a Libidine interfectus,” and a few lines, half scratched out, of a sonnet.
      Anne did not read them; she put down the sketch‐book. She knew the sense of that allegory,
      even before her eye caught the words, “and thus my soul,” which formed one of the lines of the
      rough‐scrawled sonnet. Anne shuddered. Steps came along the corridor—Hamlin’s steps. She sat
      down near the window, for she expected her heart would have begun beating even to bursting.
      But it was not so; Miss Brown felt wonderfully calm.

“I want to talk to you about something, Mr Hamlin,” she said, when he had recovered from the
      surprise of finding her in the studio. “You have nothing very pressing to do just now, I
      hope?”
“Nothing,” answered Hamlin; “I am at your disposal.” He sat down opposite to her, and began
      to fidget with the pencils and pen‐knives lying on the table. He was very pale, haggard, and
      looked tired and worried.
“You don’t seem well,” said Anne, mechanically.
“I am horribly nervous, that’s all,” he answered, passing his hand through his hair. “I
      suppose it’s this damp heat. Will it annoy you if I smoke a cigarette? I feel my brain
      spinning.”
Anne nodded, and waited in silence till he had taken two or three puffs.
“Mr Hamlin,” she suddenly began, in a low, steady voice, rather like a person reciting a
      lesson, “it is going on three years since I left Coblenz and came into this house. I am over
       twenty‐four, and I don’t think it is possible to continue
      much longer on the theory that I am your ward. It is time that something should be decided
      about my future.”
Hamlin listened quietly, with a certain listless and helpless look that was very
      painful.
“I quite agree with you,” he answered, “and I fully see how greatly I am to blame in not
      having forestalled you. You must not suppose that I have not thought more than once about this
      matter. I have done so, I assure you. But somehow, things have always come in the way; and
      then, you know, I—I did not wish to put any pressure upon you. In short, I am unable to say
      how it is that I have placed myself in what may appear to be the wrong in this matter.”
Again he passed his hand across his head.
“Forgive me,” he said, “for being so feeble this morning. I really have a wretched
      headache.”
“I am very sorry for you,” answered Anne, but adding with the same deliberate resolution
      , “but all the same, I feel that I can no longer delay, and
      that I must avail myself of this opportunity to ask you a question. Have you any intention of
      marrying me?”
Hamlin, who had been sitting with his head resting on his hand, vacantly watching the
      wreathing smoke of his cigarette, suddenly looked up at Anne. She was seated very erect in a
      high‐backed chair opposite, looking taller, calmer than ever, less girlish than ever also,
      although he had never thought of her, even years ago, as a girl. He looked at her for a moment
      in silence; a long, lingering, and very melancholy look.
“Miss Brown,” he answered, and his voice became tremulous towards the end of his speech,
      “you have, if you remember the terms of our reciprocal engagement, always been free; and you
      are free. It is rather sad for me to reflect—and perhaps a little sad for you also—how very
      differently things have turned out from what I believe both of us anticipated. And it is, as
      you may understand, not a little
       sad to part with what has been the best thing in my life—to
      end my best episode. But you must remember that I never wished you to be otherwise than
      perfectly independent; it has been a great matter in a useless life like mine to have
      contributed to reinstate you, as it were, in your birthright; it will be something to think of
      later, that I have been conducive in making you what you are; and”—Hamlin had risen from his
      chair and stretched out his hand—“will you believe me also when I say that I am very, very
      happy that you have found a man whom you can love and respect, and who can make you
      happy?”
Hamlin’s mouth, that delicate mouth with the uncertain lines, began to quiver. Anne turned
      very red, and then, suddenly, very white. She did not take his hand; she did not look at him
      as he stood before her; her eyes seemed fixed in space, as she answered in a voice which
      became steadier and louder as she went on—
“You don’t understand me. I was not
       alluding to any notion of marrying my cousin. I don’t want
      to marry Richard. What I want to ask you is this: Will you marry me, Mr Hamlin?”
Anne, spoke very slowly, gravely, and calmly; but as she spoke, she felt her heart tighten.
      There remained still one chance, one shred of hope, and in another moment that might be
      gone.
A sudden convulsion passed over Hamlin’s face; he caught at the back of a chair, for he
      seemed trembling and reeling, his eyes closed for a moment as if he were choking, and he made
      a vague helpless movement with one hand, as a man who cannot speak. Then, suddenly, he flung
      himself down before Miss Brown’s chair, seized both her hands, and covered his face with
      them.
“Anne—Anne!” he cried.
They remained thus for a moment; she seated upright in the chair, he on his knees, her hands
      pressed to his face.
“Anne—you love me,” he murmured.

Miss Brown did not answer. She looked straight before her into space, fixedly, vaguely,
      taking in nothing, with her solemn, tearless, grey eyes. She felt as if she were waiting she
      knew not for what, counting the tickings of an unheard clock.
“You love me, Anne; you love me!” cried Hamlin, louder; and pressing closer to her, he put
      out his arms, and drew down her face to his, and kissed her, twice, thrice, a long kiss on the
      mouth.
It seemed to Anne as if she felt again the throttling arms of Sacha Elaguine about her neck,
      her convulsive kiss on her face, the cloud of her drowsily scented hair stifling her. She drew
      back, and loosened his grasp with her strong hands.
Hamlin sprang up. His face was changed: he was radiant. He took her hand in both his, and
      looked long into her eyes.
“Forgive me,” he whispered; “forgive me—oh, forgive me, Anne. That all this time I should
      have been so blind—thought
       you indifferent and contemptuous. Oh, forgive me for all my
      wickedness, my folly; forgive me, my darling, for not having understood that I belonged to
      you, that you loved me.”
Anne nodded without speaking. She could not tell a lie, even now; and she knew she must not
      tell the truth. Yet never perhaps had she loathed Hamlin as she loathed him—vain, fatuously
      happy—at this moment that he believed she had confessed that she loved him.
“Well, then,” she said quickly, “perhaps you can understand that—after what has passed, you
      understand—I am anxious that we should get married at once. Perry was asking me, only the
      other day, why things had dragged on so long; and then also there is . . .”
“I understand,” interrupted Hamlin. “Oh, forgive me, dearest. I never, never really loved
      that woman: I could not have loved her. I have never loved but you. Will you believe it?”

“You will never see her again?—I mean, never except in my presence? ” went on Anne. “Will
      you promise that? And will you promise to leave London in a day or two—to go to Italy,
      anywhere where she is not—and wait till I can join you with Aunt Claudia?”
“I promise; I will do anything. Oh, Anne, if only you will forget all that; if you will
      believe me when I tell you that I never loved that woman—that I felt the whole time that she
      was debasing, humiliating me, making me forfeit all my honour and my happiness . . .”
Anne paid no attention to these assurances. So he was shifting all the shame of his weakness
      and baseness and sensuality on to another,—washing his hands of the woman who had given
      herself to him. How like him! How well, how terribly well, Anne knew him!
“You have promised, remember,” she repeated,—“you will leave to‐morrow, the day after—as
      soon as you can. You won’t tell her where you are going—do you understand? You will write
      to‐day, and tell her of our
       marriage, and that you have promised never to see her
      again.”
Hamlin kissed her hand with passion.
“And listen,” went on Miss Brown; “this evening there is a big party at the Argiropoulos. I
      did not intend going; but I wish to go now. Write to Mrs Argiropoulo to tell her we are coming
      together; explain that we are going to be married; ask her to tell all her guests. I want
      every one to know. Do you understand, Mr Hamlin—Walter, I mean? You won’t lose time, will
      you?”
“No, no!” cried Hamlin; “I understand. Only forgive me; and tell me that you love me, my
      darling;” and he seized Anne, and kissed her again with a sort of fury. “Tell me that you
      forgive me for all that I have made you suffer, Anne. Speak,—only one word, Anne—one
      word.”
Anne covered her eyes with her hand.
“I forgive you, Walter,” she answered, and burst into tears. But she wiped them away, and,
      rising suddenly, left the room.

“Walter is leaving for Italy to‐morrow,” she said, as she met Melton Perry in the corridor.
      “I want you to accompany me and Aunt Claudia there in a few days. Mr Hamlin and I are going to
      be married.”
“God bless my soul!” cried Perry. “When—where—why didn’t you tell me before?” But Anne was
      out of sight.
</div></body></text></TEI>