<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="19">
CHAPTER II.
LIFE was monotonous enough at Mrs Simson’s at Coblenz; but it was a kind of
      monotony which to Anne Brown was positively exciting. It was for her a process of absorption
      into another class of life; and as such, represented a daily influx of new ideas and habits, a
      daily surprise, effort, and adjustment. By virtue of her half‐Italian nature, Anne required
      but little to make her, in education and manners, a lady. With her wide‐open but rather empty
      mind, her seriousness and dignity of person, extreme simpleness, as the reverse of complexity
      of character, it was wholly unnecessary that she should unlearn anything, or even that she
      should absorb anything absolutely new; the only thing was to fill up the magnificent design
       which already existed in her. No one ever required to say
      to Anne, “You must not do, or think, or say such or such a thing.” She surprised people only
      by her timidity, her silence, her passiveness, and by a sort of haughtiness which accompanied
      them strangely enough; a certain solemn, and, at the same time, abrupt way of judging of
      things and treating people, and which was the mental counterpart of her look, gait, nay, even
      of the folds which her dresses took on her. Ignorant though she was, she seemed at her ease
      with the new culture with which she was presented, just as, for all her habits of waiting on
      instead of being served, she seemed at ease in her behaviour. But it was difficult for Anne to
      tune herself or get herself tuned to the pitch of the everyday feelings and life of her
      companions; she could not understand these young ladies. The girls at Mrs Simson’s did not
      exceed half‐a‐dozen, and they were none of them schoolgirls in the ordinary sense. They were,
      like Anne, eccentrically placed young women; orphans, or girls
       whose parents were in the colonies, or girls who could not
      get on at home,—girls, all of them, with a certain pretension to superiority, and a great
      habit of independence, which was fostered by the schoolmistress, whose theory was that women
      could not possibly be left too much to their own devices.
Mrs Simson was very fond of preaching this gospel of higher education, to the great scandal
      of the respectable German matrons whom she visited. “Narrow‐minded, vicious creatures,” she
      used to say, who shook their heads at the young ladies attending public lectures, walking
      about by themselves, and flirting in the most stalwart and open manner (quite unsentimental
      and unwomanly, said the Germans) with the Prussian officers. Of these girls two were orphans,
      and had been sent to Coblenz as a convenient riddance by their guardians; one had been
      deposited in Europe by her parents, to be called for when educated, and shipped off to New
      Zealand; one, a huge damsel approaching thirty, was studying eye‐
       surgery with a famous Rhenish oculist; the fifth was going
      to Girton and was studying German; the sixth had found her home too much for her, and was
      perpetually complaining of the hardness of her fate and the viciousness of her own character,
      aspiring to impossible ideals of knowledge and usefulness and self‐sacrifice, and spending her
      leisure making up frocks in which to disport herself at the garrison balls.
Each of them studied whatsoever she thought fit: Greek and Latin professors, piano and
      singing masters, German governesses, were perpetually going in and out of the house; the girls
      were continually running to lectures on botany or physiology or comparative philology, where
      the youth of the town eyed the Schöne Engländerinnen with
      rapture, sending them anonymous bouquets and verses, and bringing them serenades, and even, to
      poor Mrs Simson’s horror, slipping love‐letters of the most burning description into the
      door‐hinges. Among these girls poor Anne would have felt utterly lost, had she not been
      accustomed for years to be
       her own sole company, letting her life brush by that of
      other folk, without ever mixing. It seemed to her quite natural to exchange one kind of
      isolation for another: to drudge on at improving her own mind as she had formerly drudged on
      at mending the clothes and making the beds of the little Perrys, interesting herself as little
      in, and awakening as little interest among, her companions as she had done among her
      fellow‐servants in Italy. Mrs Simson had received full instructions from Hamlin as to all the
      things which she was and was not to teach or have taught to his ward; and Anne would have been
      perfectly satisfied with working for her French and German masters, preparing her lessons of
      geography and history, and reading such books as Hamlin would send her, but the other girls
      were not at all so minded.
Anne Brown’s arrival created a tremendous sensation in Mrs Simson’s establishment. Her
      strange kind of beauty, which did not strike the conventional spectator as being beauty
       at all, excluding, as it did, fairness, rosiness,
      youthfulness, daintiness, liveliness, voluptuousness, sentimentalness, or any of the orthodox
      ingredients of female charm,—her wholly unlike‐everyone‐else appearance, her silence,
      sullenness, haughtiness, all took the girls by surprise. Her shyness, ignorance, newness in
      her position, was obvious from the very first day. The knowledge of what she had been and what
      she was going to be, all this romance was quickly wheedled out of Mrs Simson by the
      misunderstood little girl who wished to turn sister of mercy, and carried on a simultaneous
      flirtation with a lieutenant, a Bonn student, a painter, and a piano‐master; and bullied out
      of her by the bouncing amazon who talked about nothing but retinal impressions and optic
      nerves. From that moment Anne became a subject of intense interest at the school: most of the
      girls had heard of Hamlin in England, and all of them had heard of him from the enthusiastic
      schoolmistress. To possess in their midst his chosen one was a great privilege,
       although they sometimes made fun of Anne and him behind her
      back, drawing pictures of the solemn and tragic girl dressed in the most draggled æsthetic
      manner, surrounded by a circle of young æsthetes copied out of ‘Punch’ (Bunthome did not exist
      at that time) holding lilies and swinging censers as she went. They all thought Anne a
      strange, awe‐inspiring, and, at the same time, somewhat ridiculous person; but they all got to
      like her, although the misunderstood High Church flirt could never be got to see why Anne
      should despise officers and garrison balls; and the scientific girl of twenty‐eight thought
      æstheticism and æsthetic poets idiotic and immoral; and each of the others found some
      reservation to make about the Italian, as they called her. Yet, as I said, they did grow to
      like her; and Anne, who was unaccustomed to friendliness, was so touched by the familiarity
      and good‐nature of her companions, that she gradually began to take a great and serious
      interest in their concerns. She became quite enthusiastic about ocular
       surgery, listening with scarcely any shudders to the
      narration of the most complicated operations; she let herself be overwhelmed with discourses
      about Middle High German and Gothic, and the connection with Sanskrit; she firmly believed in
      the mystical fervours, the desire of self‐sacrifice, the wasted passion of the little
      fair‐haired flirt, reasoning seriously about them, and trying to check what she believed to be
      a suicidal tendency; she was greatly touched by the home‐sickness and family squabbles of the
      other girls. Not that Anne was a fool, or made to be a dupe; on the contrary, she saw well
      enough the funniness of the contrasts between her friends’ words and their life; but Anne was
      so earnest, so simple, so homogeneous of nature, she was so fervent in all her feelings, that
      she always imagined that the serious things which people said or affected must be the reality;
      and, as in her own case, the levity, the frivolousness, the fickleness, must be the mere
      exterior clothing of social fictions. Thus she gave her sympathy wherever it was asked
       for, while asking for no sympathy herself. The girls used
      often to remark upon this, and complain that for all they did, Anne Brown remained surrounded
      by a sort of moral moat, alone, isolated, impregnable in a kind of moral fortress.
</div></body></text></TEI>