<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="28">
CHAPTER VI.
THE sudden discovery that she was the standard beauty of the most prominent
      artistic set, and accepted as such by the rest of society, would have greatly disturbed almost
      any woman. But Anne Brown’s nature was too completely homogeneous—too completely without the
      innumerable strata, and abysses, and peaks, and winding ways of modern women’s characters—for
      her to experience any of the mixed feelings of pride, and disgust, and humiliation, and
      general uncomfortablehess which would have been the lot of a more complex nature. The atoms of
      her character were not easily shaken into new patterns: it was coherent, and, like most
      coherent things, difficult to upset, slow to move, and quick to settle down.

After the first shock of surprise, she resigned herself, without doubts, or diffidence, or
      elation, to her new place. That she was more beautiful than other women had indeed never
      occurred to her before; but once that it had been proved to her she accepted it as a fact, as
      she had accepted as a fact the still stranger news that Hamlin had singled her out to change
      her life and love her. She did not take it at all as a merit or any other exciting thing in
      herself: the only effect which it had upon her was to strengthen a curious feeling,
      constitutional in her, and resulting probably from the very coherence and weightiness of her
      character, that she was fated to be or do something different from other women—a sort of sense
      of tragic passiveness, which always formed the background of her happiness. Moreover, the
      discovery which she had made at Mrs Argiropoulo’s somehow made Anne’s position more
      intelligible and simple to herself. She had heard of other men who had educated and married
      girls of the lower orders on account
       of their beauty. Hamlin’s behaviour was now no longer a
      mystery to her; and the absence of mystery served merely, to Anne’s quite unromantic,
      practically passionate, half‐southern temper, to make Hamlin’s nobleness and goodness more
      obvious to her. She had the curious Italian capacity for feeling an ideal passion—a passion
      which was merely a sublimated form of friendship and admiration—for a real personality; and
      her instinctive desire was merely to get nearer that real personality. But much as she tried,
      the reality of Hamlin seemed to escape and baffle her: he was a complex man, and she a
      homogeneous woman; and as she could not see Hamlin well in detail, she loved him in the very
      simple and broad outlines which she was able to comprehend.
Now that she had settled down in æsthetic society, and found her place, and got to
      understand the main points of things, she was quite ideally happy. Her life was very full, and
      was surrounded by a flood of love,—on her side or on Hamlin’s? She scarcely knew; but she
       knew that she was happy. By this time the round of
      sight‐seeing, play‐going, excursions, and introductions, was over; her life had subsided into
      the normal. Its object, she felt, as one feels a wholesome and agreeable desire for food or
      sleep, was to make herself as worthy as possible of Hamlin, or rather to let him find in her
      the best possible bargain. She worked very hard at all the things which the school had left
      incomplete,—at what, living in that æsthetic society, seemed to her the solid requisites of
      life. She read history and biography and poetry, with the determination with which other
      girls, anticipating marriage, might study manuals of domestic economy; and she worked at
      developing her taste in art and music as others might have practised cooking or dressmaking;
      for these were the things which would be requisite in Hamlin’s spiritual household. The people
      around her, the men and women of Hamlin’s set, seemed to her as necessary, as inevitable, as
      normal as the trees and houses all round. Some of them
       she liked, and some she disliked; but their ideas, though
      sometimes absurd caricatures, and their tempers, though often intolerable, seemed to Anne
      quite natural and proper in the main, though rendered ridiculous or disagreeable in
      individuals. Indeed she got rather to believe in imperfect individuals,—being thus constantly
      either made cross by the touchiness, the morbidness, the disgusting fleshliness, the
      intolerance of the æsthetes around her, or made to laugh by their affectations, their vanity,
      their inconsistency, their grotesque manias of wickedness and mysticism—while unable to judge
      or condemn the general, intellectual, and moral condition of which these individual
      excrescences were the result.
Some of the people were distinctly repulsive, or distinctly boring, or distinctly annoying
      to her; others, like Mrs Spencer and her father and mother and sisters, decidedly lovable;
      others, like little Chough, decidedly amusing and amiable: and she took them as they came, but
      with the indifference of concentrated
       feeling; for what did it matter whether she cared for them,
      or they cared for her, as long as she was doing her best to deserve Hamlin?
Meanwhile Anne Brown read quantities of medieval and Elizabethan literature; went with
      Hamlin to see pictures and hear music; studied Dante and Shakespeare—the algebra and
      arithmetic, so to speak, of the æsthetic set—and even began, secretly, to work at a Greek
      grammar. Twice a‐week Cosmo Chough came to practise her accompaniments with her; and twice
      a‐week also, of an evening, friends dropped in at the house at Hammersmith, when Mrs Macgregor
      would leave her nephew and niece, as she called her, to entertain the guests. On other
      evenings Anne would usually go to the house of one of the set, where literature and art, and
      the faults of friends, and the wrong‐headedness of the public, were largely discussed; music
      was made, young long‐haired Germans on the loose performing; and poets, especially the
       inexhaustible Chough, would recite their compositions,
      perched on the arms of sofas, or stretched on the hearth‐rug; while the ladies went to sleep,
      or pretended to do so, over the descriptions of the kisses of cruel, blossom‐mouthed women,
      who sucked out their lovers’ hearts, bit their lips, and strewed their apartments with
      coral‐like drops of blood. Most of these poets, as Anne speedily discovered, were young men of
      harmless lives, and altogether unacquainted with the beautiful, baleful ladies they
      represented as sucking at their vitals; and none was more utterly harmless than Cosmo Chough.
      Instead of the terrible Faustinas, Messalinas, and Lucretia Borgias to whom his poems were
      addressed, the poor little man had in his miserable home in the north of London a wife older
      than himself, often bedridden and always half crazy, who turned the house in a sort of
      disorderly litter, neglected her children, and vented on her husband the most jealous and
      perverse temper; but the victim of Venus, as he styled himself,
       nursed her with absolute devotion, denied himself every
      gratification to allow her a servant and send his children to school, and made all new‐comers
      believe that Mrs Cosmo Chough was the most angelic invalid that the world had ever seen.
      People in the set had got accustomed to this fact, and treated Chough merely as an amusing
      little caricature of genius; but when Anne understood the real state of the case, she was
      deeply touched, and possessed with a violent desire to help the little man. He could not,
      indeed, restrain his habit of alluding in pompous language to Phryne, Pasiphaë, La Belle
      Heaulmière, Madame du Barry, and all the most celebrated improprieties of all times and
      nations; nor from discussing the most striking literary obscenities, from Petronius to Walt
      Whitman. But although at first surprised (as every one was surprised and indeed shocked) by
      Anne’s unblushing and quietly resolute—“I think you had better leave that subject alone, Mr
      Chough”—he became quite devoted to Anne.
       When he gave a set of lectures, in Mrs Spencer’s house, on
      what was nominally Elizabethan drama, but virtually the unmentionable play of Ford, and the
      ladies dropped off one by one and merely laughed at poor Cosmo’s eccentricities, Anne had the
      courage to sit out the performance, and to tell Chough openly that he ought to be ashamed of
      himself for holding forth on such subjects—a proceeding which made Hamlin’s friends blame Miss
      Brown for want of womanly feeling and prudishness alike; and which put Hamlin just a little
      out of temper, until she answered his unspoken censure by remarking, with a sort of Italian
      bluntness and seriousness, that a woman of her age had no business not to understand the real
      meaning of such things, and understanding them, not to let the poets know that she would not
      tolerate them.
“You see, it enters into their artistic effects,” explained Mrs Spencer. “I don’t like such
      things personally, but of course everything is legitimate in art.”

“They may be legitimate in art,” answered Anne, sceptically, “but they shan’t be legitimate
      in my presence.”
To return to Chough. Anne gradually became the confidant of the domestic difficulties,
      though not of the domestic shame, of the little poet; and to every one’s great astonishment,
      she obtained Hamlin’s permission to have one of Chough’s little girls at Hammersmith every
      Saturday till Monday, and tried to instil into the miserable puny imps some notion of how to
      behave and how to amuse themselves.
“You are not going to take that child out in the carriage with you, surely?” asked Hamlin,
      the first Sunday that Maggy Chough spent at Hammersmith.
“Of course I am,” answered Anne. “She’s the daughter of your most intimate friend; surely
      you can’t grudge the poor little thing some amusement. And I want you to go with us to the
      Zoo, Mr Hamlin. I’m sure it’s much more fascinating than the Grosvenor or the Elgin
      rooms.”

Hamlin smiled; and next day made a crayon drawing of Anne, one of the dozens in his studio,
      with Chough’s child; but he managed to make Anne look mournfully mysterious, and the child
      haggard and wild, so that people thought it represented Medea and one of the children of
      Jason.
So far Anne’s acquaintance were entirely limited to the æsthetic set; but there were two
      exceptions. One was a couple of sisters, Mary and Marjory Leigh, who existed as it were on the
      borderland—Mary Leigh being a sort of amateur painter with strong literary proclivities; the
      other was Richard Brown, who, after the meeting at Mrs Argiropoulo’s, called at Hammersmith,
      was politely received by Hamlin, with whom he appeared quite reconciled, and talked on a
      variety of indifferent subjects, as if Anne Brown had never been his ward. Hamlin had
      apparently never appeared to him in the light of a slave‐buyer and seducer, and all parties
      had apparently never been in any save their present position. Anne
       asked her cousin to one or two of their evenings: he came,
      seemed to know one or two people slightly, and although professing profound ignorance of art,
      managed to interest one or two of the æsthetic brotherhood by developing his views on the
      necessity of extending artistic training to the lower classes.
“He isn’t at all a stupid man, that cousin of yours,” remarked little Mrs Spencer; “and I do
      think he is so right in wishing to give poor people a taste of beauty.”
“I’m sure we are most of us poor people, and don’t always get a taste of
      anything else, Edith,” cried her father, the veteran painter in tempera, who was a fearful
      punster.
“Oh papa, you know what I mean; and I’m sure art will gain ever so much. It’s only what Mr
      Ruskin has said over and over again, and Mr Morris is always talking about.”
“Any one is free to give the lower classes that taste of beauty, as long as I
      am not required to see or speak to the noble workmen,” said Hamlin. “I hate all that
      democratic bosh.”

“Oh, I know, Watty; your ancestors kept negroes, and you would like to have negroes
      yourself,” said Mrs Spencer, hotly.
“Heaven forbid! I only ask to be left alone, my dear Edith, especially by reformers.”
At any rate, Richard Brown was permitted to show himself sometimes in æsthetic company. But
      Richard Brown did not avail himself much of the condescending permission to improve his mind;
      and neither at her own house (for people always spoke of Miss Brown’s house now) nor at the
      houses of any of her friends would Anne have had much opportunity of seeing her cousin, had he
      not, by a curious chance, been a frequent visitor at the house of the Leigh girls.
Mary Leigh was, as already said, a demi‐semi‐æsthete; she had studied art in an irregular,
      Irish sort of way, and she had a literary, romantic kind of imagination, which fitted her
      rather for an illustrator than a painter. She felt the incompleteness of her own endowment, in
      a gentle, half‐humorous,
       half‐sad way; and the incompleteness of her own life—for her
      ideal of happiness was to travel about, to live in Italy, and this she had cheerfully
      sacrificed to please her sister, whose only interests in life were school boards, and
      depauperisation, and (it must be admitted) a mild amount of flirtation with young men of
      scientific and humanitarian tendencies. Between the sisters there was perfect love, but not
      perfect understanding; and Mary Leigh, who felt a little lonely, a little shut into herself by
      her younger sister, who was at once a philosopher and a baby in her eyes, vented her
      imaginative and artistic cravings in a passionate admiration for Hamlin’s strange and
      beautiful ward or fiancée, a kind of intellectual fervour
      which Anne was as remarkable for inspiring as she seemed unable to inspire either ordinary
      liking or ordinary love: and as Mary Leigh likewise adored Hamlin, and Hamlin in return
      thought Mary Leigh a nice sort of girl, Anne Brown did what visiting and sight‐seeing and
      shopping was left to her
       almost always in Mary Leigh’s company. Now, if Anne was the
      idol of the æsthetic Mary, the humanitarian and practical younger sister, who, with the
      cut‐and‐dry decision of a philosopher of twenty‐two, looked upon æsthetics and æsthetes as
      somewhat pestilent in nature, had her idol also in a very different person, and this was no
      other than Richard Brown, to be whose lieutenant in some of his philanthropical and
      educational schemes was Marjory’s highest ambition. Richard Brown had, ever since meeting his
      cousin at Mrs Argiropoulo’s in the character of an artistic beauty, made up his mind that Anne
      was no concern of his, and was luckily disposed of in the æsthetic set; and for some time he
      almost took a pleasure in making her understand, whenever he met her at the Leighs’ house in
      Chelsea, that he did not in the least expect her to take an interest, or pretend
      to take an interest, in the plans which he discussed with Marjory Leigh. Anne on the other
      hand, imbued with Hamlin’s and
       Chough’s theory that all attempts at improving the world
      result merely in failure, and that the only wise occupation of a noble mind is to make for
      itself a paradise of beautiful thoughts and forms and emotions, was extremely sceptical of her
      cousin’s and Marjory’s schemes, and once or twice declared her disbelief with perfect
      openness.
Richard Brown was at first annoyed, then amused, then indignant; and then, seeing how
      completely Anne’s ideas were borrowed from her set, and also how completely unsuitable they
      were to her downright, serious, and practical nature, he determined, not without vanity
      playing a part as well as conviction, to “let a little light,” as he expressed it, into her
      mind.
There had been recently founded, by some friends of his, a kind of club where girls of the
      dressmaker’s apprentice and shopwomen class might spend their leisure moments in reading and
      meeting each other; which club, besides a library and reading‐room, offered
       to its members a certain number of classes or sets of
      lectures on various subjects, delivered at a nominal price, after work hours.
The lecturers or teachers were nearly all young ladies: Marjory Leigh had for some time
      lectured on sanitary arrangements (this being her especial hobby), and Mary Leigh was going to
      set up a drawing‐class.
Anne Brown, practical by nature and æsthetically sceptical by training, had no very great
      belief in the famous club; she had been told so often that mankind is too stupid and degraded
      to be helped, that she had almost got to believe it. But she let herself be taken one evening
      to a lecture, at what she called Marjory’s college. The lecture was just beginning as they
      entered the little, white‐washed, bare room up innumerable stairs. Four or five young women,
      decently dressed, were seated at desks, copy‐books and ink‐stands before them; and a beautiful
      little girl, who had been pointed out to Anne in æsthetic circles as a rising poetess, was
      seated opposite
       them at the end of a table. The Leighs and Anne sat down
      silently near the door, and the lecture began. It was on modern history. The pupils listened
      with the greatest attention, their pens flying on their copy‐books. The lecturer, a small,
      graceful, extremely frail little creature, began in a somewhat tremulous voice; then
      gradually, as she got more excited, became more voluble, excited, and absolutely eloquent.
“She is too delicate for such work,” whispered Marjory, “but she will do it.”
Anne listened. But she did not follow the lecturer’s argument very closely. She thought what
      these girls were, what the drudgery of their work, the temptations of their leisure, the
      hopeless narrowness of their horizon; and she thought also, the thought throbbing on almost
      like dull pain, what it would have been for her, when she also was alone in the world—when she
      had drudgery on the one hand and temptation on the other—when her whole nature had been
      parched and withered for want of a few words that should speak of
       higher and nobler things,—had she been permitted, once
      a‐week, to come to such a place, to hear about such subjects, to be spoken to by such an
      earnest and enthusiastic and exquisite creature as this. At the end of the lecture the girls
      crowded shyly round the lecturer, some to beg her to explain a point, others to ask for books
      on the subject, all of them to thank with pathetic earnestness. Then they went away, and the
      Leigh girls came forward to the lecturer. From where she sat she could not see the new‐comers;
      and she was astonished, and in a way awe‐stricken, on seeing Anne Brown, the exotic beauty of
      whom she had heard so much, whose portrait she had seen in so many studios, and to whom she
      had been introduced almost in fear and trembling, for Anne had a kind of awe‐inspiring
      fascination for imaginative people. Anne, on the other hand, was silent and depressed, and the
      little poetess must have made up her mind that this magnificent and sombre creature was as
      sullen and lethargic and haughty as one of
       Michelangelo’s goddesses. But in reality Miss Brown could
      have laid her head on one of the desks and cried like a child.
When, the following day, Mary Leigh came to take her out for a walk, Anne looked as if she
      had received bad news, or as if she had bad news to communicate. She answered only in
      monosyllables; until, as they were looking in at a shop window, she suddenly turned to her
      companion.
“Do you think,” she said hesitatingly, “that I might perhaps—teach something at Marjory’s
      college?”
“Teach!” exclaimed Mary Leigh in astonishment; “you teach! Why, what would you teach, Anne
      dear?”
Anne was silent. She sighed. “That’s just what I have been thinking all the morning—I
      fear—but you see I do so want to teach something. You see, that little poet‐girl
      gives up her time to it, and she was born a lady, and doesn’t know—can’t know—all the good she
      is doing. While I—”

Mary Leigh squeezed her hand.
“We will ask your cousin,” she said.
“Oh no, not Dick—don’t mention it to Dick,” answered Anne; “he is sure to make difficulties
      and laugh at me—he thinks me a useless thing.”
“You a useless thing!” replied the enthusiastic Irish girl looking at her
      companion. “Why, then—then all the Titians in the gallery, and the Elgin marbles, and all
      Keats, and all Shelley, and Beethoven, and Mozart, must be useless also.”
Anne sighed. “All those things didn’t make themselves,” she answered. “It’s the artists who
      were useful and whom we have to thank.”
The other Miss Leigh was immensely astonished, and, with her youthful intolerance, rather
      indignant at Anne’s suggestion.
“I think,” said Anne, hesitatingly, “that I could, with a little work, manage medieval
      literature—at least medieval lyrics.”
Marjory shook her head. “There’s too much of that sort of thing already,” she
       said. “Every one wants to teach literature. Where’s the use
      of telling them about a parcel of Provençal and old French and German and Italian people, when
      they don’t yet know the difference between Voltaire and Molière, and Goethe and Frau von
      Hillern?”
“That’s true,” Anne said sadly.
Marjory was rather sorry for her rough practicalness, but at the same time she had a blind
      impulse to harass an æsthete.
“Political economy is what we want most,” she said; and, as the door opened and Richard
      Brown entered, she went on—
“Isn’t it true that political economy is what we want most at the college, Mr Brown?”
“Yes,” answered Richard. “How are you, Miss Leigh?—how are you, Annie? What about it?”
“Oh, only that your cousin wants to teach at the college, and I tell her that literature is
      no use, and that political economy is what we want.”
“You want to teach, Annie?” cried Brown,
       and his face assumed that look of somewhat brutal contempt
      hidden under suavity of manner, which Anne hated so much. “You want to teach? How dull
      æsthetic society must be getting, to be sure!”
“I am not dull, Dick,” answered Anne, sternly; “but it struck me that, having been a poor
      girl without education myself—until” (and she looked her cousin reproachfully in the face) “Mr
      Hamlin had me taught—I have an obligation to help other girls like what I was, greater than
      the obligation of people who have always been educated. I daresay there may be nothing that I
       can teach; but there is no reason to laugh at me.”
“Laugh at you!” cried Brown. “Oh, not in the least! I was only smiling at the cool way in
      which you absolve those who are born in fortunate circumstances from the obligation which you
      yourself feel.”
“I don’t think that’s quite true, Dick,” answered Anne, simply. “You think it’s absurd on my
      part, and I knew you would,
       because you think me frivolous and artistic.”
“Well,” said Brown, evidently surprised at her manner, and looking searchingly in her pale,
      strange‐featured face, “what do you think you might teach?”—his voice was much gentler.
“At present”—Anne’s voice sank, for she felt the uselessness of her offer—“I can think only
      of medieval literature” (Brown smiled); “but perhaps, if there were something else, I might
      get it up.”
“I’m sure there won’t be a vacancy for anything except political economy,” interrupted
      Marjory Leigh, impatiently. “I’m quite positive, from what the secretary told me, all the rest
      is glutted.”
“I fear it is the case,” mused Brown. “There has been a talk of teaching singing,—in which
      case, perhaps—”
“I don’t sing well enough,” said Anne, haughtily. Why was she always having her æstheticism
      thrust in her face?

“Besides,” added her cousin, “it’s extremely improbable.”
They fell to talking of other things. As Brown was leaving, Anne stopped him.
“Tell me,” she said, “what are the best books to begin learning political economy?”
Brown smiled. “Why? Do you want to teach it?”
“Since it is such an important thing,” answered Anne, gravely, “I think I should like to
      learn it.”
“It’s not amusing, Annie.”
“It can’t be duller than Minnesingers—and nothing is dull when one is learning it. Can’t you
      tell me of some books?”
Brown looked at her with a puzzled expression. “I have written a primer of it myself,” he
      said—“I will send it you; and if you get through that, you will find at the end a list of
      text‐books, some of which I can lend you to take into—”
“Thank you, Dick. I shall be much obliged to you.”

“You shall have it this evening. Goodbye, Annie, and felici
       studj, as you Italians say.” He laughed, and went away.
“You’ll find it tough work,” remarked Marjory, shaking her short mane of hair out before the
      glass; “but, of course, a primer is never very difficult.”
</div></body></text></TEI>