<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Miss Brown : VWWP edition </title><author>Lee, Vernon (1856-1935)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1884</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="21">
CHAPTER IV.
THUS one year went by; and then, slowly, another, while Anne Brown was being
      transformed from a nursemaid into a lady. Hamlin saw her twice during that time. Once, while
      Mrs Simson and Anne were staying in Paris—for he had begged that her holidays might be spent
      either in Switzerland, or in some place where she might see pictures and statues—when he
      suddenly turned up for a day on his way from England to Greece; and once at Coblenz. Mrs
      Simson was giving a party: suddenly into the parlour, filled with German matrons and damsels,
      with a sprinkling of professors and soldiers, was introduced a slight, fair man, who looked
      very young till you saw him closely, and at whose sight that
       sombre, quiet, strange, half‐Italian girl had suddenly
      turned crimson, and clutched a chair, as if afraid to fall, while the company stared and
      whispered. Hamlin left that same evening; and as the day in Paris had been spent in seeing and
      talking about pictures, so this afternoon passed in trifling conversation at Mrs Simson’s
      table. Alone, Anne scarcely saw him for an instant. Only, when he left Coblenz, he seized her
      hand as he stood at the door, and kissed it fervently. It seemed to her, during the long
      months of absence, that she would give all her life to see him again, to be able to tell him
      how grateful she was to him. Yet, in reality, his presence passed like the picture of a
      magic‐lantern on a wall; and she felt as if her lips were glued together: it was a vision, and
      no more. But on that second visit Hamlin had been dazzled. He had recognised from the first
      the exotic beauty and strangeness of the Perrys’ servant; he had seen in Paris that his
      judgment had been correct; but when, after eighteen months of schooling, he
       suddenly saw Anne again, it was as if he had never seen her
      before, a fresh revelation. A year and a half of a lady’s life, without bodily fatigue or
      mental weariness, had developed to the full the girl’s marvellous beauty: strange, mysterious,
      amazonian it was as ever; but it was as the regalness of a triumphant queen by the side of the
      queenliness of a deposed Amazon chief. The haughtiness which had struck him in the nursemaid
      of the little Perrys, was not diminished, but softened, by a kind of quiet graciousness and
      goodness. Hamlin remarked that she seemed, now that she was no longer humbled and cramped, to
      have a much kindlier spirit and a sense of humour which had at first seemed scarcely to exist,
      or to exist only in bitterness. But what struck him most of all was an indefinable change in
      Anne’s expression: the soul, which had lain as a tiny germ at the bottom of her nature, had
      expanded and come to the surface. She was as beautiful and singular as ever, but more manifold
      and subtle: her mind had increased threefold. Hamlin
       went away, intending that Anne should remain at Coblenz
      another year. But he found that his patience, hitherto inexhaustible, had suddenly departed.
      He found the time intolerably heavy on his hands. He travelled about in out‐of‐the‐way
      countries, having fragmentary love‐affairs, in a dreamy, irresponsible way, with other women;
      and sending Anne more letters than usual, and presents of all manner of outlandish
      stuffs—silver ornaments and so forth—which used to create great excitement at the school; but
      he fretted with impatience. Impatience, be it well understood, not to marry Anne, for he
      always thought of marriage as the return from, the end of, a sort of spiritual honeymoon; but
      impatience to commence that long courtship which had, from the beginning, been the object of
      his desires. He grew tired of their correspondence, found that he had exhausted all the
      delights of unconsciously revealed love, love budding and developing with the girl’s mind. It
      began to be mere repetition; and he scarcely knew
       what to write about now: the prologue had lasted long
      enough; the piece must begin.
One day, some two years or so after her arrival at Coblenz, Anne Brown received a letter in
      which Hamlin reminded her that she was twenty‐one, and that his guardianship had consequently
      come to an end already some months before; and suggested that, as he heard that her education
      was now completed, at least in so far as Coblenz went, he thought that it might be wiser if
      she came to England, where she would have better opportunities of continuing any special
      studies. Moreover, that his aunt, Mrs Macgregor, a widow without any children, was coming to
      settle in London, and that he thought it might be a good arrangement that she and Anne should
      live together, as Anne could scarcely take a house by herself. What did Miss Brown think of
      this arrangement? And would she authorise him to settle everything for Mrs Macgregor and her?
      Faintly and vaguely Anne thanked him for his forethought, and acquiesced in
       everything which he might be kind enough to decide upon.
      She had never realised her situation, she was not the sort of mind which has clear conceptions
      of the future, and she had been far too much absorbed, these two years, in the unreal present.
      Besides, Anne felt a confused pain, a disappointment, which prevented her attending to
      anything else. Hamlin had said nothing about himself, not a word as to whether he also would
      settle in London, or whether he intended continuing his wandering life. And she had not the
      courage to ask him. She was conscious of a coldness and emptiness in her heart, of the
      disappointment of some vague, unspoken hope. But why feel disappointed? or did she really feel
      disappointed at all? She believed that she cared for Hamlin only as for a benefactor, a
      divinity, a creature who might bestow affection but could not be asked for it; and this being
      the case, and knowing herself to have been perfectly satisfied and happy hitherto,
       she persuaded herself that she really did not feel
      disappointed about anything, when Hamlin thus wrote about her education and her plans and
      nothing else.
But as the winter drew to a close, there came another letter from Hamlin (all the
      intermediate ones had been only the usual talk about himself, and about books and scenery)
      telling her that, with a view to her living with his aunt, he had, as her ex‐guardian (he
      always spoke of himself as her guardian, completely ignoring Richard Brown) deemed it wise to
      employ part of her capital, which had been accumulating in his hands, in the purchase of the
      lease of a house at Hammersmith, which he was having prepared and furnished against her coming
      in May. “It is in a pretty neighbourhood, with the river in front and old houses and gardens
      all round,” he wrote. “What determined my choice, as I am sure it would have determined yours
      also, is that the house is itself more than a century and a
       half old, and has some fine trees in the garden. Flowers
      seem to grow well, as it is pretty well beyond reach of smoke. There are also some fine elms
      and poplars in front, all along the river‐side, which is old‐fashioned, and .not yet made into
      a modern embankment. It is rather far from the world; but the world is hideous, and the
      farther away from it the better, don’t you think? My aunt is busy about the practical
      household properties; I am getting in some of the more useless furniture. If you should
      dislike the arrangement, it can all be easily undone. I hope you will not disapprove of this
      step; the house is pretty well unique, and I had to decide on taking it, unless some one else
      was to snap it up; otherwise I should certainly have consulted you first. I trust you will
      forgive me.”
Anne put the letter down, and wondered whether she was dreaming. What was all this about
      buying and consulting her, employing her capital? What capital had she
       got? What right to be consulted? For a moment she felt
      quite bewildered; and then the full consciousness of Hamlin’s goodness rushed out and
      overwhelmed her, and she let her head fall on her desk and cried for sheer happiness. Then she
      thought it must all be a dream, and snatched the letter where it lay all crumpled, and
      smoothed it out trembling. Yes, there it all was. And then, as postscript, came this sentence,
      which made her heart leap:—
“There are two rooms additional on the garden, having a separate entrance from the
      embankment, and which I think you will not at present require for yourself. Would you perhaps
      let me rent them for a studio? My own lodgings are a long way from St John’s House (that is
      its name, for it was a priory once); but if I had my workshop there, I might hope to see you
      almost every day, if you would let me.”
The first dinner‐bell rang, and Anne, having hastily washed her eyes and smoothed her
       hair, ran down‐stairs, not knowing very well why the bell
      rang, or what it was all about. In the sitting‐room she found the girl from New Zealand, a
      little nervous creature, whom she had nursed through a bad fever, in her cold, absent way, and
      who had conceived a shy, intense passion for this beautiful strange creature, who seemed to
      her an unapproachable being from another world.
“I am going away,” cried Anne—she felt she must say it—“going away from school—to London,
      next month.”
The thin, nervous, anæmic little girl turned ashy‐white.
“Oh, are you really going?” she exclaimed faintly, for with Anne disappeared all the poor
      child’s sunshine and ideal from this dreary, worse than orphaned life, among girls who had too
      many occupations and interests to care for her.
“Are you really going, Annie? . . . Oh, I am so sorry!”
“Sorry?” cried Anne; “it is very nasty
       of you to be sorry—I am glad; oh, so glad! so glad!”
The little New Zealander had gone to the window, and was looking through its panes at the
      rainy street; she gave a little suppressed sob.
Anne felt as if she had committed a murder. She ran to the window, and seized the struggling
      small creature in her powerful arms, and knelt down before her, clasping her round the
      waist.
“Oh, forgive me! forgive me!” cried Anne, as the consciousness of the girl’s love, which she
      had never before perceived, came upon her, together with the shame and remorse at her
      heartlessness; “forgive me, forgive—I am a brute—a beast —oh dear, oh dear, that happiness
      should make me so wicked!”
The New Zealander smiled and buried her thin yellow face in the masses of Anne’s dark crisp
      hair.
“Will you remember me sometimes?” she asked; “I love you so much.”

Anne kissed the poor, pale, tear‐stained cheeks.
“Oh yes, I will always remember you,” she said.
But she was already thinking of Hamlin.
</div></body></text></TEI>