
CHAPTER XXXIII.

“... Rushes life on a race
As the clouds the clouds chase;
And we go,
And we drop like the fruits of the tree,
Even we,
Even so.”

JUST at first, it was a sheer impossibility to do anything but bask and bathe in
       the sunny present, to spend the days in wandering incredulously through vernal Paris, over
       whose bursting freshness and brilliancy the white clouds seemed to be driven, with the same
       joy of life. The city was crammed; the inhabitants poured forth in swarms to enjoy, in true
       French fashion, the genial warmth and the universal awakening after the long capricious
       winter. It was actually hot in the sun, and fresh light clothing became a luxury, like a bath
       after a journey. The year had raised its siege, and there was sudden amity between man and
       Nature. Shrivelled man could relax the tension of resistance to cold and damp and change, and
       go forth into the sun with cordial insouciance. In many of
       the faces might be read this kindly amnesty, although there were some so set and fixed with
       past cares that not even the soft hand of a Parisian spring could smooth away the lines, or
       even touch the spirit.
These Hadria passed with an aching pity. Circumstance had been to them a relentless
       taskmaster. Perhaps they had not rubbed the magic ring of will, and summoned the obedient
       genius. Perhaps circumstance had forbidden them even the rag wherewith to rub—or the
       impulse.
Sallying forth from the pension, Hadria would sometimes
        pause, for a moment, at the corner of the street, where it
       opened into the Place de la Concorde, irresolute, because of the endless variety of possible
       ways to turn, and places to visit. She seldom made definite plans the day before, unless it
       were for the pleasure of changing them. The letter of introduction to Madame Vauchelet had
       remained unpresented. The sense of solitude, combined for the first time with that of
       freedom, was too delightful to forego. One must have time to realize and appreciate the
       sudden calm and serenity; the sudden absence of claims and obstructions and harassing
       criticisms. Heavens, what a price people consented to pay for the privilege of human ties!
       what hard bargains were driven in the kingdom of the affections! Thieves, extortionists,
       usurers—and in the name of all the virtues!
“Yes, solitude has charms!” Hadria inwardly exclaimed, as she stood watching the coming and
       going of people, the spouting of fountains, the fluttering of big sycamore
       leaves in the Champs Elysées.
Unhappily, the solitude made difficulties. But meanwhile there was a large field to be
       explored, where these difficulties did not arise, or could be guarded against. Her sex was a
       troublesome obstruction. “One does not come of centuries of chattel-women for nothing!” she
       wrote to Algitha. Society bristled with insults, conscious and unconscious. Nor had one lived
       the brightest, sweetest years of one's life tethered and impounded, without feeling the
       consequences when the tether was cut. There were dreads, shrinkings, bewilderments,
       confusions to encounter; the difficulties of pilotage in unknown seas, of self-knowledge, and
       guidance suddenly needed in new ranges of the soul; fresh temptations, fresh possibilities to
       deal with; everything untested, the alphabet of worldly experience yet to learn.
But all this was felt with infinitely greater force a little later, when the period of
       solitude was over, and Hadria found herself in the midst of a little society whose real codes
       and ideas she had gropingly to learn. Unfamiliar (in any practical sense)
        with life, even in her own country, she had no landmarks
       or finger-posts, of any kind, in this new land. Her sentiment had never been narrowly
       British, but now she realized her nationality over-keenly; she felt herself almost
       grotesquely English, and had a sense of insular clumsiness amidst a uprightly, dexterous
       people. Conscious of a thousand illusive, but very real differences in point of view, and in
       nature, between the two nations, she had a baffled impression of walking among mysteries and
       novelties that she could not grasp. She began to be painfully conscious of the effects of the
       narrow life that she had led, and of the limitations that had crippled her in a thousand ways
       hitherto scarcely realized.
“One begins to learn everything too late,” she wrote to Algitha. “This ought all to have
       been familiar long ago. I don't know anything about the world in which I live. I have never
       before caught so much as a distant glimpse of it. And even now there are strange thick
       wrappings from the past that cling tight round and hold me aloof, strive as I may to strip
       off that past-made personality, and to understand, by touch, what things are made of. I feel
       as if I would risk anything in order to really know that. Why should a woman treat herself as
       if she were Dresden china? She is more or less insulted and degraded whatever happens,
       especially if she obeys what our generation is pleased to call the moral law. The more I see
       of life, the more hideous seems the position that women hold in relation to the social
       structure, and the more sickening the current nonsense that is talked about us and our
       ‘missions’ and ‘spheres.’ It is so feeble, so futile, to try to ornament an essentially
       degrading fact. It is such insolence to talk to us—good heavens, to us!—about
       holiness and sacredness, when men (to whom surely a sense of humour has been denied) divide
       their women into two great classes, both of whom they insult and enslave, insisting
       peremptorily on the existence of each division, but treating one class as private and the
       other as public property. One might as well talk to driven cattle in the shambles about their
        ‘sacred mission’ as to women. It is an added mockery, a
       gratuitous piece of insolence.”
Having been, from childhood, more or less at issue with her surroundings, Hadria had never
       fully realized their power upon her personality. But now daily a fresh recognition of her
       continued imprisonment, baffled her attempt to look at things with clear eyes. She struggled
       to get round and beyond that past-fashioned self, not merely in order to see truly, but in
       order to see at all. And in doing so, she ran the risk of letting go what she might have done
       better to hold. She felt painfully different from these people among whom she found herself.
       Her very trick of pondering over things sent her spinning to hopeless distances. They seemed
       to ponder so wholesomely little. Their intelligence was devoted to matters of the moment;
       they were keen and well-finished and accomplished. Hadria used to look at them in
       astonishment. How did these quick-witted people manage to escape the importunate inquisitive
       demon, the familiar spirit, who pursued her incessantly with his queries and suggestions? He
       would stare up from river and street and merry gardens; his haunting eyes looked mockingly
       out of green realms of stirring foliage, and his voice was like a sardonic echo to the happy
       voices of the children, laughing at their play under the flickering shadows, of mothers
       discussing their cares and interests, of men in blouses, at work by the water-side, or
       solemn, in frock-coats, with pre-occupations of business and bread-winning. The demon had his
       own reflections on all these seemingly ordinary matters, and so bizarre were they at times,
       so startling and often so terrible, that one found oneself shivering in full noontide, or
       smiling, or thrilled with passionate pity at “the sad, strange ways of men.”
It was sweet to stretch one's cramped wings to the sun, to ruffle and spread them, as a
       released bird will, but it was startling to find already little stiff habits arisen, little
       creaks and hindrances never suspected, that made flight in the high air not quite effortless
       and serene.

The Past is never past; immortal as the Gods, it lives enthroned in the Present, and sets
       its limits and lays its commands.
Cases have been known of a man blind from birth being restored to sight, at mature age. For
       a time, the appearance of objects was strange and incomprehensible. Their full meaning was
       not conveyed to him; they remained riddles. He could not judge the difference between near
       and far, between solid and liquid; he had no experience, dating from childhood, of the
       apparent smallness of distant things, of the connexion between the impression given to the
       touch by solids and their effect on the eye. He had all these things to learn. A thousand
       trifling associations, of which those with normal senses are scarcely conscious, had to be
       stumblingly acquired, as a child learns to connect sound and sight, in learning to read.
Such were the changes of consciousness that Hadria found herself going through; only
       realising each phase of the process after it was over, and the previous confusion of vision
       had been itself revealed, by the newly and often painfully acquired coordinating skill.
But, as generally happens, in the course of passing from ignorance to knowledge, the
       intermediate stage was chaotic. Objects loomed up large and indistinct, as through a mist;
       vague forms drifted by, half revealed, to melt away again; here and there were clear outlines
       and solid impressions, to be deemed trustworthy and given a place of honour; thence a
       disproportion in the general conception; it being almost beyond human power to allow
       sufficiently for that which is unknown.
For some time, however, the dominant impression on Hadria's mind was of her own gigantic
       ignorance. This ignorance was far more confusing and even misleading than it had been when
       its proportions were less defined. The faint twinkle of light revealed the dusky outline,
       bewildering and discouraging the imagination. Intuitive knowledge was disturbed by the
       incursion of scraps of disconnected experience.
        This condition of mind made her an almost insoluble
       pyschological problem. Since she was evidently a woman of pronounced character, her
       bewilderment and tentitive attitude were not allowed for. Her actions were regarded as
       deliberate and cool-headed, when often they would be the outcome of sheer confusion, or
       chance, or perhaps of a groping experimental effort.
The first three weeks in Paris had been given up to enjoying the new conditions of
       existence. But now practical matters claimed consideration. The pension in the Rue Boissy d'Anglas was not suitable as a permanent abode. Rooms
       must be looked for, combining cheapness with a good situation, within easy distance of the
       scene of Hadria's future musical studies, and also within reach of some park or gardens for
       Martha's benefit.
This ideal place of abode was at last found. It cost rather more than Hadria had wished to
       spend on mere lodging, but otherwise it seemed perfect. It was in a quiet street between the
       Champs Elysées and the river. Two great thoroughfares ran, at a respectful distance, on
       either side, with omnibuses always passing. Hadria could be set down within a few minutes'
       walk of the School of Music, or, if she liked to give the time, could walk the whole way to
       her morning's work, through some of the most charming parts of Paris. As for Martha, she was
       richly provided with playgrounds. The Bois could be quickly reached, and there were always
       the Champs Elysées or the walk beneath the chestnuts by the river, along the Cours de la
       Reine and the length of the quays. Even Hannah thought the situation might do. Hadria had
       begun her studies at the School of Music, and found the steady work not only a profound,
       though somewhat stern enjoyment, but a solid backbone to her new existence, giving it
       cohesion and form. Recreation deserved its name, after work of this kind. Any lurking danger
       of too great speculative restlessness disappeared. There had been a moment when the luxurious
       joy of mere wandering observation and absorption, threatened to
        become overwhelming, and to loosen some of the rivets of
       the character.
But work was to the sum-total of impulse what the central weight was to one of Martha's
       toys: a leaden ballast that always brought the balance right again, however wildly the little
       tyrant might swing the creature off the perpendicular. When Hadria used to come in,
       pleasantly tired with her morning's occupation, and the wholesome heat of the sun, to take
       her simple déjeuner in the little apartment with Martha, a
       frivolous five minutes would often be spent by the two in endeavouring to overcome the rigid
       principles of that well-balanced plaything. But always the dead weight at its heart
       frustrated their attempts. Martha played the most inconsiderate pranks with its centre of
       gravity, but quite in vain. When a little French boy from the étage above was allowed to come and play with Martha, she proceeded to experiment
       upon his centre of gravity in the same way, and seemed much surprised when Jean
       Paul Auguste not only howled indignantly, but didn't swing up again after he was over-turned.
       He remained supine, and had to be reinstated by Hadria and Hannah, and comforted with
       sweetmeats. Martha's logic received one of its first checks. She evidently made up her mind
       that logic was a fallacious mode of inference, and determined to abandon it for the future.
       These rebuffs in infancy, Hadria conjectured, might account for much!
About three weeks passed in almost pure enjoyment and peace; and then it was discovered
       that the cost of living, in spite of an extremely simple diet, was such as might have
       provided epicurean luxuries for a family of ten. Hadria's enquiries among her acquaintances
       elicited cries of consternation. Obviously the landlady, who did the marketing, must be
       cheating on a royal scale, and there was nothing for it but to move. Hadria suggested to
       Madame Vauchelet, whose advice she always sought in practical matters, that perhaps the
       landlady might be induced to pursue her lucrative art in moderation;
        could she not put it honestly down in the bill
       “Peculation—so much per week?”
Madame Vauchlelet was horrified. “Impossible!” she cried; one must seek another apartment.
       If only Hannah understood French and could do the marketing herself. But Hannah scorned the
       outlandish lingo, and had a poor opinion of the nation as a whole.
It was fatiguing and somewhat discouraging work to begin, all over again, the quest of
       rooms, especially with the difficulty about the landlady always in view, and no means of
       ascertaining her scale of absorption. It really seemed a pity that it could not be mentioned
       as an extra, like coal and lights. Then one would know what one was about. This uncertain
       liability, with an extremely limited income, which was likely to prove insufficient unless
       some addition could be made to it, was trying to the nerves.
In order to avoid too great anxiety, Hadria had to make up her mind to a less attractive
       suite of rooms, farther out of town, and she found it desirable to order many of the
       comestibles herself. Madame Vauchelet was untiring in her efforts to help and advise. She
       initiated Hadria into the picturesque mysteries of Parisian housekeeping. It was amusing to
       go to the shops and markets with this shrewd Frenchwoman, and very enlightening as to the
       method of living cheaply and well. Hadria began to think wistfully of a more permanent
        ménage in this entrancing capital, where there were still
       worlds within worlds to explore. She questioned Madame Vauchlelet as to the probable cost of
       a femme de ménage . Madame quickly ran through some
       calculations and pronounced a sum alluringly small. Since the landlady difficulty was so
       serious, and made personal superintendence necessary, it seemed as if one might as well have
       the greater comfort and independence of this more home-like arrangement.
Madame Vauchelet recommended an excellent woman who would cook and market, and, with
       Hannah's help, easily do all that was necessary. After many calculations and consultations
        with Madame Vauchelet, Hadria finally decided to rent, for
       three months, a cheerful little suite of rooms near the Arc de Triomphe.
Madame Vauchelet drank a cup of tea in the little salon,
       with quiet heroism, not liking to refuse Hadria's offer of the friendly beverage. But she
       wondered at the powerful physique of the nation that could submit to the trial daily.
Hadria was brimming over with pleasure in her new home, which breathed Paris from every
       pore. She had already surrounded herself with odds and ends of her own, with books and a few
       flowers. If only this venture turned out well, how delightful would be the next few months.
       Hadria did not clearly look beyond that time. To her, it seemed like a century. Her only idea
       as to the farther future was an abstract resolve to let nothing short of absolute compulsion
       persuade her to renounce her freedom, or subject herself to conditions that made the pursuit
       of her art impossible. How to carry out the resolve, in fact and detail, was a matter to
       consider when the time came. If one were to consider future difficulties as well as deal with
       immediate ones, into what crannies and interstices were the affairs of the moment to be
       crammed?
There has probably never been a human experience of even a few months of perfect happiness,
       of perfect satisfaction with conditions, even among the few men and women who know how to
       appreciate the bounty of Fate, when she is generous, and to take the sting out of minor
       annoyances by treating them lightly. Hadria was ready to shrug her shoulders at legions of
       these, so long as the main current of her purpose were not diverted. But she could not steel
       herself against the letters that she received from England.
Everyone was deeply injured but bravely bearing up. Her family was a stricken and sorrowing
       family. Being naturally heroic, it said little but thought the more. Relations whose names
       Hadria scarcely remembered, seemed to have waked up at the news of her departure and claimed
       their share of the woe. Obscure Temperleys raised astounded heads and
        mourned. Henriette wrote that she was really annoyed at
       the way in which everybody was talking about Hadria's conduct. It was most uncomfortable. She
       hoped Hadria was able to be happy. Hubert was ready to forgive her and to receive her back,
       in spite of everything. Henriette entreated her to return; for her own sake, for Hubert's
       sake, for the children's. They were just going off to school, poor little boys. Henriette,
       although so happy at the Red House, was terribly grieved at this sad misunderstanding. It
       seemed so strange, so distressing. Henriette had thoroughly enjoyed looking after dear Hubert
       and the sweet children. They were in splendid health. She had been very particular about
       hygiene. Hubert and she had seen a good deal of the Engletons lately. How charming Lady
       Engleton was! So much tact. She was advanced in her ideas, only she never allowed them to be
       intrusive. She seemed just like everybody else. She hated to make herself conspicuous; the
       very ideal of a true lady, if one might use the much-abused word. Professor Fortescue was
       reported to be still far from well. Professor Theobald had not taken the Priory after all. It
       was too large. It looked so deserted and melancholy now.
Henriette always finished her letters with an entreaty to Hadria to return. People were
       talking so. They suspected the truth; although, of course, one had hoped that the separation
       would be supposed to be temporary—as indeed Henriette trusted it would prove.
Madame Bertaux, who had just returned from England to her beloved Paris, reported to
       Hadria, when she called on the latter in her new abode, that everyone was talking about the
       affair with as much eagerness as if the fate of the empire had depended on it. Madame Bertaux
       recommended indifference and silence. She observed, in her sharp, good-natured, impatient
       way, that reforming confirmed drunkards, converting the heathen, making saints out of
       sinners, or a silk purse out of a sow's ear, would be mere child's play compared with the
       task of teaching the average idiot to mind his own business.
