
CHAPTER XVII
Sir Charles Collingham and his escort, M. Floçon, entered a cab together and were driven
     first to the Faubourg St. Honoré. The General tried hard to maintain his nonchalance, but he
     was yet a little crestfallen at the turn things had taken, and M. Floçon, who, on the other
     hand, was elated and triumphant, saw it. But no words passed between them until they arrived at
     the portals of the British Embassy, and the General handed out his card to the magnificent
     porter who received them.
"Kindly let Colonel Papillon have that without delay." The General had written a few words:
     "I have got into fresh trouble. Come on to me at the Police Prefecture if you can spare the
     time."
"The Colonel is now in the Chancery: will not monsieur wait?" asked the porter, with superb
     civility.
But the detective would not suffer this, and interposed, answering abruptly for Sir
     Charles:
"No. It is impossible. We are going to the Quai l'Horloge. It is an urgent matter."
The porter knew what the Quai l'Horloge meant, and he guessed intuitively who was speaking.
     Every Frenchman can recognize a police officer, and has, as a rule, no great opinion of
     him.
"Very well!" now said the porter, curtly, as he banged the wicket-gate on the retreating cab,
     and he did not hurry himself in giving the card to Colonel Papillon.
"Does this mean that I am a prisoner?" asked Sir Charles, his gorge rising, as it did
     easily.
"It means, monsieur, that you are in the hands of justice until your recent conduct has been
     fully explained," said the detective, with the air of a despot.
"But I protest--"
"I wish to hear no further observations, monsieur. You may reserve them till you can give
     them to the right person."
The General's temper was sorely ruffled. He did not like it at all; yet what could he do?
     Prudence gained the day, and after a struggle he decided to submit, lest worse might befall
     him.
There was, in truth, worse to be encountered. It was very irksome to be in the power of this
     now domineering little man on his own ground, and eager to show his power. It was with a very
     bad grace that Sir Charles obeyed the curt orders he received, to leave the cab, to enter at a
     side door of the Prefecture, to follow this pompous conductor along the long vaulted passages
     of this rambling building, up many flights of stone stairs, to halt obediently at his command
     when at length they reached a closed door on an upper story.
"It is here!" said M. Floçon, as he turned the handle unceremoniously without knocking.
     "Enter."
A man was seated at a small desk in the centre of a big bare room, who rose at once at the
     sight of M. Floçon, and bowed deferentially without speaking.
"Baume," said the Chief, shortly, "I wish to leave this gentleman with you. Make him at
     home,"--the words were spoken in manifest irony,--"and when I call you, bring him at once to my
     cabinet. You, monsieur, you will oblige me by staying here."
Sir Charles nodded carelessly, took the first chair that offered, and sat down by the
     fire.
He was to all intents and purposes in custody, and he examined his gaoler at first
     wrathfully, then curiously, struck with his rather strange figure and appearance. Baume, as the
     Chief had called him, was a short, thick-set man with a great shock head sunk in low between a
     pair of enormous shoulders, betokening great physical strength; he stood on very thin but
     greatly twisted bow legs, and the quaintness of his figure was emphasized by the short black
     blouse or smock-frock he wore over his other clothes like a French artisan.
He was a man of few words, and those not the most polite in tone, for when the General began
     with a banal remark about the weather, M. Baume replied, shortly:
"I wish to have no talk;" and when Sir Charles pulled out his cigarette-case, as he did
     almost automatically from time to time when in any situation of annoyance or perplexity, Baume
     raised his hand warningly and grunted:
"Not allowed."
"Then I'll be hanged if I don't smoke in spite of every man jack of you!" cried the General,
     hotly, rising from his seat and speaking unconsciously in English.
"What's that?" asked Baume, gruffly. He was one of the detective staff, and was only doing
     his duty according to his lights, and he said so with such an injured air that the General was
     pacified, laughed, and relapsed into silence without lighting his cigarette.
The time ran on, from minutes into nearly an hour, a very trying wait for Sir Charles. There
     is always something irritating in doing antechamber work, in kicking one's heels in the
     waiting-room of any functionary or official, high or low, and the General found it hard to
     possess himself in patience, when he thought he was being thus ignominiously treated by a man
     like M. Floçon. All the time, too, he was worrying himself about the Countess, wondering first
     how she had fared; next, where she was just then; last of all, and longest, whether it was
     possible for her to be mixed up in anything compromising or criminal.
Suddenly an electric bell struck in the room. There was a table telephone at Baume's elbow;
     he took up the handle, put the tube to his mouth and ear, got his message answered, and then,
     rising, said abruptly to Sir Charles:
"Come."
When the General was at last ushered into the presence of the Chief of the Detective Police,
     he found to his satisfaction that Colonel Papillon was also there, and at M. Floçon's side sat
     the instructing judge, M. Beaumont le Hardi, who, after waiting politely until the two
     Englishmen had exchanged greetings, was the first to speak, and in apology.
"You will, I trust, pardon us, M. le Général, for having detained you here and so long. But
     there were, as we thought, good and sufficient reasons. If those have now lost some of their
     cogency, we still stand by our action as having been justifiable in the execution of our duty.
     We are now willing to let you go free, because--because--"
"We have caught the person, the lady you helped to escape," blurted out the detective, unable
     to resist making the point.
"The Countess? Is she here, in custody? Never!"
"Undoubtedly she is in custody, and in very close custody too," went on M. Floçon, gleefully.
     "_ Au secret_, if you know what that means--in a cell separate and apart, where no one is
     permitted to see or speak to her."
"Surely not that? Jack--Papillon--this must not be. I beg of you, implore, insist, that you
     will get his lordship to interpose."
"But, sir, how can I? You must not ask impossibilities. The Contessa Castagneto is really an
     Italian subject now."
"She is English by birth, and whether or no, she is a woman, a high-bred lady; and it is
     abominable, unheard-of, to subject her to such monstrous treatment," said the General.
"But these gentlemen declare that they are fully warranted, that she has put herself in the
     wrong--greatly, culpably in the wrong."
"I don't believe it!" cried the General, indignantly. "Not from these chaps, a pack of
     idiots, always on the wrong tack! I don't believe a word, not if they swear."
"But they have documentary evidence--papers of the most damaging kind against her."
"Where? How?"
"He--M. le Juge--has been showing me a note-book;" and the General's eyes, following Jack
     Papillon's, were directed to a small _carnet_, or memorandum-book, which the Judge,
     interpreting the glance, was tapping significantly with his finger.
Then the Judge said blandly, "It is easy to perceive that you protest, M. le Général, against
     that lady's arrest. Is it so? Well, we are not called upon to justify it to you, not in the
     very least. But we are dealing with a brave man, a gentleman, an officer of high rank and
     consideration, and you shall know things that we are not bound to tell, to you or to any
     one."
"First," he continued, holding up the note-book, "do you know what this is? Have you ever
     seen it before?"
"I am dimly conscious of the fact, and yet I cannot say when or where."
"It is the property of one of your fellow travellers--an Italian called Ripaldi."
"Ripaldi?" said the General, remembering with some uneasiness that he had seen the name at
     the bottom of the Countess's telegram. "Ah! now I understand."
"You had heard of it, then? In what connection?" asked the Judge, a little carelessly, but it
     was a suddenly planned pitfall.
"I now understand," replied the General, perfectly on his guard, "why the note-book was
     familiar to me. I had seen it in that man's hands in the waiting-room. He was writing in
     it."
"Indeed? A favourite occupation evidently. He was fond of confiding in that note-book, and
     committed to it much that he never expected would see the light--his movements, intentions,
     ideas, even his inmost thoughts. The book--which he no doubt lost inadvertently is very
     incriminating to himself and his friends."
"What do you imply?" hastily inquired Sir Charles.
"Simply that it is on that which is written here that we base one part, perhaps the
     strongest, of our case against the Countess. It is strangely but convincingly corroborative of
     our suspicions against her."
"May I look at it for myself?" went on the General in a tone of contemptuous disbelief.
"It is in Italian. Perhaps you can read that language? If not, I have translated the most
     important passages," said the Judge, offering some other papers.
"Thank you; if you will permit me, I should prefer to look at the original;" and the General,
     without more ado, stretched out his hand and took the note-book.
What he read there, as he quickly scanned its pages, shall be told in the next chapter. It
     will be seen that there were things written that looked very damaging to his dear friend,
     Sabine Castagneto.
