
CHAPTER XX
M. Floçon was the first to realize the full meaning of Colonel Papillon's surprising
     statement.
"Run, run, La Pêche! Have the outer doors closed; let no one leave the place."
"Draw back, gentlemen!" he went on, and he hustled his companions with frantic haste out at
     the back of the mortuary chamber. "Pray Heaven he has not seen us! He would know us, even if we
     do not him."
Then with no less haste he seized Colonel Papillon by the arm and hurried him by the back
     passages through the office into the outer, public chamber, where the astonished crowd stood,
     silent and perturbed, awaiting explanation of their detention.
"Quick, monsieur!" whispered the Chief; "point him out to me."
The request was not unnecessary, for when Colonel Papillon went forward, and, putting his
     hand on a man's shoulder, saying, "Mr. Quadling, I think," the police officer was scarcely able
     to restrain his surprise.
The person thus challenged was very unlike any one he had seen before that day, Ripaldi most
     of all. The moustache was gone, the clothes were entirely changed; a pair of dark green
     spectacles helped the disguise. It was strange indeed that Papillon had known him; but at the
     moment of recognition Quadling had removed his glasses, no doubt that he might the better
     examine the object of his visit to the Morgue, that gruesome record of his own fell
     handiwork.
Naturally he drew back with well-feigned indignation, muttering half-unintelligible words in
     French, denying stoutly both in voice and gesture all acquaintance with the person who thus
     abruptly addressed him.
"This is not to be borne," he cried. "Who are you that dares--"
"Ta! ta!" quietly put in M. Floçon; "we will discuss that fully, but not here. Come into the
     office; come, I say, or must we use force?"
There was no escaping now, and with a poor attempt at bravado the stranger was led away.
"Now, Colonel Papillon, look at him well. Do you know him? Are you satisfied it is--"
"Mr. Quadling, late banker, of Rome. I have not the slightest doubt of it. I recognize him
     beyond all question."
"That will do. Silence, sir!" This to Quadling. "No observations. I too can recognize you now
     as the person who called himself Ripaldi an hour or two ago. Denial is useless. Let him be
     searched; thoroughly, you understand, La Pêche? Call in your other men; he may resist."
They gave the wretched man but scant consideration, and in less than three minutes had
     visited every pocket, examined every secret receptacle, and practically turned him inside
     out.
After this there could no longer be any doubt of his identity, still less of his complicity
     in the crime.
First among the many damning evidences of his guilt was the missing pocketbook of the porter
     of the sleeping-car. Within was the train card and the passengers' tickets, all the papers
     which the man Groote had lost so unaccountably. They had, of course, been stolen from his
     person with the obvious intention of impeding the inquiry into the murder. Next, in another
     inner pocket was Quadling's own wallet, with his own visiting-cards, several letters addressed
     to him by name; above all, a thick sheaf of bank-notes of all nationalities--English, French,
     Italian, and amounting in total value to several thousands of pounds.
"Well, do you still deny? Bah! it is childish, useless, mere waste of breath. At last we have
     penetrated the mystery. You may as well confess. Whether or no, we have enough to convict you
     by independent testimony," said the Judge, severely. "Come, what have you to say?"
But Quadling, with pale, averted face, stood obstinately mute. He was in the toils, the net
     had closed round him, they should have no assistance from him.
"Come, speak out; it will be best. Remember, we have means to make you--"
"Will you interrogate him further, M. Beaumont le Hardi? Here, at once?"
"No, let him be removed to the Prefecture; it will be more convenient; to my private
     office."
Without more ado a fiacre was called, and the prisoner was taken off under escort, M. Floçon
     seated by his side, one policeman in front, another on the box, and lodged in a secret cell at
     the Quai l'Horloge.
"And you, gentlemen?" said the Judge to Sir Charles and Colonel Papillon. "I do not wish to
     detain you further, although there may be points you might help us to elucidate if I might
     venture to still trespass on your time?"
Sir Charles was eager to return to the Hôtel Madagascar, and yet he felt that he should best
     serve his dear Countess by seeing this to the end. So he readily assented to accompany the
     Judge, and Colonel Papillon, who was no less curious, agreed to go too.
"I sincerely trust," said the Judge on the way, "that our people have laid hands on that
     woman Petitpré. I believe that she holds the key to the situation, that when we hear her story
     we shall have a clear case against Quadling; and--who knows?--she may completely exonerate
     Madame la Comtesse."
During the events just recorded, which occupied a good hour, the police agents had time to go
     and come from the Rue Bellechasse. They did not return empty-handed, although at first it
     seemed as if they had made a fruitless journey. The Hôtel Ivoire was a very second-class place,
     a lodging-house, or hotel with furnished rooms let out by the week to lodgers with whom the
     proprietor had no very close acquaintance. His clerk did all the business, and this functionary
     produced the register, as he is bound by law, for the inspection of the police officers, but
     afforded little information as to the day's arrivals.
"Yes, a man calling himself Dufour had taken rooms about midday, one for himself, one for
     madame who was with him, also named Dufour--his sister, he said;" and he went on at the request
     of the police officers to describe them.
"Our birds," said the senior agent, briefly. "They are wanted. We belong to the detective
     police."
"All right." Such visits were not new to the clerk.
"But you will not find monsieur; he is out; there hangs his key. Madame? No, she is within.
     Yes, that is certain, for not long since she rang her bell. There, it goes again."
He looked up at the furiously oscillating bell, but made no move.
"Bah! they do not pay for service; let her come and say what she needs."
"Exactly; and we will bring her," said the officer, making for the stairs and the room
     indicated.
But on reaching the door, they found it locked. From within? Hardly, for as they stood there
     in doubt, a voice inside cried vehemently:
"Let me out! Help! Help! Send for the police. I have much to tell them. Quick! Let me
     out."
"We are here, my dear, just as you require us. But wait; step down, Gaston, and see if the
     clerk has a second key. If not, call in a locksmith--the nearest. A little patience only, my
     beauty. Do not fear."
The key was quickly produced, and an entrance effected.
A woman stood there in a defiant attitude, with arms akimbo; she, no doubt, of whom they were
     in search. A tall, rather masculine-looking creature, with a dark, handsome face, bold black
     eyes just now flashing fiercely, rage in every feature.
"Madame Dufour?" began the police officer.
"Dufour! Rot! My name is Hortense Petitpré; who are you? _La Rousse_?" (Police.)
"At your service. Have you anything to say to us? We have come on purpose to take you to the
     Prefecture quietly, if you will let us; or--"
"I will go quietly. I ask nothing better. I have to lay information against a miscreant--a
     murderer--the vile assassin who would have made me his accomplice--the banker, Quadling, of
     Rome!"
In the fiacre Hortense Petitpré talked on with such incessant abuse, virulent and violent, of
     Quadling, that her charges were neither precise nor intelligible.
It was not until she appeared before M. Beaumont le Hardi, and was handled with great
     dexterity by that practised examiner, that her story took definite form.
What she had to say will be best told in the clear, formal language of the official
     disposition.
The witness inculpated stated:
"She was named Aglaé Hortense Petitpré, thirty-four years of age, a Frenchwoman, born in
     Paris, Rue de Vincennes No. 374. Was engaged by the Contessa Castagneto, November 19, 189--, in
     Rome, as lady's maid, and there, at her mistress's domicile, became acquainted with the Sieur
     Francis Quadling, a banker of the Via Condotti, Rome.
"Quadling had pretensions to the hand of the Countess, and sought, by bribes and entreaties,
     to interest witness in his suit. Witness often spoke of him in complimentary terms to her
     mistress, who was not very favourably disposed towards him.
"One afternoon (two days before the murder) Quadling paid a lengthened visit to the Countess.
     Witness did not hear what occurred, but Quadling came out much distressed, and again urged her
     to speak to the Countess. He had heard of the approaching departure of the lady from Rome, but
     said nothing of his own intentions.
"Witness was much surprised to find him in the sleeping-car, but had no talk to him till the
     following morning, when he asked her to obtain an interview for him with the Countess, and
     promised a large reward. In making this offer he produced a wallet and exhibited a very large
     number of notes.
"Witness was unable to persuade the Countess, although she returned to the subject
     frequently. Witness so informed Quadling, who then spoke to the lady, but was coldly
     received.
"During the journey witness thought much over the situation. Admitted that the sight of
     Quadling's money had greatly disturbed her, but, although pressed, would not say when the first
     idea of robbing him took possession of her. (Note by Judge--That she had resolved to do so is,
     however, perfectly clear, and the conclusion is borne out by her acts. It was she who secured
     the Countess's medicine bottle; she, beyond doubt, who drugged the porter at Laroche. In no
     other way can her presence in the sleeping-car between Laroche and Paris be accounted
     for-presence which she does not deny.)
"Witness at last reluctantly confessed that she entered the compartment where the murder was
     committed, and at a critical moment. An affray was actually in progress between the Italian
     Ripaldi and the incriminated man Quadling, but the witness arrived as the last fatal blow was
     struck by the latter.
"She saw it struck, and saw the victim fall lifeless on the floor.
"Witness declared she was so terrified she could at first utter no cry, nor call for help,
     and before she could recover herself the murderer threatened her with the ensanguined knife.
     She threw herself on her knees, imploring pity, but the man Quadling told her that she was an
     eye-witness, and could take him to the guillotine,--she also must die.
"Witness at last prevailed on him to spare her life, but only on condition that she would
     leave the car. He indicated the window as the only way of escape; but on this for a long time
     she refused to venture, declaring that it was only to exchange one form of death for another.
     Then, as Quadling again threatened to stab her, she was compelled to accept this last chance,
     never hoping to win out alive.
"With Quadling's assistance, however, she succeeded in climbing out through the window and in
     gaining the roof. He had told her to wait for the first occasion when the train slackened speed
     to leave it and shift for herself. With this intention he gave her a thousand francs, and bade
     her never show herself again.
"Witness descended from the train not far from the small station of Villeneuve on the line,
     and there took the local train for Paris. Landed at the Lyons Station, she heard of the inquiry
     in progress, and then, waiting outside, saw Quadling disguised as the Italian leave in company
     with another man. She followed and marked Quadling down, meaning to denounce him on the first
     opportunity. Quadling, however, on issuing from the restaurant, had accosted her, and at once
     offered her a further sum of five thousand francs as the price of silence, and she had gone
     with him to the Hôtel Ivoire, where she was to receive the sum. Quadling had paid it, but on
     one condition, that she would remain at the Hotel Ivoire until the following day. Apparently he
     had distrusted her, for he had contrived to lock her into her compartment. As she did not
     choose to be so imprisoned, she summoned assistance, and was at length released by the
     police."
This was the substance of Hortense Petitpré's deposition, and it was corroborated in many
     small details.
When she appeared before the Judge, with whom Sir Charles Collingham and Colonel Papillon
     were seated, the former at once pointed out that she was wearing a dark mantle trimmed with the
     same sort of passementerie as that picked up in the sleeping-car.
L'Envoi
Quadling was in due course brought before the Court of Assize and tried for his life. There
     was no sort of doubt of his guilt, and the jury so found, but, having regard to certain
     extenuating circumstances, they recommended him to mercy. The chief of these was Quadling's
     positive assurance that he had been first attacked by Ripaldi; he declared that the Italian
     detective had in the first instance tried to come to terms with him, demanding 50,000 francs as
     his price for allowing him to go at large; that when Quadling distinctly refused to be
     black-mailed, Ripaldi struck at him with a knife, but that the blow failed to take effect.
Then Quadling closed with him and took the knife from him. It was a fierce encounter, and
     might have ended either way, but the unexpected entrance of the woman Petitpré took off
     Ripaldi's attention, and then he, Quadling, maddened and reckless, stabbed him to the
     heart.
It was not until after the deed was done that Quadling realized the full measure of his crime
     and its inevitable consequences. Then, in a daring effort to extricate himself, he intimidated
     the woman Petitpré, and forced her to escape through the sleeping-car window.
It was he who had rung the signal-bell to stop the train and give her a chance of leaving it.
     It was after the murder, too, that he conceived the idea of personating Ripaldi, and, having
     disfigured him beyond recognition, as he hoped, he had changed clothes and compartments.
On the strength of this confession Quadling escaped the guillotine, but he was transported to
     New Caledonia for life.
The money taken on him was forwarded to Rome, and was usefully employed in reducing his
     liabilities to the depositors in the bank.
The other word.
Some time in June the following announcement appeared in all the Paris papers:
"Yesterday, at the British Embassy, General Sir Charles Collingham, K. C. B., was married to
     Sabine, Contessa di Castagneto, widow of the Italian Count of that name."
THE END.
