<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="13">
AT THE GATES
The darkness which holds the dawn was, as a rule, silent as the grave in the sand-stretches
     beyond the river, where the wide cut of the canal, the huge mud-heap of the gaol, with its
     scattered workshops and houses, showed as mere spots and lines on the illimitable plain. But on
     the night after the band had played "God save the Queen," while the first drops of sacred water
     trickled over the chink of the sluice into the dry bed of the canal below, its silence was
     broken by unfamiliar sounds.
First of all, by the now ceaseless splash of the thin, glassy curve of water on its way to
     find out this new road to the sea. It had a sort of dreamy whisper in it, as if it were telling
     its first impressions, its hopes, its fears, to the river it was leaving behind.
And on this background of ceaseless sound came two others intermittently.
The first--a muffled hammering from the darkness which hid the Viceroy's camp--told of
     departure, letting the night know that another white-winged tent was flitting, and that the
     dawn must be prepared to find its place empty, the dream-city in ruins, the Hosts of the
      Lord-sahib gone.
The second told of arrival. It was a strange cry, soft, almost musical:--
 "Hârâ--Hârî--Hârâ--Hârî!"
Then every now and again in a sort of chant: "Râm--Râm--Sita--Râm!"
It was the pilgrims' cry, their call on the Creator, the Destroyer, their appeal to the
     godhead in man and woman; for the forerunners of the great host to come were already nearing
     Eshwara on their road to the "Cradle of the Gods."
But there was a fourth sound, inaudible--by reason of that ceaseless noise of water through
     the chink of the sluice--except to those close by it, like George Dillon, as he stood on the
     hand-bridge above the closed gates looking down idly into the darkness which prevented him from
     seeing the cause of the sound. He had been up all night. On his return,--later than he had
     intended, owing to his determination not to be defied by any woman,--he had found that in his
     absence cholera had been hard at its work. So he had buckled to his, expecting one of those
     awful nights which live, even in a doctor's memory, as a horror, as a warning to those best
     fitted to stem the stream of death, that they are but straws on its surface.
But he had been mistaken. True, for an hour or so, cases had come in quicker than they could
     be attended to; then, suddenly, they ceased to come in at all. That had been eight hours ago.
     Too short a respite for certainty, but Dr. Dillon, being no novice in such work, had his hopes;
     the more so because the disease, from the very outset, had become steadily less and less
     virulent. Even so, seven dead bodies lay awaiting the first glint of dawn; therefore, as
     ill-luck would have it, there would be seven columns of smoke on the river's edge for all to
     see!
It was inevitable, however, nor could he do more to prevent others coming. So he had been on
     his way back to his own house for a few hours' rest when the dreamy splash of the water made
     him pause to lean over the hand-rail and listen to it, as he finished his cigar in the
     open.
Then it was that he heard a faint tap, tapping, as of a ghostly hand on a door. What was it?
     It was quite distinct, though almost as low as the "lip, lipping" of the water, made
     restless by that glassy curve against the gates.
A curiosity to know seized on him. There was already a glimmer of dawn in the east; he might
     as well wait and see.
It was not long before a streak of something faintly white made him call himself a fool. The
     cause was a log of wood. He might have thought of that. Even that faint setting of a stream
     towards a new way must have drifted it here. The thought made him frown, for this fulfilment of
     the river-people's prophecy was annoying; the more so from its absolute unlikelihood. Years
     might pass without such a chance coming again; yet it had come the very first day! It was too
     bad. The stars in their courses were fighting against him. In a pet he threw the remains of his
     cigar from him, and was striding off, when a faint glimmer, as of a candle, made him turn
     sharply and look down whence it came.
The lighted end of his cigar had fallen on something dry, inflammable, which had blazed up.
     But it was only for a second; the next found darkness, save for that still, faint, glimmer of
     white. But the brief gleam had told him it was not a log which had drifted astray--
It was a corpse.
That tap, tapping he had heard had been from the dead feet seeking vainly to pass
     through the chink of the sluice, swerving with the side current, coming back, again and again.
     He stood, grasping the rail, staring down at the dim outline almost incredulously, and feeling,
     despite himself, a trifle shivery.
Then the remembrance that this was a thing which must be seen by none, which somehow, and as
     quickly as possible, must be set on its right road again, made him hurry back to where he knew
     some coils of rope, which had been used for bunting at the ceremony, were lying. Seizing
     one--still gaily decorated--he tied a brick to one end, and hurried back to the bridge. By
     dropping this weighted rope over the dim white streak he was able to edge it gradually to one
     side, until it lay moored against the wall of the basin. Kneeling down for a closer look, he
     could see, in the fast-growing light, that it was the corpse of a woman. He could even guess
     the death she died, and if proof was needed, it could be found in the hands folded at full
     stretch down the body; the thumbs, pointing upward, linked by an iron ring. To this iron ring
     had been looped a little tuft of the tri-coloured hank of cotton which plays so large a part in
     marriage ceremonial. Dr. Dillon stood up and swore under his breath.
The fates were, indeed, inexorable in their spite. Of all things unlucky for the changing
     stream to claim, a corpse seeking union with Mother Ganges was the worst; and of all corpses,
     this--the cursed one, which had held two lives and could send one back to haunt men--was the
     worst.
He must get rid of it somehow, if he could.
Fastening the rope, so strangely out of keeping, all hung as it was with gay colours, to the
     iron ring which showed about the ankles, he proceeded to tow the body back along the basin,
     past the first gates, and so to the river itself. Thus far was simple. But how was he to get it
     afloat on a current strong enough to sweep it beyond danger of its returning to tap at the
     gates once more?
The dawn was hastening with great leaps of light that shot in broad bars from the darkest
     spot in all the dark horizon; the spot which would soon be the brightest, ablaze with the sun
     himself. Already the broad shield of the river was changing its heraldry--the sable was turning
     to steel, sign that the world would side with the light.
What was to be done?
He looked over the wide waste of sand and water, with a perplexity which vanished suddenly in
     a smile, as he caught sight of a round shadow like a man's head dipping and dancing on the
     surface. He walked on to the last dry spot of land and shouted--
"Ai! fisherman! Ai! Gu-gu! Am-ma! anybody! Come and earn a gold mohur!"
It was Am-ma. Luckily, perhaps, since the idea of even towing a dead body such as this might
     have been too much for semi-civilized Gu-gu. Am-ma, however, had not ever borrowed his
     neighbours' superstitions. In fact, ever since he, the Miss-sahiba and the
      Dee-puk-râg had bested the devil between them, he had felt himself to be
     invulnerable. So, he assured Dr. Dillon affably, were the Huzoors; therefore he obeyed
     them. Consequently, less than five minutes after the call, with a vague wonder as to what
     sixteen rupees would feel like, all at once, in a man's palm, he was heading hard to the
     nearest stream capable of carrying the thing he had in tow back to the path of purification.
     This happened to be towards Eshwara, and beyond a sandy point set with tamarisks which jutted
     out above the canal head. There was, of course, a certain stream against him, and to save
     himself exertion and finish the job--as he had agreed to do--before dawn, he swam for the most
     part under water, only coming up, after his habit, for air.
Now it so happened, also, that Gu-gu had thought fit to set nets for wild-fowl, and was even
     now dozing, while he waited for the result, in the same tamarisk jungle. But the sound of
     something swishing through the water against the stream roused him in a second, and even
     without the glimpse, which the coming dawn gave him, of a long streak parting the river with a
     curved ripple like the prow of a boat, his experience told him what it was sure to be. Briefly,
     someone of the river people,--Am-ma for choice, since who but Am-ma had the luck of such
     things--had happened on the chance of stealing a log from the piles about the canal workshops.
     He was now, after time-honoured precedent, towing it to the stream where, having set it adrift,
     he would recapture it, and, of course, claim his reward for so doing!
But two could play that game. When secrecy made it necessary for a thief to swim for the most
     part under water, it was easy to swim under water too, across the track of the robber, cut his
     prize adrift, and put your weight on the rope instead.
Then you could either choose revenge, and let an enemy tow you home--which was a
     side-splitting trick,--or you might wait till your adversary came up breathless, and dash after
     the prize yourself. Even if you could not secure the whole, half profits were generally
     possible.
Therefore, slipping noiselessly into the stream like an alligator, he was off across the
     track in a second; swimming, of course, under water. He came, up once for air, and smiled to
     see how far he had come; so, fearing lest the holder of the unseen tow-rope might chance to
     come up at the same time, his black head went under once more.
When it came up again, it was within a few yards of the long white streak. He gave one look
     at it, let loose a yell of abject terror, and almost turning a somersault in his haste to
     escape, his head went down again, his feet went skywards, and though his lungs nearly burst in
     the effort, he came up no more till he felt certain he must have put a screen of tamarisk
     between him and the horror. He had; but his teeth chattered, his eyes were half out of his head
     when he scrambled, hands and knees, on to the bank, and lying face down on the dry sand, moaned
     and shuddered. What else could a man do who had seen a cursed corpse breasting the stream on
     its way back to Eshwara? To whose house? That, however, was quite a secondary consideration to
     a man who was already as good as dead; since what man had ever survived the sight of a
      churail?
The certainty of his own fate, after a while, made him absolutely, recklessly, calm. He
     gathered up his nets, wrung the necks of the few birds he had caught pitilessly, and went with
     them, as usual, to the bazaars. Not only for profit, however. Other men should taste of his
     fear. Other men should know that they too might have to die!
Am-ma, meanwhile, having seen nothing when he came up wondering what the sound was which had
     filtered to his ears through the water, had gone on his way unwitting, found the stream, cut
     the corpse adrift himself, and gone back to his fishing.
It was not until he also went into the bazaar with his basket, that he found it ringing with
     the direful portent; yet for all that going its way buying and selling, squabbling over the
     uttermost part of a farthing; since portents are ever with an Indian bazaar. At first, when
     called upon to verify Gu-gu's story, Am-ma, remembering his promise of secrecy, gave it stout
     denial; but when the real truth of what had occurred dawned on his slow brain, the opportunity
     for piling agony on to his rival was too strong for him, and he burst into details, all of
     which made Gu-gu's chance of escape still more remote. The corpse had shot after him with a
     speed only equal to the fire-boats in which the Huzoors came across the black water;
     it had sat up, and beckoned, and called "Gu-gu! Gu-gu!"
"But if thou hast seen all this, thou, too, must die!" remarked the syrup-seller round whose
     shop the talk was loudest.
Am-ma laughed vaingloriously. "Not I! The devils are afraid of me. See you, I have taken the
      Huzoors for my God; I am on the strong side."
"Hark to him!" jeered another of his own tribe who was also selling fish. "He cannot balance
     his basket on his head, he holds it so high since the wood-sahib up the river hath
     bidden him guide their big raft,--as if he was a whit better than the rest of us!"
Am-ma smiled peacefully. "That is true, brother. I go for the raft this very day. But I leave
     a son in my house, if the luck goes against me. That is the Huzoors' doing. They have
     the Dee-puk-râg. They are the Light-bringers, the Birth-bringers!"
A tall man, in curiously crumpled clothing, who had just joined the group, gave a hollow
     laugh. "Birth-bringers!" he echoed. "Ay! and Death-bringers, too. They took seven in the gaol
     last night. I have it from a sure hand." That might well be, seeing that he was none other than
     the gosain Gopi, who, scarcely an hour agone, had been given his ticket-of-leave and
     the clothes in which he had been convicted two years before. They had since then been rolled
     up, and ticketed with his name and number; hence the creases.
"The doctor cuts a hole in their heads," he went on calmly, "takes out their brains, and puts
     the bit back. Then 'tis cholera. That is why they burn them in their clothing and their
      caps, so that none may see. But they say, 'tis for the safety of the living;
     as if that did not lie with the Gods!"
"Hark to him!" said approving voices. "Yea! hark to him, the pious one!"
The long bazaar lay flooded with sunshine and life. The quails were calling from their hooded
     cages, the sacred monkeys were chattering about the sweetmeat-sellers' shops, men and women
     were going about eager on their own affairs, and a group of schoolboys on their way to a
     mission school came along, their books under their arms,--a quaint collection, for the most
     part. A copy of the Gospels, Sa'adi's Gulistan, and the Hitopadesa, certainly; a treatise, in
     English, on the latest theories of mind and matter, equally so; selections from general
     literature, probably; with Burke's speeches and Addison's Spectator, possibly.
One or two of these boys paused in their school talk to listen, as a voice said
     fearfully:--
"'Twill be for 'momai' they want them. Folks say they are running short of
     power."
Gopi shook his head. "That may be; but these are to grease the slots of the canal sluice;
     without it, water will not run. One brain--his, that they killed with the light--opened it but
     one inch; as all can see if they choose. And these seven will not go far. What matter? There be
     plenty more where they came from."
The gossipers looked at each other. "Yea! that is so. It opens but an inch, and there are
     many prisoners," they said, with that curious faculty for giving heart-whole assent to the
     truthful foundations of a lie which makes the latter go so far in India.
The boys went on. There was nothing about the dynamic and hydraulic power of a man's brain in
     their treatises; but, after all, the statement was scarcely so strange to ignorance as many
     another held in the books under their arms.
"The times are bad," remarked someone, chiefly to give a fresh fillip to the flagging
     horrors. "They say the 'Pool of Immortality,' will be dry to-morrow."
A trail of saffron-robed pilgrims who were passing, under the charge of a priest, looked at
     their guide doubtfully. If this was to be so, what was the use of having given him a rupee each
     to be admitted thereto at the most auspicious moment?
"Lo! 'tis easy to father that falsehood!" cried the priest in charge, venomously eyeing a
     similar figure to his own, which was also followed patiently, trustfully, by a band of men and
     women and children, all in their saffron robes. "When folks have had their own miracle stopped,
     they would fain stop other folks' also. Have no fear, my children! The sacred water will rise
     as ever, and send your souls blameless to the 'Cradle of the Gods.'"
It would have been easy enough for his rival to throw doubts on the genuineness of the pool
     miracle, had it been sound policy to do so; but before those patient, trustful faces, desirous
     only to save their souls alive at any cost, it was unwise to sap at the foundations of faith.
     So the reply contented itself with assertions that there was no fear either, for them. Tampion
     or no tampion, jogi Gorakh-nâth had promised to be inside the gun as ever. And that
     would be a newer, a better, miracle, than any other in Eshwara!
Here a fresh voice put in its word; for the syrup-seller's shop, being at one corner of the
     central square or chowk of four bazaars, no one who had any errand of any sort in
     Eshwara could fail to pass it sooner or later. Therefore, Dya Ram and some other pleaders, on
     their way thus early in the morning to the tahsil court, were bound to overhear the priest's
     boast.
"But most undesirable, nevertheless," expostulated Dya Ram, quickly. "We have duly appealed
     against the order to the higher court, and our legal course is to await the result."
The priest looked at him, sullenly scornful; for such as he are no favourites with the
     hereditary Levites of India.
"The jogi hath appealed to the Gods," he retorted, "and they will give judgment
     without the help of such as thou, pleader-jee!"
"Hark to the pious one!" murmured the crowd again, admiringly responsive, as ever, to a hint
     of religious sentiment.
"But it will confuse issues--it is irregular--and I who drew up the petition object in
      toto," began Dya Ram in angry protest, when a friend interrupted him consolingly in
     English.
"True. As it has been said, it is impossible to serve God and Mammon; yet seeing that
     miracles are, as Herbert Spencer proves, ipsi facto--"
The ludicrous inadequacy of logic to the mental caliber of those around him, struck one of
     the little party of progress keenly, and he broke in, as he passed on, "What is the use of
     combatting such ignorance? It is for us--who represent the intellect of India--to pioneer the
     way--"
The rest was lost as the little party went on discussing their own position.
"Mayhap 'twas to Ramanund's house the churail was coming; there was such a corpse
     went from it a week or two since; and they return from far," said an old man, looking after the
     last speaker.
Gopi, the gosain, laughed. "This one, I'll wager, was sent back because of the
     canal. Mark my words, Mai Gunga will return them all now. 'Tis the Huzoors'
     doing."
A curious shiver ran through the crowd of men. To have your women against you, to feel in
     your heart that they cannot help being revengeful, that their blood is on your head, is ever
     the greatest of dreads. And so many lives held the possibility of this revenge.
Am-ma, philosophically seated on the outskirts of the group, trying to sell his fish, laughed
     vaingloriously again.
"Only for fools! The miss-sahiba and the lights, and I, can defy devils."
Here he stood up, and, with frightful grimaces of joy and uncouth salaams, greeted the
     appearance of Erda Shepherd, who, in the mission-lady's uniform of blouse and skirt, white pith
     hat, green veil, and bag of books, came out of a neighbouring alley.
It was not a becoming dress, Lance Carlyon told himself, as, on his way back from escort duty
     to some lingering bigwig of the camp, he, at the same moment, came cantering up the bazaar
     towards the Fort.
She could not say the same of his. It was the first time she had seen him in uniform, and the
     sight of the scarlet and gold, the buttons, the fal-lals generally, took her breath away. There
     are, in fact, few women whom they do not impress.
Yet, curiously enough, her impulse was to pass on without speaking; his, to do what he did,
     namely, pull up, dismount, and shake hands. And still more curiously, the reason for both these
     impulses was the same; the presence beside Erda of a tall, rather weedy-looking man, with a
     long, black coat and a long, red beard.
"Let me introduce my cousin, the Reverend David Campbell," said Erda, with great dignity,
     somewhat marred by a fine blush.
"I thought it must be," rejoined Lance, coolly. He might have said he was certain of it; that
     a fellow could scarcely feel a desire to murder another fellow at an instant's notice, unless
     that fellow was your rival.
Yet, still more curiously again, this notion of rivalry had come to Lance in an instant also.
     Before he caught sight of Erda and her fiancé he would have sworn that though he had
     been a bit cut up at hearing the nicest girl he had ever met was already engaged, he had never
     had the remotest idea of fighting against the fact. But the first glance at the two walking
     together had changed all this. Here by God's grace was the one maid for him. And another man
     had--
Not a bad looking chap, certainly. Better dressed, too, than most missionaries. That was
     because he was fresh out from England. Any fool, though, could be that with an English tailor.
     Yes, not a bad sort; but not the sort for her.
"You've been out on your rounds, I suppose," he said, pointing to Erda's books.
"Yes," answered the Reverend David, with eager assent, and the benevolent smile which
     includes the smiler's own virtue in smiling; "and I have been privileged for the first time to
     see somewhat of the noble work Englishwomen are doing for their Indian sisters. It is no easy
     task, Mr. Carlyon, for delicate--"
"I like it," put in Erda, with a faint frown at the missionary-report style of her cousin's
     enthusiasm. "So there is no use wasting your pity on me, David."
"Pity!" he echoed, in appropriating approval. "I did not even pity you when they called you
     evil names." Being of the new school of Free church ministers, he put all possible ill into
     ev-il like any ritualistic curate.
"Do they call you names?" asked Lance, sharply.
Erda gave a vexed look at her cousin. For the first time in her life the militant joy at
     persecution of the true proselytizer failed her.
"Sometimes, not often," she said, quite apologetically. "They happened to do so to-day, and
     David heard it; there are so many strangers about, you see, who don't know me."
"And what did you do?" Lance's eyes were on the Reverend David this time.
"Do?" repeated the latter, in faint surprise. "Nothing, of course. We missionaries hear such
     things joyfully--for--for the Work's sake." There was dignity in his tone and manner.
"By Jove!" said Lance, softly, under his breath, "if I'd been there, there would have been a
     row. Besides," he added, quite argumentatively, "if I believed in my work as you do I'd be
     hanged if I let anybody 'krab'[9] it--or me--for
     it's the same thing. Not at least, without trying to make 'em answer for it all I know."
The Reverend David Campbell shook his head. "That is not our view. Erda, the meeting is at
     nine, and it is already the half-hour. To-morrow, you see, Mr. Carlyon, is our field-day, and
     we have to arrange our forces."
Once more the flavour of the missionary report made Erda shrink, but Lance nodded.
"A field-day for most of us. I expect to be in the saddle all day. Good-by, Miss
     Shepherd."
But something in the girl rose up in revolt at parting with him thus. When he had been out of
     sight, she had faced the probability of never seeing him any more with equanimity. Now she felt
     that she must tell him she was leaving Eshwara the very next day, or the day after; that she
     must make this a real good-by.
"I have to see another old woman in an alley close by first, David," she said. "You had
     better go on and let me follow."
Yet when he had gone, after another joyously militant pæan over the work, she stood silent.
     It seemed somehow too sunshiny for words. Then she looked up at Lance, and her heart sank. For
     something in his face told her, in an instant, that she had been too long in letting him know
     of her engagement to her cousin. The fact, by rousing her indignation,--since it was impossible
     to go about proclaiming that you were not available for idle people to fall in love
     with,--helped her to be hard.
"You need not have been so fierce just now," she said, with an unreal little laugh. "People
     won't have many more chances of calling me names in Eshwara. I told you, didn't I, that I was
     going; but it will be sooner than I expected--to-morrow, or next day."
"Then I shan't see you again?" He grasped the meaning to him in an instant, and the wondering
     pain in his voice awoke an echo in her heart.
"I suppose so; for Mr. Campbell's appointment will be at the other end of India; unless,
     indeed--" she could not withstand his look--"my Aunt has asked a few friends in to tea this
     afternoon to say good-by. If you, or Captain Dering, cared--"
"Of course I'll come," he interrupted quietly. "Now which way are you going, for I am going
     too?"
She looked at him helplessly. "But you can't," she began.
"Oh, yes, I can! I'll finish the smoke you interrupted, while you polish off the old lady.
     They're not going to have a chance of--of abusing the work again."
He had a most ingenious way of appealing to her sense of humour, and though it was partly at
     her cousin's expense, she laughed as they set off together--a most incongruous couple. He had
     little time for his smoke, however, for he had barely left off watching the point where she had
     disappeared, for any hint of felonious calling of names, when she reappeared in company with
     Father Ninian, the latter looking almost pope-like, yet also curiously native, in the white
     washing soutane and skull-cap which he invariably wore in his visitations. His face
     was rather stern, and he had his spectacles on.
"Ah! Mr. Carlyon," he said, surprised in his turn, "I am glad. Will you take Miss Shepherd
     home? I want to go over to Dr. Dillon at once: and I have advised her not to visit in this
     quarter to-day. There are many lodging houses for the pilgrims, and--"
"Did they call names?" asked Lance, belligerent at once.
The old man looked at him sharply, almost angrily. "No one ever called me names, sir; still
     less a lady who was with me. But excuse me--I am pressed for time."
"Now, that's a man!" said Lance, enthusiastically, as he looked after the hurrying white
     figure. The comparison was too obvious.
"Father Ninian is not a missionary," she said coldly. "It is easy for him--" she paused,
     turned to her companion, and held out her hand. "Good-by, and thanks; but I really can go home
     by myself, Mr. Carlyon."
"Good-by," he echoed; then, holding her hand still, a sudden resolve seemed to come to him.
     "But--I should like to tell you something first, please."--
She felt her heart beating everywhere but in its proper place.
--"Not that it matters, but I'd like you to know it. I had some news by the mail this
     morning--bad news."
She felt her blood everywhere but in its normal course, now, in sheer shame at her own
     imaginations. "I'm sorry," she murmured.
"So am I," he went on thoughtfully; "though it isn't bad in a way for me. Do you remember my
     telling you about my cousin? a weedy chap, six-four. Well, they sent him round the world for
     his health, and he died two months ago, it seems, in Australia. And the shock was too much for
     my uncle; he was an old man, and this was his only son. So--so I am Sir Lancelot now. It
     doesn't make any odds, of course, but I thought I should like you to know, first."
She looked up at him as he stood beside her, so tall, so strong, so young, so kind; and
     though she only said, "Thanks, Sir Lancelot, it won't make any difference to--to our
     friendship, I'm sure," she knew in her heart of hearts that it did. Though how, she had not yet
     had time to discover.
</div></body></text></TEI>