<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Hosts of the Lord</title><author>Steel, Flora Annie (1847-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="24">
BEYOND THE SHADOW
The fact that the quarrel had begun did not, however, have the same effect upon Roshan
     Khân.
In the first tempest of rage and hate which the sight of Laila and Vincent in the balcony had
     roused in him he had simply let himself go. He had not thought at all. Had his revolver held
     other cartridges, he would have gone on shooting at Vincent, Pidar Narâyan, at everybody, till
     he could shoot no more. He had run â-mak; that curious phase of the Oriental mind when
     once it oversteps the hard and fast lines of custom in which it moves and breathes and has its
     being.
The very fact that his revolver did not contain more possibilities for death, that he had no
     other weapon, emphasized his wild revolt.
He was helpless--impotent--before these strangers, who had stolen everything! Everything,
     save bare existence. This thought, as he burst into the open, into the lurid darkness of the
     new-come storm, had made him laugh bitterly; for it was only that bare existence which
      he wished to steal! They might keep the rest; but that he would claim from
     them somehow, in fair exchange.
The time was ripe for such exchange too,--for fair exchange. (The epithet "fair" haunted him,
     trying to still the keen remorse for that shot in the dark; for one part of him knew it to have
     been cowardly.) Yes! this useless plot, with foolish mischief hidden in its heart, to which he
     had just been listening with loyal intent to frustrate it, could be made to serve his purpose
     without delay. His men would follow him anywhere. He had but to say the word--the word so many
     of them wanted. Then, those thieves of all that made life worth living would learn a lesson.
     They would fight and win, of course; but the lesson that without such men as he--men whom they
     thwarted and repressed at every turn--they could not rely upon their regiments, would have to
     be learnt. And in the learning, one thief would learn something else.
So, without more thought than this desperate clashing of jealousy and despair, he had dashed
     through the crowd of pilgrims who were waiting for the dawn, gone back to the Fort, and given
     the word.
In the excitement which followed, spreading swiftly from his own, he had not--and it was
     typical of the man that he did not--forget Lance Carlyon's friendliness; a more equal
     friendliness than that of most. There was no need to drag him into the quarrel, the more so
     because the disloyalty of the Sikh pioneers was doubtful. They might complicate matters at the
     beginning. So he had locked and barred them into the inner courtyard, out of the way.
But Captain Dering, he knew, was outside! Let him be alone with his troopers, as he, Roshan
     would be alone with them! Let them both try their influence; let them try conclusions on these
     terms. That was but fair.
This first step, however, necessitated others. The original plot, with its waiting for the
     dawn, its cumbrous mechanism of keys, and pilgrims, and God knows what, was not to his liking.
     He meant to fight. And if, as the conspirators had asserted, some of the warders were friends
     hand and foot, his men could crack the nut of the gaol in half an hour. The sooner the
     better.
Pidar Narâyan, he knew, had recognized him, and he was a fox for wiliness. Then, Captain
     Dering must be after him even now. And Dillon-sahib might be on the alert any time. So
     the coup de main must come at once. As to what might follow, that might be after the
     fashion of Meerut in '57, or not. Who could tell the end of anything? The beginning would be an
     opportunity for fair fight between him and a thief. Once more the epithet "fair" scorched and
     shrivelled him with vague remorse, not for Laila--she was but a woman, a woman who had played
     him false and who deserved the worst--but for that shot in the dark.
For there were two Roshans, warring fiercely in heart and brain.
Then, after his mad, reckless ride to the gaol, the first realities had come to him in the
     sight of Dr. Dillon, standing with the light in his hand to welcome friends; and in the sound
     of those two snap-shots proclaiming foes.
Why? The question had come swiftly. What quarrel had he with Dr. Dillon? Or with Eugene
     Smith, whose tall, gaunt figure showed behind the other? Eugene Smith, who must have brought
     his wife, his child, with him!
The horror, the terror of what might come, swept through the quondam prize pupil of a mission
     school; the horror, the terror, in the remembrance of the Great Mutiny, which is, alas! a
     legacy of wrong to young India. Which ties her hand and foot; which makes those who are worthy
     of the name shrink instinctively from anything which may rouse the underlying savagery--the
     unavoidable savagery--of their countrymen.
Could he hold his troopers? Could he be sure? He had come to curse. Was it too late to
     bless?
Then the memory of Laila--the whole hateful tale which was irrevocable--struck him hopeless.
     He was damned utterly; he could not escape.
He sat rigid as a statue on his horse for a second; then with a wild fury gave the orders for
     his troopers to dismount and force the gates.
"Your slaves, Nawab-sahib!" had come the answer, making him smile proudly.
      That, at any rate, could not be stolen from him now. Now he could
     fight and die in what should have been his real position.
Yet, once more, when the search-light had come to throw that group of excited men hacking and
     hewing at doors closed by authority into significant black-and-white relief, that doubt had
     returned; that desire to be on the side, once more, of men like Dr. Dillon, whose bold resolve
     to be alone responsible for his gaol, which the warder's tale revealed, filled him with
     admiration.
But that sudden throwing up of a trooper's hands, that sidelong stumble into death, had left
     Roshan cruel as death itself; for the man thus killed had been to him as a brother.
So he had gone on with a fresh impulse towards revenge, and for a time found forgetfulness in
     the excitement, the action. For though the first gate, that one giving on the open sort of
     porch, had yielded, almost at once, to the troopers outside and the warders within, the second,
     barring the arched tunnel, was a tougher job. It was not until this had given way, and the
     attacking party were completely sheltered from the fire of the little garrison on the roof,
     that there was leisure for that thought to return: "What am I doing? Why am I doing it?"
No man, it may be said broadly, ever fights without feeling that the battle is an appeal to a
     tribunal beyond himself, and Roshan did not feel this. Then the remembrance of the woman, the
     child, upstairs came persistently, burdened by the weight of that past tragedy which, in India,
     it is impossible to forget. And this was a woman who had always been courteous to him, a child
     to whom he had given toys.
What was he doing?
The men were at work on the last, the strongest gate, with every tool they could find. Not
     many, for Dr. Dillon's forethought had left them before barred doors everywhere. The delay had
     already been great; would be greater. They must be close now on the lines of the original plot,
     at which Roshan had laughed, for the dawn was showing faintly--a mere promise of light to
     come--in the east. And the storm was passing. The dull reverberations of faint thunder were
     lost now in the cries, the blows of those at work trying to batter down the iron bars.
A sudden distaste--more than regret or repentance--came to Roshan as he stood silent,
     watching blow after blow; a sudden doubt.
Which was the right? No man worth calling a man ever fights for anything else; every man
     worth calling one fights for that. But which was right? Those men, hacking and hewing, or the
     little garrison upstairs?
There were no such searchings of heart there, at any rate; no question as to what they were
     doing, though at that exact moment they were engaged in the trivial occupation of drinking
     tea.
Muriel Smith had made it, at Dr. Dillon's suggestion, against this very pause; this
      "cease firing" which he had foreseen. And in the making of it she had used a
     continental tea-basket which more than once had been her companion on the Brindisi
      route. Dr. Dillon had laid hands on it in his foraging, and as she had boiled the
     kettle, the rush and roar of a train racing through the peaceful French champaignes had seemed
     to be in her ears, instead of that rush and roar of blows and shouting which was now rising
     from every part of the gaol; though the prisoners were still helpless for evil in their
     sections.
So the three men, haggard, anxious, drank their tea in silence, hastily; yet with a curious
     insistence, as if the triviality gave them a hold on things familiar, things beyond this
     midsummer-night's dream of madness. But the child chattered as she munched a biscuit; chattered
     of the charms of this strange picnic on the "woof, in the dark with oo's nighty an'
      s'ippers only."
The unconscious little voice struck a chill to the men's hearts, but the woman smiled, as
     mothers can do when they wish to guard that blessed unconsciousness to the last; the
     unconsciousness of which they are guardians by right.
"We are doing as well as could be expected," remarked Dr. Dillon, suddenly, with a quaint
     professional reminiscence; then added, "I wish to God, though, I knew what my prisoners were up
     to--those solitary cellers are on my mind--I believe the convalescents could dig them out with
     the cook-room platters and ladles. I ought to have thought of that. But, as I say, we are doing
     very fairly well--your light, Dering, was a godsend."
Eugene Smith looked up sharply, almost as if he meant a disclaimer; then he gave a brief
     assent. "Yes! but that will be more of a godsend still--it is the dawn!"
He pointed to that faint promise of light in the east, and Vincent Dering's eyes followed his
     hand with the doubtful look of one sick to death, as he watches the long weary night merge once
     more into another long weary day of certain pain. There was an utter hopelessness in it.
"Yes," he echoed slowly, "that is the dawn."
"Carlyon said the attack was planned for dawn, didn't he?" asked the doctor, deliberately
     helping himself to another lump of sugar, deliberately trying to keep the pulse beats of those
     around him as near normal as might be--and there had been something beyond it in Vincent's
     voice. "They must have meant to use the keys that brute Kishen Rao made off with. I wonder what
     it was that started the show prematurely?"
"Do you think it was premature? Why?" put in Eugene Smith.
"We should have had some of the townspeople, some of the pilgrims otherwise."
"Perhaps the storm"--began Vincent.
The doctor shook his head. "If they had meant to come they would have come. Of course now,
     with the wind blowing straight off us, they can't possibly hear."
He paused and listened, for a sudden silence had fallen on the turmoil beneath, and out of it
     came an all too familiar sound, the clank of leg irons. Some of the prisoners, therefore, had
     managed to break out of their dormitories; or were these the solitary cellers?
"I wish Carlyon would turn up," he muttered, almost petulantly, "it's our only chance--"
But there was to be another; for, from below, a voice rose loud and clear.
"Dr. Dillon! I have no desire to hurt you or yours, but I warn you that, if you persist, I am
     not responsible. Open the gates, and you shall have a safe conduct--for--for everybody."
George Dillon was on his feet at once, but Captain Dering stopped him; his eyes ablaze.
"What shall I tell him, Dillon?" he said sharply. "I'll take my orders from you--you're in
     charge; but that man is under mine. What shall I say?"
Dr. Dillon gave one glance at the woman and the child. "Tell him to be universally damned,"
     he answered; and Eugene Smith, husband and father, nodded acquiescence.
Roshan Khân was standing in full view as Vincent Dering stepped up to the parapet. His face
     was raised; there was almost an appeal in it. But every atom of that, every atom almost of
     humanity, vanished as he recognized his captain. His hand went instinctively to his
     revolver.
Then a thought seemed to come to him. He drew himself up proudly, and waited for the
     answer.
It came, keen as a knife.
"Risaldar! draw off your men and return to barracks, or I'll shoot you as a
     mutineer."
There was half a second's silence; then a wild laugh: "Close up, men, rush that
     gate--forward!"
The words and the crack of Vincent's revolver--the bullet of which, aimed too high, passed
     through Roshan's turban-were almost lost in the answering yell. But the risaldar stood
     his ground for a second, then coolly sought shelter.
That was over! They were quits now for the fair fight. And fate had been kind. He had
     unwittingly offered this man--his greatest enemy--a safe conduct; and it had been refused,
     luckily. Well! let Vincent Dering take the whole consequences. The blood of one woman was
     already on his head; so would be the blood spilt here. He, Roshan, would need have no further
     scruples.
So, as if it had gained strength from the brief respite, the turmoil recommenced; and now
     Roshan Khân's voice could be heard urging the men on. And there were answering shouts from
     different parts of the gaol.
George Dillon frowned. "They mean business now. And I fancy I hear pounding at the left
     section door. If so we shall have the solitary cell men--my worst lot, of course--out in the
     courtyard before long. Dering--can you hear anything?--there's such a confounded noise--"
Vincent, who was standing at the top of the stairs which led to the ten-feet drop, ran down a
     few steps and listened. Then he looked up quickly and nodded.
"They are there. The door's shaking. How many of them are there?"
"Two dozen or thereabouts; and the convalescents, of course. That's nothing--if they haven't
     got their leg irons off! We ought to settle most of them before they can help with the door.
     Still, I wish Carlyon would turn up."
A sudden hurry and urgency had come to the struggle, and Dr. Dillon passed restlessly to the
     other side of the roof. The sky was lightening faintly. More because the dust had sought dust
     again, the earth earth, than from any increase of light; and so the broad ray of the
     search-light, widening as it went, lost itself in the distant darkness, and there was nothing
     to be seen riverwards. But close at hand two men--one in a warder's uniform--were running
     towards the gaol, shouting.
The doctor was back to the inner parapet in a second. "Look out! they've got the keys
     now--not of this door, but some of the sections--and the alley. The game's up unless
     Carlyon--Mrs. Smith, please--you had better go into the turret--we shall be shooting
     free--"
Eugene, who had been standing beside her, laid his hand on her shoulder. "Yes, dear!" he said
     gently; "go inside--it will be better for Gladys--and for me--"
Muriel turned white, but stood quite firm, quite calm. "Come, little girlie," she said,
     holding out her hand to the child. "You've had your tea--it's bedtime--I can't have you sitting
     up all--" she broke down a little, partly because she was passing Vincent, and he, busy loading
     various rifles and revolvers, kept his eyes studiously from her. But Gladys did not choose to
     pass her friend in this fashion. She paused, a dainty little figure in a blue dressing-gown,
     like her mother, and with the same fluffy golden curls about her coaxing, delicate little
     child's face.
"Dood-night, Derin' darlin'," she said. "I'm so glad 'oo's here, an' so's--"
Something that was not all desire to check that formula made the man pause, too, to lift her
     gently, and kiss her.
"Good-night, Gladys. You mustn't be frightened at anything, you know. You've got to be a
     brave girl--haven't you?" The coaxing face was close to the haggard, haunted-looking one.
"If 'oo's goin' to be brave, Derin' darlin', I'll be brave too. Is 'oo, dearest?"
The haggardness vanished.
"I think so, little one. Good-night." He put the child down hastily, at a crash. The moment
     for courage had come.
"Shoot as straight as you can!" shouted the doctor. "The section door's gone. Let 'em have
     it!"
The door had gone, indeed; and in a second the courtyard beneath them was half full of naked,
     desperate men; the worst characters in the gaol.
"Pick off the ones nearest the gate--don't let 'em touch the bolts--it's good for another ten
     minutes if we can keep them from it," came the doctor's voice in jerks, as he leant over the
     parapet just above the centre of the door below, and carried out his own orders with deadly
     effect; though his heart sank when he saw that some of the prisoners were unironed--or rather
     unironed on one leg, and that they were armed with the other iron; a deadly enough weapon at
     close quarters. Besides, it meant more treachery. It meant a previous filing of the
     ankle-fetters; and if others in the remaining sections were as free--
He shot quicker, steadier, while Eugene Smith and Vincent, one above the other on the top of
     the stair, did the same, taking the intruders on the flank. It was growing lighter every
     instant, the air was clearer, the breeze of dawn was sweeping the smoke of the rifles
     riverwards, the great white wheel of the gaol was growing broader in its outlines, the shadows
     were shrinking. But the storm seemed still there, in the ceaseless reverberations.
"They're up to something in the far corner!" called Eugene. "What is it, Dillon? You can see
     better."
The doctor ceased firing for a second, and ran farther down the parapet.
"The keys! the keys!" he shouted back. "They are trying to pass in the keys! Shoot the
     devils--those in the corner! Don't let 'em--or the gaol is gone!"
So, for the next minute, it was deadly work down in that corner by the crevice through which
     some unseen hand was thrusting something. Three times a man, clutching at the prize, fell in a
     heap ere he touched it. Then a fourth pitched forward against the doors with the keys in his
     hand, and a fifth, groping for them, rolled over on his side with them hidden under his dead
     body. And from outside the gate came rendings, and crashings, and yells; from above, that call,
     "Shoot straight, or the gaol's gone!"
Muriel crept out from shelter, possessed once more by that frantic desire to see to the very
     end, and stood looking down on those two on the stairs. She gave a faint cry when Vincent flung
     his rifle away, and ran down to that ten-foot drop for revolver practice. At the sound, her
     husband gave one quick look up, and followed suit.
But their own success was against them. The growing pile of the wounded formed a barricade,
     behind which a man, squirming with covetous hands among the dead and dying, found what he
     sought.
"He's got them! Stop him! stop him!"
There was a fusillade, the man dropped; but the keys were in another
     hand--another--another--passing outwards from the crush--outwards towards that low door at the
     end of the narrow alley.
Without a word, Vincent, revolver in hand, let himself drop on the heads below.
"Oh, don't, Vincent, don't!" came a woman's voice; and at the sound, another man gave that
     swift look up once more, and followed suit.
"Let them be!" said Dr. Dillon, sharply. "Let them do what they can; it is about the only
     chance." And still, as he spoke, he kept singling out a foe and firing.
The chance, even with his help, was a poor one in that crowd, where there was always another
     dark hand to snatch at the prize, and pass it nearer to the door--that door which was the key
     to so much!
Yet, the crush through which they fought lessening, those two Englishmen found themselves
     with the straight alley before them for a race. A race against three men, without arms, but
     without irons; and with a fair start. While close behind was the crush--the crowd!
It was nothing but a race, now, since the revolvers had done their worst, had fired their
     last shot; a race with the hope--if Vincent could come up with those three--of using a Goorkha
      kukri, which he had thrust into the yellow silk sash he wore instead of a waistcoat
     beneath his red jacket--thrust it therewith an ugly frown as a last argument for his foes, when
     he had seen it lying among the pile of miscellaneous weapons Dr. Dillon had foraged from the
     Smiths' house. It had a dainty ivory handle--Vincent had given it to Mrs. Smith himself, and
     its last use had been to cut the pages of a fashion paper--
It had a sterner job now.
But Vincent was behind; a yard or two--no more. He had fired one more shot before beginning
     the race, and Eugene's legs were longer. Yet the yard meant all things, and he knew it; so as
     he ran, his hand sought the knife.
"Look out, Smith! look out!" he called. "I'll chuck you my kukri; get on and job
     them; I'll keep the others back--a bit."
As he spoke, a glittering curve sped from his hand to the other man's feet.
Then he pulled up and faced the crowd behind with his clubbed revolver.
The lane was very narrow. Three men could barely breast it shoulder to shoulder. Surely one
     could bar it by swift blows and slow retreat! For a time, at any rate--time for the opening and
     shutting of a door! He could but try.
"Oh! what is he going to do?" gasped the woman who was watching.
"I appose he's going to be brave, mum," said the child, who clutched at her hand, watching,
     too, with great, wide, uncomprehending eyes.
But the man beside them held his breath.
So retreating, step by step, Vincent Dering kept the crowd back, lured the crowd on, safe--so
     far! For these, the first, the swiftest, were naturally the unironed, therefore, the unarmed.
     But there were others, forcing their way to the front, who would be harder to deal with.
Vincent threw his head back and wondered how Eugene was faring; for he dared not turn his
     face from his task even for a second.
Had those three been caught up? Had the kukri helped?
It had. And one of those three had fallen before a flash, as of light.
And another!
But the third had the key in the door; had turned it, when Eugene struck him from behind.
     With a wild yell he flung his full weight on the door; it burst open, and the two fell headlong
     into the tower beyond.
But only for a second. Eugene Smith was up again, had the key out, and in on the further
     side.
"All right!" he shouted; "make a rush for it! I'm ready!"
Vincent Dering gave one sharp look round. The door was not four yards from him, but the crowd
     was not one. There was no time. "Shut it," he called, "I'm all right."
Eugene Smith stood uncertain; the door ajar.
The keys! ah! what could he do with the keys if he went back to help--and if not--
"Oh! please shut it, Smith! there's a good fellow; please."
The four yards were two now, were one. Then slowly the door closed, and Vincent had his back
     against it.
"Oh, Vincent! Vincent!"
The agonized cry echoed above all other cries, but only for an instant; the next, George
     Dillon's hand was gagging the lips which uttered it.
"Hush!" he said fiercely. "Can't you let him forget for these last few minutes that there is
     such a thing as a woman in the world. Hush! I say."
And a great hush came. The sound of blows, of iron clashing on iron, and falling with a dull
     thud on something softer, seemed to fill the world and leave room for nothing else.
Nothing except a softer sound still. A shuddering moan, as a woman slipped to her knees, and
     covered her face with her hands; then slipped lower still to the ground, in a heap.
But the child looked at her mother, surprised.
"Doesn't 'oo like Derin' darlin' to be brave, dearest?" she asked, in a concerned little
     voice.
</div></body></text></TEI>