
CHAPTER IX.
I have a faint recollection of feeling myself swung, and jolted down a
                            number of stairs, and of a cold breeze striking on my face. And
                            doubtless they carried me down; for the room in which I had found my
                            enemy was two floors above the cellarage. When I came to myself, I had
                            no idea where in the world I was. The air was heavy with a most powerful
                            and oppressive smell, a reek and taint as of death and corruption. It
                            made me faint, and I think I must have gone off again. Lifting my head
                            at last, I began to look languidly around. The table, or working-bench,
                            on which I lay, was near the centre of a long and narrow room, gloomy
                            and cold, even in the dog-days, floored with moss-green stone, and far
                            below the ground-level. Those flag-stones, I suppose, were bedded
                            immediately upon the tough blue London clay, that most unconquerable
                            stratum, sullen, damp, and barren. I could only see two windows in the
                            long low room, both upon the same side, horizontally fixed, and several
                            feet from the floor. Heavy iron bars, perpendicularly set, crossed them
                            at narrow intervals, as if it had been the condemned cell in a prison.
                            One of these windows was already darkened with a truss of straw, and
                            sacks over it, placed outside the glass; as is done in Corsica, during
                            Vendetta siege. The technical term is "inceppar le fenestre." Through
                            the other window (which looked up a slide or scoop of brickwork, like a
                            malt-shovel, to the flabby garden behind the house), I saw an arm, the
                            colour and shape of an American herring, very active with a hammer.
I knew that arm at once. Sticking out at the joints, like the spurs of a
                            pear-tree, welted and wired with muscle between them, like the drumstick
                            of a turkey, but flat as if plaited of hide, no friend of mine could
                            claim it, except the Corsican Cora. Deliberately she drove the nails,
                            like a gardener training a tree, paying undue attention to her skinny
                            knuckles; then she lifted the sacks, stooped down and looked in, grimly
                            reconnoitring me. By the slanting light I saw what a horrible place I
                            lay in. Around and under me, on the furrowed timber, were dull
                            plum-coloured blotches, where the slowly trickling blood of many an
                            unlucky dog and cat had curdled; even if there were not any shed from
                            nobler veins. Reaching in a back-handed way towards the jagged margin, I
                            grasped a cold hard cylinder. It was an iron hold-fast, like, but larger
                            than the instrument to be seen in every carpenter's bench, which works
                            in a collared hole, and has a claw for clutching. Under it, no doubt,
                            many a poor live victim had quivered and sobbed in vain. At my head were
                            two square slides, fitted with straps of stout unyielding web. Near them
                            was a rasped iron plane working along a metal bed or groove, with a
                            solid T piece, and a winch to adjust it.
As with morbid observation I surveyed these fiendish devices, and many
                            others which I cannot stop to tell of, I who love almost every creature
                            made by our own Maker, especially those to whom we are lent as Gods, my
                            flesh, I say, began to creep, and my blood to curdle, as if the
                            dissecting knife were already in my diaphragm. Surely those who in full
                            manhood torture His innocent creatures—poor things that cannot plead or
                            weep, but worship the foot that kicks them—surely these, if any, we may
                            without presumption say that He who made will judge. Four brief lines by
                            a modern poet, too well known for me to quote them, express a grand and
                            simple truth, seldom denied, more seldom felt.
But here am I, laid out in this fearful place, perhaps myself a subject
                            for vivisection. No, I am not strapped; even my feet are free. Off the
                            grouted and grimy table I roll with all possible speed, the table where
                            even strong Judy must have lain still as a skeleton. Of skeletons there
                            were plenty ranged around the walls, and other hideous things which I
                            cannot bear to think of. One was a monstrous crocodile, with scales like
                            a shed fir-cone, all reflexed and dry, and ringent lips of leather, and
                            teeth that seemed to look the wrong way, like a daisy-rake over-worked.
                            Another was some pulled-out beast, that never could hit his own joints
                            again—plesiosauri, deinosauri, marsupials, proboscidians—I am sure I
                            cannot tell, having never been at college. I only know that at every one
                            of them I shuddered, and shrugged my shoulders, and wished that he
                            smelled rather nicer. Then there were numbers of things always going up
                            and down, in stuff like clarified syrup, according to the change of
                            temperature, just as leeches do in a pickle-bottle. Snakes as well, and
                            other reptiles streaked like sticks of peppermint, and centipedes, and
                            Rio wrigglers, called I think La Croya. It was enough in that vault-like
                            room, which felt like the scooping of an August iceberg; it was more
                            than enough to strike a chill to the marrow, as of one who sleeps in a
                            bed newly brought from the cellar. But the worst and most horrible thing
                            of all was the core and nucleus of the smell that might be felt, the
                            half-dissected body of a porpoise, leaning on a dozen stout cross-poles.
                            It was enough to make the blood of a dog run cold.
Overpowered by sights and smells, and the fear of mingling with them, I
                            huddled away in a corner, and tried in vain to take my eyes from the
                            only sign of life yet left, the motion of Cora's club-like arm. The poor
                            old woman enjoyed my interest in her work, and when she had finished,
                            she made me a mock salaam, and kissed the pixie's heart. Then, with a
                            grin, she dropped the rough hangings, and left me in ghastly
                            twilight.
As the sacks fell over the window-frame, I lost all presence of mind, all
                            honest indignation, everything but a coward horror, and the shrinking of
                            life from death. With all the strength of my chest and throat, I cast
                            forth, as a cannon discharges, one long, volleyed, agonising shriek. As
                            it rang among the skeletons, and rattled their tissue-less joints, a
                            small square grating in the upper panel of the heavy door swung back,
                            and in the opening appeared the face of Lepardo Della Croce. He lifted
                            his hat with a pleasant air, and addressed me with a smile,
"Ah! now, this I call a pity, a great pity, indeed, Miss Vaughan; but
                            that I always fear the imputation of pedantry, I should call it a
                            bathos. You can hardly be aware that since you made that dreadful noise,
                            you have fallen in my opinion from a Porcia, or an Arria, to a common
                            maid Marian. Fie, fie, it is too disappointing. It saps one's candid
                            faith in the nobility of human nature. But, as I can no longer appeal to
                            your courage or spirit, I must, it appears, address myself to your
                            reason; if, as I am fain to hope, your nerves have not impaired it. Be
                            assured, then, once for all, that it is a vulgar error to exert your
                            sweet voice in so high a key. My little dissecting theatre, though not
                            so perfect as I could wish, particularly in ventilation, is nevertheless
                            so secured from erroneous plebeian sympathy, that all the cats in London
                            might squall away their fabulous nine lives without affecting the tea
                            and muffins of the excellent old ladies who live on either side of us.
                            That noble tabby, on the third shelf right, was a household god at No.
                            39, until he had the honour of attracting my attention. Breathe not a
                            word about him, if you ever come out. Twice a day, I sent to inquire,
                            with my kindest compliments, whether poor Miss Jenkinson had recovered
                            her darling cat. Meanwhile, by inanition scientifically graduated, I
                            succeeded in absorbing his adipose deposit, and found him one of the
                            kindest subjects I have had the pleasure of manipulating. Be not
                            alarmed, Miss Vaughan; I have no intention of starving you; neither, if
                            you behave with courtesy, will I even dissect you. I only mention these
                            little facts to convince you of our pleasing retirement. The ceiling of
                            your room is six feet below the level of the street, the walls are three
                            feet thick and felted, and the bricks set all as headers, which makes a
                            great difference in conducting power. The windows, as perhaps you have
                            already observed, are secluded from vulgar eyes, and command a very
                            partial view of our own little Eden. Moreover, if by exerting your
                            nobly-developed chest, to an extent which for your sake I affectionately
                            deprecate, you even succeeded at last in producing an undulation—do you
                            remember my lecture upon the conflicting theories of sound?—or a
                            vibration in the tympanum of a neighbour, I fear you would be
                            regarded—it shocks me greatly to think of it—as a cat of rare vocal
                            power, unduly agitated by my feeble pursuit of science. Therefore, let
                            me conclude my friendly counsel in the language of all your theatres—ah!
                            you have no drama now in this country, such poverty of invention—but in
                            the words, which I regret to say, appear from six to a dozen times in
                            every British trugody, Miss Vaughan, 'Be calm.'"
Through all this brutal sneering, I stood resolutely with my back turned
                            to him. Perhaps he thought that I would stoop to supplication. I could
                            have bitten my tongue off for that contemptible shriek; it was such a
                            triumph to him.
"Ah! sulky, I fear; young lady sulky with the poor Professor, who tries
                            to develop her mind. Fie, fie, very small and ungrateful, and not half
                            so grand a study as the attitude of contempt. What a pity poor Conrad
                            was not present an hour ago! How he might have enriched his little book
                            of schemata. Several most magnificent poses. But I fear the poor fellow
                            has taken his last chip. A sad thing, was it not? Why, how you start,
                            Miss Vaughan! Oh, you can show your face at last! And how pale! Well, if
                            eyes could only kill—"
"What is it—I mean be good enough just to go away."
"To be sure I will. I have a little matter on hand which must not be
                            delayed; to leave my carte de visite upon the right man, this time. I
                            cannot sufficiently thank you for your invaluable information. Is that
                            snug little entrance practicable still? Very hospitable people they used
                            to be at Vaughan Park. Fare you well, young lady; I will not keep you in
                            any unnecessary suspense. After my return, I shall arrange for your
                            release; if it can be made compatible with my safety. You will have
                            plenty of food, and much time for meditation. Let your thoughts of me be
                            liberal and kindly. I never injure any one, when I can avoid it. I only
                            regret that the air you breathe will impair, for the while, your roses.
                            But what an opportunity of analysing the gases! Carbonic acid
                            predominant. Do you gratify me by bearing in mind a lecture, at which
                            you were very attentive, on Malaria and Miasma?"
Taunting to the last, and sneering even at himself, as men of the
                            blackest dye of wickedness are very apt to do, he closed the grating
                            carefully, and I heard the ring of the metal cross on the rough stone
                            steps. He had the boots of vengeance on; his errand was stealthy and
                            cold-blooded murder; me, who had never harmed him, he was abandoning
                            perhaps to death, certainly to madness—and yet to his own ideas, all he
                            was doing was right.
Frantic at the horrors around me, and still more so at those impending
                            through my own rash folly, I tore and scratched at the solid door, and
                            flung myself against it, till my nails were broken, and my fingers
                            bleeding, and all my body palpitating with impotent mad fury. In
                            weariness at last and shame at this wild outburst, I sat upon the floor,
                            for I could not touch the operator's stool, and tried to collect my
                            thoughts. Was there any possibility of saving my poor Uncle? It must now
                            be nearly four o'clock on the Friday afternoon, or at least I so
                            computed it. The beautiful watch given me by my Uncle had stopped
                            through my reckless violence, and the breaking of the glass. The hands,
                            as I could barely perceive, stood at a quarter to four. The
                            express-train, by which Mrs. Fletcher and I were to have returned, would
                            leave Paddington at five P.M. and reach Gloucester soon after eight.
                            Lepardo Della Croce would catch it easily, and perhaps would accomplish
                            his foul design that night. My only hope of preventing him lay in his
                            own tenacity of usage. From my Uncle's account, I knew, that on their
                            cursed Vendetta enterprises, a certain pilgrimage on foot is, in many
                            families, regarded as a matter of honour. This usage owes its origin
                            perhaps to some faint trace of mercy, some wish to afford the evil
                            passions one more chance of relenting to the milder reflections of
                            weariness, and the influence of the air. Be that as it may, I believed
                            that the custom was hereditary in the Della Croce family; and if so, the
                            enemy would finish his journey on foot, quitting the train some distance
                            on this side of Gloucester. Therefore if I could contrive to escape in
                            the course of the night, I might yet be in time.
All the rest of the daylight, such as it was, I spent in examining, inch
                            by inch, every part of the loathsome chamber, which was now my dungeon.
                            By this time all my patience, habitual more than natural, had returned,
                            and all my really inborn determination and hope. Surely I had been every
                            bit as badly off before, and had struggled through quite as hopeless a
                            difficulty. If arduous courage and tough perseverance were of any avail,
                            those four walls should not hold me, though they might be three feet
                            thick. So stopping both my nostrils with cotton-wool from a specimen
                            (for the smell was most insufferable), and pinning up my dress, I set to
                            work in earnest. First, I examined the windows: there was nothing to
                            hope from them; I could never loosen a bar, and even if I could, I
                            should only escape from one prison to another, for the garden behind the
                            house was surrounded with high dead walls. Fireplace there was none; the
                            door had already baffled me; could I dig through the party wall, and
                            into the adjoining house? Most likely it was all a falsehood and boast
                            about the thickness, intended perhaps to discourage me from attempting
                            the easiest way. And in so damp a place, the mortar probably would be
                            soft.
So, after searching and groping, ever so long, to find, if possible, one
                            loose brick to begin with, I drew from my pocket a knife, of which I was
                            very proud, "because my father had given it me; and I looked at it
                            wistfully in the dusk, because I feared so to break it. Nothing but the
                            thought that life itself was at stake would ever have induced me to use
                            that beloved knife for work so very unsuitable.
It was a knife of strong but by no means elegant make, shorter in the
                            handle, and squarer in the joints, than the rising generation of knives.
                            Very likely Sheffield of the present day would laugh at it; but like
                            most who laugh, it could not produce the fellow. My father himself had
                            owned it for nearly thirty years, and had treated it with the high
                            respect which an honest knife deserves. From this due regard his
                            daughter had not derogated, and the knife was now as good as when it
                            left the maker's hand. It had never been honed in utter ignorance of
                            proper plane and angle, as nearly all knives are, and by none so often
                            as the professional knife-grinder. I never dared to meddle with it,
                            except on a very mild razor-strap; and all it was allowed to do was to
                            mend my pens—I, Clara Vaughan, hate steel paper-stabbers—and sometimes
                            to cut my pencils.
Now, this true and worshipful knife was to cut bricks and mortar! In my
                            natural affection for it, I hesitated and trembled, and knowing what was
                            to come it closed upon my fingers. Oh, ruthless Atta Nævia! trusty
                            knife, fall to!
Meanwhile old Cora showed at the heavy grating her countenance demiss; to
                            all my eager adjurations, promises, and prayers, she answered not a
                            word, but grimly smiled, like an ancient bird, beyond the reach of
                            chaff. She handed me in a pint of milk, and a loaf of the variety termed
                            in London a "twopenny brick." A red herring on the toasting-fork,
                            dripping with its own unction, was hastily shown, and then withdrawn,
                            and the gordit appeared in its stead; which being done, the experienced
                            dame winked, and regarded me deeply. This meant, "Surrender your legal
                            right in Our Lady's heart, without which I shall have no luck, and I
                            will give you this beautiful fish, hard-roed, and done to a nicety." Ah
                            no, sweet Cora, a good red herring is not to be despised; but who could
                            eat in a reeking hole like this? Once I went, for Judy's sake, being
                            rash and light of step, into the back premises of a highly respectable
                            butcher. Woe is me, what I saw and smelt there was Muscat grapes
                            compared to this.
When Cora had departed, after handing me in a pillow and a blanket of the
                            true work-house texture, and crossing herself with a strange expression,
                            meaning, as I interpreted, "Now keep alive if possible till breakfast
                            time, young woman," I sat me down upon the floor at one end of the room,
                            and began my labours. First. I put on a pair of tan-leather gloves; for
                            small as my vanity is, I do not like my hands to look altogether like a
                            hodman's. Then I removed a strip of the felt with which the wall was
                            covered. It was nearly dark, but I could easily feel the joints between
                            the bricks. The mortar was not very good, but my work was rendered
                            doubly difficult by the bricks being all set cross-wise to the line of
                            the wall; this, I suppose, is what he meant when he described them as
                            "headers." By reason of this arrangement, I had to dig and dig for
                            hours, before I could loosen a single brick; and working all in the dark
                            as I was, I feared every moment to break the stick-blade of my knife.
                            The fingers of my gloves were very soon worn away, and even the palm
                            where the heel of the knife was chafing; nor was it long before my skin
                            was full of weals, and raspy, like the knobs I have seen inside the legs
                            of a horse. At last, to my wonderful delight, one brick began to
                            tremble. In another half-hour, I eased it out most carefully, kissed my
                            trusty blade, now worn almost to a skewer, and with stiff and aching
                            muscles, and the trophy brick upon my lap, fell off into as sound a
                            sleep as ever I was blest with.
