
CHAPTER VIII.
My uncle's tale, as repeated here, will no more be broken either by my
                            interruptions, which were frequent enough, or by his own pauses, but
                            will be presented in a continuous form.
STORY OF EDGAR VAUGHAN.
"On the following day, when I called at the house in Bloomsbury—then a
                            fashionable neighbourhood—to which I had been directed, I was met at the
                            threshold, with power and warmth, by Peter Green himself, an old
                            acquaintance of mine, who proved to be Adelaide's brother. My nature had
                            been too reserved for me to be friendly with him at College, but I had
                            liked him much better than any one else, because he was so decided and
                            straight-forward. The meeting rather surprised me, for Green is not a
                            rare name, and so it had never occurred to me to ask the weary Adelaide
                            whether she knew one Peter Green, a first-class man of Christchurch.
                            Peter, who was a most hearty fellow, and full, like his sister, of
                            animal life, overpowered me with the weight of his gratitude, which I
                            did not at all desire or deserve. As, in spite of your rash conclusion,
                            my romantic Clara, I did not fall in love with Adelaide, who besides her
                            pithsome health and vigour was in many respects astray from my fair
                            ideal, and more than all, was engaged long ago to the giver of the
                            sapphire ring, I need not enlarge upon my friendship with Peter Green,
                            whom I now began to like in real earnest.
Young as he was, his father's recent death had placed him at the head of
                            a leading mercantile house, Green, Vowler, and Green, of Little Distaff
                            Lane. And young as he was—not more than seven-and-twenty—his manners
                            were formed, and his character and opinions fixed, as if he had seen all
                            the ways, and taken stock of the sentiments of all the civilised world.
                            Present to him any complexity, any conflict of probabilities, any maze
                            whose ins and outs were abroad half over the universe, and if the
                            question were practical, he would see what to do in a moment; if it were
                            theoretical, he would quietly move it aside. I have known many learned
                            judges sum up a case most lucidly, blow away all the verbiage, sweep
                            aside all the false issues, balance the contradictions, illuminate all
                            the obscurities, and finally lift from its matrix, and lay in the
                            colourless sunlight the virgin truth, without either dross or polish.
                            All this Peter Green seemed to have done in a moment, without any
                            effort, without any reasoning process; not jumping at his conclusion,
                            but making it fly to him. He possessed what an ancient writer, once
                            highly esteemed at Oxford, entitles the "wit universal," which confers
                            and comprises the "wit of details." For this power when applied to a
                            practical purpose, a great historian employs a happy expression not
                            welcomed by our language; he calls it the power to "pontoon the
                            emergency." Excuse my harsh translation, perhaps it is better than
                            paraphrase.
With all these business qualities, my friend was as merry and
                            unpretentious a man as ever made a bad joke, or laughed at another
                            fellow's; liberal also, warm-hearted, and not sarcastic. In a word, he
                            was a genuine specimen of the noble English merchant, who has done more
                            to raise this country in the esteem of the world than would a thousand
                            Nelsons or Wellingtons.
Now this man discerned at a glance the wretched defects of my nature and
                            position. An active mind like his could never believe in the possibility
                            of being happy without occupation. And by occupation he meant, not the
                            chasing of butterflies, or maundering after foxes, but real honest
                            Anglo-Saxon work; work that strings the muscles, or knits the
                            hemispheres of the brain. And work he would himself, ay, and with all
                            his energies. Not the man was he to tap the table with his pipe, and cry
                            out, "Bravo, Altiora! A little more gin if you please, and chalk it down
                            to the Strike;" but he was the man to throw off his coat, and pitch into
                            the matter before him without many words, though with plenty of thought.
                            Now, this man, feeling deeply indebted to me, and beginning to like me
                            as my apathy and reserve went to pieces before his energy, this man, I
                            say, cast about for some method of making me useful and happy.
                            Wonderfully swift as he was in pouncing upon the right thing, I believe
                            it took him at least five minutes to find out the proper course for an
                            impracticable fellow like me. And when he had found this out, it took
                            even him a week to draw the snail out of his hole. Years of agreeable
                            indolence, and calm objective indifference, seldom ruffled except at
                            fashionable snobbery, had made of me not a Sybarite, or a supercilious
                            censor, much less a waiter on fortune, but a contemplative islander, a
                            Haytian who had been once to Spain, and would henceforth be satisfied
                            with the view of her caravels. But my Adelantado was a man of gold and
                            iron. Green, Vowler, and Green were largely concerned in the oil and
                            dried fruit business. They had ransacked the olive districts of
                            continental Europe, and found the price going up and the quality going
                            down, so they wanted now to open another oil vein.
Peter Green observing my love of uncultured freedom, the only subject on
                            which I ever grew warm and rapturous, espied the way to relieve me of
                            some nonsense, give my slow life a fillip, and perhaps—oh climax—open a
                            lucrative connexion. He knew, for he seemed to know everything done or
                            undone by commerce, that there was a glorious island rich in jewels and
                            marble and every dower of nature, and above all teeming with olives,
                            lemons, and grapes, and citrons; and that this gifted island still
                            remained a stranger, through French and Genoese ignorance, to our London
                            trade. This was the island libelled by Seneca, idolised by its natives,
                            drenched with more blood than all the plains of Emathia, yet mother of
                            heroes and conquerors of the world—if that be any credit—in a single
                            word, Corsica. Once or twice indeed our countrymen have attempted to
                            shake hands with this noble race, so ruined by narrow tradition; and in
                            the end we shall doubtless succeed, as we always do; but the grain of
                            the Corsican is almost as stubborn as our own. In fact the staple is
                            much the same, the fabric is very different. Bold they are, and manly,
                            simple, generous, and most hospitable, lovers too of their country
                            beyond all other nations; but—oh fatal ignorance—industry to them is
                            drudgery; and labour is an outrage. Worse than all is the fiend of the
                            island, the cursed Blood-revenge.
"Just the place for you, Vaughan," said the indomitable Peter, "every one
                            there as dignified as an eagle after stealing a lamb. No institutions to
                            speak of, but the natural one of Vendetta, splendid equality, majestic
                            manhood, lots of true womanhood, and it does all the work that is done,
                            which isn't saying much. Why, my dear Quixotic, the land of Sampiero and
                            Paoli, and where Rousseau was to legislate, only he proved too lazy,—is
                            not that the jockey for you? After all these levees and masquerades that
                            you so much delight in—you need not scowl like a bandit; it is only
                            because they don't want you, you are just the same as the rest, or why
                            do you notice the nonsense?—after all this London frippery, Monte
                            Kotondo will be a fresh oyster after devil'd biscuits."
"True enough, my friend: but an oyster to be swallowed shell and
                            all."
"Well, is not that just what you want? Lime is good for squeamishness.
                            And more than that, you are just the man we want. You can talk Italian
                            with excellent opera style and sentiment; and you won't be long till you
                            fraternise with the Corsicans. Perhaps they will drive out the French,
                            who don't know what to do with it, and make you their king like Theodore
                            of Neuhoff; and then you proclaim free trade restricted to the navy of
                            Green, Vowler, and Green. But in sober earnest, think of it, my dear
                            Vaughan. Anything is better than this cynic indolence. Some of your
                            views will be corrected, and all enlarged by travel. A common sentiment.
                            Yes, the very thing you are short of. All your expenses we pay of
                            course, and give you an honest salary; and all we ask of you is to
                            explore more than a tourist would; and to send us a plain description of
                            everything. You have plenty of observation; make it useful instead of a
                            torment to you. We know well enough the great gifts of that island, but
                            we want to know how they lie, and how we may best get at them."
"Then you would expect me to make commercial arrangements?"
Peter laughed outright. "I should rather fancy not. Somewhat queer ones
                            they would be. Platonic no doubt, and panisic, but not altogether
                            adapted to double entry."
"Then in fact I am to go as a committee of inquiry."
"I have told you all we want. If you make any friends all the better; but
                            that we leave to yourself. Perhaps you'll grow sociable there. Though
                            the Corsican does not sing, 'We won't go home till morning,' and be
                            going home all the time."
"And how long would my engagement last?"
"Till you have thoroughly traversed the country, if you stick to it so
                            long; and then if you quit yourself well, we should commission you for
                            Sardinia. What an opening for an idle man, though it would soon kill
                            me—so little to do. But you may cut it short when you like. Plenty of
                            our people would jump at such an offer; but for a country like that we
                            must have a thorough gentleman. A coarse-mannered bagman would very soon
                            secure the contents of a fusil. He would be kissing the Corsican girls,
                            who are wonderfully lovely they say, and their lovers amazingly jealous;
                            and every man carries a gun. A timid man they despise, an insolent man
                            they shoot; and most of our fellows are one or the other, or both. But
                            will you undertake it? Yes, or no, on the spot. And I ask you to say
                            'yes' as a special favour to me."
"Then of course I say yes. When shall I go?"
"To-morrow, if you like. Next month if you prefer it. We can give you
                            introductions. There is no real danger for a thorough gentleman, or you
                            should not go for all the olives in Europe. Mind we want a particular
                            sort, very long and taper—Virgil's 'Ray,' in fact. You shall have a
                            sample of it. As yet we know but one district of Italy where it grows,
                            but have got scent of it in Corsica. Glorious fellows they are, if half
                            that I hear is true, glorious fellows but for their laziness, and that
                            —— Vendetta."
To be brief, I received very clear instructions in writing, and was off
                            for Bonifazio the following week, in a small swift yacht of my own, a
                            luxury to which I had always aspired, and which I could now for a time
                            afford. But before I went, your poor father, Clara, protested most
                            strongly against the scheme, and even came to London in the vain hope of
                            dissuading me. He had some deep presentiment that it would end darkly,
                            and so indeed it did.
"Ned," said he once more, "there are only two of us, and my dear wife is
                            very delicate. I have been at Genoa, where those islanders are well
                            known, and even there they are rarely spoken of but with a cold shudder.
                            They are a splendid race, I believe, great heroes and all that, but they
                            shoot a man with no more compunction than they shoot a muffro. I implore
                            you, my dear brother, not to risk the last of our family, where blood
                            flows as freely as water. And your temper, you know, is not the best in
                            the world. Don't go, my dear fellow, don't go. I shall have to come and
                            avenge you, and I don't understand Vendetta."
Ah, me! If I had only listened to him. And yet, I don't know. After a
                            pleasant voyage we reached the magnificent island, about the middle of
                            May. My intention was to skirt round it from the southern extremity,
                            taking the western side first, and touching at every anchorage, whence I
                            would make incursions, and return to my little cutter, as the most
                            convenient head-quarters. Of course I should have to rough it; but what
                            young man would think twice of that, with an adventurous life before
                            him?
I will not weary you, my dear child, with a long description of Corsica.
                            It is a land which combines all the softness and the majesty, all the
                            wealth and barrenness, all the smile and menace of all the world beside.
                            I could talk of it by the hour; but you want to know what I did, and was
                            done to, more than what I saw. From the awful rock of Bonifazio, the
                            streets where men should have no elbows, and the tower of Torrione,
                            along the fantastic coast which looks as if time were a giant rabbit, we
                            traced the blue and spur-vexed sea, now edged with white, and now with
                            gray, and now with glowing red, until we reached that paradise of
                            heaven, the garden of Balagna.
