
CHAPTER X.
Although Ann Maples was not so very talkative, it would be romantic to
                            suppose that Mrs. Shelfer had failed to learn my entire history, so far
                            at least as her cousin knew it.
Having now disposed of one Grove Street, I was about to try the same rude
                            tactics with another, viz. that in Hackney; when my landlady gave a
                            little nervous knock, and hurried into the room. "Oh, Miss Vaughan, is
                            it about them willains you are wandering about and taking on so, and
                            frightening all of us nearly to death?"
"Mrs. Shelfer, I shall feel obliged by your leaving me to manage my own
                            affairs."
"Bless you, Miss, so I will. I wouldn't have them on my mind for the Bank
                            of England, and Guildhall, paved with Lombard Street, and so I told
                            Charley last night. Right, my good friend, quite right, you may depend
                            upon it." Here she tapped her forehead, and looked mysterious.
"That being so, Mrs. Shelfer, I need say nothing more;" and with that I
                            was going away.
"No, no, to be sure not. Only listen to me, Miss, one minute; and I knows
                            more about willains, a deal more than you do of course, Miss. Why, ever
                            since that rogue who come to Miss Minto's with brandyballs and
                            rabbitskins on a stick."
"Once more, Mrs. Shelfer, I have no time to spare for gossip—"
"Gossip! No, no, Miss Vaughan; if you ever heard any one say Patty
                            Shelfer was a 'gossip,' I'll thank you for their name. Gossip! A mercy
                            on me with all I has to do, and the days drawing in so, and how they
                            does charge for the gas, and the directors holds a meeting first Tuesday
                            in every month, and fills up the pipes with spittle, that's the reason
                            it sputters so, Charley told me."
"Good bye, Mrs. Shelfer."
"No, no. One minute, Miss Vaughan; you are always in such a hurry. What
                            Charley and me was talking about last night was this. My Uncle John, a
                            very high class man, first-rate, first-rate, Miss Vaughan, has been for
                            ever so long in the detective police. There's nothing he don't know of
                            what goes on in London, from the rats as comes up the drain pipes to the
                            Queen getting up on her throne. A wonderful man he is. I said t'other
                            day—"
"Is he like you, Mrs. Shelfer?"
"Like me, my good friend! No, no. And I wouldn't be like him for
                            something. With all them state secrets upon him. Why he daren't sneeze
                            out of his hat. But if you'll only put off going again till to-morrow,
                            he'll be here this very night about the plate they stole in the Square.
                            And I'm sure you can't do better than hear what he thinks about you.
                            He'll be sure to know all that was done at the time. Bless you, he has
                            got to make all the returns; what that is, I don't know. It's a kind of
                            tobacco Charley says, that they smokes in the Queen's pipe. But I think
                            it's the convicts as returns from Botany Bay."
"Well, Mrs. Shelfer, I'll think of what you say, and I am much obliged to
                            you for the suggestion; but I can't bear the idea of coming before the
                            Police again, with a matter in which they failed so signally."
"But you know, my good friend, it need not be put on the books at all.
                            He'll tell us what he thinks of it, private like, and for the love of
                            the thing."
"If I see him at all, I must beg to see him alone."
"To be sure, my good friend. Quite right, Miss Vaughan, quite right. I'm
                            sure I would rather have the plumber's ladle put to my ear, than one of
                            them horrible secrets."
"Mrs. Shelfer, have I told you any? Now remember, if you ever again
                            allude to this subject before me, I leave your house that day. You ought
                            to know better, Mrs. Shelfer."
"You are quite right, Miss Vaughan; I ask your pardon, you are quite
                            right. The very words as Charley said to me the other night. 'You ought
                            to have knowed better, Patty, that you did.'"
Away she went, smoothing her apron, patting the fray of her hair—for she
                            never wore side-combs—and mumbling down the stairs. "Quite right, my
                            good friend, quite right, I ought to have knowed better, poor
                            thing."
She brought up my dinner and tea, without a single word, but with many
                            sly glances at me from her quick grey eyes. Once or twice she was at the
                            point of speaking, and the dry smile she always spoke with fluttered
                            upon her face; but she closed her lips firmly and even bit them to keep
                            herself in. I could scarcely help laughing, for I liked the odd little
                            thing; but she was so free with her tongue, that the lesson was sadly
                            wanted.
Late in the evening, she came to say that Inspector Cutting was there,
                            and would come up if I wished it. Upon my request he came, and one look
                            was enough to show that his niece had not misdescribed him. An elderly
                            man, but active looking and wiry, with nothing remarkable in his
                            features, except the clear cast of his forehead and the firm set of his
                            mouth. But the quick intelligence that shot from his eyes made it seem
                            waste of time to finish telling him anything. For this reason, polite
                            though he was, it became unpleasant to talk to him. It was something
                            like shooting at divers—as my father used to describe it—for whom the
                            flash of the gun is enough.
Yet he never once stopped or hurried me, until my tale was done, and all
                            my thoughts laid bare. Then he asked to see all my relics and vestiges
                            of the deed; even my gordit did not escape him.
"L.D.O." he said shortly, "do you speak Italian?'
"I can read it, but not speak it."
"Is it commoner for Italian surnames to begin with an O, or with a
                            C?"
"There are plenty beginning with both; but more I should think with a
                            C."
When all my particulars had been told, and all my evidence shown, I asked
                            with breathless interest—for my confidence in him grew fast—what his
                            opinion was.
"Allow me, young lady, to put a few questions to you, on matters you have
                            not mentioned. Forgive me, if they pain you. I believe you feel that
                            they will not be impertinent."
I promised to answer without reserve.
"What was your mother's personal appearance?"
"Most winning and delicate."
"How old was she at the time of her marriage?"
"Twenty-one, I believe."
"How old was your father then?"
"Twenty-five."
"How many years were they married?"
"Sixteen, exactly."
"When did your guardian first leave England?"
"In the course of a year or two after the marriage."
"Had there been any misunderstanding between him and your father?"
"None, that I ever heard of."
"Did your father, at any time, travel on the continent?"
"Only in Switzerland, and part of Italy, during his wedding tour."
"Your guardian returned, I believe, at intervals to England?" I had never
                            told him this.
"Yes. At least I suppose so, or he would not have been in London."
"Did he visit then at Vaughan Park?"
"Not once within my memory."
"Thank you. I will ask no more. It is a strange story; but I have known
                            several much more strange. Of one thing be assured. I shall catch the
                            criminal. I need not tell you that I heard much of this case at the
                            time."
"Were you sent down to Gloucestershire?"
"No. If I had been—well, I will not say. But I was not then in my present
                            position. Had I been so, it would have become my special
                            department."
"Pray keep me no more in suspense. Tell me what you think."
"That I must not do, or you should know it at once, for my opinion is
                            formed. It would be a breach of duty for me to tell you now."
"Oh," I cried in my disappointment, "I wish I had never seen you."
"Young lady, you have done your duty in placing the matter before me, and
                            some day you will rejoice that you did so. One piece of advice I will
                            give you: change your name immediately, before even the tradesmen about
                            here know it."
"Change my name, Inspector Cutting! Do you think I am ashamed of my
                            name?"
"Certainly not. You have shown great intelligence when a mere child;
                            exert but a little now, and you will see the good sense, or rather the
                            necessity, of my recommendation. When you have gained your object, you
                            may resume your name with pride. You have given your information, Miss
                            Vaughan, as clearly as ever I knew a female give it."
If I detest anything, in the way of small things, it is to be called a
                            "female." So I said coldly; "Inspector Cutting, I thank you for the
                            compliment. It would be strange indeed if I could not tell with
                            precision, what I have thought of all my life."
"Excuse me, Miss, it would not be strange at all, in a female. And now I
                            will wish you 'good night.' You shall hear from me when needful.
                            Meanwhile, I will take charge of these articles."
He began, in the coolest manner, to pack up my sacred relics, dagger,
                            casts, and all.
"Indeed you won't," I cried, "you shall not have one of them. What are
                            you thinking of?"
He went on with his packing. I saw he was resolute; so was I. I sprang to
                            the door, locked it, and put the key in my pocket. He said nothing, but
                            smiled.
"Now," I exclaimed in triumph, "you cannot take those away, unless you
                            dare to outrage a young lady."
I was wholly mistaken. He passed by, without touching me, drew some
                            instrument from his waistcoat pocket, and the door stood open before
                            him. All my treasures were in his left hand. I flew at, and snatched
                            them, and then let go with a scream. A gush of blood poured from my
                            hand. He had taken the dagger folded in paper only, and I was cut to the
                            bone. I sank on a chair and fainted.
When I came to myself, Mrs. Shelfer was kneeling before me, with her feet
                            in a basin of water, while two other basins, and numberless towels, were
                            round. Mrs. Shelfer was rubbing my other hand, and crying and talking
                            desperately about her bad luck that day, and a man with eyes crossed
                            whom she had met in the morning. In the background stood Mr. Shelfer
                            himself, whom I had hitherto failed to see, though I believe he had seen
                            me often. He had a pipe in his mouth about a yard long, and seemed
                            wholly undisturbed. "All right, old 'ooman," he said deliberately
                            through his nose, as he saw that I perceived him, "she'll do now, if you
                            don't make too much rumpus." And with that he disappeared, and I had
                            time to pity myself. The hand the poor farmer used so to admire, and
                            which I was proud of no doubt, in my way, lay in a dishcloth covered and
                            oozing with blood. But my relics were on the table, all safe. A quick
                            step was heard on the stairs, and Inspector Cutting came in, carrying a
                            small phial.
"Out of the way, Patty," he cried, "you are doing more harm than
                            good."
He took up a basin of cold water, and poured half the contents of the
                            little phial into it.
"Now hold her arm up, Patty, as high as you can. I never knew arnica
                            fail."
My hand was put into the water, and the bleeding was stanched in a minute
                            or two. However he kept it there for a quarter of an hour, till it was
                            quite benumbed.
"Now you may look at your hand, Miss Vaughan; it will not be disfigured
                            at all. There will be no inflammation. Patty, fetch me some cambric and
                            the best lard; put the young lady to bed at once, and prop her arm up a
                            little."
I looked at my hand, and found three parallel gashes across it, for every
                            edge of the weapon was keen. But only one wound was deep, viz. that
                            across the palm, which was very deep under the thumb. I have the mark of
                            it still. All the wounds were edged with a narrow yellow line.
"Inspector Cutting," I cried, "no power will move me from here, until you
                            promise not to steal my property. Stealing it is, and nothing else. You
                            have no warrant, and my information to you was wholly unofficial."
The last word seemed to move him. They all like big words, however
                            clear-headed they are.
"Miss Vaughan, under these special circumstances, I will promise what you
                            require; upon condition that you give me accurate drawings, for I see
                            that you can make them."
"Certainly, when my hand is well enough."
"Believe me, I am deeply concerned at what has occurred. But the fault
                            was all your own. How dare you obstruct the Police? But I wish some of
                            my fellows had only half your spirit. A little more experience, and
                            nothing will escape you. Come, Miss Vaughan, though you are a lady, or
                            rather because you are one, give me your left hand, in token that you
                            forgive me."
I did so with all my heart. I liked him much better since I had defeated
                            him; and I saw that it was well worth the pain, for he would do his
                            utmost to make amends. He wished me good night with a most respectful
                            bow. "I will come and inquire how you are to-morrow, Miss Vaughan.
                            Patty, quiet, and coolness, and change the lard frequently. No doctor,
                            if you please; and above all hold your queer little tongue."
"Never fear me, Uncle John; you are right, my good friend, it is a little
                            tongue, but no queerer than my neighbours."
Inspector Cutting would have formed a far lower opinion of my spirit, if
                            he had seen how I cried that night; not from the pain of the wounds, I
                            am sure, but to think of the fuss dear mother would have made about
                            them.
