
CHAPTER II.
At my earnest entreaty, the idea of assembling the tenants especially was
                            allowed to drop, and I was to be inducted at the Midsummer dinner, which
                            was very near at hand. A deed had been prepared by the London
                            solicitors, reciting the facts and assuring all the estate to me, as my
                            father's proper heiress. My Uncle also desired to settle upon me all the
                            personal property, except a sum of 10,000*l.*, which he would reserve
                            for his children, to enable them, if ever they should be found, to
                            establish their claims in Corsica: then if the son obtained his rights,
                            his sister was to have the money with all expenditure made good by him.
                            But I would not hear of it. It would have made me a rogue. By his skill
                            and economy, my Uncle, during the nine years of his management, had
                            saved more than 50,000*l.* from the proceeds of the estate. But he had
                            added at least an equal amount to the value of the land, by carrying out
                            most judiciously the improvements begun by my father; and the whole was
                            now considered the best-managed estate in Gloucestershire.
Therefore, when he abandoned his legal right, in the most honourable
                            manner, it would have been horribly shabby and unlike a Vaughan, to hold
                            him accountable for the back rents. I begged him to leave the whole of
                            it for the benefit of his poor children, requesting only, and
                            unnecessarily, that the hypocrite might not have sixpence. Another thing
                            I entreated, that he would prolong his guardianship, and stewardship, if
                            his health allowed it, until I should be of age, that is to say, for two
                            years and a half. Seeing how earnestly I desired it, he undertook to do
                            so, though he made the promise with a melancholy smile, adding that he
                            hoped his children would be found ere then, if he was to see them at
                            all.
When the rent-dinner was over, and the glasses had been replaced, my
                            Uncle, who had not been there as usual, led me into the great old hall.
                            Feeble as he was, he entered with a grace and courtesy not always to be
                            discovered in the mien of princes. The supper—as the farmers called
                            it—had not begun till six o'clock; and now the evening sunshine glanced
                            through the western window, and between the bunches of stoning grapes
                            into the narrow doorway, stealing in from the Vinery with sandals of
                            leafy pattern. The hall was decked with roses, no other flower but
                            roses; yet who could want any other, when every known rose was there?
                            Even the bright yellow blossoms of the Corsican rock-rose, a plant so
                            sensitive that to steal one flower is to kill all the rest. From time
                            out of mind, some feudal custom of tenure by the rose had been handed
                            down in our family.
All the guests rose as we passed, which made me rather nervous, albeit I
                            knew every one of them from my childhood up. Then my Uncle, leaning on
                            me, spoke a few words from the step, plain and simple words without
                            flourish or pretence. What he said was known long since, and had been
                            thoroughly discussed in every house of the village. He finished by
                            setting me in the black oak chair of state—which he had never used—and
                            presenting me with a rose; then he turned round and proposed my health.
                            When I took the rose, an exquisite crested moss, kissed it and placed it
                            in my bosom, according to the usage, such a shout arose, such an English
                            hurrah, that it must have echoed to the other bank of the distant
                            Severn. At first I was quite frightened, then I burst into tears as I
                            thought of him whose chair I sat in, whose memory still was echoing in
                            that mighty shout. It was not only love of right, or sympathy with a
                            helpless girl, that moved those honest bosoms, but the remembrance of
                            him who had been so pleasant to them, humble, kind and just, in one
                            word, a gentleman.
But as they came up, one by one, and begged to take my hand, and wished
                            me joy and long life with all their hearts, I found that I was right in
                            one thing; I knew them better than my Uncle did. Instead of being rude
                            or cold to him, as he expected, they almost overwhelmed him with praise
                            and admiration. But all this I must not dwell on, for my story hurries
                            hence, and its path is not through roses.
Annie Franks, who still was with us, and did not mean to go until she had
                            finished all the Froissart novels, and such a dear good girl she was,
                            that we hoped they would last for ever, Annie Franks brought me next day
                            two letters of aspect strange to "good society." One I knew at a glance
                            to be from Tossil's Barton, though the flourishes were amazing, and the
                            lead-pencil lines rubbed out. The other, a work of far less ambition and
                            industry, was an utter stranger; so of course I took it first.
                            Nevertheless, I will treat of it last, because it opens the stormy
                            era.
Dear Sally's gossip is not to be served up whole. Even if it were
                            interesting to others as to me, my space permits no dalliance with
                            farm-yards, no idyls of Timothy Badcock, nay, nor even the stern iambics
                            of Ebenezer Dawe. Only to be just and clear, I may not slur it all. The
                            direction was remarkable. The farmer was always afraid of not being duly
                            explicit, for he believed that letters were delivered throughout England
                            as in the parish of Trentisoe; where all, except those for the parson
                            and Tossil's Barton farm, were set upside down in the window at Pewter
                            Will's, the most public-house in the place. The idea was ingenious, and,
                            I believe, original—having been suggested by the Queen's boy, whose head
                            Mrs. Huxtable punched. It was that no one could read the name upside
                            down, except the owner of the name and therefore of the letter. Sound or
                            not, I cannot say, having had no experience; but there was this to be
                            said for it, that no one would try the puzzle who did not expect a
                            letter, unless indeed he were of precocious genius, and from that
                            Trentisoe was quite safe.
Upon the present "papper-scrawl," after a long description of me,
                            patronymical, local, and personal, the following injunctions and menaces
                            were added, "Not be stuck tops I turve I on no account in no public
                            house. She be in her own house now again, thank God and dang them as
                            turned her out I say, so mind you carr it there. A deal of money there
                            be in it, and no fear of Joe because he knows it, and there lives a man
                            in Gloucestershire knows me well by the name of Thomas Henwood. Best
                            look sharp I say. I be up to every one of you. John Huxtable his name,
                            no mark this time. God save the queen."
So the farmer had actually learned to write, although as yet to a
                            strictly limited extent. Of course he had not written any of the above
                            except his name; but that was his, and did him credit, though it nearly
                            described a circle.
After the warmest congratulations and returning the five-pound note,
                            which I had sent for interest, with an indignant inquiry from father
                            whether I took him for a Jew, and after several anecdotes and some
                            histories of butter sold at Ilfracombe market, Sally proceeded thus:
"Now what do you think, Miss Clara dear? No you never would guess as long
                            as you live—father are going to London town, and me, and Jack, and Beany
                            Dawe. None of us have slept two grunts of a pig, ever since it were made
                            up, only father, and he always sleep without turning. Now mind if I tell
                            you all about it, you must not tell again, Miss Clara, because there is
                            ever so much money upon it, and we do hear they have put it on some
                            London paper and no business of theirs. Two great gentlefolks, the
                            greatest of any about these parts, have been and made up a bet for my
                            father to wrestle along with a great big chap as they calls the North
                            Country champion. Seems as some great Northern lord was boasting in
                            London one dinner-time, Speaker's dinner they called it because there
                            were a deaf and dumb dinner next day, this here great lord was telling
                            up as how Sam Richardson were the strongest man in the world. So our Sir
                            Arthur spake up for Devonshire, and laid him a quart-pot full of
                            sovereigns as he would find a better man in the West country. And so I
                            don't know the rights of it, nor father nor mother either, but it was
                            made up atwixt them that Farmer Huxtable, that's my father, Miss, should
                            try this great North country chap at the time of the great Xabition—you
                            never showed me the way to spell it, Miss, so I go by the light of
                            nature, as you used to say, Miss—and should take best of three falls for
                            200*l.* a side. That will be 400*l.* for us, when father gets it, and
                            all his expenses paid, and they say the other folk won't allow no
                            kicking, so he must be a soft-shelled chap; but father feel no call to
                            hurt him, if so be he can help it. Mother don't want father to go, but
                            he say he be bound for the honour of old Devonshire, or maybe they will
                            take a man not good enough to make a standard.
And please, Miss, when we brings home the money, I be to go to Miss
                            Bowden's, in Boutport Street, and our Jack to be put to a day-school not
                            more than six miles away, and then I hope he know himself, and look
                            higher than that minx of a Tabby Badcock. What do you think, Miss Clara,
                            you would never believe it I know, but only a week ago last Tuesday I
                            come sudden round the corner, and catched her a kissing of our Jack in
                            the shed there by the shoot. And after all you taught her, Miss! Jack he
                            ran away, as red as mangawazzle, but that brazen slut, there she stand
                            with her legs out, as innocent as a picture. Never a word I said, but
                            with no more to do I put her head in the calves' stommick as we makes
                            the cheese with, in a bucket handy. It would have done you good to see
                            her Miss, she did cry so hard, and she smell of it for a week, and it
                            cure our Jack, up to Sunday anyhow. Mother come out at the noise, but
                            her see that she deserve it, and the runnet was no account, except for
                            the pigs, because it were gone by. I hope she know her manners now and
                            her spear in life with her sheep's eyes, and not come trying to catch
                            any of my family.
Well, Miss Clara please, father want mother to go; but no, say she, "with
                            all they"—she ought to have said "them" Miss, now hadn't she
                            ought?—"with all they young pigs, and the brown cow expecting every day,
                            and Suke no head at all, and all the chillers and little Clara"—she call
                            her "Clara" now, Miss,—"why farmer what be thinking of?" Then father rub
                            the nose of him, you know the way he do it, Miss, and he say, "I must
                            have some one. London be such a wicked place." Mother look up very sharp
                            at that, and say quite peart, "take your daughter, farmer Huxtable, if
                            you wants to be kept respectable." So I be to go Miss; and go I wouldn't
                            without Jack and leave him along of that sly cat Tabby, and her got
                            sweet again now; besides I want him to choose a knife I promised him,
                            same as he saw to Coom one time, if he wouldn't let Tabby kiss him with
                            seven blades and a corkscrew, and I'll give eighteen pence for it, that
                            I will. And Beany Dawe must go to show us the way about, and see as they
                            doesn't cheat us, because his father was once to London town, and told
                            him a power about it.
If you please, Miss Clara, father be put in training as they call it in
                            these parts, all the same as a horse. He run up and down Breakneck hill,
                            with the best bed on his back, nine times every day, and he don't drink
                            no cider, no nor beer, nor gin and water, and mother hardly know him, he
                            be come so clear in the skin; but he say his hand shake still from the
                            time I taught him to write, and please, Miss, what do you think of the
                            way he is going to sign this? I can't get him to put his thumb right, no
                            nor his middle finger, and he stick his elbow out every bit as bad as
                            Tabby, and he say he like the pot-hooks over the fire best, but for all
                            that I believe I shall make a scholard of him, particular when he give
                            up wrestling, which he have sworn to do if he throw this Cumberland
                            chap, and stick to his Bible and Prayer-book.
Please, Miss, not to be offended, but excuse us asking if you like to see
                            the great wrestling. Father say no, it would not be fitty, and that be
                            the worst of being a gentlefolk; but mother say what harm, and she be
                            sure the farmer do it twice as well with you there, and you shall have
                            the best seat in the place next to the two judges, and such a pretty
                            handkerchief they sent down all spotted the same as a Guernsey cow, how
                            the people in church did stare at me, and you shall have two of the
                            best, Miss, but I am afraid it be making too bold; but you never see any
                            wrestling, Miss, and I am sure you would enjoy it so. It take place in
                            the copandhagen fields, next Saturday week. Do come, Miss Clara dear, it
                            will do you so much good, and you see father, and me, and Jack, and
                            Beany Dawe."
I need recount no more of poor Sally's soft persuasions. The other letter
                            was of a different vein:—
"HONOURED Miss,—Balak and me after a deal of trouble and labouring night
                            and day and throwing up our vacation has at last succeeded in finding
                            you knows who. Personal interview will oblige, earliest inconvenience.
                            No more at present not being safe on paper, from your most obedient
                            servants and suitors
BALAAM AND BALAK—you knows who.—
Poscrip.—Balak says a sharp young lady quite sure to know what is right,
                            but for fear of accidents please a little of the ready will oblige,
                            large families both of us has and it do take a deal of beer more than
                            our proper vacation no one would guess unless they was to try and bad
                            beer too a deal of it. For self and partner.—BALAAM."
