
CHAPTER XII.
But when Conrad should have learned who it was that nursed his dog, would
                            he feel the tender gratitude and delight which he now displayed so
                            freely? Would he say, as in his fervour he now said every day, "Miss
                            Valence, I do believe there is no one like you in the world!" Would he
                            not rather say, "Miss Vaughan, how basely you have deceived me! Giudice,
                            come away!" A whistle and the last sound of the foot, for which I
                            listened now by the hour.
This thought was continually with me. It poisoned half the flavour and
                            ruined all the digestion of my happy moments. But what could I do? How
                            unmaidenly, how presumptuous of me to imagine that he was likely to
                            break his heart for me! And if he did—why then he should break my own as
                            well. I am not one of the drawing-room young ladies, who receive a
                            modified proposal every Sunday afternoon, and think much more about the
                            sermon afterwards. I cannot play with the daffodils upon the brink of
                            love, sleepily thrusting my admirers in, and lounging with half-open
                            breast, which neither love-knots may secure, nor fluttering sighs
                            unzone. No, here I am, such as I am, such as God has made me. No usury,
                            no auction for my heart: once for all I give it, and my life goes with
                            it.
So it must always be with a girl of any feeling, who has trained her own
                            existence. But for my wild ignorance, I would dare to say—so it must be
                            always with a girl of feeling, twist and warp her as you will. Yet I am
                            told, by those who know the world, that it is not so with nine girls out
                            of ten among the lady caste. If, beneath the roc of fashion, they prefer
                            the diamond to the meat, let them have it, and starve thereon. The
                            choice is of their own young crops. No parent bird can force the bauble
                            down. But what have I to do with this? All I know is that neither I, nor
                            any child of mine, will or shall be gulleted thus for life.
After every little burst of thought, every feeble sally of imagination,
                            came (as always is the case with me) came the slow pusillanimous
                            reaction. All that I had any right to do was to paint, earn money, and
                            be off for Italy.
Little as I knew about the expense of travelling, I felt sure that it
                            would be vain to start with less than a hundred pounds. Enormous sum!
                            How could I ever hope to win it, though I painted day and night, and
                            lived on bread and water. To this diet, or what in London is quite
                            synonymous, bread and milk, I had already reduced myself, in my stern
                            resolve to lay by two pounds every week. Farewell to meat, so soon as my
                            Devonshire "pegmate" was gone, and farewell to what I cared much more
                            about, a glass of good London stout. I suppose there is something
                            horribly "vulgar" in my tastes, for I will confess that the liquid
                            called "black draught" by Mr. Dawe had much charm for me. However, I
                            abjured it with all other luxuries, and throve no whit the worse. The
                            kindly little woman, whose summum bonum (next to her "sticks") was
                            plenty of good fare, took it much to heart that I should live so
                            plainly.
"Why, Miss Valence, you are the queerest young lady as ever I set eyes
                            on. All as ever I see, and I've see'd a many, they picks a little bit so
                            dainty, like a canary cracking a hemp seed when the gentlemen is by:
                            then off they goes when there's nobody looking, and munches like so many
                            pigs in a potato bury. Miss Violante you know. But as for you, why bless
                            me and keep me, you feeds that great horse of a dog with all the fat of
                            the land, and you lives on a crust yourself. Now do come down, that's a
                            good soul; there's a clod of beef a-biling with suet dumplings, and such
                            lovely parsnips, you can smell it all up the stairs, galloping,
                            galloping, my good friend, and that rogue of a Charley won't come home I
                            know, he's got along with that thief Bob Ridley; and I expects the boy
                            every minute with a little drop of stout, and the best pewter pot for
                            you. Now if you won't come down, Miss Valence, my dinner will all stick
                            in my throat, and I am so hungry."
"So am I, Mrs. Shelfer, you have made me so."
In her excitement, she slipped from the edge of the chair, whereon she
                            always balanced herself when I made her sit down. She thought it
                            disrespectful to occupy too much room, and cuddled herself in the
                            smallest compass possible.
Let no ill be thought of Giudice. Who thinks ill of me I care not, for I
                            can defend myself, if it be worth while. So can Giudice with his
                            teeth—the finest set in London—but he has no tongue, no merop tongue, I
                            mean. It was true that Giudice had good fare, and thoroughly he enjoyed
                            it. That dog knew a juicy bit of meat, short of staple, crisp, yet
                            melting, quite as well as I did. True, he had a love of bones,
                            transparent gristle, and white fibres, which I, from inferior structure,
                            cannot quite appreciate. Yet all this was no part of his mind, much less
                            did it affect the greatness of his soul. He kept, as all of us do who
                            are good for anything, a certain alter ego, a higher voice, a purer
                            sense, a vein which fashion cannot leech, or false shame tourniquet. So
                            the good dog used to come to me, before he touched his breakfast, lunch,
                            or dinner, and entreat me to devour all I could, there would be lots
                            still left for him.
In my hurry to get start of time, to spin a little faster the revolving
                            moons, I did a thing which I could ill-approve to myself, even at the
                            moment. I wrote to Sally Huxtable to obtain Mr. Dawe's permission for me
                            to sell my gordit. Professor Ross had offered me no less than ten
                            guineas for it. As a gentleman he should not have made the offer, after
                            what I had told him. But the love of science—falsely so called by
                            collectors—drives men to discern propriety "by the wire-drawn line of
                            their longings." However, I was not quite so
                            blind upon right and wrong, as to mean to keep all the money. I offered
                            Mr. Dawe half, if the plaything should be sold.
I knew not why, but I could not bear the idea of a bargain and sale with
                            Conrad's father, wide apart as the two always were in my mind. I rather
                            hoped that Beany Dawe, though sorely tempted, would refuse.
And now the time was almost come for news from Tossil's Barton. Dear
                            Sally must have filled the twelve copybooks, at the rate of one a week.
                            Ere I quite expected it, the letter came; but before its tidings are
                            imparted, I must in few words describe the visit of Inspector Cutting's
                            son. George Cutting came one evening to see his good Aunt Patty, for so
                            he called Mrs. Shelfer, who was in truth his cousin. Though I had been
                            so assured that my enemy could not escape, I was not equally convinced,
                            and at times a deep anxiety and despair possessed me.
Therefore I went to the kitchen to see the Inspector's son, and requested
                            Mrs. Shelfer to allow me five minutes of conversation with him. He stood
                            all the while, and seemed rather shy and confused. He had not heard from
                            his father, since the ship sailed; but he had seen in the papers that
                            she had been spoken somewhere. "The party as I knew of" was still safe
                            in London—my blood ran like lava at the thought—or I should have heard
                            of it. He, George Cutting, had his eye upon him, and so had two of the
                            detective force; but what were they in comparison with his father? This
                            he asked, despite his shyness, with so large a contempt, that I began to
                            think the Cutting family admired the Cuttings only.
Upon me, who am no Cutting, he left the simple impression that the
                            qualities, so lauded by his father, lay as yet beneath a bushel.
                            However, his Aunt Patty declared that he could eat three times as much
                            as Charley. Not unlikely, if he only drank one-third of Charley's
                            allowance.
Mrs. Shelfer, who knew that I was laying by a fixed sum every week, began
                            to look upon me as a fine young miser. Of course she quite fell in with
                            what she supposed to be my ideas, for she never contradicted any one,
                            unless it was a cabman.
"Oh, I do love money, my good friend; gold, gold, it is so bootiful. Did
                            you ever hear tell of the marrow bone I had? Oh dear!"
"What marrow bone, Mrs. Shelfer?"
"Why a big beef marrow bone, that long, full of sovereigns and guineas
                            after dear Miss Minto. I stopped it with a bung and a piece of bladder,
                            and for better than a twelvemonth, while they was executing her will, I
                            slept with that beneath my pillow for fear the priest should get it.
                            Lord, how they did fight over the poor old lady's rags and bones, that
                            leathery priest and three yellow kites of cousins, they said they was,
                            as come from Portugal. At last they got a ministration with the testament and text, and they robbed
                            me shameful, shameful, my good friend. Never catch me going to mass
                            again, or you may tell me of it."
"And what became of the marrow bone, Mrs. Shelfer?"
At this inquiry, she winked both eyes rapidly, and screwed up her little
                            mouth.
"Oh what a thief that Father Banger was, to be sure! You see, Miss, I had
                            strict orders to shut him out, when Miss Minto was near her end, because
                            he had kicked her dear cat Filippina from the top of the stairs to the
                            bottom, after he had gived her unction. What a pretty sight it was to
                            see them seven dear cats, all sitting round the fire, each one on his
                            proper stool with his name done on it in different coloured worsted. I
                            had so much a year left me on the Bank of England, honourable to the
                            day, for each one of those cats, and change of diet every week, and now
                            there's only one of them left, and that is my dear old Tom."
"But, Mrs. Shelfer, about the marrow bone—"
"Well, my good friend, I was going to tell you. The way that Father
                            Banger got into the house again to steal the poor old lady's money, for
                            building a school or some such villany. He knowed how fond the poor soul
                            was of cats, so he borrowed a cat somewhere, and he got two boys to let
                            it down the area with a whipcord round its stomach, and to jerk, jerk,
                            jerk away at it, and the poor thing did squeal sure enough. 'Pain,
                            Patty,' says my poor mistress, and she could hardly speak—'Oh, Patty,
                            there's some cruel Englishman torturing a cat again.' So out I runs into
                            the area, and in pops Father Banger, who had his back to the wall, with
                            a great sheet of paper; and he begins to make a list of all the things
                            in the house. I took the cat to dear Miss Minto, and how pleased she
                            was! 'Please God,' says she, 'to let me live a few days more till I make
                            a Catholic of this poor heretic'—she always converted her cats the first
                            thing—'and then it shall have a stool and a good annuity.' But next day
                            the poor thing went."
Little Mrs. Shelfer had so great a fear of death, that like some ancient
                            nations she shunned all mention of his name, by euphemistic periphrase.
                            She had never known real illness, and even a stitch or a spasm would
                            frighten her for days. When I spoke calmly, as I sometimes did, of our
                            great inevitable friend, whom we so labour to estrange, up would jump
                            Mrs. Shelfer with a shudder and a little scream.
"Oh don't, my good soul, oh don't! How can you? Let us live, Miss
                            Valence, let us live while we can, and not think of such dreadful
                            things. You make my blood run cold."
"But, Mrs. Shelfer, surely you know that we all must die."
"Of course, my good friend, of course. But then you needn't remind one of
                            it. I met Doctor Franks to-day, and he said, 'Why, Mrs. Shelfer, I do
                            declare, you look younger than ever,' and a very clever man he is, yes,
                            yes; and not a gray hair in my head, and my father lived to
                            eighty-eight."
"And how old are you, Mrs. Shelfer, now?"
"Oh I am sure I don't know, Miss Valence, I don't keep no account. Let us
                            talk of something else. Did you hear what Tom did to your Judy
                            to-day?"
Ah, poor little thing! But I am not going to moralise. Shall I ever know
                            the history of that marrow bone?
