
CHAPTER XII.
Inspector Cutting, upon the first tidings of the robbery, came at once,
                            and assured me that he knew the "party" well, and wanted her for several
                            other plants, and crafty as she was ("leary" was the elegant word he
                            used) he was sure to be down upon her in the course of a very short
                            time.
Isola Ross, to my great surprise, did not come the next day, nor even the
                            day after; so I set out to look for her, at the same time wondering at
                            myself for doing so. Knowing that College Street must take its name from
                            some academic building in or near it, I concluded of course that there I
                            should find Professor Ross and my lovely new friend. So without
                            consulting Mrs. Shelfer, who would have chattered for an hour, away I
                            went one tine frosty morning to ask about the College.
I found that a low unsightly building, which I had often passed, near the
                            bottom of the street, was the only College there; so I entered a small
                            quadrangle, to make further inquiries.
The first person I saw was a young man dressed like one of my father's
                            grooms, and cracking a long whip and whistling. He had a brilliant
                            scarlet neckcloth, green sporting coat, and black boots up to his knees.
                            I studied him for a moment because it struck me that he would look well
                            in a foreground, when toned down a little, as water colours would render
                            him. He appreciated my attention, and seemed proud of it.
"Now, Polly, what can I do for you, dear?"
He must have been three parts drunk, or he would never have dared to
                            address me so. Of course I made no answer, but walked on. He cracked his
                            whip like a pistol, to startle me.
"Splendid filly," I heard him mutter, "but cussed high action." What he
                            meant I do not know or care.
The next I met was a fussy little man, dressed all in brown, who smelt of
                            musty hay.
"Will you kindly tell me," I asked, "where to find Professor Ross?'
"Ross, Ross! Don't know the name. No Ross about here. What's he Professor
                            of?"
"That I was not told. But it is something the young ladies study."
"No young ladies about here. But I see you have brought your dear mamma's
                            lapdog. Take it out of the bag. Let me look at it."
"Is not this the College?"
"Yes to be sure. The best College in London. Quick, let me see the
                            dog."
"I have no dog, sir. I have made some mistake."
"Then you have got a pony. Pet over-fed. Shetland breed."
"No indeed. Nothing except myself; and I am looking for Miss Ross."
"Young lady, you have made a very great mistake. You have kept me five
                            minutes from a lecture on the navicular disease. And my practice is
                            controverted by an upstart youth from the country. I am in search of
                            authorities." And off he darted, I suppose to the library.
It was clear that I had made some mistake, so I found my way back to the
                            street, and asked in the nearest shop what building it was that I had
                            just left.
"Oh, them's the weterans," said the woman, "and a precious set they
                            be!"
"Why, they did not look like soldiers."
"No, no, Miss. Weterans, where they takes in all the sick horses and
                            dogs. And very clever they are, I have heard say."
"And where is the College where the young ladies are?"
"I don't know of no other College nearer than High Street, where the boys
                            wear flat caps. But there's a girls' school down the road."
"I don't want a school. I want a College where young ladies go."
"Then I cant help you, Miss." And back I went to consult Mrs.
                            Shelfer.
"Bless my soul, Miss Valence," cried the little woman, out of breath with
                            amazement, "have you been among them niggers? It's a mercy they didn't
                            skin and stuff you. What do you think now they did to my old Tom?"
"How can I guess, Mrs. Shelfer?"
"No, no, to be sure not. I forgot, my good friend. Why, they knowed him
                            well it seems, because he had been there in dear Miss Minto's time, for
                            a salmon bone that had got crossways in his oesop, so they said at
                            least, but they are the biggest liars—so only a year ago come next
                            Boxing-day, here comes to the door half a dozen of them, bus-cad and
                            coachman all in one, all looking as grave as judges. When I went to the
                            door they all pulled their hats off, as if I had been the Queen at the
                            very least. 'What can I do for you, my good friends?' says I; for
                            Shelfer was out of the way, and catch me letting them in for all their
                            politeness. No, no, thank you. 'Mrs. Shelfer,' says the biggest of them,
                            a lantern-jawed young fellow with covers over his pockets, 'Mrs.
                            Shelfer, you are possessed of a most remarkable cat. An animal, ma'am,
                            of unparalleled cemetery and organic dewelopment. Our Professor, ma'am,
                            is delivering a course of lectures on the Canonical Heapatightness of
                            the Hirumbillycuss."
"Well done, Mrs. Shelfer! What a memory you must have!"
"Pretty well, Miss, pretty well. Particular for long words, when I likes
                            the sound of them. 'Well sir,' I says, feeling rather taken aback,
                            'thank God I haven't got it.' 'No, ma'am,' says he, 'your blooming
                            countenance entirely negatives any such dyingnoses. But the Professor,
                            in passing the other morning, observed some symptoms of it in your
                            magnificent cat, for whom he entertains the most sincere attachment, and
                            whom he will cure for our advancement and edification upon the lecture
                            table. And now, ma'am, Professor Sallenders desires his most respectful
                            compliments, and will you allow us to take that dear good cat to be
                            cured. The Professor was instrumental once in preserving his honoured
                            existence, therefore he feels assured that you will not now refuse him.'
                            Well you see, Miss, I didn't half like to let him go, but I was afraid
                            to offend the Professor, because of all my animals, for I knew that he
                            could put a blight upon them, birds and all, if he chose. Old Tom was
                            lying roasting his back again the fender, the same as you see him now,
                            poor soul; so I catched him up and put him in a double covered basket,
                            with a bit of flannel over him, because the weather was cold; and he was
                            so clever, would you believe it, he put up his old paws to fight me, he
                            knew he was going to mischief, and that turned me rather. 'Now will you
                            promise to bring him back safe?' I says. 'Ma'am,' says the lantern-jawed
                            young man, bowing over his heart, and as serious as a pulpit, 'Ma'am, in
                            less than an hour. Rely upon the honour of Weteran Arian Gent."
"Well, Mrs. Shelfer, I am astonished. Even I should never have been so
                            silly. Poor old Tom among the Philistines!"
"Well, Miss, I began to feel very uneasy directly they was gone. I
                            thought they looked back so queerly, and old Tom was mewing so dreadful
                            in the basket. Presently I began to hear a mewing out of the cupboard,
                            and a mewing out of the clock, and even out of the dripping-pan. So I
                            put on my bonnet as quick as I could, and ran right away to the College,
                            and somehow or other by the time I got there, I was in a fright all
                            over. As good luck would have it, the man was at the gate; a nice
                            respectable married man, and a friend of Charley's. 'Curbs,' I says,
                            'where is Professor Sallenders?' 'Down in the country,' says he, 'since
                            last Friday. He never stops here at Christmas, Mrs. Shelfer, he's a deal
                            too knowing for that.' My heart went pop, Miss, like an oyster shell in
                            the fire. I held on by the door, and I thought it was all up with me.
                            'Don't take on so, Missus,' says Curbs, 'if any of your museum is ill,
                            there's half a dozen clever young coves in the operating room over
                            there, only they're busy just now, cutting up a big black cat. My eyes,
                            how he did squeal!' I screamed out and ran—Curbs thought I was mad, and
                            he was not far out—bang went the door before me, and there on the table,
                            with the lantern-jawed young man flourishing a big knife over him, there
                            lay my precious old Tom strapped down on his back, with his mouth tied
                            up in white tape, and leather gloves over his feet, and sticks trussed
                            across him the same as a roasting rabbit, and a streak of white all
                            along his blessed stomach—you know, Miss, he hadn't got one white hair
                            by rights—where the niggers had shaved and floured him, to see what they
                            were about. He turned up his dear old eyes when he saw me; it would have
                            made you cry, and he tried to speak. Oh you precious old soul, didn't I
                            scatter them right and left? I scratched that lantern-jawed hypocrite's
                            face till I gave him the hirumbillycuss and hirumtommycuss too, I
                            expect. I called a policeman in, and there wasn't one of them finished
                            his Christmas in London. But the poor old soul has never been the same
                            cat since. The anxiety he was in, turned his hair white on both sides of
                            his heart and all round the backs of his ears. He wouldn't come to the
                            door, he shook so, at the call of the cat's-meat man for better than a
                            month, and he won't look at it now, while there's a skewer in it."
The poor little woman was crying with pity and rage. Old Tom looked up
                            all the time as if he knew all she said, and then jumped on her lap, and
                            showed his paws, and purred.
Meanwhile, a change had come over my intentions. Perhaps all the rudeness
                            I had met with that day had called my pride into arms. At any rate, much
                            as I liked pretty Isola, and much as I longed for her fresh warm
                            kindness, I now resolved to wait until she should choose to seek me. So
                            I did not even ask Mrs. Shelfer whether she knew the College where the
                            Professor lectured. What were love and warm young hearts to me? I
                            deserved such a rebuff for swerving so from my duty. Now I would give
                            all my thoughts to the art, whence only could spring any hope of
                            attaining my end, and the very next day I would follow the
                            picture-dealer's advice.
