
CHAPTER XIV.
“As the water is dried upon sands, so a life flieth back to the dust.”—Sir
      Alfred Lyall.
How Sibyl spent the morning that followed she never knew. She dared not go out of doors. The
     world of spring, with the new breath of life in it, mocked her. The song of the birds hurt her.
     She felt as if she should scream outright if she saw the may-blossom against the sky. She
     wandered aimlessly about the house, and at last crept back to her own room and lay down on her
     bed, and turned her face to the wall.

The day went on. Her maid brought her soup, and drew down the blinds, and was pettishly
     dismissed.
The afternoon came. They were mowing the grass on the terrace on the south front. The faint
     scent of newly-cut grass came in through the open window, and seemed, through the senses, to
     reach some acute nerve of the brain. She moaned, and buried her face in the pillows. Presently
     the mowing ceased, and everything became very silent. A bluebottle fly, pressed for time,
     rushed in, made the circuit of the room, and rushed out again.
Far away in the other wing, on the ground-floor, she heard the library door open. She knew
     Mr. Loftus's slow, even step. It crossed the hall; it entered the orangery; it came out through
     the orangery door, down the stone steps to
      the terrace below her window. She could hear his step on the gravel outside in
     the crisp air. Crack gave a short bark in recognition of the spring, and satisfaction that the
     long morning of arranging papers and the afternoon of letter-writing were at last over.
The steps dwindled and died away into the sunny silence. It seemed to Sibyl's overwrought
     mind that he was walking slowly out of her life, and that unless she made haste to follow him
     she would lose him altogether. With a sudden revulsion of feeling, she sprang to her feet, and
     put on her hat and shoes. Then she braved the spring, and went swiftly out.

A great tranquillity had fallen upon Mr. Loftus. He had made up his mind. After a turn along
     the terrace, he and
      Crack went into the little wood near the gardens, and sat down under the pink
     horse-chestnut-tree, just blushing into flower. It would have been difficult to put the
     arrangement into words, but there was a tacit understanding between the husband and wife that
     when Mr. Loftus sat under that particular tree he did not mind being interrupted. Sibyl
     generally fluttered out to him after he had been there a few minutes, though the wood was out
     of sight of the windows. And he waited for her to come to him now.
Spring had returned at last. But you might have walked through the wood and not known she was
     there: have seen only the naked trees, and the gray twigs of the alder, bleached white where
     the rabbits had bitten them in the frost. But if you had stopped to listen and look as Mr.
      Loftus did, you would have seen and heard her; seen her in the blue haze, and the
     mystery of change that lurked among the gray twigs, and in the rare primroses among the brown
     leaves; heard her in the persistent double-tongue of the chiff-chaff, and, not near at hand,
     but two trees away, in the ripple of the goldfinch, with a little question at the end of it. Is
     it a hint of immortality, that haunting desire and expectation of happiness which comes with
     the primroses, that longing for some future year when the spring shall bring with it no
     heartache, the autumn no contrition; of another year, somewhere in the future, when the ills of
     life will be done away? Mr. Loftus looked straight in front of him, and his face took an
     expression as of one whose eyes are on a goal where even patience itself, so visible in every
     line of
      his quiet face, will at last with other burdens be laid aside.
She saw him before he saw her, as she came towards him. Her heart went out to him wistfully
     and passionately by turns. She longed to turn to him as a young wife turns to a young husband,
     and cry her heart out on his breast, and be petted, and caressed, and comforted. But she dared
     not. Whatever besides she was ignorant of, she had learnt certain things about her husband, and
     one of them was that she must never show her devotion unasked. And she was seldom asked. Her
     life was a constant repression of its greatest, its only real affection.
As she came towards him he roused himself and smiled at her. She sat down by him in silence.
     He had a single primrose in the buttonhole of his coat, and he
      took it out and drew it very gently through the Russian embroidery on her
     bodice.
“When I was young, Sibyl,” he said, “I was convinced, and the conviction has never wholly
     left me, that flowers are God's thoughts which He sows broadcast in the hearts of all alike.
     But we will have none of them, and they drop unheeded to the ground. But the faithful earth
     receives them—thoughts despised and rejected of us—and nurses them in her bosom, and they come
     forth transfigured. And that is why, when we see them again, we love them so much, and feel
     akin to them.”
Her locked hands trembled on her knee.
“It must have been a beautiful thought that could turn into a lily,” he went on, noting, but
     ignoring, her emotion. “I
      wonder, if it had fallen into a poet's heart, what it would have grown into.
     Nothing more beautiful, I think. And I know the primroses are first love. I have felt sure of
     that always. I wonder, my Sibyl, when there is so much in your heart for me, that there are any
     left to come out in the woods; but there are a few, you see, among the brown leaves.”
“They will soon be over,” said Sibyl, turning her head away.
“Yes,” said Mr. Loftus, with a gentleness which was new to Sibyl, and he was always gentle.
     “They will die presently, as first love dies. But nevertheless it is a beautiful gift while it
     lasts, and we must not grieve because, like the primroses, it cannot last in flower for
      ever. I have lived through so many feelings, Sibyl, I have seen so many die which seemed
      immortal, that I have long since ceased to count on the permanence of any.”
He leant towards her, and for the first time he took her slender hands and kissed them. It
     was as if he were readjusting his position towards her, reassuring her of his trust and
     confidence and sympathy, supporting her in some great trouble. She leaned her forehead against
     his shoulder, and a sense of comfort came across her desolation, as if she were leaning her
     faint soul against his soul. He put his arm round her, and drew her closer to him.
“My darling!” he said, and there was an emotion in his voice which she had never heard in it
     before. Her hat had slipped off, and he passed his hand very tenderly over her hair.
Sibyl's over-strained nerves relaxed. Some of the craving of her heart and its
      long yearning was stilled by the touch of his hand. Ah! he loved her, after
     all—certainly he loved her. Doll was right, after all. How foolish she had been to cry all
     night! Certainly he loved her.
She could not speak. She could not weep. She could only lean against him. She had never known
     him like this before. It was this that she had always wanted, all her life, long before she had
     ever met him.
“You have been so good to me,” he went on, “from the first day of our married life when I was
     ill. Do you remember? And I know that your dear love and kindness will not fail me while I
     live. I thank and bless you for all you have given me, your whole spring of primroses; and now
     that spring is passing, as it must, Sibyl, as it must, not by your fault, take comfort,
      and when other feelings come into your heart, as they have come in, do not
     reproach yourself, do not cut me to the heart by grieving, but remember that I understand, and
     that my love and honour and gratitude can never change towards you, and that I too was young
     once: as young as—Doll, and there is no need for you and him to be so miserable. It will only
     be—like a—long engagement.”
As the drift of his words gradually became clear to her, Sibyl insensibly shrank back as from
     an abyss before her feet. But in another moment she took in their whole meaning. She pushed him
     from her with sudden violence, and stood before him, her hands clenched, her eyes blazing, her
     slender figure shaking with passion.

“How dare you!” she stammered. “How dare you insult me?”
He put out his hand feebly, and she struck it down.
“What is Doll to me?” she went on, “to me, your wife! Oh, will you never, never
     understand that I love you, that I worship you, that I care for nothing in the whole world but
     you, and that I cried all night because you married me out of pity?” Sibyl wrung her hands.
     “Oh! how dared you do it, how dared you swear to love me before God, if you did not, if you
     could not? I am too miserable. I cannot bear it—I cannot bear it!”
He sat like one stunned. His hand went to his heart.
In a moment her arms were round him, and his head was on her shoulder.
“Forgive,” he repeated over and over
      again, between the long-drawn gasps which shook him from head to foot.
And then the battle for life began.
She found his little flask in his pocket, and managed to make him swallow the contents.
He struggled, but she upheld him. Her strength was as the strength of ten.
At last, all in a moment, the struggle ceased, and a light came into his fixed eyes of awe
     and thankfulness, and—was it joy?
He did not move. He did not speak. His whole being seemed absorbed in that of some vast
     enfolding presence.
She called him wildly by name.
He trembled, and his troubled eyes, with all the light blown out of them, wandered back to
     seek hers. Death looked at her through them. He saw her as across a gulf. He recognised her.
      He remembered. He had hoped that when he came to die it might be quietly, without
     a scene, but it was not to be. He made a last effort.
“Not for pity—for——” he gasped, his ebbing breath winnowing the air. But Death cut short the
     lie faltering on his lips, and his head fell suddenly forward on her breast. She held him
     closely to her, murmuring incoherent words of love and tenderness, such as she had never dared
     to speak while he had ears to hear.

How long she had knelt beside him, holding him in her arms, the frightened servants, who at
     last found them after sunset, never knew. And when they came to lay him in his coffin, they saw
     on one of the thin folded hands a faint blue mark, as from a blow.

