<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
STORM
That night the change came and the wind veered first to the south, then to the southwest. By
      morning, gray clouds hid the sky and hourly grew darker and lower. As yet no rain fell, but
      the world had altered, and every light-value, from an artist's standpoint, was modified.
John Barren sat by his stove in the byre, made himself a cup of black coffee, and presently,
      wrapped in a big mackintosh, walked out to Gorse Point. His picture he left, of course, at the
      shed, for painting was out of the question.
Nature, who had been smiling so pleasantly in sunshine these many days, now awoke in a grim
      gray mood. The sea ran high, its white foam-caps and ridges fretting the rolling volume of it;
      the luggers fought their way out with buried noses and laboring hulls; rain still held off,
      but it was coming quickly, and the furze and the young grasses panted for it on Gorse Point.
      Below the cliffs a wild spirit inhabited the sea fowl, and they screamed and wheeled in many
      an aerial circle, now sliding with motionless outstretched wing upon the gathering gale, now
      beating back against it, now dancing in a fleet and making music far away in the foam. Upon
      the beach the dry sand whipped round in little whirls and eddies where wind-gusts caught it;
      the naked rocks poked shining weed-covered heads out of a low tide, and the wet white light of
      them glimmered raw through the gray tones of the atmosphere. Now and then a little cloud of
      dust would puff out from the cliff-face where the wind dislodged a dry particle of stone or
      mould; elsewhere Barren saw the sure-rooted samphire and tufts of sea-pink, innocent of
      flowers as yet; and sometimes little squeaking dabs of down might also be observed below where
      infant gulls huddled together in the ledges outside their nests and gazed upon a condition of
      things as yet beyond their experience.
Joan came presently to find the artist looking out at the sea.
"You ban't gwaine to paint, I s'pose, 'cause o' this ugly fashion weather?" she said.
"No, sweetheart! All the gold has gone out of the world, and there is nothing left but lead
      and dross. See how sharp the green is under the gray, and note the clearness of the air.
      Everything is keen and hard upon the eye to-day; the sky is full of rain and the sea is a wild
      harmony in gray and silver."
"Iss, the cleeves be callin' this marnin'. 'Tis a sort o' whisper as comes to a body's ear,
      an' it means that the high hills knaws the rain is nigh. An' they tell it wan to t'other, and
      moans it mournful over the valleys 'pon the wind. 'The storm be comin', the storm be comin','
      they sez."
The south and west regions of distance blackened as they sat there on the cliff, and upon
      the sea separate heavy gusts of wind roughened up the hollows of the waves. Which effect seen
      from afar flickered weirdly like a sort of submarine lightning shivering white through dark
      water. Presently a cloud broke, showing a bank of paler gray behind, and misty silver arrows
      fell in broad bands of light upon the sea. They sped round, each upon the last, like the
      spokes of a gigantic wheel trundling over the world; then the clouds huddled together again
      and the gleam of brightness died.
"You'm wisht this marnin', Mister Jan. You abbun so much as two words for me. 'Tis 'cause
      you caan't paint your picksher, I reckon."
He sighed and took her hand in his.
"Don't think that, my Joan. Once I cared nothing for you, everything for my picture; now I
      care nothing for my picture, everything for you. And the better I love you, the worse I paint
      you. That's funny, isn't it?"
"Iss, 'tis coorious. But I'm sure you do draw me a mighty sight finer than I be. 'Tis
      wonnerful clever, an' theer edn' no call to be sad, for no man else could a done better, I
      lay."
He did not answer, and still held her hand. Then there came a harder breath of wind with a
      sob of sound in it, while already over the distant sea swept separate gray curtains of
      rain.
"It's coming, Joan; the storm. It's everywhere, in earth and air and water; and in my blood.
      I am savage to-day, Joan, savage and thirsty. What will be the end of it?"
He spoke wildly, like the weather. She did not understand, but she felt his hand clinch
      tightly over hers, and, looking at the white thin fingers crooked round her wrist, they
      brought to her mind the twisted claws of a dead sea-gull she remembered to have found upon the
      beach.
"What will be the end of it, Joan? Can't you answer me?"
"Doan't 'e, Mister Jan; you'm hurtin' my hand. I s'pose as a sou'westerly gale be comin'. Us
      knaws 'em well enough in these paarts. Faither reckoned theer was dirty weather blawin' up
      'fore he sailed. He was away by daylight. The gales do bring trouble to somebody most
      times."
"What will be the end of us, I mean, not of the weather? The rain will come and the clouds
      will melt, and we know, as sure as God's in heaven, that we shall see sunshine and blue sky
      again. But what about our storm, Joan; the storm of love that's burst in my heart for you—what
      follows that?"
His question frightened her. She had asked herself the same and been well content to leave
      an answer to him. Here he was faced with a like problem and now invited her to solve it.
"I dunnaw. I thot such love never comed to no end, Mister Jan. I thot 'tweer good to wear;
      but—but how do I knaw if you doan't?"
"You trust me, Joan?"
"Why, who should I trust, if 'tweern't you? I never knawed any person else as set such store
      'pon the truth. I doan't s'pose the cherrybims in heaven loves it more'n what you do."
"Here's the rain on the back of the wind," he said.
A few heavy drops fell, cold as ice upon his burning face, and Joan laughed as she held out
      her hand, on which a great splash as big as a shilling had spread.
"That be wan of Tregagle's tears," she said, "an' 'tis the voice of en as you can hear
      howlin' in the wind. He's allus a bawlin' an' squealin', poor sawl, but you can awnly hear en
      now an' again 'fore a storm when the gale blaws his hollerin' this way."
"Who was Tregagle?"
"He was a lawyer man wance, an' killed a many wives, an' did a many shameful deeds 'fore he
      went dead. Then, to Bodmin Court, theer comes a law case, an' they wanted Tregagle, an' a man
      said Tregagle was the awnly witness, and another said he wadden. The second man up an' swore
      'If Tregagle saw it done, then I wish to God he may rise from's graave and come this minute.'
      Then, sure enough, the ghost of Tregagle 'peared in the court-house an' shawed the man was a
      liar. But they couldn' lay the ghost no more arter; an' it was a devil-ghost, which is the
      worstest kind; an' it stuck close to thicky lyin' man an' wouldn' leave en nohow. But at last
      a white witch bound the spirit an' condemned it to empty out Dosmery Pool wi' a crogan wi' a
      hole in it. A crogan's a limpet shell, which you mightn't knaw, Mister Jan. Tregagle, he done
      that party quick, an' then he was at the man again; but a passon got the bettermost of en an'
      tamed en wi' Scripture till Tregagle was as gentle as a cheel. Then they set en to work agin
      an' bid en make a truss o' sand down in Gwenvor Cove, an' carry it 'pon his shoulder up to
      Carn Olva. Tregagle weer a braave time doin' that, I can 'sure 'e, but theer comed a gert
      frost wan winter, an' he got water from the brook an' poured it 'pon the truss o' sand, so it
      froze hard. Then he carried it up Carn Olva; an' then, bein' a free spirit agin, he flew off
      quicker'n lightning to that lyin' man to tear en to pieces this time. But by good chance, when
      Tregagle comed to en, the man weer carryin' a lil baaby in's arms—a lil cheel as had never
      done a single wicked act, bein' tu young; so Tregagle couldn' do no hurt. An' they caught en
      again, an' passon set en 'pon another job: to make a truss o' sand in Whitsand Bay wi'out
      usin' any fresh water. But Tregagle caan't never do that; so he cries bitter sometimes, an'
      howls; an' when 'e howls you knaw the storm's a comin' to scatter the truss o' sand he's
      builded up."
Barron followed the legend with interest. Tregagle and his victim and the charm of the pure
      child that saved one from the other filled his thought and the event to which Fate was now
      relentlessly dragging him. He argued with himself a little; then the rain came down and the
      wind leaped like a lion over the edge of the land, and the man's blood boiled as he breathed
      ocean air.
"Us'll be wetted proper. I'll run for it, Mister Jan, an' you'd best to go up-long to your
      lil lew house. Wet's bad for 'e, I reckon."
"No," he said, "I can't let you go, Joan. Look over there. Another flood is going to burst,
      I think. Follow me quickly, quickly."
The rain came slanting over the gorse in earnest, but Joan hesitated and hung back. Louder
      than the wind, louder than the cry of the birds, than the howling of Tregagle, than the
      calling of the cleeves, spoke something. And it said "Turn, on the wing of the storm; fly
      before it, alone. Let this man walk in the teeth of the gale if he will; but you, Joan
      Tregenza, follow the wind and set your face to the east, where the sole brightness now left in
      the sky is shining."
Sheets of gray swept over them; the world was wet in an instant; a little mist of water
      splashed up two inches high off the ground; the gorse tossed and swayed its tough arms; the
      sea and the struggling craft upon it vanished like a dream; from the heart of the storm cried
      gulls, themselves invisible.
"Come, Joan, we shall be drowned."
He had wrapped her in a part of the mackintosh, and laughed as he fastened them both into it
      and hugged her close to himself. But she broke away, greatly fearing, yet knowing not what she
      feared.
"I reckon I'd best run down fast. Indeed an' I want to go."
"Go? Where? Where should you go? Come to me, Joan; you shall; you must. We two,
      sweetheart—we two against the rain and the wind and the world. Come! It will kill me to stand
      here, and you don't want that."
"But—"
"Come, I say. Quicker and quicker! We two—only we two. Don't make me command you, my
      priceless treasure of a Joan. Come with me. You are mine now and always. Quicker and quicker,
      I say. God! what rain!"
Still she hesitated and he grew angry.
"This is folly, madness. Where is your trust and belief? You don't trust, nor love,
      nor—"
"Doan't 'e say that! Never say that! It edn' true. You'm all to me, an' you knaws it right
      well, an' I'll gaw to the world's end with 'e, I will—ay, an' trust 'e wi' my life!"
He moved away and she followed, hastening as he hastened. Unutterable desolation marked the
      spot. Life had vanished save only where sheep clustered under a bank with their tails to the
      weather, and long-legged lambs blinked their yellow eyes and bleated as the couple passed.
      Despite their haste the man and the girl were very wet before reaching the shelter of the
      byre. Rain-water dribbled off his cap on to his hot face and his feet were soaking. Joan was
      breathless with haste; her draggled skirts clung to her; and the struggle against the storm
      made her giddy.
So they reached the place of shelter; and the gale burst over it with a great, crowning yell
      of wind and hurtle of rain. Then John Barren opened the byre door and Joan Tregenza passed in
      before him; whereupon he followed and shut the door.
A loose slate clattered upon the roof, and from inside the byre it sounded like a hand
      tapping high above the artist's bed of brown fern—tapping some message which neither the man
      nor the girl could read—tapping, tapping, tapping tirelessly upon ears wholly deaf to it.
</div></body></text></TEI>