<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="39">
CHAPTER ELEVEN
A NIGHT VISIT
He who less than an hour before had hastened hot-footed through the Newlyn streets, whose
      habitual stern expression had softened before the well-known sights and smells of the gray
      village, whose earnest soul was full of happiness under the rain of the night, now turned back
      upon his way and skulked through the darkness with a murderer's heart in him. The clear
      spectacle of his revenge blinded lesser presentations and even distracted his sorrow. There
      was no space now vacant in Noy's brain to hold the full extent of his loss; and the fabric of
      happiness which for weary months on various seas he had been building up in imagination, and
      which a madman's word had now sent spinning to chaos, yet remained curiously with him, as an
      impression stamped by steadfast gazing remains upon the eye. It recurred as of old: a joy; and
      not till the former emotion of happiness had again and again reappeared to be blunted, as a
      dream, at waking, by the new knowledge, did truth sink into this man's mind and become part of
      memory. Now he was dazed, as one who has run hard and well to a goal, and who, reaching it,
      finds his prize stolen. Under these circumstances, Joe Noy's natural fatalism—an instinct
      beyond the power of any religion to destroy—appeared instant and strong. Chance had now fed
      these characteristics, and they grew gigantic in an hour. But the religious habit made him
      turn to his Maker in this pass, and the merely primitive passions, which were now breaking
      loose within him, he regarded as the direct voices of God. They proclaimed that solitary duty
      the world still held for him; they marked out his road to the lurid end of it.
Thus Noy's own furious lust for revenge was easily and naturally elevated into a mandate
      from the Highest—into a message echoed and reiterated upon his ear by the multitudinous voices
      of that wild night. The rain whispered it on the roof-trees, the wind and sea thundered it;
      out of elemental chaos the awful command came, as from primal lips which had spoken since
      creation to find at last the ultimate destination of their message within a human ear. To Noy,
      his purpose, not yet an hour old, seemed ancient as eternity, a fixed and deliberate
      impression which had been stamped upon his mind at a period far earlier than his life in time.
      For one end had he been created; that by some sudden short cut he should hurry to its close a
      vile life, fill up God's bitter curse upon this man, destroy the destroyer, and speed a black
      soul into the torment awaiting it.
Irresolute and deep in thought as to his future actions, Joe Noy walked unconsciously
      forward. He felt unequal to returning to his home in Mousehole after what he had learned at
      Newlyn; and he wandered back, therefore, toward Penzance. A glare of gas lamps splashed the
      wet surface of the parade with fire; while below him, against the sea wall, a high tide
      spouted and roared. Now and again, after a heavy muffled thud of sea against stone, columns of
      glimmering, gray foam shot upward, like gigantic ghosts out of the water. For a moment they
      towered in the air, then, wind-driven, swept hissing across the black and shining surfaces of
      the deserted parade.
Noy stood here a moment, and the cold wind cooled him, and the riot and agony of the sea
      boiling against the granite face of the breakwater chimed with the riot and agony of his mind,
      whose hopes were now rent in tatters, riven, splintered and disannulled by chance. He turned a
      moment where the Newlyn harbor light flashed across the darkness to him. From his standpoint
      he knew that a line drawn through that light must fall upon the cottage of the Tregenzas
      beyond it on the shore, and, fixing his eyes where the building lay hidden, he stretched out
      his hand and spoke aloud.
"May God strike me blind and daft if ever I looks 'pon yon light an' yonder cot again till
      the man be dead."
Then he turned, and was about to seek the station, with a vague purpose to go straight to
      London at the earliest opportunity, when a wiser thought arrested this determination. He must
      learn all that it was possible to learn concerning the last days of Joan. Mrs. Tregenza had
      explained her stepdaughter's life at Drift. To Drift, therefore, the sailor determined to go;
      and the stress upon his mind was such that even the prospect of conversation with Mary
      Chirgwin—a thing he had certainly shrunk from under other circumstances—caused him no
      uneasiness.
Over the last road that Joan had ever walked, and under similar conditions of night and
      storm, he tramped up to Drift, entered through the side gate, and surprised Mr. Chirgwin and
      his niece at their supper. As before with the Tregenzas, so now again in company of Uncle
      Thomas and Mary, Joe Noy formed the third in a trio of curious significance. Though aware that
      the sailor was due from his voyage, this sudden apparition of him at such a time startled his
      former friends not a little. Mary indeed was unnerved in a manner foreign to her nature, and
      the candle-lighted kitchen whirled in her eyes as she felt her hand in his. Save for an
      ejaculation from the old man, which conveyed nothing beyond his astonishment, Noy was the
      first to speak; and his earliest words relieved the minds of his listeners in one great
      particular; he already knew the worst that had happened.
"I be come from Newlyn, from the Tregenzas. Thomasin have tawld me of all that's falled out;
      but I couldn't bide in my awful trouble wi'out comin' up-long. I reckon you'll let the past be
      forgot now. I'm punished ugly enough. You seed her last, dead an' alive; you heard the last
      words ever she spoke to any of her awn folks. That drawed me. If I must ax pardon for comin',
      then I will."
"Nay, nay, my poor sawl; sit you down an' eat, Joe, an' take they wet boots off a while. Our
      hearts have bled for 'e this many days, Joe Noy, an' never more'n now."
"I thank you, uncle; an' you, Mary Chirgwin—will 'e say as much? 'Tis you I wants to speak
      with, 'cause you—you seed Joan arter 'twas awver." 
"I wish you well, Joe Noy, an' if I ever done differ'nt 'tis past an' forgot. What I can
      tell 'e 'bout our poor lass, as lived the end of her days along wi' me an' uncle, you've a
      right to knaw."
"An' God bless 'e for sayin' so. I comed rough an' ready, an' thrust in 'pon you; but this
      news be but two hour auld in my heart, you see, an' 'tedn' easy for such as me to make choice
      o' words at a time like this."
"Eat, my son, an' doan't 'e fancy theer's any here but them as be friends. Polly an' me seed
      more o' Joan through her last days than any; an' I do say as she was a lamb o' God's foldin',
      beyond all manner o' doubt; an' Polly, as feared it mightn't 'sactly be so, be of my 'pinion
      now. Them as suffered for the sins o' other folk, like what she done, has theer hell-fire 'pon
      this side o' the graave, not t'other."
"I lay that's a true sayin'," declared Noy shortly. "I won't keep 'e ower-long from your
      beds," he added. "If you got a drink o' spirits I'll thank you for it; then I'll put a
      question or two to she—to Mary Chirgwin, if she'll allow; an' then I'll get going."
The woman was self-possessed again now, although Joe's voice and well-remembered gestures
      moved her powerfully and made it difficult to keep her voice within absolute control.
"All you can ax that I knaw, I'll tell 'e, though Joan shut her thots purty close most
      times. Us awnly got side views of her mind, and them not often."
"The man," he said. "Tell me all—every-thin' you can call home—all what her said of
      him."
"Fust she thot a 'mazin' deal 'bout en," explained the farmer; "then time made her mind get
      stale of en, an' she begin to see us was right. He sent money—a thousand pound, an' I—poor
      fool—thot Joan weern't mistook at fust. But 'twas awnly conscience money; an' now Thomasin's
      the better for't by will."
But this sensational statement was not appreciated, Joe's mind being elsewhere.
"You never heard the name of en?"
"Awnly the christening name, as was 'Jan.' You may have heard tell she got a letter the
      night she passed. Us found the coverin' under the table next day, an' Mary comed across the
      letter itself in her pocket at the last."
"'Tis that I be comed for. If you could tell so much as a word or two out of it, Mary? They
      said you burned it an' the crowner was mighty angry, but I thot as p'raps you'd looked at it
      all the same, awnly weern't pleased to say so."
"No," she answered. "Tis true I found a letter, an' I might a read some of it if I would,
      but I judged better not. 'Tweern't fair to her like."
"Was theer anything else as shawed anything 'bout en?"
"No—awnly a picksher of a ship he painted for her. I burned that tu; an' I'd a burned his
      money if I could. He painted her—I knaw that much. She tawld us wan night—a gert picksher near
      as large as life. He took it to Lunnon—for a shaw, I s'pose." 
"I'd think of en no more if I was you, Joe," said Uncle Chirgwin. "Leave the likes of en to
      the God of en. Brace yourself agin this sore onset an' pray to Heaven to forgive all
      sinners."
Noy looked at the old man and his great jaw seemed to spread laterally with his thought.
"God have gived the man to me! that's why I be here: to knaw all any can teach me. I've got
      to be the undoin' o' that devil—the undoin' an' death of en. I'll be upsides wi' the man if it
      takes me fifty year to do it. Awnly 'more haste, more let.' I shall go slow an' sure. That's
      why I comed here fust thing."
Mr. Chirgwin looked extremely alarmed, and Mary spoke.
"This be wild, wicked talkin', Joe Noy, an' no mort o' sorrer as ever was can excuse sich
      words as them. 'Tedn' no task o' yourn to take the Lard's work out His hand that way. He'll
      pay the evil-doer his just dues wi'out no help from you."
"I've got a voice in my ear, Mary—a voice louder'n any human voice; an' it bids me be doin'
      as the instrument of God A'mighty's just rage. If you can help me, then I bid you do it, if
      not, let me be away. Did you read any o' that theer letter—so much as a word, or did 'e larn
      wheer 'twas writ from?"
"If I knawed, I shouldn't tell 'e, not now. I'd sooner cut my tongue out than aid 'e 'pon
      the road you'm set. An' you a righteous thinkin' man wance!"
He looked at her and there was that in his face which showed a mind busy with time past. His
      voice had changed and his eyes softened.
"I be punished for much, Mary Chirgwin. I be punished wi' loss an' wi' sich work put on me
      as may lead to a terrible ugly plaace at the end. But theer 'tis. Like the chisel in the hand
      o' the carpenter, so I be a sharp tool in the Lard's grip."
"Never! You be a poor, dazed worm in the grip o' your awn evil thots! You'm foxing
      [Footnote: Foxing—Deceiving.] yourself, Joe; you'm listenin' to the devil an' tellin'
      yourself 'tis God—knawin' 'tedn' so all the while. Theer's no religion as would put you in the
      right wi' sich notions as them. Listen to your awn small guidin' voice, Joe Noy; listen to me,
      or to Luke Gosp'lers or any sober-thinkin', God-fearin' sawl. All the world would tell 'e you
      was wrong—all the wisdom o' the airth be agin you, let alone heaven."
"If 'twas any smaller thing I'd listen to 'e, Mary, for I knaw you to be a wise, strong
      wummon; but theer ban't no mistakin' the message I got down-long when they told me what's
      fallen 'pon Joan Tregenza. No fay; my way be clear afore me; an' the angel o' God will lead my
      footsteps nearer an' nearer till I faace the man. Windin' ways or short 'tis all wan in the
      end, 'tis all set down in the Book o' the Lard."
"How can the likes o' you dare to up an' say what be in the Book o' the Lard, Joe?" asked
      Uncle Chirgwin, roused to words by the other's sentiments. "You've got a gashly, bloody-minded
      fit on you along of all your troubles. But doan't 'e let it fasten into your heart. Pray to
      God to wipe away these here awful opinions. Else they'll be the ruin of 'e, body an' sawl. If
      Luke Gosp'ling brot 'e to this pass in time o' darkness an' tribulation, 'tis a cruel pity you
      didn't bide a church member."
"I wish I thot you was in the right, uncle," said the sailor calmly, "but I knaws you ban't.
      All the hidden powers of the airth an' the sea edn' gwaine to keep me from that man. Now I'll
      leave 'e; an' I'm sorry, Mary Chirgwin, as you caan't find it in your heart to help me, but so
      the Lard wills it. I won't ax 'e to shake my hand, for theer'll be blood on it sooner or
      later—the damnedest blood as ever a angry God called 'pon wan o' His creatures to spill
      out."
"Joe, Joe, stay an' listen to me! For the sake of the past, listen!"
But Noy rose as Mary cried these words, and before she had finished speaking he was
      gone.
</div></body></text></TEI>