<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Gutenberg text of Lying Prophets: A Novel</title><author>Phillpotts, Eden (1862-1960)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1897</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER ONE
AN INTERVAL
For a week the rain came down and it blew hard from the west. Then the weather moderated,
      and there were intervals of brightness and mild, damp warmth that brought a green veil
      trembling over the world like magic. The elms broke into a million buds, the pear trees in
      sunny corners put forth snowy flowers; the crimson knobs of the apple-blossom prepared to
      unfold. In the market gardens around and about Newlyn the plums were already setting, the
      wallflowers, which make a carpet of golden-brown beneath the fruit-trees in many orchards,
      were velvety with bloom; the raspberry canes, bent hoop-like in long rows, beautifully
      brightened the dark earth with young green; and verdure likewise twinkled even to the heart of
      the forests, to the stony nipples of the moor's vast, lonely bosom. So spring came, heralded
      by the thrush; borne upon the wings of the western wind. And then followed a brief change with
      more heavy rains and lower temperature.
The furzes on Gorse Point were a scented glory now—a nimbus of gold for the skull of the
      lofty cliff. Here John Barren and Joan Tregenza had met but twice since the beginning of the
      unsettled weather. For her this period was in a measure mysterious and strange. Centuries of
      experience seemed to separate her from the past, and, looking backward, infinite spaces of
      time already stretched between what had been and what was. Now overmuch sorrow mingled with
      her reflections, though a leaven of it ran through all—a sense of loss, of sacrifice, of
      change, which flits, like the shadow of a summer cloud, even through the soul of the most
      deeply loving woman who ever opened her eyes to smile upon the first day-dawn of married life.
      But Joan's sorrow was no greater than that, and little unquiet or uneasiness went with it. She
      had his promises; from him they could but be absolute; and not a hundred attested ceremonies
      had left her heart more at ease. In fact she believed that John Barren was presently going to
      marry her, and that when he vanished from Newlyn, she, as the better-loved part of himself,
      would vanish too. It was the old, stale falsehood which men have told a hundred thousand
      times; which men will go on telling and women believing, because it is the only lie which
      meets all requirements of the case and answers its exact purpose effectively. Age cannot
      wither it, for experience is no part of the armor of the deceived, and Love and Trust have
      never stopped to think since the world began.
As for the artist, each day now saw him slipping more deeply, more comfortably back into the
      convolutions of his old impersonal shell. He had been dragged out, not unwilling, by a giant
      passion, and he had sacrificed to it, sent it to sleep again, and so returned. He felt
      infinitely kind to Joan. A week after her visit to the linhay he, while sitting alone there,
      had turned her picture about on the easel, withdrawn its face from the wall and studied his
      work. And looking, with restored critical faculty and cold blood, he loved the paint for
      itself and deemed it very good. The storm was over, the transitory lightnings drowned lesser
      lights no more, and that steady beacon-flame of his life, which had been merged, not lost, in
      the fleeting blaze, now shone out again, steadfast and clear. Such a revulsion of feeling
      argued well for the completion of his picture, ill for the model of it.
They sat one day, as the weather grew more settled, beside a granite bowlder, which studded
      the short turf at the extremity of Gorse Point, where it jutted above the sea. Joan, with her
      chin upon her hands, looked out upon the water; Barron, lying on a railway-rug, leaned back
      and smoked his pipe and studied her face with the old, keen, passionless eagerness of their
      earliest meetings.
"When'll 'e tell me, Jan love? When'll 'e tell me what 'e be gwaine to do? Us be wan now—you
      an' me—but the lines be all the lovin'est wife can p'int to in proof she be a wife.
      Couldn't us be axed out in church purty soon?"
He did not make immediate answer, but only longed for his easel. There, in her face, was the
      wistful, far-away expression he had sighed for; a measure of thought had come to the little
      animal—her brains were awake and her blue eyes had never looked liked this before. Joan asked
      the question again, and Barren answered.
"The same matter was in my own mind, sweetheart. I am in a mighty hurry too, believe it. You
      are safe with your husband, Joan. You belong to me now, and you must trust the future with me.
      All that law demands to make us man and wife it shall have; and all religion clamors for as
      well, if that is a great matter to you. But not here—in this Newlyn. I think of you when I say
      that, Joan, for it matters nothing to me."
"Iss. I dunnaw what awful sayin's might go abroad. Things is all contrary to home as 'tis.
      Mother's guessed part an' she tawld faither I weer gwaine daft or else in love wi' some pusson
      else than Joe. An' faither was short an' sharp, an' took me out walkin', an' bid me bide at
      home an' give over trapsin' 'bout. An' 'e said as 'ow I was tokened to Joe Noy an' bound by
      God A'mighty to wait for en if 'twas a score years. But if faither had knawed I weer never for
      Noy, he'd a' said more'n that. I ban't 'feared o' faither now I knaws you, Jan, but I be cruel
      'feared o' bein' cussed, 'cause theer's times when cusses doan't fall to the ground but
      sticks. 'Twouldn' be well for the likes o' you to have a ill-wished, awver-luked body for
      wife. An' if faither knawed 'bout you, then I lay he'd do more'n speak. So like's not he'd
      strike me dead for't, bein' that religious. But you must take me away, Jan, dear heart. I'm
      yourn now an' you must go on lovin' me allus, 'cause theer'll never be nobody else to not now.
      I've chose you an' gived 'e myself an' I caan't do no more."
He listened to her delicious voice, and shut out the crude words as much as might be while
      he marked the music. He was thinking that if Joan had possessed a reasonable measure of
      intellect, a foundation for an education, he would have been satisfied to keep her about him
      during that probably limited number of years which must span his existence. But the gulf
      between them was too wide; and, as for the present position, he considered that no harm had
      been done which time would not remedy. Joan was not sufficiently intelligent to suffer long or
      much. She would forget quickly. She was very young. Her sailor must return before the end of
      the year. Then he began to think of money, and then sneered at himself. But, after all, it was
      natural that he should follow step by step upon the beaten track of similar events. "Better
      not attempt originality," he thought, "for the thing I have done is scarce capable of original
      treatment. I suppose the curtain always rings down on a check—either taken or spurned."
"So you think you can give them all up for poor me, Joan? Your home, your father, brother,
      mother—all?"
"I've gived up a sight more'n them, Jan. I've gived 'e what's all to a maiden. But my folks
      weern't hard to give up. 'Tis long since they was ought to me now. I gaws an' comes from the
      cottage an' sez, all the time, 'this ban't home no more. Mister Jan's home be mine,' I sez to
      myself. An' each time as I breaks bread, an' sleeps, an' wakes, an' looks arter faither's
      clothes I feels 'tis wan time nigher the last. They'll look back an' think what a snake 'twas
      they had 'bout the house, I s'pose. Mother'll whine an' say, 'Ah! 'er was a bitter weed for
      sartain,' an' faither'll thunder till the crocks rattle an' bid none dare foul the air wi' my
      name no more. But I be wearyin' of 'e wi' my clackin', Jan, dear heart?"
"Not so, Joan—never think that. I could listen to you till Doomsday. Only we must act now
      and talk presently. I know you're tired of the picture, and you were cross last time we met
      because I could speak of it; but I must for a moment more. It cries out to be finished. A few
      hours' good work and all's done. The weather steadies now and the glass is rising, so our
      sittings may begin in a day or two. Let me make one last, grand struggle. Then, if I fail, I
      shall fling the picture over this cliff, and my palette and brushes after it. So we will keep
      our secret a little longer. Then, when the picture is made or marred, away we'll go, and by
      the time they miss you from your old home you will be half way to your new one."
But she did not heed the latter part of his remarks, for her thoughts were occupied with
      what had gone before.
"'Pears, when all's said, you'd sooner have the picksher Joan than the real wan. 'Tis all
      the picksher an' the picksher an' the picksher."
This was not less than the truth, but of course he blamed her for so speaking, and said her
      words hurt him.
"'Tis this way," she said, "I've larned so much since I knawed 'e, an' I be like as if I was
      woke from a sleep. Things is all differ'nt now; but 'tis awnly my gert love for 'e as makes me
      'feared sometimes 'cause life's too butivul to last. An' the picksher frights me more'n fancy,
      'cause, seemin'ly, theer's two Joans, an' the picksher Joan's purtier than me. 'Er's me, but
      better'n me. 'Er's allus bright an' bonny; 'er's never crossed an' wisht; 'er 'olds 'er tongue
      an' doan't talk countrified same as me. Theer'll never be no tears nor trouble in her eyes;
      she'll bring 'e a name, an' bide purty an'—an' I hates the picksher now, so I do."
Barron listened with considerable interest to these remarks. There was passion in Joan's
      voice as she concluded, and her emotion presently found relief in tears. She only uttered
      thoughts long in her mind, without for an instant guessing the grim truth or suspecting what
      his work was to the man; yet, things being as they were, she felt some real passing pain to
      find him devote so much thought to it. Before the storm his painting had sunk to
      insignificance, since then it began to grow into a great matter again; and Joan was honestly
      jealous of the attention the artist bestowed upon it now. If she had dared, she would have
      asked him to destroy it; but something told her he would refuse. No fear for the future was
      mingled with this emotion. Only his mighty interest in the work annoyed her. It was a natural
      petty jealousy; and when John Barron laughed at her and kissed her tears away, she laughed too
      and felt a little ashamed, though none the less glad that she had spoken.
But while he flung jests at her anger, Barron felt secretly surprised to note the strides
      his Awdrey's mind was making. Much worth consideration appeared in her sudden attack upon the
      picture. She had evidently been really reflecting, with coherence and lucidity. That
      astonished him. But still he answered with a laugh.
"Jealous, Joan! Jealous of yourself—of the poor painted thing which has risen from the
      contents of small tubes smeared over a bit of canvas! My funny little dear delight! Will you
      always amuse me, I wonder? I hope you will. Nobody else can. Why, the gorse there will grumble
      next and think I love my poor, daubed burlesque of its gold better than the thing itself. If I
      find pleasure in the picture, how much the more must I love the soul of it? You see, I'm
      ambitious. You are quite the hardest thing I ever found to paint, and so I go on trying and
      trying. Hard to win and hard to paint, Joan."
She stretched out her hands to him and shook her head.
"Not hard to win, Jan. Easy enough to win to you. I ne'er seed the likes o' you in my small
      world. Not hard to win I wasn't."
"You won't refuse me a few more sittings, then, because you have become my precious
      wife?"
"In coorse not. An' I'm so sorry I was cranky. I 'dedn' mean what I said ezacally."
To-day, coming fresh to his ear after a week's interval, after several days spent with
      cultured friends and acquaintances in Newlyn, Joan's rustic speech grated more painfully than
      usual. Once he had found pleasure in it; but he was not a Cornishman to love the sound of
      those venerable words which sprinkled Joan's utterances and which have long since vanished
      from all vocabularies save those of the common people; and now her language began to get upon
      his nerves and jar them. He was tired of it. Often, while he painted, she had prattled and he,
      occupied with his work, had heard nothing; but to-day he recognized the debt he owed and
      listened patiently for a considerable time. Her deep expectancy irritated him too. He had
      anticipated that, however, and was aware that her trust and confidence in him were alike
      profound. Perhaps a shadow of fear, distrust or uneasiness had pleased him better. He was
      snugly back in his tub of impersonality from which he liked to view the fools' show drift
      pass. His last experiment in the actively objective had ruined a girl and promised to produce
      a fine picture. And that was the end of it. No fellow-creature could ever share this cynic's
      barrel with him.
Presently Joan departed upon her long tramp home. She had gone to convey a message to one of
      Thomasin Tregenza's friends at Paul. And when the girl left him, with a promise to come at all
      costs upon the next sunny morning, Barron began to think about money again. He found that the
      larger the imaginary figures, the smaller shadow of discomfort clouded his thoughts. So he
      decided upon an act of princely generosity, as the result of which resolve peace returned and
      an unruffled mind. For the musty conventionality of his conclusion, it merely served as a peg
      upon which to hang thoughts not necessary to set down here.
</div></body></text></TEI>