<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Inheritance of Evil, Or, the Consequence of
                        Marrying a Deceased Wife’s Sister : VWWP edition </title><author>Skene, Felicia (1821-1899)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1849</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
CHAPTER VI.
IT was winter now. Christmas‐tide was scarcely past, and the holly and
                    mistletoe still decorated the walls of the beautiful church where Richard and
                    Agnes had knelt that morning, happy with a strange restless happiness in one
                    another’s society, which they would scarce have ventured to analyze. They agreed
                    that they had never spent a Christmas of such unalloyed gladness. Mr. Clayton
                    always made it his especial care that this season should be one of true
                    rejoicing to every individual in his parish, and they had readily and generously
                    assisted him in this endeavour. Agnes had carried her gifts and good wishes to
                    every house in the village, and there was warmth and light on the humblest
                    hearth amongst them, when the chimes rung out on the clear midnight air, bearing
                    forth the glad tidings of great joy which the angels brought from heaven at the
                    selfsame hour.
In their own house Agnes had taken care that all
                    should be cheerfulness and gaiety, and Richard thought with delight of the
                    bright scene that waited him as he rode home through the darkness that evening.
                    He had been called to some distance on business; he was chilled and wearied, and
                    he pictured to himself the well lighted room, with the huge fire blazing on the
                    hearth, and the little Mary springing from the arms of her young aunt to meet
                    him.
The scene which did in fact await him at the Mount, was a melancholy contrast to
                    this pleasing vision. He went first to the drawing‐room, already surprised that
                    no one met him at the door. There was no light there, and the room was in
                    disorder; but most of all, he missed the sweet face of Agnes brightening so
                    gaily at his approach. It was the first time she had ever failed to welcome him,
                    and a sudden foreboding of evil assailed him. He went hurriedly from room to
                    room in search of her. He called her anxiously, but no answer was returned. At
                    last a sound of stifled sobbing met his ear. It came from the sleeping room of
                    his children, and he opened the door at once and went in. Agnes was kneeling
                    beside the cradle of the little Mary, who had fallen asleep, her cheeks yet wet
                    with the tears she had shed in her innocent sympathy for the sorrow of her aunt,
                    though she had been unable to comprehend the 
                    cause of it. Agnes had buried her face in the pillow, and was weeping as though
                    her very heart would break. She started at the sound of Richard’s voice, as he
                    took her hands in his and besought her to tell him what had grieved her. Her
                    distress was so violent that she could not speak for a few minutes; then she
                    could only utter a few incoherent words. She pointed to the child, so beautiful
                    and smiling in its quiet slumber.
“How can I ever bear to leave her!” she exclaimed; “and still more, how could I
                    leave you, dear Richard, and this happy home—all, all I love in the world! How
                    can I go? I cannot, I cannot! I should die! I know that I should!” She spoke
                    with that frantic impatience of suffering which we should all be disposed to
                    feel, had we no pure and holy motive given us for a calm endurance. Richard was
                    bewildered with astonishment.
“What can you mean, Agnes?” he said; “Where would you go? Who is it that would
                    dare to take you from me?” She was sobbing so much that she could not answer,
                    but she pointed to the letter which lay on the ground beside her. He took it up
                    and read it through. Agnes looked up at him when he had finished it, and she was
                    perfectly appalled by the storm of passion which convulsed his features. He  actually shook with anger; he crushed the
                    letter in his hand till not a word was legible; then, trampling it under foot,
                    he burst into the most tremendous invectives against those who had written it.
                    Agnes trembled with terror at his violence. She almost forgot her grief in her
                    anxiety. She rose up, and clinging to his arm, implored of him to be more
                    composed.
“Dear Richard,” she said, “it can do no good to use these terrible words against
                    them; let us think rather what we are to do. I cannot go, I feel that I cannot;
                    it would kill me!”
“You shall not,” said Richard, turning to her almost fiercely. “I tell you, you
                    shall not leave me; no power on earth will induce me to part from you.”
“But how? how?” said Agnes. “I cannot stay when such terms have been used towards
                    me.” She covered her face with her hands as she spoke: her movement seemed to
                    increase the fury of Richard’s indignation, but a stern resolution made him now
                    more calm; he drew away her hands, and bid her look up boldly.
“Agnes,” he said, “I must take this night to consider how the matter had best be
                    managed, but I charge you in the mean time to remain convinced of this—you shall
                    not leave me; we shall not be separated, come what may; I will never consent to
                    part with you.” His tone of  decision, and his
                    look of settled determination, gave Agnes an involuntary faith in his words,
                    though she could not at all perceive how they were to be verified; but her
                    womanly feeling of helplessness compelled her to rely with unquestioning trust
                    on his promise, that he would save her from the trial she could not and would
                    not bear.
“I will leave it all to you, then,” she said, “for I am bewildered,—I cannot tell
                    what is to be done. I only know I cannot leave you and those dear
                    children:—Who would care for them as I have done?”
“Who indeed? and for their sakes, Agnes, we must not scruple at any measure which
                    shall ensure to them your tender love and watchfulness. Fear nothing, then; go
                    and sleep in peace; to‐morrow we will make some arrangement by which we can defy
                    the world to separate us.”
And Agnes did rest calmly that night with Mary nestling in her arms. She felt as
                    though she must keep guard over this precious child, even through the darkness,
                    lest they stole her away; but she trusted with the most perfect security to
                    Richard’s assurances, nothing doubting that he could perform what he had
                    promised.
For Richard Clayton, however, there was no rest that night; hour after hour he
                    paced to  and fro in anxious reflection as to
                    his future conduct. He was a shrewd and a clever man, and from the first moment
                    when he read the Hardmans’ letter, his acute mind had grasped the details of the
                    case in their full extent, and he had perceived that there remained but one
                    alternative for himself and his sister‐in‐law. It was perfectly impossible that
                    Agnes Maynard should continue to reside in his house in a position which had
                    called forth such remarks; he would have been the first to despise her had she
                    done so; and yet with the same impatience of sorrow which she had manifested,
                    and which is the characteristic of all undisciplined minds, he felt that he
                    could not, he would not, lose her. Even for his children’s sake she must remain.
                    How could he endure to see them dying for want of the assiduous care which she
                    alone could give them? Mary, who seemed to have no power to live, save in an
                    atmosphere of love; and the fragile infant, his son, the pride of his heart, on
                    whom so many hopes were built, only now beginning to exhibit symptoms of
                    increasing strength and health, which all would vanish, as he knew full well, if
                    a cold heart and careless hand alone were to be concerned in his welfare.
                    Moreover Richard Clayton, although of a generous temper, was essentially
                    selfish—peculiarities of disposition which are by no means incompatible. He could not bear to think of his house in
                    disorder, cheerless, and lonely, with all the petty cares of the “menage,” which
                    are so essentially a woman’s province, devolving on himself. No; Agnes
                        must remain with him; but there was one only position in which
                    it was possible for her to do so—she must become his wife!
He would never have desired to look upon Agnes in any other light than as his
                    sister, had the unlawfulness of a union, such as that which he now projected,
                    been sufficiently felt and understood in this country to have enabled her to
                    remain with impunity in charge of his establishment.
This, however, is not the case,—to the destruction of much domestic happiness,
                    and of many of the holiest and best feelings of our nature. It is certain that
                    the unjustifiable license which has been given to these marriages by the
                    diversity of opinion on this point (so long decided by primitive and holy
                    authority), has driven many to form the connexion from which their better
                    feelings would otherwise have revolted.
Richard Clayton was determined to retain the society of his sister‐in‐law, and by
                    this arrangement alone could he do so. Therefore, following the inflexible law
                    of his own inclination, he resolved to accomplish it. He had no  pure and lofty principle in his own soul to restrain
                    him, and for external obstacles he cared little, for he knew that such marriages
                        had taken place. But he was not aware of the fact, that they
                    are very generally reprobated by society.
Had Richard known that the world he loved so truly, severe in the enforcement of
                    its own code of conventional laws, has affixed a stigma to the name of him who
                    takes for his wife the woman who has been called his sister, he would perhaps
                    have been prevented by his worship of public opinion from taking that step which
                    his professed Christianity in vain prohibited. He was ignorant, however, of the
                    general feeling which is fortunately so strong on this point, and he anticipated
                    no opposition excepting from his father. Mr. Clayton, he was certain, would view
                    such a deed with the sternest disapprobation.
But Richard had long ceased attempting even to follow in the straight and narrow
                    path which his father, uncompromising in his high standard of right and wrong,
                    had traced out before him. He could not have taken one step in such a course,
                    unassisted by that self‐denial, without which it is worse than mockery to
                    profess the Holy Christian Faith, but which was a blessing yet unknown to him.
                    He, therefore, constantly  declared that it was
                    quite impossible for him to please his father, and made this conviction a
                    license to himself, recklessly to brave his displeasure at all times. One
                    measure only must be taken with regard to Mr. Clayton,—the marriage must be
                    carefully concealed from him until it was too late to prohibit it. From Agnes
                    herself Richard expected no opposition; the idea would be startling to her at
                    first, for he felt certain she bad never entertained a thought as to the
                    possibility of such an arrangement; but he knew that he possessed great
                    influence over her—the influence which a man of strong will must at all times
                    possess over a weak and timid woman, unless there be in her that
                    strength which is best shown forth in weakness. But most of all he relied on the
                    all‐powerful argument of his children’s welfare, and her own bitter grief at the
                    mere thought of leaving her happy home.
Richard Clayton had plausibly reasoned himself into the full belief that he was
                    acting for the best when he went next morning to offer Agnes Maynard the
                    position of wife in the house where she had dwelt as sister; and yet there was a
                    feeling of conscious guilt at his heart when she came to meet him with her frank
                    warm greeting, and addressed him by the name of brother, which, for the first
                    time, grated so unpleasantly  on his ears. The
                    sight of his children, however, reassured him—they seemed to plead his cause
                    already. The infant lay on Agnes’ knees, now showing signs of intelligence, and
                    smiling at the sound of her sweet well‐known voice; whilst Mary clung to her
                    hand, which she kissed repeatedly. Richard looked on the group for a moment, and
                    then spoke in an earnest and serious tone which his anxiety rendered impressive.
                    He told her calmly and boldly the result of his deliberations. They had mutually
                    agreed that, happen what might, they would remain together. In one manner only
                    was this possible—she must consent to marry him. The violent start, the rush of
                    warm blood to her very forehead, the wild bewildered glance of her eyes upon his
                    face—for all this Richard was fully prepared; but he trembled for the success of
                    his plan, when he saw that she shrunk from his side where she had placed herself
                    so confidingly, and that her breast seemed heaving with some strong emotion. It
                    was many minutes before she could speak; and when at last her words came,
                    seemingly from her very heart, with a heavy sigh, they were but these:—“Oh,
                    Elizabeth, Elizabeth!” It was the voice of her conscience which spoke in that
                    brief exclamation, too much warped and deadened by indifference and false
                    sentiment to arouse her at  once with the
                    remembrance of the immaculate holiness of the faith to which she was pledged; it
                    seemed, with a sudden instinct, to raise up the dead before her as a barrier
                    between herself and the man who sought to make her his wife.
Yet this was but a vague and weak obstacle wherewith to oppose the concentrated
                    strength of her affection for all those dear ones round her. Had there ever been
                    in her soul one pure and firm determination to follow in the painful steps of
                    Him, who for her sake had not where to lay His head, how willingly would she
                    have abandoned home and friends, and all earth’s dearest joys, rather than have
                    deviated one hair’s breadth from the line of severest holiness and rectitude!
                    But she had never known any such solemn and blessed delivering up of self at the
                    foot of the Cross; she had made herself at all times so much the slave of her
                    own feelings, that it could not be expected that they should fail to obtain the
                    mastery at this the crisis of her fate.
It is needless to repeat all the arguments by which Richard induced her to give
                    him a favourable answer. They were such as have been mentioned already, and for
                    a mind constituted like that of Agnes Maynard certainly most powerful. Her
                    French education had  tended sadly to falsify
                    her sense of right and wrong; and many things seemed to her pardonable, and even
                    justifiable, that would have shocked a mind never subjected to the poisonous
                    influence that had not been without effect on hers. It was this that enabled her
                    to adopt so readily the shallow sophistry of Richard, who answered her, when she
                    attempted feebly to urge the peculiar connexion which already existed between
                    them, by reminding her that he had known her before his engagement with her
                    sister, she would not have scrupled to have married him then, and why should she
                    do so now? Their connexion was but in name. Would she, for the sake of a name—a
                    shadow, sacrifice his happiness and her own—the life of those dear children? He
                    took the little hands of his innocent Mary and folded them in his own that she
                    might plead for him, and Agnes yielded. Richard Clayton effected his purpose—his
                    sister‐in‐law agreed to become his wife.
</div></body></text></TEI>