<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Inheritance of Evil, Or, the Consequence of
                        Marrying a Deceased Wife’s Sister : VWWP edition </title><author>Skene, Felicia (1821-1899)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1849</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI.
IT may be imagined with what delight Richard welcomed his child and her
                    future husband to the home which had so long been cheerless and unblest. He
                    almost fancied, as he looked on his fair and innocent daughter, that she was to
                    be the means of redeeming him from the fatality which pursued him, from the sort
                    of curse which he asserted had settled upon him and his family since the day
                    when he made his sister‐in‐law his wife. Not only did he believe that Mary would
                    herself have a most happy fate, but by her marriage with a man of rank and
                    station, he trusted she would restore to him the honour and consideration he had
                    lost, and she might even regain for him his former footing in society. He forgot
                    in what awful words it had been said, that the sins of the fathers should be
                    visited on the children.
Mary Clayton found much in her father’s house to startle and distress her. Of her
                    father and step‐mother’s conduct and state of mind she would not allow herself
                    to form an opinion. At her age and in their relative posi‐ tions she would have held it the height of
                    presumption to have done so; but the condition of her brother Edward filled her
                    with anxiety. She saw that he had already gone very far astray; his parents had
                    not now the slightest authority over him, and he treated them both with
                    disrespect and unkindness; he took care to let them see how much he thought they
                    had injured him; and yet Mary could not help perceiving clearly, that his faults
                    and follies were only the result of his neglected education, and of the
                    unfortunate circumstances in which he was placed. She believed that he might
                    even yet be led to know the unspeakable happiness of abjuring all unholy things,
                    and doing His will in submission and in love; and she determined to try at least
                    what her own gentle influence could effect.
She soon won his warmest affection; for few could know Mary Clayton without
                    loving her. Her pure and elevated character, and the daily shining forth in all
                    her actions of the holy faith which Edward had never before seen thus
                    practically illustrated in the life of an individual, failed not to inspire him
                    with a degree of respect and almost reverence for his sister, which had a strong
                    effect upon his mind. Already he had begun to attend to her counsels; he seemed
                    disposed to admit, at least, the Glory and the Beauty of the Truths which she
                    set be‐ fore him; and Richard Clayton dwelt
                    more and more on the flattering hope, that his daughter was as a good angel sent
                    to restore peace and honour and happiness to his house.
At this juncture Lord and Lady Verney arrived at B—. They were to spend the first
                    few weeks of their stay in this place at the house of the noble family who had
                    been the most rigid and uncompromising in their just exclusion of Richard and
                    his wife from all respectable society. The marriage of Mary and Mr. Verney had
                    not been announced till the arrival of his father and mother, and they were
                    themselves the first to mention it to their friends.
Their horror and indignation may be imagined at the revelation which followed
                    from their astonished acquaintance. They were told at once who and what was the
                    man to whose daughter their son and heir was to be united. They learnt that he
                    was one who had contracted a union which, by the most holy authority, has been
                    pronounced a sin worthy to be branded with a fearful name; a union which the
                    Church of Christ in all ages has openly denounced and solemnly prohibited; so
                    that none professing themselves members of the same, dare countenance him who
                    has not feared to disregard that stern prohibition; a union which, if ever in a
                    Christian country it came to be regarded with 
                    other feelings than those of the profoundest abhorrence, would serve as a
                    precedent to the license that might then be taken for the commission of the most
                    awful crimes. This unnatural and most unholy union Richard Clayton had
                    contracted, in defiance of his father’s righteous indignation as a Priest,
                    steward of the mysteries of God, and as a man serving an All‐pure Master—in
                    defiance of a distinct law Divine and human.
Lord and Lady Verney further learnt that Richard, and the wife who had
                    co‐operated with him in this sinful act, had been by just and universal judgment
                    expelled from society in all the bitterness of disgrace. The history of their
                    life from that period to the present day was then detailed;—the birth of the
                    son, whose social position was so questionable, that the very companions of his
                    games taunted him with many a galling name;—the reckless and dissipated course
                    he was now pursuing, whereby it seemed likely that he would add to the dishonour
                    which had in fact made him what he was;—the self‐excommunication of Mr. and Mrs.
                    Clayton, sufficiently showing that they dared not for very shame pass the sacred
                    threshold of the house of God;—and, finally, the condition to which they had for
                    some years been reduced, so disgraceful and humiliating,  shunned by high and low, and above all, avoided by
                    those, like Mr. Lambert, whose holiness of life and faithful obedience to the
                    given laws, rendered their disapprobation of any individual a sure sign of his
                    unworthiness.
Amidst the contending feelings of excessive anger and vexation, which filled the
                    minds of Lord and Lady Verney when they had heard all these facts, there were
                    two ideas which predominated over the rest. The first was, a sensation of
                    profound thankfulness, that it was yet time to prevent their only son from
                    contracting the disgraceful alliance, to which no power on earth would ever
                    induce them to consent; and the next, a feeling of the very deepest indignation
                    against Mary and her relations, for having concealed these dishonouring
                    circumstances from them, and so having artfully stolen, as it were, their
                    consent from them.
Their anger at what they held to be an unworthy deception had certainly been
                    justly incurred by Richard, who ought in strictest honour to have acquainted
                    them with the whole truth the moment he heard of the proposed alliance; and who
                    had not done so merely because he was too weak and selfish to risk the failure
                    of the plan which gave him so much pleasure. A man who once indulges in laxity
                    of principle, as Richard had done when he married his sister‐ in‐law, will have no scruple in carrying out the same
                    system in all other matters.
But poor Mary was most innocent of the contemptible and wicked conduct of which
                    they had accused her. No one had ever ventured to enlarge to her upon her
                    father’s sins, or their consequences; she knew far too little of the world to be
                    aware of their peculiar and painful position in society. She was perfectly
                    aware, as a Christian, what a great and grievous sin Richard and Agnes had
                    committed in their marriage; but, as a daughter, she considered it unwarrantable
                    in herself to allow her mind to dwell one moment on their failings; and she had
                    never opened her lips on the subject to any human being, or allowed a whisper
                    connected with it to meet her ear. But as for concealment, Mary was too
                    guileless to suppose that it could exist; she had never doubted but that Lord
                    and Lady Verney were thoroughly acquainted with all circumstances connected with
                    herself and her family.
Meantime, they determined at once to take vigorous measures for terminating an
                    affair which they considered already but too dishonouring to themselves. That
                    their son’s name should ever have been even coupled with that of Richard
                    Clayton’s daughter was a disgrace most galling to their pride. They sent for  Mr. Verney, they acquainted him with all the
                    unhappy circumstances of the case, and commanded him from that moment to give up
                    all thoughts of ever making Mary Clayton his wife. Never, under any
                    circumstances, would they consent to such a marriage; sooner would they see him
                    laid in his grave with an unstained name—sooner would they disown him
                    altogether, and alienate from him the family estates, so that he should have but
                    an empty title to dishonour. Nothing is too violent for injured pride, when
                    pride has become a passion; and Lord and Lady Verney spoke violently, unmoved by
                    their son’s despair. But they took a yet stronger measure for putting a complete
                    stop to an affair now most hateful to them.
They wrote two letters, Lord Verney to Richard, his wife to Mary; the tenor of
                    both was the same. In unsparing terms they qualified the dishonourable position
                    of Mr. and Mrs. Clayton; solemnly and with a cruel haughtiness they declared
                    that nothing should ever induce them to allow their son to have the slightest
                    connexion with such a family. With the most cutting bitterness they intimated
                    that if Richard chose to take legal measures for forcing Mr. Verney to keep his
                    engagement, they were willing to sacrifice their whole fortune to save him from
                    the disgrace of the proposed marriage;  and
                    they concluded by openly expressing their utter contempt of the miserable
                    deception which they declared had been practised upon them by Mary and her
                    father.
Richard Clayton was alone when this cruel letter reached him, whereby he saw that
                    the retribution of his sin, which he termed a curse, so far from being removed
                    by his daughter’s hand, was now about to take effect upon herself. By this
                    anticipated marriage he had looked for happiness to Mary, and restored honour to
                    himself, and straightway his unforgotten deed, his ineffaceable act, rose up
                    before him, and turned that bright prospect into gloom and bitterness; it
                    changed the hope of his daughter’s happiness to the certainty of her misery; it
                    converted the vision of his own renewed prosperity into the palpable evidence of
                    the actual dishonour that sullied his name with a stain never to be blotted out.
                    At once his conviction of the fatality which he believed had pursued him ever
                    since his marriage, (bringing upon him the results of that fatal step in the
                    shape of unceasing misfortune,) returned to his mind with redoubled vigour. It
                    had but gained new strength from its temporary banishment by that delusive hope,
                    and it came to him now in the guise of despair. He saw clearly that the effects
                    of his crime were coming at last to  their
                    full fruition; they were spreading on to sufferers most innocent of the guilt.
                    “The father had eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth were set on
                    edge.”
Hitherto the punishment of his deed had been administered by the world, because
                    of his dereliction from the merely human laws of morality; but now, for the
                    first time, he perceived and understood his sin in its true nature and actual
                    criminality, for the judgment of God had commenced. Truly Lord Verney’s letter
                    was an awful blow to Richard Clayton. 
When Agnes, alarmed at his long absence, entered his room, she found him lying
                    back in his armchair, speechless and well nigh senseless; breathing only in
                    short suffocating gasps, his face livid, his whole frame convulsed, his
                    appearance was fearful. It was clear that he had been stricken with some
                    physical attack of a dreadful nature. The screams of his terrified wife brought
                    the servants flocking in. A physician was instantly sent for; he soon arrived,
                    and seemed quite appalled at the state in which he found Mr. Clayton. He used
                    the strongest remedies, but for some hours he would give little hope. At length
                    his patient breathed more freely, his countenance resumed its natural hue, and
                    without having spoken, or appeared aware of his position, he sunk into a  deep lethargic sleep. The physician then
                    pronounced him out of danger, and informed Agnes that her husband had been
                    seized with an attack evidently brought on by some overpowering mental
                    excitement, and which had well nigh proved fatal. He earnestly urged upon her
                    the necessity of his being kept free henceforward from all agitation or
                    uneasiness. It would be next to impossible that he should rise from another such
                    seizure.
Agnes literally shuddered at these words. She knew it would be madness even to
                    hope that Richard could henceforward be preserved, either from mental anxiety,
                    or from bitter corroding grief. She had taken Lord Verney’s letter from the
                    stiffened hand of her unhappy husband, and she knew its contents. She had
                    already seen that which Lady Verney had written to her step‐daughter; and she
                    had met the piteous despairing gaze of Mary Clayton’s sweet blue eyes, when she
                    received from it the blow whereby she was smitten to the very dust.
Agnes Clayton betook herself to her knees, crushed and bewildered with anguish,
                    but she scarce knew what to pray for; it seemed to her a hopeless task to seek
                    to avert from Richard and herself the misfortunes that were springing so thickly
                    from the seed they had sown in their reckless sin and folly years ago. Truly it was bearing such fruit as they had
                    never dreamt of; and there fell a terrible weight upon her heart, when she
                    thought of that innocent one whose whole existence was too probably blighted by
                    her father’s fault.
It was some days before Richard was sufficiently recovered to inquire how it
                    fared with his daughter since she had learnt the utter destruction of her whole
                    earthly happiness. The misery which Mary Clayton was enduring would have been
                    altogether insupportable to her but for one thought of holy hope.
                    The affection she felt for him she had believed was to be her husband, was of a
                    nature to be felt but once in a lifetime, and never to be forgotten or
                    replaced—full of an unchanging clinging tenderness, which must turn to bitterest
                    suffering if rejected. There is no trial purely of this earth which can bring
                    greater agony to a human heart, than the conviction that its true and devoted
                    affection has been for ever given in vain. It seemed to her, when she was thus
                    suddenly flung down from her bright hope and joy into such exceeding
                    wretchedness, as though the eyes that were to look on him no more might well
                    refuse to meet again the light of day; and the sinking heart revolt from bearing
                    the heavy load of that dark cheerless future, which was all that now remained to
                    her on earth Her sorrow had every aggravation 
                    which man could give it; for not only was she rejected and cast off by him to
                    whom she had trusted for her life’s happiness, but she was treated with the most
                    unmerited and cutting contempt by his family.
Mary would have sunk altogether under this overwhelming burden of sudden trial,
                    had it not been, as we have said, for one thought. It was the recollection of
                    the Love of Him who alone is holy, who only is the Lord, for her that was even
                    as a worm in His sight; a love that was manifest in His unutterable agony, that
                    hereafter might be manifest in her unutterable bliss; that even now was shown
                    forth in the light affliction, enduring but for a moment, wherewith He chastened
                    her, in order that at the last it might bear fruit in a great and exceeding
                    weight of glory. She felt that though by His will the soul may be cast forth
                    into the deep waters of human misery, whose bitterness no earthly power can
                    assuage, still this one hope shall uphold it in the fearful struggle, as with
                    the hand of an angel, and teach it through its very suffering (tempered by
                    submission and faith) that neither in this world nor in the world to come can
                    the redeemed of Christ know aught of despair.
Richard Clayton rose from his dangerous illness a humbled and remorseful man. It
                    may be doubted whether his was a repentance not  to be repented of; but, at least, he now thoroughly understood how glaring
                    was the sin from which so much suffering was springing, not to those only who
                    had erred, but to those also who were altogether guiltless of it. He no longer
                    felt any power to struggle with the retribution which had so clearly commenced;
                    silent and hopeless, he seemed constrained to sit by and watch the working of
                    all the misery and ruin which his selfishness had wrought.
The first meeting between the father and daughter was a terrible one. Richard
                    gave but one glance to that pale sad face, with its look of patient
                    wretchedness, and to the dim eyes from which the sunshine of hope and joy was
                    for ever fled, quenched in bitterest tears, and then he almost crouched down
                    before her as though he would have implored her forgiveness.
Mary understood from that moment that a great duty and task were now set before
                    her, in the soothing and comforting of the father, who had so profoundly though
                    unwillingly injured her. She must not only be resigned, but cheerful; that he
                    might never know how sorely stricken and overwhelmed she was by the sorrow he
                    had brought upon her. She nerved herself at once to this holy effort of filial
                    love, but the struggle was severe, and she felt it would undermine both health
                    and life.
</div></body></text></TEI>