<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Inheritance of Evil, Or, the Consequence of
                        Marrying a Deceased Wife’s Sister : VWWP edition </title><author>Skene, Felicia (1821-1899)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1849</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">
CHAPTER X.
SEVENTEEN years had passed away since the birth of Edward Clayton, the
                    only child of Richard and Agnes, when Mr. Clayton died. His life had been
                    greatly protracted, doubtless, because he laboured well in the vineyard of the
                    Lord; but at length his weary feet were arrested at the gate of the heavenly
                    fold; his aged form was laid down to rest among the green pastures and by the
                    still waters. Mary Clayton knelt beside his coffin, looking for the last time on
                    his serene face; restored now to the look of innocence and of placid rest which
                    only guileless infants and the dead can know; but she shed no tears whilst she
                    laid her cheek upon his cold stiff hand, for she dared not weep for him.
She had been his chief thought and care; for the last years of his life he had
                    but one wish respecting her, and that was to educate in her a true and devoted
                    servant for his Master. He set before himself, as the type of what he desired
                    her to be, a lily of the field—humble, spotless,  having but slender root in the earth; giving no
                    fragrance to the world around, but lifting up the sweet head ever towards
                    heaven:—and she became such. His tenderness and prayers were not in vain. Deep
                    set within her heart was the desire to keep herself blameless against the coming
                    of our Lord. In disposition she was meek, gentle, and unselfish; but her
                    grandfather saw that she inherited all her mother’s acuteness of feeling and
                    intensity of affection, and from this peculiarity in her character he rightly
                    judged that her trials in life would spring. He sought then to fortify her
                    beforehand for that struggle, which sooner or later comes to us all, of our
                    human wishes and feelings with our sworn allegiance to the cross; for none ever
                    sought in sincerity to follow Him, but at some one period of their existence
                    they are called on to suffer for His sake. Mr. Clayton saw with delight that on
                    Mary his lessons were not thrown away; and he died in peace at last, with the
                    firm conviction, that whatever might be her fate in this world, she would never
                    accept the highest joys it could offer if they involved a dereliction from
                    duty.
Very different had been the education and very different was now the character of
                    Edward Clayton, Mary’s half‐brother, whom she had seen only at rare intervals.
                    He resembled his father in disposition; he was clever, impetuous,  and wilful—proud to the very uttermost; and he had
                    become profoundly selfish. His was precisely one of those characters which,
                    rightly controlled and judiciously guided, might have been moulded to great
                    excellence. Had he been drawn to follow and to seek after the good, he would
                    have struggled on in the right path with all the energy of his ardent mind; but
                    he was left to pursue the bent of his own inclination, and he turned reckless
                    and unthinking to evil.
It may seem strange that the only child of parents yet living should have been
                    abandoned to the fatal guidance of his own will; but it arose from the fact,
                    that although outwardly they held him in control, they had lost all moral
                    influence over him so soon as he was of an age to gather from the remarks of the
                    servants and the taunts of his schoolfellows in what light esteem they
                    themselves were held by the world in general; from that hour he lost all respect
                    for them, and they became powerless to sway his mind for right or
                    wrong, however much they might regulate his outward actions. There is no
                    observer more keen and acute than a shrewd and clever child. Edward soon
                    understood that his parents were exiled from society solely on account of their
                    own conduct; he saw that they were not treated with the same consideration as
                    the relations of his companions at school; he learnt that his own grandfather had been driven from the
                    village because he would not countenance his son, and that his sister had been
                    taken away because his mother was deemed an unfit guide for her. Mr. Lambert,
                    revered and respected by the whole neighbourhood, never visited his father; he
                    himself was sent to church with a servant only, because his parents were too
                    proud and too ashamed to face, in that holy place, all those who so openly
                    disapproved of their conduct, and therefore seldom went there, thinking too
                    little of the guilt they were incurring by neglecting so inestimable a
                    privilege. Was it not, therefore, inevitable that when Agnes and Richard
                    attempted to enforce upon their son the necessity of religious principle and
                    self‐discipline, he could only treat their effort as a mockery? Still deeper,
                    however, lay the cause which rendered it impossible for Edward to feel either
                    respect or esteem for his parents—it lay in the dissension and
                    misery which reigned in his own home, in the mutual recriminations and
                    disagreements which seemed to have taken the place of the affection that had
                    once subsisted between his father and mother.
Richard Clayton had become embittered to the very last degree by the results of
                    what he now termed his most unfortunate marriage. After the birth of Edward,
                    when he saw how  completely he was cut off
                    from society, he was very anxious to go abroad, and seek acquaintances in some
                    part of the world where his name was not known. But his circumstances rendered
                    it quite out of the question for him to think of leaving B—; he had nothing to
                    depend upon but the allowance which his father still continued to give him; and
                    as The Mount was Mr. Clayton’s property, where he allowed him to reside, free of
                    expense, he could not have lived in the same manner elsewhere. He was,
                    therefore, compelled to remain where every day and hour he was subjected to
                    treatment most galling to his haughty spirit. The sinful pride which restrained
                    himself and Agnes from entering the church door, augmented very much the
                    discomfort of their position: it prevented the possibility of any softening of
                    the severity with which the world had visited his conduct. It was quite
                    impossible for Mr. Lambert to hold any intercourse with persons who showed so
                    pernicious an example to the poor of his parish—who had, in fact, removed
                    themselves from communion with the Church; and his open disapprobation was
                    necessarily imitated by the parishioners, who held him in such high esteem.
Mr. and Mrs. Clayton were, probably, not altogether aware how great was the sin
                    they committed in allowing an unholy pride to debar  them of the means of grace. Richard had always been
                    careless respecting these things; and now his inward uneasiness and bitterness
                    of spirit, which arose, though he admitted it not, from the smitings of an
                    unquiet conscience, had rendered him sneering, and well‐nigh sceptical, on the
                    subject of religion. It is no uncommon case, when a man has wilfully sinned
                    against the light, that he should seek for a refuge in the falsehood which calls
                    it darkness.
Richard Clayton had taken his first step in the downward course, when he placed
                    his foot within the church where Agnes became his wife; and the descent was
                    becoming daily more abrupt and easy, although he was himself, perhaps, scarce
                    aware of the danger in which he stood, when he began to find relief and
                    satisfaction in scoffing at what he had once at least held sacred. Even Agnes
                    had not learnt, in her fashionable Parisian school, to attach much value to
                    Church principles. Both now resented very strongly the judgment of public
                    opinion, which consigned them, in the midst of a populous neighbourhood, to an
                    exile as complete as though they had been sent to the wilds of Siberia. But this
                    resentment Richard vented on his wife, being unable to give it scope
                    elsewhere.
A torturing conviction took possession of his mind, that the consequences of his
                    marriage  were to follow him throughout his
                    life, in every possible shape in which misfortune could visit him. He felt
                    certain that it would cause the failure of every scheme and every
                    hope,—that it would pursue him, to his continual vexation and annoyance, and
                    would finally hunt him down, as it were, to a dishonoured and untimely end. This
                    idea, which really became a species of monomania, caused him to acquire an
                    irritable dislike to Agnes, which he made her feel every hour of the day. During
                    Edward’s childhood, it sufficed that his mother had given him some order, for
                    the father to reverse it,—a system which would ruin any child; and as the boy
                    grew up, when Richard perceived that his son openly showed how little respect he
                    felt for the parents whom he heard universally slighted and condemned, his
                    father declared it was but a part of the fatality which had pursued him since
                    his Union with Agnes; and he recklessly abandoned Edward, without an attempt to
                    reclaim him, to the evil course which he began so early.
Edward found that his own position in the world was seriously injured by that of
                    his father; and whilst he nourished a most unhallowed anger against his parents
                    for what he considered an injury inflicted on him by them, he was too proud to
                    court the acquaintance of those who shunned him; and therefore flung  himself, without restraint, into the only society
                    which was open to him,—that of low and dissipated company.
It was impossible for the father and mother not to tremble at the course which it
                    seemed likely would be taken by their only son. They had made no attempt to
                    place him in any profession, because Richard had been so completely severed from
                    all connexion with the world that he would have found great difficulty in
                    opening out for him any honourable career. Edward was his grandfather’s heir,
                    and therefore, in a pecuniary point of view, it was not necessary that he should
                    find any means of existence for himself; but both Richard and Agnes were
                    passionately attached to their son, and keenly alive to the incalculable evils
                    which would probably result to him from their unhappy position. This feeling
                    produced, however, a very different effect upon the minds of each. In Richard it
                    only increased to an alarming extent the gloomy morbid despondency in which he
                    indulged, under the belief that all was to go wrong with him henceforward, and
                    which paralyzed him so much, that he made no attempt to rectify the evil fruits
                    of his own action, though he failed not bitterly to reproach Agnes as the cause
                    of it all. Mrs. Clayton meantime felt that her husband was both unjust and
                    cruel,  in accusing her so harshly of the
                    consequences of that which she had done at his own solicitation for the sake of
                    his own children. But there was now in the midst of her trials a
                    dawning of better feeling than she had ever been blessed with in happier
                    days.
That is a beautiful provision of nature, which causes the purest and tenderest
                    affections of our humanity to be very often the instruments for awakening in our
                    souls a holier love. In the deep anxiety and terror which the mother felt lest
                    her only son should suffer by her former conduct, she was led to turn
                    imploringly to Him who alone could avert the evil she dreaded. But she could not
                    approach the Throne of all Purity without looking also into her own life, and
                    learning how far she had erred and strayed from His ways. Her heart was full of
                    penitence, but she was too much bewildered by the mists and obscurity of a life
                    of negligence and sin, to understand as yet what the Lord would have her to do,
                    and how, if she could not retrieve the past, she might at least sanctify the
                    future by deep submission and repentance. She longed earnestly to apply to Mr.
                    Lambert for counsel and instruction; but she dared not do it—she dared not brave
                    the fierce anger which she knew such a proceeding would  awaken in her husband. In like manner she would now
                    gladly have gone to church, though she did not even yet appreciate either the
                    duty or the privilege of worshipping in His courts; but this was equally
                    impossible—Richard would never have permitted it. Remorse and uncertainty for
                    herself, and profound anxiety for her son, rendered Agnes Clayton a miserable
                    being.
Such was the condition of the inhabitants of The Mount at the period of Mr.
                    Clayton’s death. But immediately on this event there followed another, which
                    gave Mr. and Mrs. Clayton the first moment of joy, real heartfelt joy, which
                    they had known for years. Intelligence was brought them of the approaching
                    marriage of Mary Clayton with one to whom it was most desirable, under every
                    point of view, that she should be united.
Mr. Verney was the heir and future representative of a most ancient and noble
                    house. He was the only child of Lord and Lady Verney, who were chiefly
                    remarkable for the pride of birth, which was to them almost a hereditary
                    possession. Forgetting how their name would avail them nothing in the dust,
                    their whole thoughts and hopes and schemes in this life were given to maintain
                    the honour of that which had come to them unstained through a long line of
                        ances‐ try. In their only son, as was to
                    be expected, all their plans and wishes were centred. Their pride and their
                    ancient title were allied to a poverty which they held to be a most unseemly
                    condition for the members of so noble a family; and it was their favourite
                    project that he should make some wealthy alliance, which should restore them to
                    their former grandeur; at the same time, no desire for riches could have induced
                    them to overlook the necessity that the wife of their son should bear a name, if
                    not as noble, at least as honourable and unsullied as their own. It was their
                    wish that she should be possessed of rank also, and for this reason they were at
                    first highly displeased when they perceived that their son had formed a very
                    serious attachment with Mary Clayton, whose grandfather’s residence was close to
                    their own. Gradually, however, they became somewhat more reconciled to the idea
                    that she was to be their daughter‐in‐law, not because she was in herself
                    everything they could wish, but because they believed her to be the heiress of
                    all Mr. Clayton’s property: and they were also well aware, that though not of
                    noble birth, he was of a good old family, and of a most honourable reputation.
                    Of the existence of her father, mother‐in‐law, and brother, they knew nothing
                    whatever; Mary never mentioned them, know‐ ing
                    how painful the subject was to her grandfather; and he himself never allowed
                    those names to pass his lips which he sent up hourly in prayer to heaven.
If Mr. Clayton had entertained the slightest idea that Mr. Verney wished to marry
                    his granddaughter, he would at once have stated the whole circumstances of his
                    son’s second marriage and present position to Lord Verney, with which it was in
                    fact impossible he could be acquainted, as the family had resided abroad until
                    lately. But the good old Vicar was far too unworldly and simple‐minded to think
                    of such an occurrence at all; he could scarce have believed that his little Mary
                    had left her childhood so far behind her. And his death, somewhat unexpected at
                    the last, occurred before Mr. Verney had taken any steps for arranging the
                    matter beyond his own secret determination.
When Mr. Clayton died, Lady Verney, at her son’s solicitation, persuaded Mary to
                    leave the house where she was now quite alone (as Mrs. Harewood had died some
                    years previously), and conveyed her to their own home, to remain with them till
                    her future plans were arranged.
Mary then communicated to them the fact, that her father was living, and that she
                    had decided, of course, on returning to his house.
This intelligence was rather startling to Lord 
                    and Lady Verney, but as Mary herself had been kept very much in ignorance of the
                    circumstances of her family, they still believed that her grandfather must have
                    left her a large fortune, and at all events, the universal lamentations which
                    his death called forth from high and low, sufficiently proved that his virtues
                    had rendered an alliance with her in truth, an honour. They therefore acquiesced
                    in their son’s wishes, when he announced to them that Mary had given her consent
                    to the marriage, provided theirs could be obtained. And they could not but admit
                    that by doing so they insured him every prospect of happiness, for the quiet and
                    gentle Mary Clayton was not one to feel a light attachment for her future
                    husband. They saw that her affection for him was deeply rooted and intense, of a
                    nature to endure even to her life’s end, alike unchanging whether it were
                    destined to work her happiness or misery.
Lady Verney could not but agree with Mary, that she ought now at once to repair
                    to her father’s house, there to pass the time which must intervene till the
                    period fixed for her marriage. But as they were all anxious that they should not
                    be completely separated for so many months, the Verneys determined to come
                    themselves to spend the interval at a place of  public resort in the vicinity of B—. It so chanced that one of the most
                    aristocratic and exclusive of the families in the neighbourhood of that village
                    were old acquaintances of theirs, which was of course an additional inducement
                    to them to visit the place. But it more than once occurred to Lady Verney as a
                    strange circumstance, that her noble friends had never mentioned the father of
                    her future daughter‐in‐law among their list of acquaintances, for she never
                    doubted but that he was held in the same consideration as Mr. Clayton had been
                    in their own county. She did not, however, dwell much on the fact; and when Mary
                    left them to proceed to The Mount, she promised that they would all join her at
                    B— in a very short time. Mr. Verney himself followed her almost immediately,
                    that he might be introduced to the family of his future wife; their ready
                    consent having been obtained, of course, before the marriage was finally
                    settled.
</div></body></text></TEI>