
CHAPTER XLIII
Robert, tired and sick at heart, felt himself in no mood this evening for a dinner-party in
      which conversation would be treated more or less as a fine art. Liberal Catholicism had lost
      its charm; his sympathetic interest in Montalembert, Lacordaire, Lamennais, had to be
      quickened, pumped up again as it were, by great efforts, which were constantly relaxed within
      him as he sped westwards by the recurrent memory of that miserable room, the group of men, the
      bleeding hand, the white dying face.
In Madame de Netteville's drawing-room he found a small number of people assembled. M. de
      Quérouelle, a middle-sized, round-headed old gentleman of a familiar French type; Lady Aubrey,
      thinner, more lath-like than ever, clad in some sumptuous mingling of dark red and silver;
      Lord Rupert, beaming under the recent introduction of a Land Purchase Bill for Ireland, by
      which he saw his way at last to wash his hands of 'a beastly set of tenants'; Mr. Wharncliffe,
      a young private secretary with a waxed moustache, six feet of height, and a general air of
      superlativeness which demanded and secured attention; a famous journalist, whose smiling
      self-repressive look assured you that he carried with him the secrets of several empires; and
      one Sir John Headlam, a little black-haired Jewish-looking man with a limp—an ex-Colonial
      Governor, who had made himself accepted in London as an amusing fellow, but who was at least
      as much disliked by one half of society as he was popular with the other.
'Purely for talk, you see, not for show!' said Madame de Netteville to Robert, with a little
      smiling nod round her circle as they stood waiting for the commencement of dinner.
'I shall hardly do my part,' he said with a little sigh. 'I have just come from a very
      different scene.'
She looked at him with inquiring eyes.
'A terrible accident in the East End,' he said briefly. 'We won't talk of it. I only mention
      it to propitiate you beforehand. Those things are not forgotten at once.'
She said no more, but, seeing that he was indeed out of heart, physically and mentally, she
      showed the most subtle considera
      tion for him at dinner. M. de Quérouelle was made to talk. His hostess wound him up
      and set him going, tune after tune. He played them all, and, by dint of long practice, to
      perfection, in the French way. A visit of his youth to the island grave of Chateaubriand; his
      early memories, as a poetical aspirant, of the magnificent flatteries by which Victor Hugo
      made himself the god of young romantic Paris; his talks with Montalembert in the days of
       L'Avenir; his memories of Lamennais's sombre figure, of Maurice de Guérin's feverish
      ethereal charm; his account of the opposition salons under the Empire—they had all
      been elaborated in the course of years, till every word fitted and each point led to the next
      with the 'inevitableness' of true art. Robert, at first silent and distrait, found it
      impossible after a while not to listen with interest. He admired the skill, too, of Madame de
      Netteville's second in the duet, the finish, the alternate sparkle and melancholy of it; and
      at last he too was drawn in, and found himself listened to with great benevolence by the
      Frenchman, who had been informed about him, and regarded him indulgently, as one more curious
      specimen of English religious provincialisms. The journalist, Mr. Addlestone, who had won a
      European reputation for wisdom by a great scantiness of speech in society, coupled with the
      look of Minerva's owl, attached himself to them; while Lady Aubrey, Sir John Headlam, Lord
      Rupert, and Mr. Wharncliffe made a noisier and more dashing party at the other end.
'Are you still in your old quarters, Lady Aubrey?' asked Sir John Headlam, turning his old
      roguish face upon her. 'That house of Nell Gwynne's, wasn't it, in Meade Street?'
'Oh dear no! We could only get it up to May this year, and then they made us turn out for
      the season, for the first time for ten years. There is a tiresome young heir who has married a
      wife and wants to live in it. I could have left a train of gunpowder and a slow match behind,
      I was so cross!'
'Ah—"Reculer pour mieux faire sauter!"' said Sir John, mincing out his pun as
      though he loved it.
'Not bad, Sir John,' she said, looking at him calmly, 'but you have way to make up. You were
      so dull the last time you took me in to dinner, that positively——'
'You began to wonder to what I owed my paragraph in the Société de Londres,' he
      rejoined, smiling, though a close observer might have seen an angry flash in his little eyes.
      'My dear Lady Aubrey, it was simply because I had not seen you for six weeks. My education had
      been neglected. I get my art and my literature from you. The last time but one we met, you
      gave me the cream of three new French novels and all the dramatic scandal of the period. I
      have lived on it for weeks. By the way, have you read the Princesse de—— ?'
He looked at her audaciously. The book had affronted even Paris.
'I haven't,' she said, adjusting her bracelets, while she flashed
       a rapier-glance at him, 'but if I had, I should say precisely the same. Lord
      Rupert, will you kindly keep Sir John in order?'
Lord Rupert plunged in with the gallant floundering motion characteristic of him, while Mr.
      Wharncliffe followed like a modern gunboat behind a three-decker. That young man was a
      delusion. The casual spectator, to borrow a famous Cambridge mot, invariably assumed
      that all 'the time he could spare from neglecting his duties he must spend in adorning his
      person.' Not at all! The tenue of a dandy was never more cleverly used to mask the
      schemes of a Disraeli or the hard ambition of a Talleyrand than in Master Frederick
      Wharncliffe, who was in reality going up the ladder hand over hand, and meant very soon to be
      on the top rungs.
It was a curious party, typical of the house, and of a certain stratum of London. When,
      every now and then, in the pauses of their own conversation, Elsmere caught something of the
      chatter going on at the other end of the table, or when the party became fused into one for a
      while under the genial influence of a good story or the exhilaration of a personal skirmish,
      the whole scene—the dainty oval room, the lights, the servants, the exquisite fruit and
      flowers, the gleaming silver, the tapestried walls—would seem to him for an instant like a
      mirage, a dream, yet with something glittering and arid about it which a dream never has.
The hard self-confidence of these people—did it belong to the same world as that humbling,
      that heavenly self-abandonment which had shone on him that afternoon from Charles Richards's
      begrimed and blood-stained face? 'Blessed are the poor in spirit,' he said to himself
      once with an inward groan. 'Why am I here? Why am I not at home with Catherine?'
But Madame de Netteville was pleasant to him. He had never seen her so womanly, never felt
      more grateful for her delicate social skill. As she talked to him, or to the Frenchman, of
      literature, or politics, or famous folk, flashing her beautiful eyes from one to the other,
      Sir John Headlam would, every now and then, turn his odd puckered face observantly towards the
      farther end of the table.
'By Jove!' he said afterwards to Wharncliffe as they walked away from the door together,
      'she was inimitable to-night; she has more rôles than Desforêts!' Sir John and his
      hostess were very old friends.
Upstairs smoking began, Lady Aubrey and Madame de Netteville joining in. M. de Quérouelle,
      having talked the best of his répertoire at dinner, was now inclined for amusement,
      and had discovered that Lady Aubrey could amuse him, and was, moreover, une belle
       personne. Madame de Netteville was obliged to give some time to Lord Rupert. The other
      men stood chatting politics and the latest news, till Robert, conscious of a complete failure
      of social energy, began to look at his watch. Instantly Madame de Netteville glided up to
      him.


'Mr. Elsmere, you have talked no business to me, and I must know how my affairs in Elgood
      Street are getting on. Come into my little writing-room.' And she led him into a tiny panelled
      room at the far end of the drawing-room and shut off from it by a heavy curtain, which she now
      left half-drawn.
'The latest?' said Fred Wharncliffe to Lady Aubrey, raising his eyebrows with the slightest
      motion of the head towards the writing-room.
'I suppose so,' she said indifferently; 'she is East-Ending for a change. We all do it
      nowadays. It is like Dizzy's young man who "liked bad wine, he was so bored with good."'
Meanwhile, Madame de Netteville was leaning against the open window of the fantastic little
      room, with Robert beside her.
'You look as if you had had a strain,' she said to him abruptly, after they had talked
      business for a few minutes. 'What has been the matter?'
He told her Richards's story, very shortly. It would have been impossible to him to give
      more than the driest outline of it in that room. His companion listened gravely. She was an
      epicure in all things, especially in moral sensation, and she liked his moments of reserve and
      strong self-control. They made his general expansiveness more distinguished.
Presently there was a pause, which she broke by saying—
'I was at your lecture last Sunday—you didn't see me!'
'Were you? Ah! I remember a person in black, and veiled, who puzzled me. I don't think we
      want you there, Madame de Netteville.'
His look was pleasant, but his tone had some decision in it.
'Why not? Is it only the artisans who have souls? A reformer should refuse no one.'
'You have your own opportunities,' he said quietly; 'I think the men prefer to have it to
      themselves for the present. Some of them are dreadfully in earnest.'
'Oh, I don't pretend to be in earnest,' she said with a little wave of her hand; 'or, at any
      rate, I know better than to talk of earnestness to you.'
'Why to me?' he asked, smiling.
'Oh, because you and your like have your fixed ideas of the upper class and the lower. One
      social type fills up your horizon. You are not interested in any other, and, indeed, you know
      nothing of any other.'
She looked at him defiantly. Everything about her to-night was splendid and regal—her dress
      of black and white brocade, the diamonds at her throat, the carriage of her head, nay, the
      marks of experience and living on the dark subtle face.
'Perhaps not,' he replied: 'it is enough for one life to try and make out where the English
      working class is tending to.'
'You are quite wrong, utterly wrong. The man who keeps
       his eye only on the lower class will achieve nothing. What can the idealist do
      without the men of action—the men who can take his beliefs and make them enter by violence
      into existing institutions? And the men of action are to be found with us.'
'It hardly looks just now as if the upper class was to go on enjoying a monopoly of them,'
      he said, smiling.
'Then appearances are deceptive. The populace supplies mass and weight—nothing else. What
       you want is to touch the leaders, the men and women whose voices carry, and then
      your populace would follow hard enough. For instance,'—and she dropped her aggressive tone and
      spoke with a smiling kindness,—'come down next Saturday to my little Surrey cottage; you shall
      see some of these men and women there, and I will make you confess when you go away that you
      have profited your workmen more by deserting them than by staying with them. Will you
      come?'
'My Sundays are too precious to me just now, Madame de Netteville. Besides, my firm
      conviction is that the upper class can produce a Brook Farm, but nothing more. The religious
      movement of the future will want a vast effusion of feeling and passion to carry it into
      action, and feeling and passion are only to be generated in sufficient volume among the
      masses, where the vested interests of all kinds are less tremendous. You upper-class folk have
      your part, of course. Woe betide you if you shirk it—but——'
'Oh, let us leave it alone,' she said with a little shrug. 'I know you would give us all the
      work and refuse us all the profits. We are to starve for your workman, to give him our hearts
      and purses and everything we have, not that we may hoodwink him—which might be worth doing—but
      that he may rule us. It is too much!'
'Very well,' he said drily, his colour rising. 'Very well, let it be too much.'
And, dropping his lounging attitude, he stood erect, and she saw that he meant to be going.
      Her look swept over him from head to foot—over the worn face with its look of sensitive
      refinement and spiritual force, the active frame, the delicate but most characteristic hand.
      Never had any man so attracted her for years; never had she found it so difficult to gain a
      hold. Eugénie de Netteville, poseuse, schemer, woman of the world that she was, was
      losing command of herself.
'What did you really mean by "worldliness" and the "world" in your lecture last Sunday?' she
      asked him suddenly, with a little accent of scorn. 'I thought your diatribes absurd. What you
      religious people call the "world" is really only the average opinion of sensible people which
      neither you nor your kind could do without for a day.'
He smiled, half amused by her provocative tone, and defended himself not very seriously. But
      she threw all her strength into the argument, and he forgot that he had meant to go at once.
       When she chose she could talk admirably, and she chose now. She had the most
      aggressive ways of attacking, and then, in the same breath, the most subtle and softening ways
      of yielding and, as it were, of asking pardon. Directly her antagonist turned upon her he
      found himself disarmed he knew not how. The disputant disappeared, and he felt the woman,
      restless, melancholy, sympathetic, hungry for friendship and esteem, yet too proud to make any
      direct bid for either. It was impossible not to be interested and touched.
Such at least was the woman whom Robert Elsmere felt. Whether in his hours of intimacy with
      her, twelve months before, young Alfred Evershed had received the same impression may be
      doubted. In all things Eugénie de Netteville was an artist.
Suddenly the curtain dividing them from the larger drawing-room was drawn back, and Sir John
      Headlam stood in the doorway. He had the glittering amused eyes of a malicious child as he
      looked at them.
'Very sorry, madame,' he began in his high cracked voice, 'but Wharncliffe and I are off to
      the New Club to see Desforêts. They have got her there to-night.'
'Go,' she said, waving her hand to him, 'I don't envy you. She is not what she was.'
'No, there is only one person,' he said, bowing with grotesque little airs of gallantry,
      'for whom time stands still.'
Madame de Netteville looked at him with smiling half-contemptuous serenity. He bowed again,
      this time with ironical emphasis, and disappeared.
'Perhaps I had better go back and send them off,' she said, rising. 'But you and I have not
      had our talk out yet.'
She led the way into the drawing-room. Lady Aubrey was lying back on the velvet sofa, a
      little green paroquet that was accustomed to wander tamely about the room perching on her
      hand. She was holding the field against Lord Rupert and Mr. Addlestone in a three-cornered
      duel of wits, while M. de Quérouelle sat by, his plump hands on his knees, applauding.
They all rose as their hostess came in.
'My dear' said Lady Aubrey, 'it is disgracefully early, but my country before pleasure. It
      is the Foreign Office to-night, and since James took office I can't with decency absent
      myself. I had rather be a scullerymaid than a minister's wife. Lord Rupert, I will take you on
      if you want a lift.'
She touched Madame de Netteville's cheek with her lips, nodding to the other men present,
      and went out, her fair stag-like head well in the air, 'chaffing' Lord Rupert, who obediently
      followed her, performing marvellous feats of agility in his desire to keep out of the way of
      the superb train sweeping behind her. It always seemed as if Lady Aubrey could have had no
      childhood, as if she must always have had just that voice and those eyes. Tears she could
      never have shed, not even as a baby over
       a broken toy. Besides, at no period of her life could she have looked upon a lost
      possession as anything else than the opportunity for a new one.
The other men took their departure for one reason or another. It was not late, but London
      was in full swing, and M. de Quérouelle talked with gusto of four 'At homes' still to be
      grappled with.
As she dismissed Mr. Wharncliffe, Robert too held out his hand.
'No,' she said, with a quick impetuousness, 'no: I want my talk out. It is barely half-past
      ten, and neither of us wants to be racing about London to-night.'
Elsmere had always a certain lack of social decision, and he lingered rather reluctantly—for
      another ten minutes, as he supposed.
She threw herself into a low chair. The windows were open to the back of the house, and the
      roar of Piccadilly and Sloane Street came borne in upon the warm night air. Her superb dark
      head stood out against a stand of yellow lilies close behind her, and the little paroquet,
      bright with all the colours of the tropics, perched now on her knee, now on the back of her
      chair, touched every now and then by quick unsteady fingers.
Then an incident followed which Elsmere remembered to his dying day with shame and
      humiliation.
In ten minutes from the time of their being left alone, a woman who was five years his
      senior had made him what was practically a confession of love—had given him to understand that
      she knew what were the relations between himself and his wife—and had implored him with the
      quick breath of an indescribable excitement to see what a woman's sympathy and a woman's
      unique devotion could do for the causes he had at heart.
The truth broke upon Elsmere very slowly, awakening in him, when at last it was
      unmistakable, a swift agony of repulsion, which his most friendly biographer can only regard
      with a kind of grim satisfaction. For after all there is an amount of innocence and
      absent-mindedness in matters of daily human life, which is not only niaiserie, but
      comes very near to moral wrong. In this crowded world a man has no business to walk about with
      his eyes always on the stars. His stumbles may have too many consequences. A harsh but a
      salutary truth! If Elsmere needed it, it was bitterly taught him during a terrible half-hour.
      When the half-coherent enigmatical sentences, to which he listened at first with a perplexed
      surprise, began gradually to define themselves; when he found a woman roused and tragically
      beautiful between him and escape; when no determination on his part not to understand; when
      nothing he could say availed to protect her from herself; when they were at last face to face
      with a confession and an appeal which were a disgrace to both—then at last Elsmere paid 'in
      one
       minute glad life's arrears,'—the natural penalty of an optimism, a boundless faith
      in human nature, with which life, as we know it, is inconsistent.
How he met the softness, the grace, the seduction of a woman who was an expert in all the
      arts of fascination he never knew. In memory afterwards it was all a ghastly mirage to him.
      The low voice, the splendid dress, the scented room came back to him, and a confused memory of
      his own futile struggle to ward off what she was bent on saying—little else. He had been
      maladroit, he thought, had lost his presence of mind. Any man of the world of his
      acquaintance, he believed, trampling on himself, would have done better.
But when the softness and the grace were all lost in smart and humiliation, when the Madame
      de Netteville of ordinary life disappeared, and something took her place which was like a
      coarse and malignant underself suddenly brought into the light of day—from that point onwards,
      in after days, he remembered it all.
' ... I know,' cried Eugénie de Netteville at last, standing at bay before him, her hands
      locked before her, her white lips quivering, when her cup of shame was full, and her one
      impulse left was to strike the man who had humiliated her—'I know that you and your
      puritanical wife are miserable—miserable. What is the use of denying facts that all
      the world can see, that you have taken pains,' and she laid a fierce deliberate emphasis on
      each word, 'all the world shall see? There—let your wife's ignorance and bigotry, and your own
      obvious relation to her, be my excuse, if I wanted any; but,' and she shrugged her white
      shoulders passionately, 'I want none! I am not responsible to your petty codes.
      Nature and feeling are enough for me. I saw you wanting sympathy and affection——'
'My wife!' cried Robert, hearing nothing but that one word. And then, his glance sweeping
      over the woman before him, he made a stern step forward.
'Let me go, Madame de Netteville, let me go, or I shall forget that you are a woman and I a
      man, and that in some way I cannot understand my own blindness and folly——'
'Must have led to this most undesirable scene,' she said with mocking suddenness, throwing
      herself, however, effectually in his way. Then a change came over her, and erect, ghastly
      white, with frowning brow and shaking limbs, a baffled and smarting woman from whom every
      restraint had fallen away, let loose upon him a torrent of gall and bitterness which he could
      not have cut short without actual violence.
He stood proudly enduring it, waiting for the moment when what seemed to him an outbreak of
      mania should have spent itself. But suddenly he caught Catherine's name coupled with some
      contemptuous epithet or other, and his self-control failed him. With flashing eyes he went
      close up to her and took her wrists in a grip of iron.


'You shall not,' he said, beside himself, 'you shall not! What have I done—what has she
      done—that you should allow yourself such words? My poor wife!'
A passionate flood of self-reproachful love was on his lips. He choked it back. It was
      desecration that her name should be mentioned in that room. But he dropped the hand
      he held. The fierceness died out of his eyes. His companion stood beside him panting,
      breathless, afraid.
'Thank God,' he said slowly, 'thank God for yourself and me that I love my wife! I
      am not worthy of her—doubly unworthy, since it has been possible for any human being to
      suspect for one instant that I was ungrateful for the blessing of her love, that I could ever
      forget and dishonour her! But worthy or not—— No!—no matter! Madame de Netteville, let me go,
      and forget that such a person exists.'
She looked at him steadily for a moment, at the stern manliness of the face which seemed in
      this half-hour to have grown older, at the attitude with its mingled dignity and appeal. In
      that second she realised what she had done and what she had forfeited; she measured the gulf
      between herself and the man before her. But she did not flinch. Still holding him, as it were,
      with menacing defiant eyes, she moved aside, she waved her hand with a contemptuous gesture of
      dismissal. He bowed, passed her, and the door shut.
For nearly an hour afterwards Elsmere wandered blindly and aimlessly through the darkness
      and silence of the park.
The sensitive optimist nature was all unhinged, felt itself wrestling in the grip of dark
      implacable things, upheld by a single thread above that moral abyss which yawns beneath us
      all, into which the individual life sinks so easily to ruin and nothingness. At such moments a
      man realises within himself, within the circle of consciousness, the germs of all things
      hideous and vile. 'Save for the grace of God,' he says to himself, shuddering, 'save
      only for the grace of God——'
Contempt for himself, loathing for life and its possibilities, as he had just beheld them;
      moral tumult, pity, remorse, a stinging self-reproach—all these things wrestled within him.
      What, preach to others, and stumble himself into such mire as this? Talk loudly of love and
      faith, and make it possible all the time that a fellow human creature should think you capable
      at a pinch of the worst treason against both?
Elsmere dived to the very depths of his own soul that night. Was it all the natural
      consequence of a loosened bond, of a wretched relaxation of effort—a wretched acquiescence in
      something second best? Had love been cooling? Had it simply ceased to take the trouble love
      must take to maintain itself? And had this horror been the subtle inevitable Nemesis?
All at once, under the trees of the park, Elsmere stopped for a moment in the darkness, and
      bared his head, with the passionate
       reverential action of a devotee before his saint. The lurid image which had been
      pursuing him gave way, and in its place came the image of a new-made mother, her child close
      within her sheltering arm. Ah! it was all plain to him now. The moral tempest had done its
      work.
One task of all tasks had been set him from the beginning—to keep his wife's love! If she
      had slipped away from him, to the injury and moral lessening of both, on his cowardice, on his
      clumsiness, be the blame! Above all, on his fatal power of absorbing himself in a hundred
      outside interests, controversy, literature, society. Even his work seemed to have lost half
      its sacredness. If there be a canker at the root, no matter how large the show of leaf and
      blossom overhead, there is but the more to wither! Of what worth is any success, but that
      which is grounded deep on the rock of personal love and duty?
Oh! let him go back to her!—wrestle with her, open his heart again, try new ways, make new
      concessions. How faint the sense of her trial has been growing within him of late!
      hers which had once been more terrible to him than his own! He feels the special temptations
      of his own nature; he throws himself, humbled, convicted, at her feet. The woman, the scene he
      has left, is effaced, blotted out by the natural intense reaction of remorseful love.
So he sped homewards at last through the noise of Oxford Street, seeing, hearing nothing. He
      opened his own door, and let himself into the dim, silent house. How the moment recalled to
      him that other supreme moment of his life at Murewell! No light in the drawing-room. He went
      upstairs and softly turned the handle of her room.
Inside the room seemed to him nearly dark. But the window was wide open. The free
      loosely-growing branches of the plane trees made a dark, delicate network against the luminous
      blue of the night. A cool air came to him laden with an almost rural scent of earth and
      leaves. By the window sat a white motionless figure. As he closed the door it rose and walked
      towards him without a word. Instinctively Robert felt that something unknown to him had been
      passing here. He paused breathless, expectant.
She came to him. She linked her cold trembling fingers round his neck.
'Robert, I have been waiting so long—it was so late! I thought'—and she choked down a
      sob—'perhaps something has happened to him, we are separated for ever, and I shall never be
      able to tell him. Robert, Mr. Flaxman talked to me; he opened my eyes; I have been so cruel to
      you, so hard! I have broken my vow. I don't deserve it; but—Robert!——'
She had spoken with extraordinary self-command till the last word, which fell into a
      smothered cry for pardon. Catherine Elsmere had very little of the soft clingingness which
      makes the
       charm of a certain type of woman. Each phrase she had spoken had seemed to take
      with it a piece of her life. She trembled and tottered in her husband's arms.
He bent over her with half-articulate words of amazement, of passion. He led her to her
      chair, and, kneeling before her, he tried, so far as the emotion of both would let him, to
      make her realise what was in his own heart, the penitence and longing which had
      winged his return to her. Without a mention of Madame de Netteville's name, indeed!
       That horror she should never know. But it was to it, as he held his wife, he owed
      his poignant sense of something half-jeopardised and wholly recovered; it was that
      consciousness in the background of his mind, ignorant of it as Catherine was then and always,
      which gave the peculiar epoch-making force to this sacred and critical hour of their lives.
      But she would hear nothing of his self-blame—nothing. She put her hand across his lips.
'I have seen things as they are, Robert,' she said very simply; 'while I have been sitting
      here, and downstairs, after Mr. Flaxman left me. You were right—I would not
      understand. And, in a sense, I shall never understand. I cannot change,' and her voice broke
      into piteousness. 'My Lord is my Lord always; but He is yours too. Oh, I know it, say what you
      will! That is what has been hidden from me; that is what my trouble has taught me;
      the powerlessness, the worthlessness, of words. It is the spirit that quickeneth. I
      should never have felt it so, but for this fiery furnace of pain. But I have been wandering in
      strange places, through strange thoughts. God has not one language, but many. I have dared to
      think He had but one, the one I knew. I have dared'—and she faltered—'to condemn your faith as
      no faith. Oh! I lay there so long in the dark downstairs, seeing you by that bed; I heard your
      voice, I crept to your side. Jesus was there, too. Ah, He was—He was! Leave me that comfort!
      What are you saying? Wrong—you? Unkind? Your wife knows nothing of it. Oh, did you think when
      you came in just now before dinner that I didn't care, that I had a heart of stone? Did you
      think I had broken my solemn promise, my vow to you that day at Murewell? So I have, a hundred
      times over. I made it in ignorance; I had not counted the cost—how could I? It was all so new,
      so strange. I dare not make it again, the will is so weak, circumstances so strong. But oh!
      take me back into your life! Hold me there! Remind me always of this night; convict me out of
      my own mouth! But I will learn my lesson; I will learn to hear the two voices, the
      voice that speaks to you and the voice that speaks to me—I must. It is all plain to me now. It
      has been appointed me.'
Then she broke down into a kind of weariness, and fell back in her chair, her delicate
      fingers straying with soft childish touch over his hair.
'But I am past thinking. Let us bury it all, and begin again. Words are nothing.'


Strange ending to a day of torture! As she towered above him in the dimness, white and pure
      and drooping, her force of nature all dissolved, lost in this new heavenly weakness of love,
      he thought of the man who passed through the place of sin, and the place of expiation, and saw
      at last the rosy light creeping along the East, caught the white moving figures, and that
      sweet distant melody rising through the luminous air, which announced to him the approach of
      Beatrice and the nearness of those 'shining tablelands whereof our God Himself is moon and
      sun.' For eternal life, the ideal state, is not something future and distant. Dante knew it
      when he talked of 'quella que imparadisa la mia mente.' Paradise is here, visible and
      tangible by mortal eyes and hands, whenever self is lost in loving, whenever the narrow limits
      of personality are beaten down by the inrush of the Divine Spirit.
