
CHAPTER VI
'Agnes, if you want any tea, here it is,' cried Rose, calling from outside through the
      dining-room window; 'and tell mamma.'
It was the first of June, and the spell of warmth in which Robert Elsmere had arrived was
      still maintaining itself. An intelligent foreigner dropped into the flower-sprinkled valley
      might have believed that, after all, England, and even Northern England, had a summer. Early
      in the season as it was, the sun was already drawing the colour out of the hills; the young
      green, hardly a week or two old, was darkening. Except the oaks. They were brilliance itself
      against the luminous gray-blue sky. So were the beeches, their young downy leaves just
      unpacked, tumbling loosely open to the light. But the larches and the birches and the
      hawthorns were already sobered by a longer acquaintance with life and Phœbus.


Rose sat fanning herself with a portentous hat, which when in its proper place served her,
      apparently, both as hat and as parasol. She seemed to have been running races with a fine
      collie, who lay at her feet panting, but studying her with his bright eyes, and evidently
      ready to be off again at the first indication that his playmate had recovered her wind.
      Chattie was coming lazily over the lawn, stretching each leg behind her as she walked, tail
      arched, green eyes flaming in the sun, a model of treacherous beauty.
'Chattie, you fiend, come here!' cried Rose, holding out a hand to her; 'if Miss Barks were
      ever pretty she must have looked like you at this moment.'
'I won't have Chattie put upon,' said Agnes, establishing herself at the other side of the
      little tea-table; 'she has done you no harm. Come to me, beastie. I won't compare you
      to disagreeable old maids.'
The cat looked from one sister to the other, blinking; then with a sudden magnificent spring
      leaped on to Agnes's lap and curled herself up there.
'Nothing but cupboard love,' said Rose scornfully, in answer to Agnes's laugh; 'she knows
      you will give her bread and butter and I won't, out of a double regard for my skirts and her
      morals. Oh, dear me! Miss Barks was quite seraphic last night; she never made a single remark
      about my clothes, and she didn't even say to me as she generally does, with an air of
      compassion, that she "quite understands how hard it must be to keep in tune."'
'The amusing thing was Mrs. Seaton and Mr. Elsmere,' said Agnes. 'I just love, as Mrs.
      Thornburgh says, to hear her instructing other people in their own particular trades. She
      didn't get much change out of him.'
Rose gave Agnes her tea, and then, bending forward, with one hand on her heart, said in a
      stage whisper, with a dramatic glance round the garden, 'My heart is whole. How is yours?'
'Intact,' said Agnes calmly, 'as that French bric-à-brac man in the Brompton Road
      used to say of his pots. But he is very nice.'
'Oh, charming! But when my destiny arrives'—and Rose, returning to her tea, swept her little
      hand with a teaspoon in it eloquently round—'he won't have his hair cut close. I must have
      luxuriant locks, and I will take no excuse! Une chevelure de poète, the eye
      of an eagle, the moustache of a hero, the hand of a Rubinstein, and, if it pleases him, the
      temper of a fiend. He will be odious, insufferable for all the world besides, except for me;
      and for me he will be heaven.'
She threw herself back, a twinkle in her bright eye, but a little flush of something half
      real on her cheek.
'No doubt,' said Agnes drily. 'But you can't wonder if under the circumstances I don't pine
      for a brother-in-law. To
       return to the subject, however, Catherine liked him. She said so.'
'Oh, that doesn't count,' replied Rose discontentedly; 'Catherine likes everybody—of a
      certain sort—and everybody likes Catherine.'
'Does that mean, Miss Hasty,' said her sister, 'that you have made up your mind Catherine
      will never marry?'
'Marry!' cried Rose. 'You might as well talk of marrying Westminster Abbey.'
Agnes looked at her attentively. Rose's fun had a decided lack of sweetness. 'After all,'
      she said demurely, 'St. Elizabeth married.'
'Yes, but then she was a princess. Reasons of State. If Catherine were "her Royal Highness"
      it would be her duty to marry, which would just make all the difference. Duty! I hate
      the word.'
And Rose took up a fir-cone lying near and threw it at the nose of the collie, who made a
      jump at it, and then resumed an attitude of blinking and dignified protest against his
      mistress's follies.
Agnes again studied her sister. 'What's the matter with you, Rose?'
'The usual thing, my dear,' replied Rose curtly, 'only more so. I had a letter this morning
      from Carry Ford—the daughter, you know, of those nice people I stayed in Manchester with last
      year. Well, she wants me to go and stay the winter with them and study under a first-rate man,
      Franzen, who is to be in Manchester two days a week during the winter. I haven't said a word
      about it—what's the use? I know all Catherine's arguments by heart. Manchester is not
      Whindale, and papa wished us to live in Whindale; I am not somebody else and needn't earn my
      bread; and art is not religion; and——'
'Wheels!' exclaimed Agnes. 'Catherine, I suppose, home from Whinborough.'
Rose got up and peered through the rhododendron bushes at the top of the wall which shut
      them off from the road.
'Catherine, and an unknown. Catherine driving at a foot's pace, and the unknown walking
      beside her. Oh, I see, of course—Mr. Elsmere. He will come in to tea, so I'll go for a cup. It
      is his duty to call on us to-day.'
When Rose came back in the wake of her mother, Catherine and Robert Elsmere were coming up
      the drive. Something had given Catherine more colour than usual, and as Mrs. Leyburn shook
      hands with the young clergyman her mother's eyes turned approvingly to her eldest daughter.
      'After all, she is as handsome as Rose,' she said to herself—'though it is quite a
      different style.'
Rose, who was always tea-maker, dispensed her wares; Catherine took her favourite low seat
      beside her mother, clasping Mrs. Leyburn's thin mittened hand awhile tenderly in her
       own; Robert and Agnes set up a lively gossip on the subject of the Thornburghs'
      guests, in which Rose joined, while Catherine looked smiling on. She seemed apart from the
      rest, Robert thought; not, clearly, by her own will, but by virtue of a difference of
      temperament which could not but make itself felt. Yet once as Rose passed her, Robert saw her
      stretch out her hand and touch her sister caressingly, with a bright upward look and smile as
      though she would say, 'Is all well? have you had a good time this afternoon, Röschen?' Clearly
      the strong contemplative nature was not strong enough to dispense with any of the little wants
      and cravings of human affection. Compared to the main impression she was making on him, her
      suppliant attitude at her mother's feet and her caress of her sister were like flowers
      breaking through the stern March soil and changing the whole spirit of the fields.
Presently he said something of Oxford, and mentioned Merton. Instantly Mrs. Leyburn fell
      upon him. Had he ever seen Mr. S—— who had been a Fellow there, and Rose's godfather?
'I don't acknowledge him,' said Rose, pouting. 'Other people's godfathers give them mugs and
      corals. Mine never gave me anything but a Concordance.'
Robert laughed, and proved to their satisfaction that Mr. S—— had been extinct before his
      day. But could they ask him any other questions? Mrs. Leyburn became quite animated, and,
      diving into her memory, produced a number of fragmentary reminiscences of her husband's
      Queen's friends, asking him for information about each and all of them. The young man
      disentangled all her questions, racked his brains to answer, and showed all through a quick
      friendliness, a charming deference as of youth to age, which confirmed the liking of the whole
      party for him. Then the mention of an associate of Richard Leyburn's youth, who had been one
      of the Tractarian leaders, led him into talk of Oxford changes and the influences of the
      present. He drew for them the famous High Church preacher of the moment, described the great
      spectacle of his Bampton Lectures, by which Oxford had been recently thrilled, and gave a
      dramatic account of a sermon on evolution preached by the hermit-veteran Pusey, as though by
      another Elias returning to the world to deliver a last warning message to men. Catherine
      listened absorbed, her deep eyes fixed upon him. And though all he said was pitched in a
      vivacious narrative key and addressed as much to the others as to her, inwardly it seemed to
      him that his one object all through was to touch and keep her attention.
Then, in answer to inquiries about himself, he fell to describing St. Anselm's with
      enthusiasm,—its growth, its Provost, its effectiveness as a great educational machine, the
      impression it had made on Oxford and the country. This led him naturally to talk of Mr. Grey,
      then, next to the Provost, the most promi
      nent figure in the college; and once embarked on this theme he became more eloquent
      and interesting than ever. The circle of women listened to him as to a voice from the large
      world. He made them feel the beat of the great currents of English life and thought; he seemed
      to bring the stir and rush of our central English society into the deep quiet of their valley.
      Even the bright-haired Rose, idly swinging her pretty foot, with a head full of dreams and
      discontent, was beguiled, and for the moment seemed to lose her restless self in
      listening.
He told an exciting story of a bad election riot in Oxford which had been quelled at
      considerable personal risk by Mr. Grey, who had gained his influence in the town by a devotion
      of years to the policy of breaking down as far as possible the old venomous feud between city
      and university.
When he paused, Mrs. Leyburn said, vaguely, 'Did you say he was a canon of somewhere?'
'Oh no,' said Robert, smiling, 'he is not a clergyman.'
'But you said he preached,' said Agnes.
'Yes—but lay sermons—addresses. He is not one of us even, according to your standard and
      mine.'
'A Nonconformist?' sighed Mrs. Leyburn. 'Oh, I know they have let in everybody now.'
'Well, if you like,' said Robert. 'What I meant was that his opinions are not orthodox. He
      could not be a clergyman, but he is one of the noblest of men!'
He spoke with affectionate warmth. Then suddenly Catherine's eyes met his, and he felt an
      involuntary start. A veil had fallen over them; her sweet moved sympathy was gone; she seemed
      to have shrunk into herself.
She turned to Mrs. Leyburn. 'Mother, do you know, I have all sorts of messages from Aunt
      Ellen'—and in an under-voice she began to give Mrs. Leyburn the news of her afternoon
      expedition.
Rose and Agnes soon plunged young Elsmere into another stream of talk. But he kept his
      feeling of perplexity. His experience of other women seemed to give him nothing to go upon
      with regard to Miss Leyburn.
Presently Catherine got up and drew her plain little black cape round her again.
'My dear!' remonstrated Mrs. Leyburn. 'Where are you off to now?'
'To the Backhouses, mother,' she said in a low voice; 'I have not been there for two days. I
      must go this evening.'
Mrs. Leyburn said no more. Catherine's 'musts' were never disputed. She moved towards
      Elsmere with outstretched hand. But he also sprang up.
'I, too, must be going,' he said; 'I have paid you an unconscionable visit. If you are going
      past the vicarage, Miss Leyburn, may I escort you so far?'
She stood quietly waiting while he made his farewells. Agnes,
       whose eye fell on her sister during the pause, was struck with a passing sense of
      something out of the common. She could hardly have defined her impression, but Catherine
      seemed more alive to the outer world, more like other people, less nun-like, than usual.
When they had left the garden together, as they had come into it, and Mrs. Leyburn,
      complaining of chilliness, had retreated to the drawing-room, Rose laid a quick hand on her
      sister's arm.
'You say Catherine likes him? Owl! what is a great deal more certain is that he likes
      her.'
'Well,' said Agnes calmly,—'well, I await your remarks.'
'Poor fellow! said Rose grimly, and removed her hand.
Meanwhile Elsmere and Catherine walked along the valley road towards the Vicarage. He
      thought, uneasily, she was a little more reserved with him than she had been in those pleasant
      moments after he had overtaken her in the pony-carriage; but still she was always kind, always
      courteous. And what a white hand it was, hanging ungloved against her dress! what a beautiful
      dignity and freedom, as of mountain winds and mountain streams, in every movement!
'You are bound for High Ghyll?' he said to her as they neared the vicarage gate. Is it not a
      long way for you? You have been at a meeting already, your sister said, and teaching this
      morning!'
He looked down on her with a charming diffidence as though aware that their acquaintance was
      very young, and yet with a warm eagerness of feeling piercing through. As she paused under his
      eye the slightest flush rose to Catherine's cheek. Then she looked up with a smile. It was
      amusing to be taken care of by this tall stranger!
'It is most unfeminine, I am afraid,' she said, 'but I couldn't be tired if I tried.'
Elsmere grasped her hand.
'You make me feel myself more than ever a shocking example,' he said, letting it go with a
      little sigh. The smart of his own renunciation was still keen in him. She lingered a moment,
      could find nothing to say, threw him a look all shy sympathy and lovely pity, and was
      gone.
In the evening Robert got an explanation of that sudden stiffening in his auditor of the
      afternoon, which had perplexed him. He and the vicar were sitting smoking in the study after
      dinner, and the ingenious young man managed to shift the conversation on to the Leyburns, as
      he had managed to shift it once or twice before that day, flattering himself, of course, on
      each occasion that his manœuvres were beyond detection. The vicar, good soul, by virtue of his
      original discovery, detected them all, and with a sense of appropriation in the matter, not at
      all unmixed with a sense of triumph over Mrs. T., kept the ball rolling merrily.


'Miss Leyburn seems to have very strong religious views,' said Robert, à propos of
      some remark of the vicar's as to the assistance she was to him in the school.
'Ah, she is her father's daughter,' said the vicar genially. He had his oldest coat on, his
      favourite pipe between his lips, and a bit of domestic carpentering on his knee at which he
      was fiddling away; and, being perfectly happy, was also perfectly amiable. 'Richard Leyburn
      was a fanatic—as mild as you please, but immovable.'
'What line?'
'Evangelical, with a dash of Quakerism. He lent me Madame Guyon's Life once to read. I
      didn't appreciate it. I told him that for all her religion she seemed to me to have a deal of
      the vixen in her. He could hardly get over it: it nearly broke our friendship. But I suppose
      he was very like her, except that, in my opinion, his nature was sweeter. He was a
      fatalist—saw leadings of Providence in every little thing. And such a dreamer! When he came to
      live up here just before his death, and all his active life was taken off him, I believe half
      his time he was seeing visions. He used to wander over the fells and meet you with a start, as
      though you belonged to another world than the one he was walking in.'
'And his eldest daughter was much with him?'
'The apple of his eye. She understood him. He could talk his soul out to her. The others, of
      course, were children; and his wife—well, his wife was just what you see her now, poor thing.
      He must have married her when she was very young and very pretty. She was a squire's daughter
      somewhere near the school of which he was master—a good family, I believe—she'll tell you so,
      in a ladylike way. He was always fidgety about her health. He loved her, I suppose, or had
      loved her. But it was Catherine who had his mind; Catherine who was his friend. She adored
      him. I believe there was always a sort of pity in her heart for him too. But at any rate he
      made her and trained her. He poured all his ideas and convictions into her.'
'Which were strong?'
'Uncommonly. For all his gentle, ethereal look, you could neither bend nor break him. I
      don't believe anybody but Richard Leyburn could have gone through Oxford at the height of the
      Oxford Movement, and, so to speak, have known nothing about it, while living all the time for
      religion. He had a great deal in common with the Quakers, as I said; a great deal in common
      with the Wesleyans; but he was very loyal to the Church all the same. He regarded it as the
      golden mean. George Herbert was his favourite poet. He used to carry his poems about with him
      on the mountains, and an expurgated Christian Year—the only thing he ever took from
      the High Churchmen—which he had made for himself, and which he and Catherine knew by heart. In
      some ways he was not a bigot at
       all. He would have had the Church make peace with the Dissenters; he was all for
      upsetting tests so far as Nonconformity was concerned. But he drew the most rigid line between
      belief and unbelief. He would not have dined at the same table with a Unitarian if he could
      have helped it. I remember a furious article of his in the Record against admitting
      Unitarians to the Universities or allowing them to sit in Parliament. England is a Christian
      State, he said; they are not Christians; they have no right in her except on sufferance. Well,
      I suppose he was about right,' said the vicar with a sigh. 'We are all so half-hearted
      nowadays.'
'Not he,' cried Robert hotly. 'Who are we that because a man differs from us in opinion we
      are to shut him out from the education of political and civil duty? But never mind, Cousin
      William. Go on.'
'There's no more that I remember, except that of course Catherine took all these ideas from
      him. He wouldn't let his children know any unbeliever, however apparently worthy and good. He
      impressed it upon them as their special sacred duty, in a time of wicked enmity to religion,
      to cherish the faith and the whole faith. He wished his wife and daughters to live on here
      after his death that they might be less in danger spiritually than in the big world, and that
      they might have more opportunity of living the old-fashioned Christian life. There was also
      some mystical idea, I think, of making up through his children for the godless lives of their
      forefathers. He used to reproach himself for having in his prosperous days neglected his
      family, some of whom he might have helped to raise.'
'Well, but,' said Robert, 'all very well for Miss Leyburn, but I don't see the father in the
      two younger girls.'
'Ah, there is Catherine's difficulty,' said the vicar, shrugging his shoulders. 'Poor thing!
      How well I remember her after her father's death! She came down to see me in the dining-room
      about some arrangement for the funeral. She was only sixteen, so pale and thin with nursing. I
      said something about the comfort she had been to her father. She took my hand and burst into
      tears. "He was so good!" she said; "I loved him so! Oh, Mr. Thornburgh, help me to look after
      the others!" And that's been her one thought since then—that, next to following the narrow
      road.'
The vicar had begun to speak with emotion, as generally happened to him whenever he was
      beguiled into much speech about Catherine Leyburn. There must have been something great
      somewhere in the insignificant elderly man. A meaner soul might so easily have been jealous of
      this girl with her inconveniently high standards, and her influence, surpassing his own, in
      his own domain.
'I should like to know the secret of the little musician's independence,' said Robert,
      musing. 'There might be no tie of blood at all between her and the elder, so far as I can
      see.'


'Oh, I don't know that! There's more than you think, or Catherine wouldn't have kept her
      hold over her so far as she has. Generally she gets her way, except about the music. There
      Rose sticks to it.'
'And why shouldn't she?'
'Ah, well, you see, my dear fellow, I am old enough, and you're not, to remember what people
      in the old days used to think about art. Of course nowadays we all say very fine things about
      it; but Richard Leyburn would no more have admitted that a girl who hadn't got her own bread
      or her family's to earn by it was justified in spending her time in fiddling than he would
      have approved of her spending it in dancing. I have heard him take a text out of the
       Imitation and lecture Rose when she was quite a baby for pestering any stray person
      she could get hold of to give her music-lessons. "Woe to them"—yes, that was it—"that inquire
      many curious things of men, and care little about the way of serving me." However, he wasn't
      consistent. Nobody is. It was actually he that brought Rose her first violin from London in a
      green baize bag. Mrs. Leyburn took me in one night to see her asleep with it on her pillow,
      and all her pretty curls lying over the strings. I daresay, poor man, it was one of the acts
      towards his children that tormented his mind in his last hour.'
'She has certainly had her way about practising it: she plays superbly.'
'Oh yes, she has had her way. She is a queer mixture, is Rose. I see a touch of the old
      Leyburn recklessness in her; and then there is the beauty and refinement of her mother's side
      of the family. Lately she has got quite out of hand. She went to stay with some relations they
      have in Manchester, got drawn into the musical set there, took to these funny gowns, and now
      she and Catherine are always half at war. Poor Catherine said to me the other day, with tears
      in her eyes, that she knew Rose thought her as hard as iron. "But what can I do?" she said. "I
      promised papa." She makes herself miserable, and it's no use. I wish the little wild thing
      would get herself well married. She's not meant for this humdrum place, and she may kick over
      the traces.'
'She's pretty enough for anything and anybody,' said Robert.
The vicar looked at him sharply, but the young man's critical and meditative look reassured
      him.
The next day, just before early dinner, Rose and Agnes, who had been for a walk, were
      startled, as they were turning into their own gate, by the frantic waving of a white
      handkerchief from the vicarage garden. It was Mrs. Thornburgh's accepted way of calling the
      attention of the Burwood inmates, and the girls walked on. They found the good lady waiting
      for them in the drive in a characteristic glow and flutter.
'My dears, I have been looking out for you all the morning! I should have come over but for
      the stores coming, and a tire
      some man from Randall's. I've had to bargain with him for a whole hour about taking
      back those sweets. I was swindled, of course, but we should have died if we'd had to eat them
      up. Well, now, my dears——'
The vicar's wife paused. Her square short figure was between the two girls; she had on arm
      of each, and she looked significantly from one to another, her gray curls flapping across her
      face as she did so.
'Go on, Mrs. Thornburgh,' cried Rose. 'You make us quite nervous.'
'How do you like Mr. Elsmere?' she inquired solemnly.
'Very much,' said both in chorus.
Mrs. Thornburgh surveyed Rose's smiling frankness with a little sigh. Things were going
      grandly, but she could imagine a disposition of affairs which would have given her personally
      more pleasure.
 'How—would—you—like—him for a brother-in-law?' she
      inquired, beginning in a whisper, with slow emphasis, patting Rose's arm, and bringing out the
      last words with a rush.
Agnes caught the twinkle in Rose's eye, but she answered for them both demurely.
'We have no objection to entertain the idea. But you must explain.'
'Explain!' cried Mrs. Thornburgh. 'I should think it explains itself. At least if you'd been
      in this house the last twenty-four hours you'd think so. Since the moment when he first met
      her, it's been "Miss Leyburn," "Miss Leyburn," all the time. One might have seen it with half
      an eye from the beginning.'
Mrs. Thornburgh had not seen it with two eyes, as we know, till it was pointed out to her;
      but her imagination worked with equal liveliness backwards or forwards.
'He went to see you yesterday, didn't he—yes, I know he did—and he overtook her in the
      pony-carriage—the vicar saw them from across the valley—and he brought her back from your
      house, and then he kept William up till nearly twelve talking of her. And now he wants a
      picnic. Oh, it's as plain as a pike-staff. And, my dears, nothing to be said against
      him. Fifteen hundred a year if he's a penny. A nice living, only his mother to look after, and
      as good a young fellow as ever stepped.'
Mrs. Thornburgh stopped, choked almost by her own eloquence. The girls, who had by this time
      established her between them on a garden-seat, looked at her with smiling composure. They were
      accustomed to letting her have her budget out.
'And now, of course,' she resumed, taking breath, and chilled a little by their silence,
      'now, of course, I want to know about Catherine?' She regarded them with anxious
      interrogation. Rose, still smiling, slowly shook her head.
'What!' cried Mrs. Thornburgh; then, with charming inconsistency, 'oh, you can't know
      anything in two days.'


'That's just it,' said Agnes, intervening; 'we can't know anything in two days. No one ever
      will know anything about Catherine, if she takes to anybody, till the last minute.'
Mrs. Thornburgh's face fell. 'It's very difficult when people will be so reserved,' she said
      dolefully.
The girls acquiesced, but intimated that they saw no way out of it.
'At any rate we can bring them together,' she broke out, brightening again. 'We can have
      picnics, you know, and teas, and all that—and watch. Now listen.'
And the vicar's wife sketched out a programme of festivities for the next fortnight she had
      been revolving in her inventive head, which took the sisters' breath away. Rose bit her lip to
      keep in her laughter. Agnes with vast self-possession took Mrs. Thornburgh in hand. She
      pointed out firmly that nothing would be so likely to make Catherine impracticable as fuss.
      'In vain is the net spread,' etc. She preached from the text with a worldly wisdom which
      quickly crushed Mrs. Thornburgh.
'Well, what am I to do, my dears?' she said at last helplessly. 'Look at the
      weather! We must have some picnics, if it's only to amuse Robert.'
Mrs. Thornburgh spent her life between a condition of effervescence and a condition of
      feeling the world too much for her. Rose and Agnes, having now reduced her to the latter
      state, proceeded cautiously to give her her head again. They promised her two or three
      expeditions and one picnic at least; they said they would do their best; they promised they
      would report what they saw and be very discreet, both feeling the comedy of Mrs. Thornburgh as
      the advocate of discretion; and then they departed to their early dinner, leaving the vicars
      wife decidedly less self-confident than they found her.
'The first matrimonial excitement of the family,' cried Agnes as they walked home. 'So far
      no one can say the Miss Leyburns have been besieged!'
'It will be all moonshine,' Rose replied decisively. 'Mr. Elsmere may lose his heart; we may
      aid and abet him; Catherine will live in the clouds for a few weeks, and come down from them
      at the end with the air of an angel, to give him his coup de grâce. As I said
      before—poor fellow!'
Agnes made no answer. She was never so positive as Rose, and on the whole did not find
      herself the worse for it in life. Besides, she understood that there was a soreness at the
      bottom of Rose's heart that was always showing itself in unexpected connections.
There was no necessity, indeed, for elaborate schemes for assisting Providence. Mrs.
      Thornburgh had her picnics and her expeditions, but without them Robert Elsmere would have
      been still man enough to see Catherine Leyburn every day. He loitered about the roads along
      which she must needs pass to do
       her many offices of charity; he offered the vicar to take a class in the school,
      and was naïvely exultant that the vicar curiously happened to fix an hour when he must needs
      see Miss Leyburn going or coming on the same errand; he dropped into Burwood on any
      conceivable pretext, till Rose and Agnes lost all inconvenient respect for his cloth and Mrs.
      Leyburn sent him on errands; and he even insisted that Catherine and the vicar should make use
      of him and his pastoral services in one or two of the cases of sickness or poverty under their
      care. Catherine, with a little more reserve than usual, took him one day to the Tysons', and
      introduced him to the poor crippled son who was likely to live on paralysed for some time,
      under the weight, moreover, of a black cloud of depression which seldom lifted. Mrs. Tyson
      kept her talking in the room, and she never forgot the scene. It showed her a new aspect of a
      man whose intellectual life was becoming plain to her, while his moral life was still
      something of a mystery. The look in Elsmere's face as he sat bending over the maimed young
      farmer, the strength and tenderness of the man, the diffidence of the few religious things he
      said, and yet the reality and force of them, struck her powerfully. He had forgotten her,
      forgotten everything save the bitter human need, and the comfort it was his privilege to
      offer. Catherine stood answering Mrs. Tyson at random, the tears rising in her eyes. She
      slipped out while he was still talking, and went home strangely moved.
As to the festivities, she did her best to join in them. The sensitive soul often reproached
      itself afterwards for having juggled in the matter. Was it not her duty to manage a little
      society and gaiety for her sisters sometimes? Her mother could not undertake it, and was
      always plaintively protesting that Catherine would not be young. So for a short week or two
      Catherine did her best to be young, and climbed the mountain grass, or forded the mountain
      streams with the energy and the grace of perfect health, trembling afterwards at night as she
      knelt by her window to think how much sheer pleasure the day had contained. Her life had
      always had the tension of a bent bow. It seemed to her once or twice during this fortnight as
      though something were suddenly relaxed in her, and she felt a swift Bunyan-like terror of
      backsliding, of falling away. But she never confessed herself fully; she was even blind to
      what her perspicacity would have seen so readily in another's case—the little arts and
      manœuvres of those about her. It did not strike her that Mrs. Thornburgh was more flighty and
      more ebullient than ever; that the vicar's wife kissed her at odd times, and with a quite
      unwonted effusion; or that Agnes and Rose, when they were in the wild heart of the mountains,
      or wandering far and wide in search of sticks for a picnic fire, showed a perfect genius for
      avoiding Mr. Elsmere, whom both of them liked, and that in consequence his society almost
      always fell to her. Nor did she ever analyse what would have been the
       attraction of those walks to her without that tall figure at her side, that
      bounding step, that picturesque impetuous talk. There are moments when Nature throws a kind of
      heavenly mist and dazzlement round the soul it would fain make happy. The soul gropes blindly
      on; if it saw its way it might be timid and draw back, but kind powers lead it genially onward
      through a golden darkness.
Meanwhile if she did not know herself, she and Elsmere learnt with wonderful quickness and
      thoroughness to know each other. The two households so near together, and so isolated from the
      world besides, were necessarily in constant communication. And Elsmere made a most stirring
      element in their common life. Never had he been more keen, more strenuous. It gave Catherine
      new lights on modern character altogether to see how he was preparing himself for this Surrey
      living—reading up the history, geology, and botany of the Weald and its neighbourhood,
      plunging into reports of agricultural commissions, or spending his quick brain on village
      sanitation, with the oddest results sometimes, so far as his conversation was concerned. And
      then in the middle of his disquisitions, which would keep her breathless with a sense of being
      whirled through space at the tail of an electric kite, the kite would come down with a run,
      and the preacher and reformer would come hat in hand to the girl beside him, asking her humbly
      to advise him, to pour out on him some of that practical experience of hers among the poor and
      suffering, for the sake of which he would in an instant scornfully fling out of sight all his
      own magnificent plannings. Never had she told so much of her own life to any one; her
      consciousness of it sometimes filled her with a sort of terror, lest she might have been
      trading, as it were, for her own advantage on the sacred things of God. But he would have it.
      His sympathy, his sweetness, his quick spiritual feeling drew the stories out of her. And then
      how his bright frank eyes would soften! With what a reverence would he touch her hand when she
      said good-bye!
And on her side she felt that she knew almost as much about Murewell as he did. She could
      imagine the wild beauty of the Surrey heathland, she could see the white square rectory with
      its sloping walled garden, the juniper common just outside the straggling village; she could
      even picture the strange squire, solitary in the great Tudor Hall, the author of terrible
      books against the religion of Christ of which she shrank from hearing, and share the anxieties
      of the young rector as to his future relations towards a personality so marked, and so
      important to every soul in the little community he was called to rule. Here all was plain
      sailing; she understood him perfectly, and her gentle comments, or her occasional sarcasms,
      were friendliness itself.
But it was when he turned to larger things—to books, movements, leaders of the day—that she
      was often puzzled, sometimes
       distressed. Why would he seem to exalt and glorify rebellion against the
      established order in the person of Mr. Grey? Or why, ardent as his own faith was, would he
      talk as though opinion was a purely personal matter, hardly in itself to be made the subject
      of moral judgment at all, and as though right belief were a blessed privilege and boon rather
      than a law and an obligation? When his comments on men and things took this tinge, she would
      turn silent, feeling a kind of painful opposition between his venturesome speech and his
      clergyman's dress.
And yet, as we all know, these ways of speech were not his own. He was merely talking the
      natural Christian language of this generation; whereas she, the child of a mystic—solitary,
      intense, and deeply reflective from her earliest youth—was still thinking and speaking in the
      language of her father's generation.
But although, as often as his unwariness brought him near to these points of jarring, he
      would hurry away from them, conscious that here was the one profound difference between them,
      it was clear to him that insensibly she had moved further than she knew from her father's
      standpoint. Even among these solitudes, far from men and literature, she had unconsciously
      felt the breath of her time in some degree. As he penetrated deeper into the nature he found
      it honeycombed, as it were, here and there, with beautiful unexpected softnesses and
      diffidences. Once, after a long walk, as they were lingering homewards under a cloudy evening
      sky, he came upon the great problem of her life—Rose and Rose's art. He drew her difficulty
      from her with the most delicate skill. She had laid it bare, and was blushing to think how she
      had asked his counsel, almost before she knew where their talk was leading. How was it lawful
      for the Christian to spend the few short years of the earthly combat in any pursuit, however
      noble and exquisite, which merely aimed at the gratification of the senses, and implied in the
      pursuer the emphasising rather than the surrender of self?
He argued it very much as Kingsley would have argued it, tried to lift her to a more
      intelligent view of a multifarious world, dwelling on the function of pure beauty in life, and
      on the influence of beauty on character, pointing out the value to the race of all individual
      development, and pressing home on her the natural religious question: How are the artistic
      aptitudes to be explained unless the Great Designer meant them to have a use and function in
      His world? She replied doubtfully that she had always supposed they were lawful for
      recreation, and like any other trade for bread-winning, but——
Then he told her much that he knew about the humanising effect of music on the poor. He
      described to her the efforts of a London society, of which he was a subscribing member, to
      popularise the best music among the lowest class; he dwelt
       almost with passion on the difference between the joy to be got out of such things
      and the common brutalising joys of the workman. And you could not have art without artists. In
      this again he was only talking the commonplaces of his day. But to her they were not
      commonplaces at all. She looked at him from time to time, her great eyes lightening and
      deepening as it seemed with every fresh thrust of his.
'I am grateful to you,' she said at last with an involuntary outburst, 'I am very
      grateful to you!'
And she gave a long sigh as if some burden she had long borne in patient silence had been
      loosened a little, if only by the fact of speech about it. She was not convinced exactly. She
      was too strong a nature to relinquish a principle without a period of meditative struggle in
      which conscience should have all its dues. But her tone made his heart leap. He felt in it a
      momentary self-surrender that, coming from a creature of so rare a dignity, filled him with an
      exquisite sense of power, and yet at the same time with a strange humility beyond words.
A day or two later he was the spectator of a curious little scene. An aunt of the Leyburns
      living in Whinborough came to see them. She was their father's youngest sister, and the wife
      of a man who had made some money as a builder in Whinborough. When Robert came in he found her
      sitting on the sofa having tea, a large homely-looking woman with gray hair, a high brow, and
      prominent white teeth. She had unfastened her bonnet strings, and a clean white handkerchief
      lay spread out on her lap. When Elsmere was introduced to her, she got up, and said with some
      effusiveness, and a distinct Westmoreland accent—
'Very pleased indeed to make your acquaintance, sir,' while she enclosed his fingers in a
      capacious hand.
Mrs. Leyburn, looking fidgety and uncomfortable, was sitting near her, and Catherine, the
      only member of the party who showed no sign of embarrassment when Robert entered, was
      superintending her aunt's tea and talking busily the while.
Robert sat down at a little distance beside Agnes and Rose, who were chattering together a
      little artificially and of set purpose as it seemed to him. But the aunt was not to be
      ignored. She talked too loud not to be overheard, and Agnes inwardly noted that as soon as
      Robert Elsmere appeared she talked louder than before. He gathered presently that she was an
      ardent Wesleyan, and that she was engaged in describing to Catherine and Mrs. Leyburn the
      evangelistic exploits of her eldest son, who had recently obtained his first circuit as a
      Wesleyan minister. He was shrewd enough, too, to guess, after a minute or two, that his
      presence and probably his obnoxious clerical dress gave additional zest to the recital.
'Oh, his success at Colesbridge has been somethin' marvellous,' he heard her say, with
      uplifted hands and eyes, 'some-thin'
       marvellous. The Lord has blessed him indeed! It doesn't matter what it is, whether
      it's meetin's, or sermons, or parlour work, or just faithful dealin's with souls one by one.
      Satan has no cliverer foe than Edward. He never shuts his eyes; as Edward says himself, it's
      like trackin' for game is huntin' for souls. Why, the other day he was walkin' out from
      Coventry to a service. It was the Sabbath, and he saw a man in a bit of grass by the roadside,
      mendin' his cart. And he stopped did Edward, and gave him the Word strong. The man
      seemed puzzled like, and said he meant no harm. "No harm!" says Edward, "when you're just
      doin' the devil's work every nail you put in, and hammerin' away, mon, at your own damnation."
      But here's his letter.' And while Rose turned away to a far window to hide an almost
      hysterical inclination to laugh, Mrs. Fleming opened her bag, took out a treasured paper, and
      read with the emphasis and the unction peculiar to a certain type of revivalism—
'"Poor sinner! He was much put about. I left him, praying the Lord my shaft might rankle in
      him; ay, might fester and burn in him till he found no peace but in Jesus. He seemed very dark
      and destitute—no respect for the Word or its ministers. A bit farther I met a boy carrying a
      load of turnips. To him, too, I was faithful, and he went on, taking, without knowing it, a
      precious leaflet with him in his bag. Glorious work! If Wesleyans will but go on claiming even
      the highways for God, sin will skulk yet."'
A dead silence. Mrs. Fleming folded up the letter and put it back into her bag.
'There's your true minister,' she said, with a large judicial utterance as she closed the
      snap. 'Wherever he goes Edward must have souls!'
And she threw a swift searching look at the young clergyman in the window.
'He must have very hard work with so much walking and preaching,' said Catherine gently.
Somehow, as soon as she spoke, Elsmere saw the whole odd little scene with other eyes.
'His work is just wearin' him out,' said the mother fervently; 'but a minister doesn't think
      of that. Wherever he goes there are sinners saved. He stayed last week at a house near
      Nuneaton. At family prayer alone there were five saved. And at the prayer-meetin's on the
      Sabbath such outpourin's of the Spirit! Edward comes home, his wife tells me, just ready to
      drop. Are you acquainted, sir,' she added, turning suddenly to Elsmere, and speaking in a
      certain tone of provocation, 'with the labours of our Wesleyan ministers?'
'No,' said Robert, with his pleasant smile, 'not personally. But I have the greatest respect
      for them as a body of devoted men.'
The look of battle faded from the woman's face. It was not
       an unpleasant face. He even saw strange reminiscences of Catherine in it at
      times.
'You're aboot right there, sir. Not that they dare take any credit to themselves—it's grace,
      sir, all grace.'
'Aunt Ellen,' said Catherine, while a sudden light broke over her face; 'I just want you to
      take Edward a little story from me. Ministers are good things, but God can do without
      them.'
And she laid her hand on her aunt's knee with a smile in which there was the slightest touch
      of affectionate satire.
'I was up among the fells the other day,' she went on; 'I met an elderly man cutting wood in
      a plantation, and I stopped and asked him how he was. "Ah, miss," he said, "verra weel, verra
      weel. And yet it was nobbut Friday morning lasst, I cam oop here, awfu' bad in my sperrits
      like. For my wife she's sick, an' a' dwinnelt away, and I'm gettin' auld, and can't wark as
      I'd used to, and it did luke to me as thoo there was naethin' afore us nobbut t' Union. And t'
      mist war low on t' fells, and I sat oonder t' wall, wettish and broodin' like. And theer—all
      ov a soodent the Lord found me! Yes, puir Reuben Judge, as dawn't matter to naebody, the Lord
      found un. It war leyke as thoo His feeace cam a-glisterin' an' a-shinin' through t' mist. An'
      iver sence then, miss, aa've jest felt as thoo aa could a' cut an' stackt all t' wood on t'
      fell in naw time at a'!" And he waved his hand round the mountain side which was covered with
      plantation. And all the way along the path for ever so long I could hear him singing, chopping
      away, and quavering out, "Rock of Ages."'
She paused, her delicate face, with just a little quiver in the lip, turned to her aunt, her
      eyes glowing as though a hidden fire had leapt suddenly outward. And yet the gesture, the
      attitude, was simplicity and unconsciousness itself. Robert had never heard her say anything
      so intimate before. Nor had he ever seen her so inspired, so beautiful. She had transmuted the
      conversation at a touch. It had been barbarous prose; she had turned it into purest poetry.
      Only the noblest souls have such an alchemy as this at command, thought the watcher on the
      other side of the room with a passionate reverence.
'I wasn't thinkin' of narrowin' the Lord down to ministers,' said Mrs. Fleming, with a
      certain loftiness. 'We all know He can do without us puir worms.'
Then, seeing that no one replied, the good woman got up to go. Much of her apparel had
      slipped away from her in the fervours of revivalist anecdote, and while she hunted for gloves
      and reticule—officiously helped by the younger girls—Robert crossed over to Catherine.
'You lifted us on to your own high places!' he said, bending down to her; 'I shall carry
      your story with me through the fells.'
She looked up, and as she met his warm moved look a little
       glow and tremor crept into the face, destroying its exalted expression. He broke
      the spell; she sank from the poet into the embarrassed woman.
'You must see my old man,' she said, with an effort; 'he is worth a library of sermons. I
      must introduce him to you.'
He could think of nothing else to say just then, but could only stand impatiently wishing
      for Mrs. Fleming's disappearance, that he might somehow appropriate her eldest niece. But
      alas! when she went, Catherine went out with her, and reappeared no more, though he waited
      some time.
He walked home in a whirl of feeling; on the way he stopped, and leaning over a gate which
      led into one of the river-fields gave himself up to the mounting tumult within. Gradually,
      from the half-articulate chaos of hope and memory, there emerged the deliberate voice of his
      inmost manhood.
'In her and her only is my heart's desire! She and she only if she will, and God will, shall
      be my wife!'
He lifted his head and looked out on the dewy field, the evening beauty of the hills, with a
      sense of immeasurable change—

'Tears
Were in his eyes, and in his ears
The murmur of a thousand years.'

He felt himself knit to his kind, to his race, as he had never felt before. It was as
      though, after a long apprenticeship, he had sprung suddenly into maturity—entered at last into
      the full human heritage. But the very intensity and solemnity of his own feeling gave him a
      rare clear-sightedness. He realised that he had no certainty of success, scarcely even an
      entirely reasonable hope. But what of that? Were they not together, alone, practically, in
      these blessed solitudes? Would they not meet to-morrow, and next day, and the day after? Were
      not time and opportunity all his own? How kind her looks are even now! Courage! And through
      that maidenly kindness his own passion shall send the last, transmuting glow.
