
CHAPTER IV
Before, however, we go on to chronicle the ultimate success or failure of Mrs. Thornburgh as
      a match-maker, it may be well to inquire a little more closely into the antecedents of the man
      who had suddenly roused so much activity in her contriving mind. And, indeed, these
      antecedents are important to us. For the interest of an uncomplicated story will entirely
      depend upon the clearness with which the reader may have grasped the general outlines of a
      quick soul's development. And this development had already made considerable progress before
      Mrs. Thornburgh set eyes upon her husband's cousin, Robert Elsmere.
Robert Elsmere, then, was well born and fairly well provided with this world's goods; up to
      a certain moderate point, indeed, a favourite of fortune in all respects. His father belonged
      to the younger line of an old Sussex family, and owed his pleasant country living to the
      family instincts of his uncle, Sir William
       Elsmere, in whom Whig doctrines and Conservative traditions were pretty evenly
      mixed, with a result of the usual respectable and inconspicuous kind. His virtues had
      descended mostly to his daughters, while all his various weaknesses and fatuities had
      blossomed into vices in the person of his eldest son and heir, the Sir Mowbray Elsmere of Mrs.
      Seaton's early recollections.
Edward Elsmere, rector of Murewell in Surrey, and father of Robert, had died before his
      uncle and patron; and his widow and son had been left to face the world together. Sir William
      Elsmere and his nephew's wife had not much in common, and rarely concerned themselves with
      each other. Mrs. Elsmere was an Irishwoman by birth, with irregular Irish ways, and a passion
      for strange garments, which made her the dread of the conventional English squire; and, after
      she left the vicarage with her son, she and her husband's uncle met no more. But when he died
      it was found that the old man's sense of kinship, acting blindly and irrationally, but with a
      slow inevitableness and certainty, had stirred in him at the last in behalf of his
      great-nephew. He left him a money legacy, the interest of which was to be administered by his
      mother till his majority, and in a letter addressed to his heir he directed that, should the
      boy on attaining manhood show any disposition to enter the Church, all possible steps were to
      be taken to endow him with the family living of Murewell, which had been his father's, and
      which at the time of the old Baronet's death was occupied by another connection of the family,
      already well stricken in years.
Mowbray Elsmere had been hardly on speaking terms with his cousin Edward, and was neither
      amiable nor generous, but his father knew that the tenacious Elsmere instinct was to be
      depended on for the fulfilment of his wishes. And so it proved. No sooner was his father dead
      than Sir Mowbray curtly communicated his instructions to Mrs. Elsmere, then living at the town
      of Harden for the sake of the great public school recently transported there. She was to
      inform him, when the right moment arrived, if it was the boy's wish to enter the Church, and
      meanwhile he referred her to his lawyers for particulars of such immediate benefits as were
      secured to her under the late Baronet's will.
At the moment when Sir Mowbray's letter reached her, Mrs. Elsmere was playing a leading part
      in the small society to which circumstances had consigned her. She was the personal friend of
      half the masters and their wives, and of at least a quarter of the school, while in the little
      town which stretched up the hill covered by the new school buildings, she was the helper,
      gossip, and confidante of half the parish. Her vast hats, strange in fashion and inordinate in
      brim, her shawls of many colours, hitched now to this side now to that, her swaying gait and
      looped-up skirts, her spectacles, and the dangling parcels in which her soul delighted, were
      the outward signs of a per
      sonality familiar to all. For under those checked shawls which few women passed
      without an inward marvel, there beat one of the warmest hearts that ever animated mortal clay,
      and the prematurely wrinkled face, with its small quick eyes and shrewd indulgent mouth,
      bespoke a nature as responsive as it was vigorous.
Their owner was constantly in the public eye. Her house, during the hours at any rate in
      which her boy was at school, was little else than a halting-place between two journeys. Visits
      to the poor, long watches by the sick; committees, in which her racy breadth of character gave
      her always an important place; discussions with the vicar, arguments with the curates, a chat
      with this person and a walk with that—these were the incidents and occupations which filled
      her day. Life was delightful to her; action, energy, influence, were delightful to her; she
      could only breathe freely in the very thick of the stirring, many-coloured tumult of
      existence. Whether it was a pauper in the workhouse, or boys from the school, or a girl caught
      in the tangle of a love-affair, it was all the same to Mrs. Elsmere. Everything moved her,
      everything appealed to her. Her life was a perpetual giving forth, and such was the inherent
      nobility and soundness of the nature, that in spite of her curious Irish fondness for the
      vehement romantic sides of experience, she did little harm, and much good. Her tongue might be
      over-ready and her championships indiscreet, but her hands were helpful, and her heart was
      true. There was something contagious in her enjoyment of life, and with all her strong
      religious faith, the thought of death, of any final pause and silence in the whirr of the
      great social machine, was to her a thought of greater chill and horror than to many a less
      brave and spiritual soul.
Till her boy was twelve years old, however, she had lived for him first and foremost. She
      had taught him, played with him, learnt with him, communicating to him through all his lessons
      her own fire and eagerness to a degree which every now and then taxed the physical powers of
      the child. Whenever the signs of strain appeared, however, the mother would be overtaken by a
      fit of repentant watchfulness, and for days together Robert would find her the most
      fascinating playmate, story-teller, and romp, and forget all his precocious interest in
      history or vulgar fractions. In after years when Robert looked back upon his childhood, he was
      often reminded of the stories of Goethe's bringing-up. He could recall exactly the same scenes
      as Goethe describes,—mother and child sitting together in the gloaming, the mother's dark eyes
      dancing with fun or kindling with dramatic fire, as she carried an imaginary hero or heroine
      through a series of the raciest adventures; the child all eagerness and sympathy, now clapping
      his little hands at the fall of the giant, or the defeat of the sorcerer, and now arguing and
      suggesting in ways which gave perpetually fresh stimulus
       to the mother's inventiveness. He could see her dressing up with him on wet days,
      reciting King Henry to his Prince Hal, or Prospero to his Ariel, or simply giving free vent to
      her own exuberant Irish fun till both he and she would sink exhausted into each other's arms,
      and end the evening with a long croon, sitting curled up together in a big armchair in front
      of the fire. He could see himself as a child of many crazes, eager for poetry one week, for
      natural history the next, now spending all his spare time in strumming, now in drawing, and
      now forgetting everything but the delights of tree-climbing and bird-nesting.
And through it all he had the quick memory of his mother's companionship, he could recall
      her rueful looks whenever the eager inaccurate ways, in which he reflected certain
      ineradicable tendencies of her own, had lost him a school advantage; he could remember her
      exhortations, with the dash in them of humorous self-reproach which made them so stirring to
      the child's affection; and he could realise their old far-off life at Murewell, the joys and
      the worries of it, and see her now gossiping with the village folk, now wearing herself
      impetuously to death in their service, and now roaming with him over the Surrey heaths in
      search of all the dirty delectable things in which a boy-naturalist delights. And through it
      all he was conscious of the same vivid energetic creature, disposing with some difficulty and
       fracas of its own excess of nervous life.
To return, however, to this same critical moment of Sir Mowbray's offer. Robert at the time
      was a boy of sixteen, doing very well at school, a favourite both with boys and masters. But
      as to whether his development would lead him in the direction of taking orders, his mother had
      not the slightest idea. She was not herself very much tempted by the prospect. There were
      recollections connected with Murewell, and with the long death in life which her husband had
      passed through there, which were deeply painful to her; and, moreover, her sympathy with the
      clergy as a class was by no means strong. Her experience had not been large, but the feeling
      based on it promised to have all the tenacity of a favourite prejudice. Fortune had handed
      over the parish of Harden to a ritualist vicar. Mrs. Elsmere's inherited Evangelicalism—she
      came from an Ulster county—rebelled against his doctrine, but the man himself was too lovable
      to be disliked. Mrs. Elsmere knew a hero when she saw him. And in his own narrow way, the
      small-headed emaciated vicar was a hero, and he and Mrs. Elsmere had soon tasted each other's
      quality, and formed a curious alliance, founded on true similarity in difference.
But the criticism thus warded off the vicar expended itself with all the more force on his
      subordinates. The Harden curates were the chief crook in Mrs. Elsmere's otherwise tolerable
      lot. Her parish activities brought her across them perpetually, and she could not away with
      them. Their cassocks, their pretensions, their stupidities, roused the Irish-
      woman's sense of humour at every turn. The individuals came and went, but the type
      it seemed to her was always the same; and she made their peculiarities the basis of a
      pessimist theory as to the future of the English Church, which was a source of constant
      amusement to the very broad-minded young men who filled up the school staff. She, so ready in
      general to see all the world's good points, was almost blind when it was a curate's virtues
      which were in question. So that, in spite of all her persistent church-going, and her love of
      church performances as an essential part of the busy human spectacle, Mrs. Elsmere had no
      yearning for a clerical son. The little accidents of a personal experience had led to wide
      generalisations, as is the way with us mortals, and the position of the young parson in these
      days of increased parsonic pretensions was, to Mrs. Elsmere, a position in which there was an
      inherent risk of absurdity. She wished her son to impose upon her when it came to his taking
      any serious step in life. She asked for nothing better, indeed, than to be able, when the time
      came, to bow the motherly knee to him in homage, and she felt a little dread lest, in her flat
      moments, a clerical son might sometimes rouse in her that sharp sense of the ludicrous which
      is the enemy of all happy illusions.
Still, of course, the Elsmere proposal was one to be seriously considered in its due time
      and place. Mrs. Elsmere only reflected that it would certainly be better to say nothing of it
      to Robert until he should be at college. His impressionable temperament, and the power he had
      occasionally shown of absorbing himself in a subject till it produced in him a fit of intense
      continuous brooding, unfavourable to health and nervous energy, all warned her not to supply
      him, at a period of rapid mental and bodily growth, with any fresh stimulus to the sense of
      responsibility. As a boy, he had always shown himself religiously susceptible to a certain
      extent, and his mother's religious likes and dislikes had invariably found in him a blind and
      chivalrous support. He was content to be with her, to worship with her, and to feel that no
      reluctance or resistance divided his heart from hers. But there had been nothing specially
      noteworthy or precocious about his religious development, and at sixteen or seventeen, in
      spite of his affectionate compliance, and his natural reverence for all persons and beliefs in
      authority, his mother was perfectly aware that many other things in his life were more real to
      him than religion. And on this point, at any rate, she was certainly not the person to force
      him.
He was such a schoolboy as a discerning master delights in—keen about everything, bright,
      docile, popular, excellent at games. He was in the sixth, moreover, as soon as his age
      allowed: that is to say, as soon as he was sixteen; and his pride in everything connected with
      the great body in which he had already a marked and important place was unbounded. Very early
      in his school career the literary instincts, which had
       always been present in him, and which his mother had largely helped to develop by
      her own restless imaginative ways of approaching life and the world, made themselves felt with
      considerable force. Some time before his cousin's letter arrived, he had been taken with a
      craze for English poetry, and, but for the corrective influence of a favourite tutor would
      probably have thrown himself into it with the same exclusive passion as he had shown for
      subject after subject in his eager ebullient childhood. His mother found him at thirteen
      inditing a letter on the subject of The Faerie Queene to a school-friend, in which,
      with a sincerity which made her forgive the pomposity, he remarked—
'I can truly say with Pope, that this great work has afforded me extraordinary
      pleasure.'
And about the same time, a master who was much interested in the boy's prospects of getting
      the school prize for Latin verse, a subject for which he had always shown a special aptitude,
      asked him anxiously, after an Easter holiday, what he had been reading; the boy ran his hands
      through his hair, and still keeping his finger between the leaves, shut a book before him from
      which he had been learning by heart, and which was, alas! neither Ovid nor Virgil.
'I have just finished Belial!' he said, with a sigh of satisfaction, 'and am beginning
      Beelzebub.'
A craze of this kind was naturally followed by a feverish period of juvenile authorship,
      when the house was littered over with stanzas from the opening canto of a great poem on
      Columbus, or with moral essays in the manner of Pope, castigating the vices of the time with
      an energy which sorely tried the gravity of the mother whenever she was called upon, as she
      invariably was, to play audience to the young poet. At the same time the classics absorbed in
      reality their full share of this fast developing power. Virgil and Æschylus appealed to the
      same fibres, the same susceptibilities, as Milton and Shakspeare, and the boy's quick
      imaginative sense appropriated Greek and Latin life with the same ease which it showed in
      possessing itself of that bygone English life whence sprung the Canterbury Tales, or
       As You Like It. So that his tutor, who was much attached to him, and who made it one
      of his main objects in life to keep the boy's aspiring nose to the grindstone of grammatical
       minutiæ, began about the time of Sir Mowbray's letter to prophesy very smooth things
      indeed to his mother as to his future success at college, the possibility of his getting the
      famous St. Anselm's scholarship, and so on.
Evidently such a youth was not likely to depend for the attainment of a foothold in life on
      a piece of family privilege. The world was all before him where to choose, Mrs. Elsmere
      thought proudly to herself, as her mother's fancy wandered rashly through the coming years.
      And for many reasons she secretly allowed herself to hope that he would find for himself
       some other post of ministry in a very various world than the vicarage of
      Murewell.
So she wrote a civil letter of acknowledgment to Sir Mowbray, informing him that the
      intentions of his great-uncle should be communicated to the boy when he should be of fit age
      to consider them, and that meanwhile she was obliged to him for pointing out the procedure by
      which she might lay hands on the legacy bequeathed to her in trust for her son, the income of
      which would now be doubly welcome in view of his college expenses. There the matter rested,
      and Mrs. Elsmere, during the two years which followed, thought little more about it. She
      became more and more absorbed in her boy's immediate prospects, in the care of his health,
      which was uneven and tried somewhat by the strain of preparation for an attempt on the St.
      Anselm's scholarship, and in the demands which his ardent nature, oppressed with the weight of
      its own aspirations, was constantly making upon her support and sympathy.
At last the moment so long expected arrived. Mrs. Elsmere and her son left Harden amid a
      chorus of good wishes, and settled themselves early in November in Oxford lodgings. Robert was
      to have a few days' complete holiday before the examination, and he and his mother spent it in
      exploring the beautiful old town, now shrouded in the 'pensive glooms' of still, gray autumn
      weather. There was no sun to light up the misty reaches of the river; the trees in the Broad
      Walk were almost bare; the Virginian creeper no longer shone in patches of delicate crimson on
      the college walls; the gardens were damp and forsaken. But to Mrs. Elsmere and Robert the
      place needed neither sun nor summer 'for beauty's heightening.' On both of them it laid its
      old irresistible spell; the sentiment haunting its quadrangles, its libraries, and its dim
      melodious chapels, stole into the lad's heart and alternately soothed and stimulated that keen
      individual consciousness which naturally accompanies the first entrance into manhood. Here, on
      this soil, steeped in memories, his problems, his struggles were to be
      fought out in their turn. 'Take up thy manhood,' said the inward voice, 'and show what is in
      thee. The hour and the opportunity have come!'
And to this thrill of vague expectation, this young sense of an expanding world, something
      of pathos and of sacredness was added by the dumb influences of the old streets and
      weather-beaten stones. How tenacious they were of the past! The dreaming city seemed to be
      still brooding in the autumn calm over the long succession of her sons. The continuity, the
      complexity of human experience; the unremitting effort of the race; the stream of purpose
      running through it all; these were the kind of thoughts which, in more or less inchoate and
      fragmentary shape, pervaded the boy's sensitive mind as he rambled with his mother from
      college to college.
Mrs. Elsmere, too, was fascinated by Oxford. But for all her
       eager interest, the historic beauty of the place aroused in her an under-mood of
      melancholy, just as it did in Robert. Both had the impressionable Celtic temperament, and both
      felt that a critical moment was upon them, and that the Oxford air was charged with fate for
      each of them. For the first time in their lives they were to be parted. The mother's long
      guardianship was coming to an end. Had she loved him enough? Had she so far fulfilled the
      trust her dead husband had imposed upon her? Would her boy love her in the new life as he had
      loved her in the old? And could her poor craving heart bear to see him absorbed by fresh
      interests and passions, in which her share could be only, at the best, secondary and
      indirect?
One day—it was on the afternoon preceding the examination—she gave hurried, half-laughing
      utterance to some of these misgivings of hers. They were walking down the Lime-walk of Trinity
      Gardens; beneath their feet a yellow fresh-strewn carpet of leaves, brown interlacing branches
      overhead, and a red misty sun shining through the trunks. Robert understood his mother
      perfectly, and the way she had of hiding a storm of feeling under these tremulous comedy airs.
      So that, instead of laughing too, he took her hand and, there being no spectators anywhere to
      be seen in the damp November garden, he raised it to his lips with a few broken words of
      affection and gratitude which very nearly overcame the self-command of both of them. She
      dashed wildly into another subject, and then suddenly it occurred to her impulsive mind that
      the moment had come to make him acquainted with those dying intentions of his great-uncle
      which we have already described. The diversion was a welcome one, and the duty seemed clear.
      So, accordingly, she made him give her all his attention while she told him the story and the
      terms of Sir Mowbray's letter, forcing herself the while to keep her own opinions and
      predilections as much as possible out of sight.
Robert listened with interest and astonishment, the sense of a new-found manhood waxing once
      more strong within him, as his mind admitted the strange picture of himself occupying the
      place which had been his father's; master of the house and the parish he had wandered over
      with childish steps, clinging to the finger or the coat of the tall stooping figure which
      occupied the dim background of his recollections. 'Poor mother,' he said thoughtfully, when
      she paused, 'it would be hard upon you to go back to Murewell!'
'Oh, you mustn't think of me when the time comes,' said Mrs. Elsmere, sighing. 'I shall be a
      tiresome old woman, and you will be a young man wanting a wife. There, put it out of your
      head, Robert. I thought I had better tell you, for, after all, the fact may concern your
      Oxford life. But you've got a long time yet before you need begin to worry about it.'
The boy drew himself up to his full height, and tossed his tumbling reddish hair back from
      his eyes. He was nearly six
       feet already, with a long thin body and head, which amply justified his school
      nickname of 'the darning-needle.'
'Don't you trouble either, mother,' he said, with a tone of decision: 'I don't feel as if I
      should ever take orders.'
Mrs. Elsmere was old enough to know what importance to attach to the trenchancy of eighteen,
      but still the words were pleasant to her.
The next day Robert went up for examination, and after three days of hard work, and phases
      of alternate hope and depression, in which mother and son excited one another to no useful
      purpose, there came the anxious crowding round the college gate in the November twilight, and
      the sudden flight of dispersing messengers bearing the news over Oxford. The scholarship had
      been won by a precocious Etonian with an extraordinary talent for 'stems,' and all that
      appertained thereto. But the exhibition fell to Robert, and mother and son were well
      content.
The boy was eager to come into residence at once, though he would matriculate too late to
      keep the term. The college authorities were willing, and on the Saturday following the
      announcement of his success he was matriculated, saw the Provost, and was informed that rooms
      would be found for him without delay. His mother and he gaily climbed innumerable stairs to
      inspect the garrets of which he was soon to take proud possession, sallying forth from them
      only to enjoy an agitated delightful afternoon among the shops. Expenditure, always charming,
      becomes under these circumstances a sacred and pontifical act. Never had Mrs. Elsmere bought a
      teapot for herself with half the fervour which she now threw into the purchase of Robert's;
      and the young man, accustomed to a rather bare home, and an Irish lack of the little
      elegancies of life, was overwhelmed when his mother actually dragged him into a printseller's,
      and added an engraving or two to the enticing miscellaneous mass of which he was already
      master.
They only just left themselves time to rush back to their lodgings and dress for the solemn
      function of a dinner with the Provost. The dinner, however, was a great success. The short,
      shy manner of their white-haired host thawed under the influence of Mrs. Elsmere's racy,
      unaffected ways, and it was not long before everybody in the room had more or less made
      friends with her, and forgiven her her marvellous drab poplin, adorned with fresh pink
      ruchings for the occasion. As for the Provost, Mrs. Elsmere had been told that he was a person
      of whom she must inevitably stand in awe. But all her life long she had been like the youth in
      the fairy tale who desired to learn how to shiver and could not attain unto it. Fate had
      denied her the capacity of standing in awe of anybody, and she rushed at her host as a new
      type, delighting in the thrill which she felt creeping over her when she found herself on the
      arm of one who had been the rallying-point of a hundred
       struggles, and a centre of influence over thousands of English lives.
And then followed the proud moment when Robert, in his exhibitioner's gown, took her to
      service in the chapel on Sunday. The scores of young faces, the full unison of the hymns, and
      finally the Provost's sermon, with its strange brusqueries and simplicities of manner and
      phrase—simplicities so suggestive, so full of a rich and yet disciplined experience, that they
      haunted her mind for weeks afterwards—completed the general impression made upon her by the
      Oxford life. She came out, tremulous and shaken, leaning on her son's arm. She, too, like the
      generations before her, had launched her venture into the deep. Her boy was putting out from
      her into the ocean; henceforth she could but watch him from the shore. Brought into contact
      with this imposing University organisation, with all its suggestions of virile energies and
      functions, the mother suddenly felt herself insignificant and forsaken. He had been her all,
      her own, and now on this training-ground of English youth, it seemed to her that the great
      human society had claimed him from her.
