
CHAPTER XXX
But the problem of these two lives was not solved by a burst of feeling. Without that
      determining impulse of love and pity
       in Catherine's heart the salvation of an exquisite bond might indeed have been
      impossible. But in spite of it the laws of character had still to work themselves inexorably
      out on either side.
The whole gist of the matter for Elsmere lay really in this question: Hidden in Catherine's
      nature, was there, or was there not, the true stuff of fanaticism? Madame Guyon left her
      infant children to the mercies of chance, while she followed the voice of God to the holy war
      with heresy. Under similar conditions Catherine Elsmere might have planned the same. Could she
      ever have carried it out?
And yet the question is still ill stated. For the influences of our modern time on religious
      action are so blunting and dulling, because in truth the religious motive itself is being
      constantly modified, whether the religious person knows it or not. Is it possible now for a
      good woman with a heart, in Catherine Elsmere's position, to maintain herself against love,
      and all those subtle forces to which such a change as Elsmere's opens the house doors, without
      either hardening, or greatly yielding? Let Catherine's further story give some sort of an
      answer.
Poor soul! As they sat together in the study, after he had brought her home, Robert, with
      averted eyes, went through the plans he had already thought into shape. Catherine listened,
      saying almost nothing. But never, never had she loved this life of theirs so well as now that
      she was called on, at barely a week's notice, to give it up for ever! For Robert's scheme, in
      which her reason fully acquiesced, was to keep to their plan of going to Switzerland, he
      having first, of course, settled all things with the bishop, and having placed his living in
      the hands of Mowbray Elsmere. When they left the rectory, in a week or ten days' time, he
      proposed, in fact, his voice almost inaudible as he did so, that Catherine should leave it for
      good.
'Everybody had better suppose,' he said choking, 'that we are coming back. Of course we need
      say nothing. Armitstead will be here for next week certainly. Then afterwards I can come down
      and manage everything. I shall get it over in a day if I can, and see nobody. I cannot say
      good-bye, nor can you.'
'And next Sunday, Robert?' she asked him, after a pause.
'I shall write to Armitstead this afternoon and ask him, if he possibly can, to come
      to-morrow afternoon, instead of Monday, and take the service.'
Catherine's hands clasped each other still more closely. So then she had heard her husband's
      voice for the last time in the public ministry of the Church, in prayer, in exhortation, in
      benediction! One of the most sacred traditions of her life was struck from her at a blow.
It was long before either of them spoke again. Then she ventured another question.
'And have you any idea of what we shall do next, Robert—of—of our future?'


'Shall we try London for a little?' he answered in a queer strained voice, leaning against
      the window, and looking out, that he might not see her. 'I should find work among the poor—so
      would you—and I could go on with my book. And your mother and sister will probably be there
      part of the winter.'
She acquiesced silently. How mean and shrunken a future it seemed to them both, beside the
      wide and honourable range of his clergyman's life as he and she had developed it. But she did
      not dwell long on that. Her thoughts were suddenly invaded by the memory of a cottage tragedy
      in which she had recently taken a prominent part. A girl, a child of fifteen, from one of the
      crowded Mile End hovels, had gone at Christmas to a distant farm as servant, and come back a
      month ago, ruined, the victim of an outrage over which Elsmere had ground his teeth in fierce
      and helpless anger. Catherine had found her a shelter, and was to see her through her
      'trouble'; the girl, a frail half-witted creature, who could find no words even to bewail
      herself, clinging to her the while with the dumbest, pitifulest tenacity.
How could she leave that girl? It was as if all the fibres of life were being
      violently wrenched from all their natural connections.
'Robert!' she cried at last with a start. 'Had you forgotten the Institute to-morrow?'
'No—no,' he said with the saddest smile. 'No, I had not forgotten it. Don't go,
      Catherine—don't go. I must. But why should you go through it?'
'But there are all those flags and wreaths,' she said, getting up in pained bewilderment. 'I
      must go and look after them.'
He caught her in his arms.
'Oh, my wife, my wife, forgive me!' It was a groan of misery. She put up her hands and
      pressed his hair back from his temples.
'I love you, Robert,' she said simply, her face colourless, but perfectly calm.
Half an hour later, after he had worked through some letters, he went into the workroom and
      found her surrounded with flags, and a vast litter of paper roses and evergreens, which she
      and the new agent's daughters who had come up to help her were putting together for the
      decorations of the morrow. Mary was tottering from chair to chair in high glee, a big pink
      rose stuck in the belt of her pinafore. His pale wife, trying to smile and talk as usual, her
      lap full of evergreens, and her politeness exercised by the chatter of the two Miss Batesons,
      seemed to Robert one of the most pitiful spectacles he had ever seen. He fled from it out into
      the village driven by a restless longing for change and movement.
Here he found a large gathering round the new Institute. There were carpenters at work on a
      triumphal arch in front,
       and close by, an admiring circle of children and old men, huddling in the shade of
      a great chestnut.
Elsmere spent an hour in the building, helping and superintending, stabbed every now and
      then by the unsuspecting friendliness of those about him, or worried by their blunt comments
      on his looks. He could not bear more than a glance into the new rooms apportioned to the
      Naturalists' Club. There against the wall stood the new glass cases he had wrung out of the
      squire, with various new collections lying near, ready to be arranged and unpacked when time
      allowed. The old collections stood out bravely in the added space and light; the walls were
      hung here and there with a wonderful set of geographical pictures he had carried off from a
      London exhibition, and fed his boys on for weeks; the floors were freshly matted; the new pine
      fittings gave out their pleasant cleanly scent; the white paint of doors and windows shone in
      the August sun. The building had been given by the squire. The fittings and furniture had been
      mainly of his providing. What uses he had planned for it all!—only to see the fruits of two
      years' effort out of doors, and personal frugality at home, handed over to some possibly
      unsympathetic stranger. The heart beat painfully against the iron bars of fate, rebelling
      against the power of a mental process so to affect a man's whole practical and social
      life!
He went out at last by the back of the Institute, where a little bit of garden, spoilt with
      building materials, led down to a lane.
At the end of the garden, beside the untidy gap in the hedge made by the builders' carts, he
      saw a man standing, who turned away down the lane, however, as soon as the rector's figure
      emerged into view.
Robert had recognised the slouching gait and unwieldy form of Henslowe. There were at this
      moment all kinds of gruesome stories afloat in the village about the ex-agent. It was said
      that he was breaking up fast; it was known that he was extensively in debt; and the village
      shopkeepers had already held an agitated meeting or two, to decide upon the best mode of
      getting their money out of him, and upon a joint plan of cautious action towards his custom in
      future. The man, indeed, was sinking deeper and deeper into a pit of sordid misery,
      maintaining all the while a snarling exasperating front to the world, which was rapidly
      converting the careless half-malicious pity wherewith the village had till now surveyed his
      fall into that more active species of baiting which the human animal is never very loth to try
      upon the limping specimens of his race.
Henslowe stopped and turned as he heard the steps behind him. Six months' self-murdering had
      left ghastly traces. He was many degrees nearer the brute than he had been even when Robert
      made his ineffectual visit. But at this actual moment
       Robert's practised eye—for every English parish clergyman becomes dismally expert
      in the pathology of drunkenness—saw that there was no fight in him. He was in one of the
      drunkard's periods of collapse—shivering, flabby, starting at every sound, a misery to himself
      and a spectacle to others.
'Mr. Henslowe!' cried Robert, still pursuing him, 'may I speak to you a moment?'
The ex-agent turned, his prominent bloodshot eyes glowering at the speaker. But he had to
      catch at his stick for support, or at the nervous shock of Robert's summons his legs would
      have given way under him.
Robert came up with him and stood a second, fronting the evil silence of the other, his
      boyish face deeply flushed. Perhaps the grotesqueness of that former scene was in his mind.
      Moreover, the vestry meetings had furnished Henslowe with periodical opportunities for venting
      his gall on the rector, and they had never been neglected. But he plunged on boldly.
'I am going away next week, Mr. Henslowe; I shall be away some considerable time. Before I
      go I should like to ask you whether you do not think the feud between us had better cease. Why
      will you persist in making an enemy of me? If I did you an injury it was neither wittingly nor
      willingly. I know you have been ill and I gather that—that—you are in trouble. If I could
      stand between you and further mischief I would—most gladly. If help—or—or money——' He paused.
      He shrewdly suspected, indeed, from the reports that reached him, that Henslowe was on the
      brink of bankruptcy.
The rector had spoken with the utmost diffidence and delicacy, but Henslowe found energy in
      return for an outburst of quavering animosity, from which, however, physical weakness had
      extracted all its sting.
'I'll thank you to make your canting offers to some one else, Mr. Elsmere. When I want your
      advice I'll ask it. Good day to you.' And he turned away with as much of an attempt at dignity
      as his shaking limbs would allow of.
'Listen, Mr. Henslowe,' said Robert firmly, walking beside him; 'you know—I know—that if
      this goes on, in a year's time you will be in your grave, and your poor wife and children
      struggling to keep themselves from the workhouse. You may think that I have no right to preach
      to you—that you are the older man—that it is an intrusion. But what is the good of blinking
      facts that you must know all the world knows? Come, now, Mr. Henslowe, let us behave for a
      moment as though this were our last meeting. Who knows? the chances of life are many. Lay down
      your grudge against me, and let me speak to you as one struggling human being to another. The
      fact that you have, as you say, become less prosperous, in some sort through me, seems to give
      me a right—to make it a duty for me, if you will—to help you if I can. Let me send a good
      doctor to see you. Let me implore you as a last chance to put yourself
       into his hands, and to obey him, and your wife; and let me,'—the rector
      hesitated,—'let me make things pecuniarily easier for Mrs. Henslowe till you have pulled
      yourself out of the hole in which, by common report at least, you are now.'
Henslowe stared at him, divided between anger caused by the sore stirring of his old
      self-importance, and a tumultuous flood of self-pity, roused irresistibly in him by Robert's
      piercing frankness, and aided by his own more or less maudlin condition. The latter sensation
      quickly undermined the former; he turned his back on the rector and leant over the railings of
      the lane, shaken by something it is hardly worth while to dignify by the name of emotion.
      Robert stood by, a pale embodiment of mingled judgment and compassion. He gave the man a few
      moments to recover himself, and then, as Henslowe turned round again, he silently and
      appealingly held out his hand—the hand of the good man, which it was an honour for such as
      Henslowe to touch. Constrained by the moral force radiating from his look, the other took it
      with a kind of helpless sullenness.
Then, seizing at once on the slight concession, with that complete lack of inconvenient
      self-consciousness, or hindering indecision, which was one of the chief causes of his effect
      on men and women, Robert began to sound the broken repulsive creature as to his affairs. Bit
      by bit, compelled by a will and nervous strength far superior to his own, Henslowe was led
      into abrupt and blurted confidences which surprised no one so much as himself. Robert's quick
      sense possessed itself of point after point, seeing presently ways of escape and relief which
      the besotted brain beside him had been quite incapable of devising for itself. They walked on
      into the open country, and what with the discipline of the rector's presence, the sobering
      effect wrought by the shock to pride and habit, and the unwonted brain exercise of the
      conversation, the demon in Henslowe had been for the moment most strangely tamed after half an
      hour's talk. Actually some reminiscences of his old ways of speech and thought, the ways of
      the once prosperous and self-reliant man of business, had reappeared in him before the end of
      it, called out by the subtle influence of a manner which always attracted to the surface
      whatever decent element there might be left in a man, and then instantly gave it a recognition
      which was more redeeming than either counsel or denunciation.
By the time they parted Robert had arranged with his old enemy that he should become his
      surety with a rich cousin in Churton, who, always supposing there were no risk in the matter,
      and that benevolence ran on all-fours with security of investment, was prepared to shield the
      credit of the family by the advance of a sufficient sum of money to rescue the ex-agent from
      his most pressing difficulties. He had also wrung from him the promise to see a specialist in
      London—Robert writing that evening to make the appointment.


How had it been done? Neither Robert nor Henslowe ever quite knew. Henslowe walked home in a
      bewilderment which for once had nothing to do with brandy, but was simply the result of a
      moral shock acting on what was still human in the man's debased consciousness, just as
      electricity acts on the bodily frame.
Robert, on the other hand, saw him depart with a singular lightening of mood. What he seemed
      to have achieved might turn out to be the merest moonshine. At any rate, the incident had
      appeased in him a kind of spiritual hunger—the hunger to escape a while from that incessant
      process of destructive analysis with which the mind was still beset, into some use of energy,
      more positive, human, and beneficent.
The following day was one long trial of endurance for Elsmere and for Catherine. She pleaded
      to go, promising quietly to keep out of his sight, and they started together—a miserable
      pair.
Crowds, heat, decorations, the grandees on the platform, and conspicuous among them the
      squire's slouching frame and striking head, side by side with a white and radiant Lady
      Helen—the outer success, the inner revolt and pain—and the constant seeking of his truant eyes
      for a face that hid itself as much as possible in dark corners, but was in truth the one thing
      sharply present to him—these were the sort of impressions that remained with Elsmere
      afterwards of this last meeting with his people.
He had made a speech, of which he never could remember a word. As he sat down, there had
      been a slight flutter of surprise in the sympathetic looks of those about him, as though the
      tone of it had been somewhat unexpected and disproportionate to the occasion. Had he betrayed
      himself in any way? He looked for Catherine, but she was nowhere to be seen. Only in his
      search he caught the squire's ironical glance, and wondered with quick shame what sort of
      nonsense he had been talking.
Then a neighbouring clergyman, who had been his warm supporter and admirer from the
      beginning, sprang up and made a rambling panegyric on him and on his work, which Elsmere
      writhed under. His work! absurdity! What could be done in two years? He saw it all as the
      merest nothing, a ragged beginning which might do more harm than good.
But the cheering was incessant, the popular feeling intense. There was old Milsom waving a
      feeble arm: John Allwood gaunt, but radiant; Mary Sharland, white still as the ribbons on her
      bonnet, egging on her flushed and cheering husband; and the club boys grinning and shouting,
      partly for love of Elsmere, mostly because to the young human animal mere noise is heaven. In
      front was an old hedger and ditcher, who came round the parish periodically, and never failed
      to take Elsmere's opinion as to 'a bit of prapperty' he and two other
       brothers as ancient as himself had been quarrelling over for twenty years, and were
      likely to go on quarrelling over, till all three litigants had closed their eyes on a mortal
      scene which had afforded them on the whole vast entertainment, though little pelf. Next him
      was a bowed and twisted old tramp who had been shepherd in the district in his youth, had then
      gone through the Crimea and the Mutiny, and was now living about the commons, welcome to feed
      here and sleep there for the sake of his stories and his queer innocuous wit. Robert had had
      many a gay argumentative walk with him, and he and his companion had tramped miles to see the
      function, to rattle their sticks on the floor in Elsmere's honour, and satiate their curious
      gaze on the squire.
When all was over, Elsmere, with his wife on his arm, mounted the hill to the rectory,
      leaving the green behind them still crowded with folk. Once inside the shelter of their own
      trees, husband and wife turned instinctively and caught each other's hands. A low groan broke
      from Elsmere's lips; Catherine looked at him one moment, then fell weeping on his breast. The
      first chapter of their common life was closed.
One thing more, however, of a private nature, remained for Elsmere to do. Late in the
      afternoon he walked over to the Hall.
He found the squire in the inner library, among his German books, his pipe in his mouth, his
      old smoking coat and slippers bearing witness to the rapidity and joy with which he had shut
      the world out again after the futilities of the morning. His mood was more accessible than
      Elsmere had yet found it since his return.
'Well, have you done with all those tomfooleries, Elsmere? Precious eloquent speech you
      made! When I see you and people like you throwing yourselves at the heads of the people, I
      always think of Scaliger's remark about the Basques: "They say they understand one
       another—I don't believe a word of it!" All that the lower class wants to
      understand, at any rate, is the shortest way to the pockets of you and me; all that you and I
      need understand, according to me, is how to keep 'em off! There you have the sum and substance
      of my political philosophy.'
'You remind me,' said Robert drily, sitting down on one of the library stools, 'of some of
      those sentiments you expressed so forcibly on the first evening of our acquaintance.'
The squire received the shaft with equanimity.
'I was not amiable, I remember, on that occasion,' he said coolly, his thin, old man's
      fingers moving the while among the shelves of books, 'nor on several subsequent ones. I had
      been made a fool of, and you were not particularly adroit. But of course you won't acknowledge
      it. Who ever yet got a parson to confess himself!'
'Strangely enough, Mr. Wendover,' said Robert, fixing him
       with a pair of deliberate feverish eyes, 'I am here at this moment for that very
      purpose.'
'Go on,' said the squire, turning, however, to meet the rector's look, his gold spectacles
      falling forward over his long hooked nose, his attitude one of sudden attention. 'Go on.'
All his grievances against Elsmere returned to him. He stood aggressively waiting.
Robert paused a moment, and then said abruptly—
'Perhaps even you will agree, Mr. Wendover, that I had some reason for sentiment this
      morning. Unless I read the lessons to-morrow, which is possible, to-day has been my last
      public appearance as rector of this parish!'
The squire looked at him dumfoundered.
'And your reasons?' he said, with quick imperativeness.
Robert gave them. He admitted, as plainly and bluntly as he had done to Grey, the squire's
      own part in the matter; but here a note of antagonism, almost of defiance, crept even into his
      confession of wide and illimitable defeat. He was there, so to speak, to hand over his sword.
      But to the squire, his surrender had all the pride of victory.
'Why should you give up your living?' asked the squire after several minutes' complete
      silence.
He too had sat down, and was now bending forward, his sharp small eyes peering at his
      companion.
'Simply because I prefer to feel myself an honest man. However, I have not acted without
      advice. Grey of St. Anselm's—you know him of course—was a very close personal friend of mine
      at Oxford. I have been to see him, and we agreed it was the only thing to do.'
'Oh, Grey,' exclaimed the squire, with a movement of impatience. 'Grey of course wanted you
      to set up a church of your own, or to join his! He is like all idealists, he has the usual
      foolish contempt for the compromise of institutions.'
'Not at all,' said Robert calmly, 'you are mistaken; he has the most sacred respect for
      institutions. He only thinks it well, and I agree with him, that with regard to a man's public
      profession and practice he should recognise that two and two make four.'
It was clear to him from the squire's tone and manner that Mr. Wendover's instincts on the
      point were very much what he had expected, the instincts of the philosophical man of the
      world, who scorns the notion of taking popular beliefs seriously, whether for protest or for
      sympathy. But he was too weary to argue. The squire, however, rose hastily and began to walk
      up and down in a gathering storm of irritation. The triumph gained for his own side, the
      tribute to his life's work, were at the moment absolutely indifferent to him. They were
      effaced by something else much harder to analyse. Whatever it was, it drove him to throw
      himself upon Robert's position with a perverse bewildering bitterness.


'Why should you break up your life in this wanton way? Who, in God's name, is injured if you
      keep your living? It is the business of the thinker and the scholar to clear his mind of
      cobwebs. Granted. You have done it. But it is also the business of the practical man to live!
      If I had your altruist emotional temperament, I should not hesitate for a moment. I should
      regard the historical expressions of an eternal tendency in men as wholly indifferent to me.
      If I understand you aright, you have flung away the sanctions of orthodoxy. There is no other
      in the way. Treat words as they deserve. You'—and the speaker laid an emphasis on the
      pronoun which for the life of him he could not help making sarcastic—'you will always
      have Gospel enough to preach.'
'I cannot,' Robert repeated quietly, unmoved by the taunt, if it was one. 'I am in a
      different stage, I imagine, from you. Words—that is to say, the specific Christian formulæ—may
      be indifferent to you, though a month or two ago I should hardly have guessed it; they are
      just now anything but indifferent to me.'
The squire's brow grew darker. He took up the argument again, more pugnaciously than ever.
      It was the strangest attempt ever made to gibe and flout a wandering sheep back into the fold.
      Robert's resentment was roused at last. The squire's temper seemed to him totally
      inexplicable, his arguments contradictory, the conversation useless and irritating. He got up
      to take his leave.
'What you are about to do, Elsmere,' the squire wound up with saturnine emphasis, 'is a
      piece of cowardice! You will live bitterly to regret the haste and the unreason of
      it.'
'There has been no haste,' exclaimed Robert in the low tone of passionate emotion; 'I have
      not rooted up the most sacred growths of life as a careless child devastates its garden. There
      are some things which a man only does because he must.'
There was a pause. Robert held out his hand. The squire would hardly touch it. Outwardly his
      mood was one of the strangest eccentricity and anger; and as to what was beneath it, Elsmere's
      quick divination was dulled by worry and fatigue. It only served him so far that at the door
      he turned back, hat in hand, and said, looking lingeringly the while at the solitary sombre
      figure, at the great library, with all its suggestive and exquisite detail: 'If Monday is
      fine, Squire, will you walk?'
The squire made no reply except by another question.
'Do you still keep to your Swiss plans for next week?' he asked sharply.
'Certainly. The plan, as it happens, is a Godsend. But there,' said Robert, with a sigh,
      'let me explain the details of this dismal business to you on Monday. I have hardly the
      courage for it now.'
The curtain dropped behind him. Mr. Wendover stood a minute looking after him; then, with
      some vehement expletive
       or other, walked up to his writing-table, drew some folios that were lying on it
      towards him, with hasty maladroit movements which sent his papers flying over the floor, and
      plunged doggedly into work.
He and Mrs. Darcy dined alone. After dinner the squire leant against the mantelpiece sipping
      his coffee, more gloomily silent than even his sister had seen him for weeks. And, as always
      happened when he became more difficult and morose, she became more childish. She was now
      wholly absorbed with a little electric toy she had just bought for Mary Elsmere, a number of
      infinitesimal little figures dancing fantastically under the stimulus of an electric current,
      generated by the simplest means. She hung over it absorbed, calling to her brother every now
      and then, as though by sheer perversity, to come and look whenever the pink or the blue
       danseuse executed a more surprising somersault than usual.
He took not the smallest spoken notice of her, though his eyes followed her contemptuously
      as she moved from window to window with her toy in pursuit of the fading light.
'Oh, Roger,' she called presently, still throwing herself to this side and that, to catch
      new views of her pith puppets, 'I have got something to show you. You must admire them—you
      shall! I have been drawing them all day, and they are nearly done. You remember what I told
      you once about my "imps"? I have seen them all my life, since I was a child in France with
      papa, and I have never been able to draw them till the last few weeks. They are such
      dears—such darlings; every one will know them when he sees them! There is the Chinese imp, the
      low smirking creature, you know, that sits on the edge of your cup of tea; there is the
      flipperty-flopperty creature that flies out at you when you open a drawer; there is the
      twisty-twirly person that sits jeering on the edge of your hat when it blows away from you;
      and'—her voice dropped—'that ugly, ugly thing I always see waiting for me on
      the top of a gate. They have teased me all my life, and now at last I have drawn
      them. If they were to take offence to-morrow I should have them—the beauties—all safe.'
She came towards him, her bizarre little figure swaying from side to side, her eyes
      glittering, her restless hands pulling at the lace round her blanched head and face. The
      squire, his hands behind him, looked at her frowning, an involuntary horror dawning on his
      dark countenance, turned abruptly, and left the room.
Mr. Wendover worked till midnight; then, tired out, he turned to the bit of fire to which,
      in spite of the oppressiveness of the weather, the chilliness of age and nervous strain had
      led him to set a light. He sat there for long, sunk in the blackest reverie. He was the only
      living creature in the great library
       wing which spread around and above him—the only waking creature in the whole vast
      pile of Murewell. The silver lamps shone with a steady melancholy light on the chequered walls
      of books. The silence was a silence that could be felt; and the gleaming Artemis, the tortured
      frowning Medusa, were hardly stiller in their frozen calm than the crouching figure of the
      squire.
So Elsmere was going! In a few weeks the rectory would be once more tenanted by one of those
      nonentities the squire had either patronised or scorned all his life. The park, the lanes, the
      room in which he sits, will know that spare young figure, that animated voice, no more. The
      outlet which had brought so much relief and stimulus to his own mental powers is closed; the
      friendship on which he had unconsciously come to depend so much is broken before it had well
      begun.
All sorts of strange thwarted instincts make themselves felt in the squire. The wife he had
      once thought to marry, the children he might have had, come to sit like ghosts with him beside
      the fire. He had never, like Augustine, 'loved to love'; he had only loved to know. But none
      of us escapes to the last the yearnings which make us men. The squire becomes conscious that
      certain fibres he had thought long since dead in him had been all the while twining themselves
      silently round the disciple who had shown him in many respects such a filial consideration and
      confidence. That young man might have become to him the son of his old age, the one human
      being from whom, as weakness of mind and body break him down, even his indomitable spirit
      might have accepted the sweetness of human pity, the comfort of human help.
And it is his own hand which has done most to break the nascent slowly-forming tie. He has
      bereft himself.
With what incredible recklessness had he been acting all these months!
It was the levity of his own proceeding which stared him in the face. His rough
      hand had closed on the delicate wings of a soul as a boy crushes the butterfly he pursues. As
      Elsmere had stood looking back at him from the library door, the suffering which spoke in
      every line of that changed face had stirred a sudden troubled remorse in Roger Wendover. It
      was mere justice that one result of that suffering should be to leave himself forlorn.
He had been thinking and writing of religion, of the history of ideas, all his life. Had he
      ever yet grasped the meaning of religion to the religious man? God and
       faith—what have these venerable ideas ever mattered to him personally, except as the
      subjects of the most ingenious analysis, the most delicate historical inductions? Not only
      sceptical to the core, but constitutionally indifferent, the squire had always found enough to
      make life amply worth living in the mere dissection of other men's beliefs.


But to-night! The unexpected shock of feeling, mingled with the terrible sense, periodically
      alive in him, of physical doom, seems to have stripped from the thorny soul its outer defences
      of mental habit. He sees once more the hideous spectacle of his father's death, his own black
      half-remembered moments of warning, the teasing horror of his sister's increasing weakness of
      brain. Life has been on the whole a burden, though there has been a certain joy no doubt in
      the fierce intellectual struggle of it. And to-night it seems so nearly over! A cold
      prescience of death creeps over the squire as he sits in the lamplit silence. His eye seems to
      be actually penetrating the eternal vastness which lies about our life. He feels himself old,
      feeble, alone. The awe, the terror which are at the root of all religions have fallen even
      upon him at last.
The fire burns lower, the night wears on; outside, an airless, misty moonlight lies over
      park and field. Hark! was that a sound upstairs, in one of those silent empty rooms?
The squire half rises, one hand on his chair, his blanched face strained, listening. Again!
      Is it a footstep or simply a delusion of the ear? He rises, pushes aside the curtains into the
      inner library, where the lamps have almost burnt away, creeps up the wooden stair, and into
      the deserted upper story.
Why was that door into the end room—his father's room—open? He had seen it closed that
      afternoon. No one had been there since. He stepped nearer. Was that simply a gleam of
      moonlight on the polished floor—confused lines of shadow thrown by the vine outside? And was
      that sound nothing but the stirring of the rising wind of dawn against the open casement
      window? Or——
'My God!'
The squire fled downstairs. He gained his chair again. He sat upright an instant, impressing
      on himself, with sardonic vindictive force, some of those truisms as to the action of mind on
      body, of brain-process on sensation, which it had been part of his life's work to illustrate.
      The philosopher had time to realise a shuddering fellowship of weakness with his kind, to see
      himself as a helpless instance of an inexorable law, before he fell back in his chair; a
      swoon, born of pitiful human terror—terror of things unseen—creeping over heart and brain.




