
CHAPTER XV
'Now, having seen our sight,' said Robert, as they left the great mass of Murewell behind
      them, 'come and see our scandal. Both run by the same proprietor, if you please. There is a
      hamlet down there in the hollow'—and he pointed to a gray speck in the distance—'which
      deserves a Royal Commission all to itself, which is a disgrace'—and his tone
      warmed—'to any country, any owner, any agent! It is owned by Mr. Wendover, and I see the
      pleasing prospect straight before me of beginning my acquaintance with him by a fight over it.
      You will admit that it is a little hard on a man who wants to live on good terms with the
      possessor of the Murewell library to have to open relations with him by a fierce attack on his
      drains and his pigsties.'
He turned to his companion with a half-rueful spark of laughter in his gray eyes. Langham
      hardly caught what he said. He was far away in meditations of his own.
'An attack,' he repeated vaguely; 'why an attack?'
Robert plunged again into the great topic of which his quick mind was evidently full.
      Langham tried to listen, but was conscious that his friend's social enthusiasms bored him a
      great deal. And side by side with the consciousness there slid in a little stinging reflection
      that four years ago no talk of Elsmere's could have bored him.
'What's the matter with this particular place?' he asked languidly, at last, raising his
      eyes towards the group of houses now beginning to emerge from the distance.
An angry red mounted in Robert's cheek.
'What isn't the matter with it? The houses, which were built on a swamp originally, are
      falling into ruin; the roofs, the drains, the accommodation per head, are all about equally
      scandalous. The place is harried with illness; since I came
       there has been both fever and diphtheria there. They are all crippled with
      rheumatism, but that they think nothing of; the English labourer takes rheumatism as
      quite in the day's bargain! And as to vice—the vice that comes of mere endless
      persecuting opportunity—I can tell you one's ideas of personal responsibility get a good deal
      shaken up by a place like this! And I can do nothing. I brought over Henslowe to see the
      place, and he behaved like a brute. He scoffed at all my complaints, said that no landlord
      would be such a fool as to build fresh cottages on such a site, that the old ones must just be
      allowed to go to ruin; that the people might live in them if they chose, or turn out of them
      if they chose. Nobody forced them to do either; it was their own look-out.'
'That was true,' said Langham, 'wasn't it?'
Robert turned upon him fiercely.
'Ah! you think it so easy for those poor creatures to leave their homes, their working
      places! Some of them have been there thirty years. They are close to the two or three farms
      that employ them, close to the osier beds which give them extra earnings in the spring. If
      they were turned out there is nothing nearer than Murewell, and not a single cottage to be
      found there. I don't say it is a landlord's duty to provide more cottages than are wanted; but
      if the labour is wanted, the labourer should be decently housed. He is worthy of his hire, and
      woe to the man who neglects or ill-treats him!'
Langham could not help smiling, partly at the vehemence of the speech, partly at the lack of
      adjustment between his friend's mood and his own. He braced himself to take the matter more
      seriously, but meanwhile Robert had caught the smile, and his angry eyes melted at once into
      laughter.
'There I am, ranting as usual,' he said penitently. 'Took you for Henslowe, I suppose! Ah,
      well, never mind. I hear the Provost has another book on the stocks.'
So they diverged into other things, talking politics and new books, public men and what not,
      till, at the end of a long and gradual descent through wooded ground, some two miles to the
      north-west of the park, they emerged from the trees beneath which they had been walking, and
      found themselves on a bridge, a gray sluggish stream flowing beneath them, and the hamlet they
      sought rising among the river flats on the farther side.
'There,' said Robert, stopping, 'we are at our journey's end. Now then, what sort of a place
      of human habitation do you call that?'
The bridge whereon they stood crossed the main channel of the river, which just at that
      point, however, parted into several branches, and came meandering slowly down through a little
      bottom or valley, filled with osier beds, long since robbed of their year's growth of shoots.
      On the other side of the river, on ground all but level with the osier beds which interposed
      be
      tween them and the stream, rose a miserable group of houses, huddled together as
      though their bulging walls and rotten roofs could only maintain themselves at all by the help
      and support which each wretched hovel gave to its neighbour. The mud walls were stained with
      yellow patches of lichen, the palings round the little gardens were broken and ruinous. Close
      beside them all was a sort of open drain or water-course, stagnant and noisome, which dribbled
      into the river a little above the bridge. Behind them rose a high gravel bank edged by firs,
      and a line of oak trees against the sky. The houses stood in the shadow of the bank looking
      north, and on this gray, lowering day, the dreariness, the gloom, the squalor of the place
      were indescribable.
'Well, that is a God-forsaken hole!' said Langham, studying it, his interest roused
      at last, rather, perhaps, by the Ruysdael-like melancholy and picturesqueness of the scene
      than by its human suggestiveness. 'I could hardly have imagined such a place existed in
      southern England. It is more like a bit of Ireland.'
'If it were Ireland it might be to somebody's interest to ferret it out,' said Robert
      bitterly. 'But these poor folks are out of the world. They may be brutalised with impunity.
      Oh, such a case as I had here last autumn! A young girl of sixteen or seventeen, who would
      have been healthy and happy anywhere else, stricken by the damp and the poison of the place,
      dying in six weeks, of complications due to nothing in the world but preventable cruelty and
      neglect! It was a sight that burnt into my mind, once for all, what is meant by a landlord's
      responsibility. I tried, of course, to move her, but neither she nor her parents—elderly
      folk—had energy enough for a change. They only prayed to be let alone. I came over the last
      evening of her life to give her the communion. "Ah, sir!" said the mother to me—not
      bitterly—that is the strange thing, they have so little bitterness—"if Mister 'Enslowe would
      jest 'a mended that bit 'o roof of ours last winter, Bessie needn't have laid in the wet so
      many nights as she did, and she coughin' fit to break your heart, for all the things yer could
      put over 'er."'
Robert paused, his strong young face, so vehemently angry a few minutes before, tremulous
      with feeling. 'Ah, well,' he said at last with a long breath, moving away from the parapet of
      the bridge on which he had been leaning, 'better be oppressed than oppressor, any day! Now,
      then, I must deliver my stores. There's a child here Catherine and I have been doing our best
      to pull through typhoid.'
They crossed the bridge and turned down the track leading to the hamlet. Some planks carried
      them across the ditch, the main sewer of the community, as Robert pointed out, and they made
      their way through the filth surrounding one of the nearest cottages.
A feeble elderly man, whose shaking limbs and sallow blood
      less skin make him look much older than he actually was, opened the door and invited
      them to come in. Robert passed on into an inner room, conducted thither by a woman who had
      been sitting working over the fire. Langham stood irresolute; but the old man's quavering
      'kindly take a chair, sir; you've come a long way,' decided him, and he stepped in.
Inside the hovel was miserable indeed. It belonged to that old and evil type which the
      efforts of the last twenty years have done so much all over England to sweep away: four mud
      walls, enclosing an oblong space about eight yards long, divided into two unequal portions by
      a lath and plaster partition, with no upper storey, a thatched roof, now entirely out of
      repair, and letting in the rain in several places, and a paved floor little better than the
      earth itself, so large and cavernous were the gaps between the stones. The dismal place had no
      small adornings—none of those little superfluities which, however ugly and trivial, are still
      so precious in the dwellings of the poor, as showing the existence of some instinct or passion
      which is not the creation of the sheerest physical need; and Langham, as he sat down, caught
      the sickening marsh smell which the Oxford man, accustomed to the odours of damp meadows in
      times of ebbing flood and festering sun, knows so well. As old Milsom began to talk to him in
      his weak tremulous voice, the visitor's attention was irresistibly held by the details about
      him. Fresh as he was from all the delicate sights, the harmonious colours and delightful forms
      of the squire's house, they made an unusually sharp impression on his fastidious senses. What
      does human life become lived on reeking floors and under stifling roofs like these? What
      strange abnormal deteriorations, physical and spiritual, must it not inevitably undergo?
      Langham felt a sudden inward movement of disgust and repulsion. 'For heaven's sake, keep your
      superstitions!' he could have cried to the whole human race, 'or any other narcotic that a
      grinding fate has left you. What does anything matter to the mass of mankind but a
      little ease, a little lightening of pressure on this side or on that?'
Meanwhile the old man went maundering on, talking of the weather, and of his sick child, and
      'Mr. Elsmere,' with a kind of listless incoherence which hardly demanded an answer, though
      Langham threw in a word or two here and there.
Among other things, he began to ask a question or two about Robert's predecessor, a certain
      Mr. Preston, who had left behind him a memory of amiable evangelical indolence.
'Did you see much of him?' he asked.
'Oh law, no, sir!' replied the man, surprised into something like energy. 'Never seed 'im
      more 'n once a year, and sometimes not that!'
'Was he liked here?'
'Well, sir, it was like this, you see. My wife, she's north-country, she is, comes from
      Yorkshire; sometimes she'd used to
       say to me, "Passon 'ee ain't much good, and passon 'ee ain't much harm. 'Ee's no
      more good nor more 'arm, so fer as I can see, nor a chip in a basin o' parritch." And
      that was just about it; sir,' said the old man, pleased for the hundredth time with his wife's
      bygone flight of metaphor and his own exact memory of it.
As to the rector's tendance of his child, his tone was very cool and guarded.
'It do seem strange, sir, as nor he nor Doctor Grimes 'ull let her have anything to put a
      bit of flesh on her, nothin' but them messy things as he brings—milk an' that. An' the beef
      jelly—lor, such a trouble! Missis Elsmere, he tells my wife, strains all the stuff through a
      cloth, she do; never seed anythin' like it, nor my wife neither. People is clever nowadays,'
      said the speaker dubiously. Langham realised that, in this quarter of his parish at any rate,
      his friend's pastoral vanity, if he had any, would not find much to feed on. Nothing, to judge
      from this specimen at least, greatly affected an inhabitant of Mile End. Gratitude,
      responsiveness, imply health and energy, past or present. The only constant defence which the
      poor have against such physical conditions as those which prevailed at Mile End is apathy.
As they came down the dilapidated steps at the cottage door, Robert drew in with avidity a
      long draught of the outer air.
'Ugh!' he said with a sort of groan, 'that bedroom! Nothing gives one such a sense of the
      toughness of human life as to see a child recovering, actually recovering, in such a
      pestilential den! Father, mother, grown-up son, girl of thirteen, and grandchild, all huddled
      in a space just fourteen feet square. Langham!' and he turned passionately on his companion,
      'what defence can be found for a man who lives in a place like Murewell Hall, and can take
      money from human beings for the use of a sty like that?'
'Gently, my friend. Probably the squire, being the sort of recluse he is, has never seen the
      place, or, at any rate, not for years, and knows nothing about it!'
'More shame for him!'
'True in a sense,' said Langham, a little drily; 'but as you may want hereafter to
      make excuses for your man, and he may give you occasion, I wouldn't begin by painting
      him to yourself any blacker than need be.'
Robert laughed, sighed and acquiesced. 'I am a hot-headed, impatient kind of creature at the
      best of times,' he confessed. 'They tell me that great things have been done for the poor
      round here in the last twenty years. Something has been done, certainly. But why are the old
      ways, the old evil neglect and apathy, so long, so terribly long in dying? This social
      progress of ours we are so proud of is a clumsy limping jade at best!'
They prowled a little more about the hamlet, every step almost revealing some new source of
      poison and disease. Of
       their various visits, however, Langham remembered nothing afterwards but a little
      scene in a miserable cottage, where they found a whole family party gathered round the mid-day
      meal. A band of puny, black, black-eyed children were standing or sitting at the table. The
      wife, confined of twins three weeks before, sat by the fire, deathly pale, a 'bad leg'
      stretched out before her on some improvised support, one baby on her lap and another
      dark-haired bundle asleep in a cradle beside her. There was a pathetic pinched beauty about
      the whole family. Even the tiny twins were comparatively shapely; all the other children had
      delicate transparent skins, large eyes, and small colourless mouths. The father, a picturesque
      handsome fellow, looking as though he had gipsy blood in his veins, had opened the door to
      their knock. Robert, seeing the meal, would have retreated at once, in spite of the children's
      shy inviting looks, but a glance past them at the mother's face checked the word of refusal
      and apology on his lips, and he stepped in.
In after years Langham was always apt to see him in imagination as he saw him then, standing
      beside the bent figure of the mother, his quick pitiful eyes taking in the pallor and
      exhaustion of face and frame, his hand resting instinctively on the head of a small creature
      that had crept up beside him, his look all attention and softness as the woman feebly told him
      some of the main facts of her state. The young rector at the moment might have stood for the
      modern 'Man of Feeling,' as sensitive, as impressionable, and as free from the burden of self,
      as his eighteenth-century prototype.
On the way home Robert suddenly remarked to his companion, 'Have you heard my sister-in-law
      play yet, Langham? What did you think of it?'
'Extraordinary!' said Langham briefly. 'The most considerable gift I ever came across in an
      amateur.'
His olive cheek flushed a little involuntarily. Robert threw a quick observant look at
      him.
'The difficulty,' he exclaimed, 'is to know what to do with it!'
'Why do you make the difficulty? I gather she wants to study abroad. What is there to
      prevent it?'
Langham turned to his companion with a touch of asperity. He could not stand it that Elsmere
      should be so much narrowed and warped by that wife of his, and her prejudices. Why should that
      gifted creature be cribbed, cabined, and confined in this way?
'I grant you,' said Robert, with a look of perplexity, 'there is not much to prevent
      it.'
And he was silent a moment, thinking, on his side, very tenderly of all the antecedents and
      explanations of that old-world distrust of art and the artistic life so deeply rooted in his
      wife, even though in practice and under his influence she had made concession after
      concession.
'The great solution of all,' he said presently, brightening,
       'would be to get her married. I don't wonder her belongings dislike the notion of
      anything so pretty and so flighty going off to live by itself. And to break up the home in
      Whindale would be to undo everything their father did for them, to defy his most solemn last
      wishes.'
'To talk of a father's wishes, in a case of this kind, ten years after his death, is surely
      excessive?' said Langham with dry interrogation; then, suddenly recollecting himself, 'I beg
      your pardon, Elsmere. I am interfering.'
'Nonsense,' said Robert brightly, 'I don't wonder, it seems like a difficulty of our own
      making. Like so many difficulties, it depends on character, present character, bygone
      character——' And again he fell musing on his Westmoreland experiences, and on the intensity of
      that Puritan type it had revealed to him. 'However, as I said, marriage would be the natural
      way out of it.'
'An easy way, I should think,' said Langham, after a pause.
'It won't be so easy to find the right man. She is a young person with a future, is Miss
      Rose. She wants somebody in the stream; somebody with a strong hand who will keep her in order
      and yet give her a wide range; a rich man, I think—she hasn't the ways of a poor man's wife;
      but, at any rate, some one who will be proud of her, and yet have a full life of his own in
      which she may share.'
'Your views are extremely clear,' said Langham, and his smile had a touch of bitterness in
      it. 'If hers agree, I prophesy you won't have long to wait. She has beauty, talent,
      charm—everything that rich and important men like.'
There was the slightest sarcastic note in the voice. Robert winced. It was borne in upon one
      of the least worldly of mortals that he had been talking like the veriest schemer. What vague
      quick impulse had driven him on?
By the time they emerged again upon the Murewell Green the rain had cleared altogether away,
      and the autumnal morning had broken into sunshine, which played mistily on the sleeping woods,
      on the white fronts of the cottages, and the wide green where the rain-pools glistened. On the
      hill leading to the rectory there was the flutter of a woman's dress. As they hurried on,
      afraid of being late for luncheon, they saw that it was Rose in front of them.
Langham started as the slender figure suddenly defined itself against the road. A tumult
      within, half rage, half feeling, showed itself only in an added rigidity of the finely-cut
      features.
Rose turned directly she heard the steps and voices, and over the dreaminess of her face
      there flashed a sudden brightness.
'You have been a long time!' she exclaimed, saying the first thing that came into
      her head, joyously, rashly, like the child she in reality was. 'How many halt and maimed has
      Robert taken you to see, Mr. Langham?'
'We went to Murewell first. The library was well worth
       seeing. Since then we have been a parish round, distributing stores.'
Rose's look changed in an instant. The words were spoken by the Langham of her earliest
      acquaintance. The man who that morning had asked her to play to him had gone—vanished
      away.
'How exhilarating!' she said scornfully. 'Don't you wonder how any one can ever tear
      themselves away from the country?'
'Rose, don't be abusive,' said Robert, opening his eyes at her tone. Then, passing his arm
      through hers, he looked banteringly down upon her. 'For the first time since you left the
      metropolis you have walked yourself into a colour. It's becoming—and it's Murewell—so be
      civil!'
'Oh, nobody denies you a high place in milkmaids!' she said, with her head in air—and they
      went off into a minute's sparring.
Meanwhile Langham, on the other side of the road, walked up slowly, his eyes on the ground.
      Once, when Rose's eye caught him, a shock ran through her. There was already a look of
      slovenly age about his stooping bookworm's gait. Her companion of the night before—handsome,
      animated, human—where was he? The girl's heart felt a singular contraction. Then she turned
      and rent herself, and Robert found her more mocking and sprightly than ever.
At the rectory gate Robert ran on to overtake a farmer on the road. Rose stooped to open the
      latch; Langham mechanically made a quick movement forward to anticipate her. Their fingers
      touched; she drew hers hastily away and passed in, an erect and dignified figure, in her
      curving garden hat.
Langham went straight up to his room, shut the door, and stood before the open window, deaf
      and blind to everything save an inward storm of sensation.
'Fool! Idiot!' he said to himself at last, with fierce stifled emphasis, while a kind of
      dumb fury with himself and circumstance swept through him.
That he, the poor and solitary student whose only sources of self-respect lay in the
      deliberate limitations, the reasoned and reasonable renunciations he had imposed upon his
      life, should have needed the reminder of his old pupil not to fall in love with his brilliant
      ambitious sister! His irritable self-consciousness enormously magnified Elsmere's motive and
      Elsmere's words. That golden vagueness and softness of temper which had possessed him since
      his last sight of her gave place to one of bitter tension.
With sardonic scorn he pointed out to himself that his imagination was still held by, his
      nerves were still thrilling under, the mental image of a girl looking up to him as no woman
      had ever looked—a girl, white-armed, white-necked—with softened eyes of appeal and confidence.
      He bade himself mark that during the whole of his morning walk with Robert down to its last
      stage, his mind had been really absorbed in some prepos
      terous dream he was now too self-contemptuous to analyse. Pretty well for a
      philosopher, in four days! What a ridiculous business is life—what a contemptible creature is
      man, how incapable of dignity, of consistency!
At luncheon he talked rather more than usual, especially on literary matters with Robert.
      Rose, too, was fully occupied in giving Catherine a sarcastic account of a singing lesson she
      had been administering in the school that morning. Catherine winced sometimes at the tone of
      it.
That afternoon Robert, in high spirits, his rod over his shoulder, his basket at his back,
      carried off his guest for a lounging afternoon along the river. Elsmere enjoyed these fishing
      expeditions like a boy. They were his holidays, relished all the more because he kept a
      jealous account of them with his conscience. He sauntered along, now throwing a cunning and
      effectual fly, now resting, smoking, and chattering, as the fancy took him. He found a great
      deal of the old stimulus and piquancy in Langham's society, but there was an occasional
      irritability in his companion, especially towards himself personally, which puzzled him. After
      a while, indeed, he began to feel himself the unreasonably cheerful person which he evidently
      appeared to his companion. A mere ignorant enthusiast, banished for ever from the realm of
      pure knowledge by certain original and incorrigible defects—after a few hours' talk with
      Langham Robert's quick insight always showed him some image of himself resembling this in his
      friend's mind.
At last he turned restive. He had been describing to Langham his acquaintance with the
      Dissenting minister of the place—a strong coarse-grained fellow of sensuous excitable
      temperament, famous for his noisy 'conversion meetings,' and for a gymnastic dexterity in the
      quoting and combining of texts, unrivalled in Robert's experience. Some remark on the
      Dissenter's logic, made, perhaps, a little too much in the tone of the Churchman conscious of
      University advantages, seemed to irritate Langham.
'You think your Anglican logic in dealing with the Bible so superior! On the contrary, I am
      all for your Ranter. He is your logical Protestant. Historically, you Anglican parsons are
      where you are and what you are, because Englishmen, as a whole, like attempting the
      contradictory—like, above all, to eat their cake and have it. The nation has made you and
      maintains you for its own purposes. But that is another matter.'
Robert smoked on a moment in silence. Then he flushed and laid down his pipe.
'We are all fools in your eyes, I know! À la bonne heure! I have been to the
      University, and talk what he is pleased to call "philosophy"—therefore Mr. Colson denies me
      faith. You have always, in your heart of hearts, denied me knowledge. But I cling to both in
      spite of you.'


There was a ray of defiance, of emotion, in his look. Langham met it in silence.
'I deny you nothing,' he said at last, slowly. 'On the contrary, I believe you to be the
      possessor of all that is best worth having in life and mind.'
His irritation had all died away. His tone was one of indescribable depression, and his
      great black eyes were fixed on Robert with a melancholy which startled his companion. By a
      subtle transition Elsmere felt himself touched with a pang of profound pity for the man who an
      instant before had seemed to pose as his scornful superior. He stretched out his hand, and
      laid it on his friend's shoulder.
Rose spent the afternoon in helping Catherine with various parochial occupations. In the
      course of them Catherine asked many questions about Long Whindale. Her thoughts clung to the
      hills, to the gray farmhouses, the rough men and women inside them. But Rose gave her small
      satisfaction.
'Poor old Jim Backhouse!' said Catherine, sighing. 'Agnes tells me he is quite bedridden
      now.'
'Well, and a good thing for John, don't you think,' said Rose briskly, covering a parish
      library book the while in a way which made Catherine's fingers itch to take it from her, 'and
      for us? It's some use having a carrier now.'
Catherine made no reply. She thought of the 'noodle' fading out of life in the room where
      Mary Backhouse died; she actually saw the white hair, the blurred eyes, the palsied hands, the
      poor emaciated limbs stretched along the settle. Her heart rose, but she said nothing.
'And has Mrs. Thornburgh been enjoying her summer?'
'Oh! I suppose so,' said Rose, her tone indicating a quite measureless indifference. 'She
      had another young Oxford man staying with her in June—a missionary—and it annoyed her very
      much that neither Agnes nor I would intervene to prevent his resuming his profession. She
      seemed to think it was a question of saving him from being eaten, and apparently he would have
      proposed to either of us.'
Catherine could not help laughing. 'I suppose she still thinks she married Robert and
      me.'
'Of course. So she did.'
Catherine coloured a little, but Rose's hard lightness of tone was unconquerable.
'Or if she didn't,' Rose resumed, 'nobody could have the heart to rob her of the illusion.
      Oh, by the way, Sarah has been under warning since June! Mrs. Thornburgh told her desperately
      that she must either throw over her young man, who was picked up drunk at the vicarage gate
      one night, or vacate the vicarage kitchen. Sarah cheerfully accepted her month's notice, and
      is still making the vicarage jams and walking out with the young man every Sunday. Mrs.
      Thornburgh sees that it will
       require a convulsion of nature to get rid either of Sarah or the young man, and has
      succumbed.'
'And the Tysons? And that poor Walker girl?'
'Oh, dear me, Catherine!' said Rose, a strange disproportionate flash of impatience breaking
      through. 'Every one in Long Whindale is always just where and what they were last year. I
      admit they are born and die, but they do nothing else of a decisive kind.'
Catherine's hands worked away for a while, then she laid down her book and said, lifting her
      clear large eyes on her sister,—
'Was there never a time when you loved the valley, Rose?'
'Never!' cried Rose.
Then she pushed away her work, and leaning her elbows on the table turned her brilliant face
      to Catherine. There was frank mutiny in it.
'By the way, Catherine, are you going to prevent mamma from letting me go to Berlin for the
      winter?'
'And after Berlin, Rose?' said Catherine, presently, her gaze bent upon her work.
'After Berlin? What next?' said Rose recklessly. 'Well, after Berlin I shall try to persuade
      mamma and Agnes, I suppose, to come and back me up in London. We could still be some months of
      the year at Burwood.'
Now she had said it out. But there was something else surely goading the girl than mere
      intolerance of the family tradition. The hesitancy, the moral doubt of her conversation with
      Langham, seemed to have vanished wholly in a kind of acrid self-assertion.
Catherine felt a shock sweep through her. It was as though all the pieties of life, all the
      sacred assumptions and self-surrenders at the root of it, were shaken, outraged by the girl's
      tone.
'Do you ever remember,' she said, looking up, while her voice trembled, 'what papa wished
      when he was dying?'
It was her last argument. To Rose she had very seldom used it in so many words. Probably, it
      seemed to her too strong, too sacred, to be often handled.
But Rose sprang up, and pacing the little workroom with her white wrists locked behind her,
      she met that argument with all the concentrated passion which her youth had for years been
      storing up against it. Catherine sat presently overwhelmed, bewildered. This language of a
      proud and tameless individuality, this modern gospel of the divine right of
      self-development—her soul loathed it! And yet, since that night in Marrisdale, there had been
      a new yearning in her to understand.
Suddenly, however, Rose stopped, lost her thread. Two figures were crossing the lawn, and
      their shadows were thrown far beyond them by the fast disappearing sun.
She threw herself down on her chair again with an abrupt—


'Do you see they have come back? We must go and dress.'
And as she spoke she was conscious of a new sensation altogether—the sensation of the wild
      creature lassoed on the prairie, of the bird exchanging in an instant its glorious freedom of
      flight for the pitiless meshes of the net. It was stifling—her whole nature seemed to fight
      with it.
Catherine rose and began to put away the books they had been covering. She had said almost
      nothing in answer to Rose's tirade. When she was ready she came and stood beside her sister a
      moment, her lips trembling. At last she stooped and kissed the girl—the kiss of deep
      suppressed feeling—and went away. Rose made no response.
Unmusical as she was, Catherine pined for her sister's music that evening. Robert was busy
      in his study, and the hours seemed interminable. After a little difficult talk Langham
      subsided into a book and a corner. But the only words of which he was conscious for long were
      the words of an inner dialogue. 'I promised to play for her.—Go and offer then!—Madness! let
      me keep away from her. If she asks me, of course I will go. She is much too proud, and already
      she thinks me guilty of a rudeness.'
Then, with a shrug, he would fall to his book again, abominably conscious, however, all the
      while of the white figure between the lamp and the open window, and of the delicate head and
      cheek lit up against the trees and the soft August dark.
When the time came to go to bed he got their candles for the two ladies. Rose just touched
      his hand with cool fingers.
'Good-night, Mr. Langham. You are going in to smoke with Robert, I suppose?'
Her bright eyes seemed to look him through. Their mocking hostility seemed to say to him as
      plainly as possible: 'Your purgatory is over—go, smoke and be happy!'
'I will go and help him wind up his sermon,' he said, with an attempt at a laugh, and moved
      away.
Rose went upstairs, and it seemed to her that a Greek brow, and a pair of wavering
      melancholy eyes, went before her in the darkness chased along the passages by the light she
      held. She gained her room, and stood by the window, seized again by that stifling sense of
      catastrophe, so strange, so undefined. Then she shook it off with an angry laugh, and went to
      work to see how far her stock of light dresses had suffered by her London dissipations.
