
CHAPTER XXXIII
But Robert was some time in finding his opening, in realising any fraction of his dream. At
      first he tried work under the Broad Church vicar to whom Grey had introduced him. He undertook
      some rent-collecting, and some evening lectures on elementary science to boys and men. But
      after a while he began to feel his position false and unsatisfactory. In truth, his opinions
      were in the main identical with those of the vicar under whom he was acting. But Mr. Vernon
      was a Broad Churchman, belonged to the Church Reform movement, and thought it absolutely
      necessary to 'keep things going,' and by a policy of prudent silence and gradual expansion
      from within, to save the great 'plant' of the Establishment from falling wholesale into the
      hands of the High Churchmen. In consequence he was involved, as Robert held, in endless
      contradictions
       and practical falsities of speech and action. His large church was attended by a
      handful of some fifty to a hundred persons. Vernon could not preach what he did believe, and
      would not preach, more than was absolutely necessary, what he did not believe. He was
      hard-working and kind-hearted, but the perpetual divorce between thought and action, which his
      position made inevitable, was constantly blunting and weakening all he did. His whole life,
      indeed, was one long waste of power, simply for lack of an elementary frankness.
But if these became Robert's views as to Vernon, Vernon's feeling towards Elsmere after six
      weeks' acquaintance was not less decided. He was constitutionally timid, and he probably
      divined in his new helper a man of no ordinary calibre, whose influence might very well turn
      out some day to be of the 'incalculably diffusive' kind. He grew uncomfortable, begged Elsmere
      to beware of any 'direct religious teaching,' talked in warm praise of a 'policy of
      omissions,' and in equally warm denunciation of 'anything like a policy of attack.' In short,
      it became plain that two men so much alike, and yet so different, could not long
      co-operate.
However, just as the fact was being brought home to Elsmere, a friendly chance
      intervened.
Hugh Flaxman, the Leyburns' new acquaintance and Lady Helen's brother, had been drawn to
      Elsmere at first sight; and a meeting or two, now at Lady Charlotte's, now at the Leyburns',
      had led both men far on the way to a friendship. Of Hugh Flaxman himself more hereafter. At
      present all that need be recorded is that it was at Mr. Flaxman's house, overlooking St.
      James's Park, Robert first met a man who was to give him the opening for which he was
      looking.
Mr. Flaxman was fond of breakfast parties à la Rogers, and on the first occasion
      when Robert could be induced to attend one of these functions, he saw opposite to him what he
      supposed to be a lad of twenty, a young slip of a fellow, whose sallies of fun and invincible
      good humour attracted him greatly.
Sparkling brown eyes, full lips rich in humour and pugnacity, 'lockës crull as they were
      layde in presse,' the same look of 'wonderly' activity too, in spite of his short stature and
      dainty make, as Chaucer lends his squire—the type was so fresh and pleasing that Robert was
      more and more held by it, especially when he discovered to his bewilderment that the supposed
      stripling must be from his talk a man quite as old as himself, an official besides, filling
      what was clearly some important place in the world. He took his full share in the politics and
      literature started at the table, and presently, when conversation fell on the proposed
      municipality for London, said things to which the whole party listened. Robert's curiosity was
      aroused, and after breakfast he questioned his host and was promptly introduced to 'Mr. Murray
      Edwardes.'


Whereupon it turned out that this baby-faced sage was filling a post, in the work of which
      perhaps few people in London could have taken so much interest as Robert Elsmere.
Fifty years before, a wealthy merchant who had been one of the chief pillars of London
      Unitarianism had made his will and died. His great warehouses lay in one of the Eastern
      riverside districts of the city, and in his will he endeavoured to do something according to
      his lights for the place in which he had amassed his money. He left a fairly large bequest
      wherewith to build and endow a Unitarian chapel and found certain Unitarian charities, in the
      heart of what was even then one of the densest and most poverty-stricken of London parishes.
      For a long time, however, chapel and charities seemed likely to rank as one of the idle freaks
      of religious wealth and nothing more. Unitarianism of the old sort is perhaps the most
      illogical creed that exists, and certainly it has never been the creed of the poor. In old
      days it required the presence of a certain arid stratum of the middle classes to live and
      thrive at all. This stratum was not to be found in R——, which rejoiced instead in the most
      squalid types of poverty and crime, types wherewith the mild shrivelled Unitarian minister had
      about as much power of grappling as a Poet Laureate with a Trafalgar Square Socialist.
Soon after the erection of the chapel, there arose that shaking of the dry bones of
      religious England which we call the Tractarian movement. For many years the new force left R——
      quite undisturbed. The parish church droned away, the Unitarian minister preached decorously
      to empty benches, knowing nothing of the agitations outside. At last, however, towards the end
      of the old minister's life, a powerful church of the new type, staffed by friends and pupils
      of Pusey, rose in the centre of R——, and the little Unitarian chapel was for a time more
      snuffed out than ever, a fate which this time it shared dismally with the parish church. As
      generally happened, however, in those days, the proceedings at this new and splendid St.
      Wilfrid's were not long in stirring up the Protestantism of the British rough,—the said
      Protestantism being always one of the finest excuses for brickbats of which the modern cockney
      is master. The parish lapsed into a state of private war—hectic clergy heading exasperated
      processions or intoning defiant Litanies on the one side,—mobs, rotten eggs, dead cats, and
      blatant Protestant orators on the other.
The war went on practically for years, and while it was still raging the minister of the
      Unitarian chapel died, and the authorities concerned chose in his place a young fellow, the
      son of a Bristol minister, a Cambridge man besides, as chance would have it, of brilliant
      attainments, and unusually commended from many quarters, even including some Church ones of
      the Liberal kind. This curly-haired youth, as he was then in reality, and as to his own quaint
      vexation he went on seeming to be
       up to quite middle age, had the wit to perceive at the moment of his entry on the
      troubled scene that behind all the mere brutal opposition to the new church, and in contrast
      with the sheer indifference of three-fourths of the district, there was a small party
      consisting of an aristocracy of the artisans, whose protest against the Puseyite doings was of
      a much quieter sterner sort, and amongst whom the uproar had mainly roused a certain crude
      power of thinking. He threw himself upon this element, which he rather divined than
      discovered, and it responded. He preached a simple creed, drove it home by pure and generous
      living; he lectured, taught, brought down workers from the West End, and before he had been
      five years in harness had not only made himself a power in R——, but was beginning to be heard
      of and watched with no small interest by many outsiders.
This was the man on whom Robert had now stumbled. Before they had talked twenty minutes each
      was fascinated by the other. They said good-bye to their host, and wandered out together into
      St. James's Park, where the trees were white with frost and an orange sun was struggling
      through the fog. Here Murray Edwardes poured out the whole story of his ministry to attentive
      ears. Robert listened eagerly. Unitarianism was not a familiar subject of thought to him. He
      had never dreamt of joining the Unitarians, and was indeed long ago convinced that in the
      beliefs of a Channing no one once fairly started on the critical road could rationally stop.
      That common thinness and aridity, too, of the Unitarian temper had weighed with him. But here,
      in the person of Murray Edwardes, it was as though he saw something old and threadbare
      revivified. The young man's creed, as he presented it, had grace, persuasiveness, even
      unction; and there was something in his tone of mind which was like a fresh wind blowing over
      the fevered places of the other's heart.
They talked long and earnestly, Edwardes describing his own work, and the changes creeping
      over the modern Unitarian body, Elsmere saying little, asking much.
At last the young man looked at Elsmere with eyes of bright decision.
'You cannot work with the Church!' he said—'it is impossible. You will only wear yourself
      out in efforts to restrain what you could do infinitely more good, as things stand now, by
      pouring out. Come to us!—I will put you in the way. You shall be hampered by no pledges of any
      sort. Come and take the direction of some of my workers. We have all got our hands more than
      full. Your knowledge, your experience, would be invaluable. There is no other opening like it
      in England just now for men of your way of thinking and mine. Come! Who knows what we may be
      putting our hands to—what fruit may grow from the smallest seed?'
The two men stopped beside the lightly frozen water. Robert
       gathered that in this soul, too, there had risen the same large intoxicating dream
      of a reorganised Christendom, a new wide-spreading shelter of faith for discouraged browbeaten
      man, as in his own. 'I will!' he said briefly, after a pause, his own look kindling—'it is the
      opening I have been pining for. I will give you all I can, and bless you for the chance.'
That evening Robert got home late after a busy day full of various engagements. Mary, after
      some waiting up for 'Fader,' had just been carried protesting, red lips pouting, and fat legs
      kicking, off to bed. Catherine was straightening the room, which had been thrown into
      confusion by the child's romps.
It was with an effort—for he knew it would be a shock to her—that he began to talk to her
      about the breakfast-party at Mr. Flaxman's, and his talk with Murray Edwardes. But he had made
      it a rule with himself to tell her everything that he was doing or meant to do. She would not
      let him tell her what he was thinking. But as much openness as there could be between them,
      there should be.
Catherine listened—still moving about the while—the thin beautiful lips becoming more and
      more compressed. Yes, it was hard to her, very hard; the people among whom she had been
      brought up, her father especially, would have held out the hand of fellowship to any body of
      Christian people, but not to the Unitarian. No real barrier of feeling divided them from any
      orthodox Dissenter, but the gulf between them and the Unitarian had been dug very deep by
      various forces—forces of thought originally, of strong habit and prejudice in the course of
      time.
'He is going to work with them now,' she thought bitterly; 'soon he will be one of
      them—perhaps a Unitarian minister himself.'
And for the life of her, as he told his tale, she could find nothing but embarrassed
      monosyllables, and still more embarrassed silences, wherewith to answer him. Till at last he
      too fell silent, feeling once more the sting of a now habitual discomfort.
Presently, however, Catherine came to sit down beside him. She laid her head against his
      knee, saying nothing, but gathering his hand closely in both her own.
Poor woman's heart! One moment in rebellion, the next a suppliant. He bent down quickly and
      kissed her.
'Would you like,' he said presently, after both had sat silent a while in the firelight,
      'would you care to go to Madame de Netteville's to-night?'
'By all means,' said Catherine with a sort of eagerness. 'It was Friday she asked
      us for, wasn't it? We will be quick over dinner, and I will go and dress.'
In that last ten minutes which Robert had spent with the squire in his bedroom, on the
      Monday afternoon, when they were to have walked. Mr. Wendover had drily recommended
       Elsmere to cultivate Madame de Netteville. He sat propped up in his chair, white,
      gaunt, and cynical, and this remark of his was almost the only reference he would allow to the
      Elsmere move.
'You had better go there,' he said huskily, 'it will do you good. She gets the first-rate
      people and she makes them talk, which Lady Charlotte can't. Too many fools at Lady
      Charlotte's; she waters the wine too much.'
And he had persisted with the subject—using it, as Elsmere thought, as a means of warding
      off other conversation. He would not ask Elsmere's plans, and he would not allow a word about
      himself.
There had been a heart attack, old Meyrick thought, coupled with signs of nervous strain and
      excitement. It was the last ailment which evidently troubled the doctor most. But, behind the
      physical breakdown, there was to Robert's sense something else, a spiritual something,
      infinitely forlorn and piteous, which revealed itself wholly against the elder man's' will,
      and filled the younger with a dumb helpless rush of sympathy. Since his departure Robert had
      made the keeping up of his correspondence with the squire a binding obligation, and he was
      to-night chiefly anxious to go to Madame de Netteville's that he might write an account of it
      to Murewell.
Still the squire's talk, and his own glimpse of her at Murewell, had made him curious to see
      more of the woman herself. The squire's ways of describing her were always half approving,
      half sarcastic. Robert sometimes imagined that he himself had been at one time more under her
      spell than he cared to confess. If so, it must have been when she was still in Paris, the
      young English widow of a man of old French family, rich, fascinating, distinguished, and the
      centre of a small salon, admission to which was one of the social blue ribbons of
      Paris.
Since the war of 1870 Madame de Netteville had fixed her headquarters in London, and it was
      to her house in Hans Place that the squire wrote to her about the Elsmeres. She owed Roger
      Wendover debts of various kinds, and she had an encouraging memory of the young clergyman on
      the terrace at Murewell. So she promptly left her cards, together with the intimation that she
      was at home always on Friday evenings.
'I have never seen the wife,' she meditated, as her delicate jewelled hand drew up the
      window of the brougham in front of the Elsmeres' lodgings. 'But if she is the ordinary country
      clergyman's spouse, the squire of course will have given the young man a hint.'
But whether from oblivion, or from some instinct of grim humour towards Catherine, whom he
      had always vaguely disliked, the squire said not one word about his wife to Robert in the
      course of their talk of Madame de Netteville.
Catherine took pains with her dress, sorely wishing to do Robert credit. She put on one of
      the gowns she had taken to
       Murewell when she married. It was black, simply made, and had been a favourite with
      both of them in the old surroundings.
So they drove off to Madame de Netteville's. Catherine's heart was beating faster than usual
      as she mounted the twisting stairs of the luxurious little house. All these new social
      experiences were a trial to her. But she had the vaguest, most unsuspicious ideas of what she
      was to see in this particular house.
A long low room was thrown open to them. Unlike most English rooms, it was barely though
      richly furnished. A Persian carpet, of a self-coloured grayish blue, threw the gilt French
      chairs and the various figures sitting upon them into delicate relief. The walls were painted
      white, and had a few French mirrors and girandoles upon them, half a dozen fine French
      portraits, too, here and there, let into the wall in oval frames. The subdued light came from
      the white sides of the room, and seemed to be there solely for social purposes. You could
      hardly have read or written in the room, but you could see a beautiful woman in a beautiful
      dress there, and you could talk there, either tête-à-tête, or to the assembled
      company, to perfection, so cunningly was it all devised.
When the Elsmeres entered, there were about a dozen people present—ten gentlemen and two
      ladies. One of the ladies, Madame de Netteville, was lying back in the corner of a velvet
      divan placed against the wall, a screen between her and a splendid fire that threw its blaze
      out into the room. The other, a slim woman with closely curled fair hair, and a neck
      abnormally long and white, sat near her, and the circle of men was talking indiscriminately to
      both.
As the footman announced Mr. and Mrs. Elsmere, there was a general stir of surprise. The men
      looked round; Madame de Netteville half rose with a puzzled look. It was more than a month
      since she had dropped her invitation. Then a flash, not altogether of pleasure, passed over
      her face, and she said a few hasty words to the woman near her, advancing the moment
      afterwards to give her hand to Catherine.
'This is very kind of you, Mrs. Elsmere, to remember me so soon. I had imagined you were
      hardly settled enough yet to give me the pleasure of seeing you.'
But the eyes fixed on Catherine, eyes which took in everything, were not cordial, for all
      their smile.
Catherine, looking up at her, was overpowered by her excessive manner, and by the woman's
      look of conscious sarcastic strength, struggling through all the outer softness of beauty and
      exquisite dress.
'Mr. Elsmere, you will find this room almost as hot, I am afraid, as that afternoon on which
      we met last. Let me introduce you to Count Wielandt—Mr. Elsmere. Mrs. Elsmere, will you come
      over here, beside Lady Aubrey Willert.'
Robert found himself bowing to a young diplomatist, who
       seemed to him to look at him very much as he himself might have scrutinised an
      inhabitant of New Guinea. Lady Aubrey made an imperceptible movement of the head as Catherine
      was presented to her, and Madame de Netteville, smiling and biting her lip a little, fell back
      into her seat.
There was a faint odour of smoke in the room. As Catherine sat down, a young exquisite a few
      yards from her threw the end of a cigarette into the fire with a little sharp decided gesture.
      Lady Aubrey also pushed away a cigarette case which lay beside her hand.
Everybody there had the air more or less of an habitué of the house; and when the
      conversation began again, the Elsmeres found it very hard, in spite of certain perfunctory
      efforts on the part of Madame de Netteville, to take any share in it.
'Well, I believe the story about Desforêts is true,' said the fair-haired young Apollo, who
      had thrown away his cigarette, lolling back in his chair.
Catherine started, the little scene with Rose and Langham in the English rectory garden
      flashing incongruously back upon her.
'If you get it from the Ferret, my dear Evershed,' said the ex-Tory minister, Lord
      Rupert, 'you may put it down as a safe lie. As for me, I believe she has a much shrewder eye
      to the main chance.'
'What do you mean?' said the other, raising astonished eyebrows.
'Well, it doesn't pay, you know, to write yourself down a fiend—not quite.'
'What—you think it will affect her audiences? Well, that is a good joke!' and the young man
      laughed immoderately, joined by several of the other guests.
'I don't imagine it will make any difference to you, my good friend,' returned Lord Rupert
      imperturbably; 'but the British public haven't got your nerve. They may take it
      awkwardly—I don't say they will—when a woman who has turned her own young sister out of doors
      at night, in St. Petersburg, so that ultimately as a consequence the girl dies, comes to ask
      them to clap her touching impersonations of injured virtue.'
'What has one to do with an actress's private life, my dear Lord Rupert?' asked Madame de
      Netteville, her voice slipping with a smooth clearness into the conversation, her eyes darting
      light from under straight black brows.
'What indeed!' said the young man who had begun the conversation with a disagreeable
      enigmatical smile, stretching out his hand for another cigarette, and drawing it back with a
      look under his drooped eyelids—a look of cold impertinent scrutiny—at Catherine Elsmere.
'Ah! well—I don't want to be obtrusively moral—Heaven forbid! But there is such a thing as
      destroying the illusion to such an extent that you injure your pocket. Desforêts is doing
      it—doing it actually in Paris too.'


There was a ripple of laughter.
'Paris and illusions—O mon Dieu!' groaned young Evershed, when he had done
      laughing, laying meditative hands on his knees and gazing into the fire.
'I tell you I have seen it,' said Lord Rupert, waxing combative, and slapping the leg he was
      nursing with emphasis. 'The last time I went to see Desforêts in Paris the theatre was
      crammed, and the house—theatrically speaking—ice. They received her in dead
      silence—they gave her not one single recall—and they only gave her a clap, that I can
      remember, at those two or three points in the play where clap they positively must or burst.
      They go to see her—but they loathe her—and they let her know it.'
'Bah!' said his opponent, 'it is only because they are tired of her. Her vagaries don't
      amuse them any longer—they know them by heart. And—by George! she has some pretty rivals too,
      now!' he added reflectively,—'not to speak of the Bernhardt.'
'Well, the Parisians can be shocked,' said Count Wielandt in excellent English,
      bending forward so as to get a good view of his hostess. 'They are just now especially shocked
      by the condition of English morals!'
The twinkle in his eye was irresistible. The men, understanding his reference to the avidity
      with which certain English aristocratic scandals had been lately seized upon by the French
      papers, laughed out—so did Lady Aubrey. Madame de Netteville contented herself with a
      smile.
'They profess to be shocked, too, by Renan's last book,' said the editor from the other side
      of the room.
'Dear me!' said Lady Aubrey, with meditative scorn, fanning herself lightly the while, her
      thin but extraordinarily graceful head and neck thrown out against the golden brocade of the
      cushion behind her.
'Oh! what so many of them feel in Renan's case, of course,' said Madame de Netteville, 'is
      that every book he writes now gives a fresh opening to the enemy to blaspheme. Your eminent
      freethinker can't afford just yet, in the present state of the world, to make himself socially
      ridiculous. The cause suffers.'
'Just my feeling,' said young Evershed calmly. 'Though I mayn't care a rap about him
      personally, I prefer that a man on my own front bench shouldn't make a public ass of himself
      if he can help it—not for his sake, of course, but for mine!'
Robert looked at Catherine. She sat upright by the side of Lady Aubrey; her face, of which
      the beauty to-night seemed lost in rigidity, pale and stiff. With a contraction of heart he
      plunged himself into the conversation. On his road home that evening he had found an important
      foreign telegram posted up at the small literary club to which he had belonged since Oxford
      days. He made a remark about it now to Count Wielandt; and the diplomatist, turning rather
      unwillingly to face his questioner, recognised that the remark was a shrewd one.


Presently the young man's frank intelligence had told. On his way to and from the Holy Land
      three years before Robert had seen something of the East, and it so happened that he
      remembered the name of Count Wielandt as one of the foreign secretaries of legation present at
      an official party given by the English Ambassador at Constantinople, which he and his mother
      had attended on their return journey, in virtue of a family connection with the Ambassador.
      All that he could glean from memory he made quick use of now, urged at first by the remorseful
      wish to make this new world into which he had brought Catherine less difficult than he knew it
      must have been during the last quarter of an hour.
But after a while he found himself leading the talk of a section of the room, and getting
      excitement and pleasure out of the talk itself. Ever since that Eastern journey he had kept an
      eye on the subjects which had interested him then, reading in his rapid voracious way all that
      came across him at Murewell, especially in the squire's foreign newspapers and reviews, and
      storing it when read in a remarkable memory.
Catherine, after the failure of some conversational attempts between her and Madame de
      Netteville, fell to watching her husband with a start of strangeness and surprise. She had
      scarcely seen him at Oxford among his equals; and she had very rarely been present at his
      talks with the squire. In some ways, and owing to the instinctive reserves set up between them
      for so long, her intellectual knowledge of him was very imperfect. His ease, his resource,
      among these men of the world, for whom—independent of all else—she felt a countrywoman's
      dislike, filled her with a kind of bewilderment.
'Are you new to London?' Lady Aubrey asked her presently, in that tone of absolute
      detachment from the person addressed which certain women manage to perfection. She, too, had
      been watching the husband, and the sight had impressed her with a momentary curiosity to know
      what the stiff, handsome, dowdily-dressed wife was made of.
'We have been two months here,' said Catherine, her large gray eyes taking in her
      companion's very bare shoulders, the costly fantastic dress, and the diamonds flashing against
      the white skin.
'In what part?'
'In Bedford Square.'
Lady Aubrey was silent. She had no ideas on the subject of Bedford Square at command.
'We are very central,' said Catherine, feeling desperately that she was doing Robert no
      credit at all, and anxious to talk if only something could be found to talk about.
'Oh yes, you are near the theatres,' said the other indifferently.
This was hardly an aspect of the matter which had yet occurred to Catherine. A flash of
      bitterness ran through her.
       Had they left their Murewell life to be 'near the theatres,' and kept at arm's
      length by supercilious great ladies?
'We are very far from the Park,' she answered with an effort. 'I wish we weren't, for my
      little girl's sake.'
'Oh, you have a little girl! How old?'
'Sixteen months.'
'Too young to be a nuisance yet. Mine are just old enough to be in everybody's way. Children
      are out of place in London. I always want to leave mine in the country, but my husband
      objects,' said Lady Aubrey coolly. There was a certain piquancy in saying frank things to this
      stiff Madonna-faced woman.
Madame de Netteville, meanwhile, was keeping up a conversation in an undertone with young
      Evershed, who had come to sit on a stool beside her, and was gazing up at her with eyes of
      which the expression was perfectly understood by several persons present. The handsome,
      dissipated, ill-conditioned youth had been her slave and shadow for the last two years. His
      devotion now no longer amused her, and she was endeavouring to get rid of it and of him. But
      the process was a difficult one, and took both time and finesse.
She kept her eye, notwithstanding, on the new-comers whom the squire's introduction had
      brought to her that night. When the Elsmeres rose to go, she said good-bye to Catherine with
      an excessive politeness, under which her poor guest, conscious of her own gaucherie
      during the evening, felt the touch of satire she was perhaps meant to feel. But when Catherine
      was well ahead Madame de Netteville gave Robert one of her most brilliant smiles.
'Friday evening, Mr. Elsmere; always Fridays. You will remember?'
The naïveté of Robert's social view, and the mobility of his temper, made him
      easily responsive. He had just enjoyed half an hour's brilliant talk with two or three of the
      keenest and most accomplished men in Europe. Catherine had slipped out of his sight meanwhile,
      and the impression of their entrée had been effaced. He made Madame de Netteville,
      therefore, a cordial smiling reply before his tall slender form disappeared after that of his
      wife.
'Agreeable—rather an acquisition!' said Madame de Netteville to Lady Aubrey, with a light
      motion of the head towards Robert's retreating figure. 'But the wife! Good heavens! I owe
      Roger Wendover a grudge. I think he might have made it plain to those good people that I don't
      want strange women at my Friday evenings.'
Lady Aubrey laughed. 'No doubt she is a genius, or a saint, in mufti. She might be handsome
      too if some one would dress her.'
Madame de Netteville shrugged her shoulders. 'Oh! life is not long enough to penetrate that
      kind of person,' she said.
Meanwhile the 'person' was driving homeward very sad and
       ill at ease. She was vexed that she had not done better, and yet she was wounded by
      Robert's enjoyment. The Puritan in her blood was all aflame. As she sat looking into the
      motley lamplit night, she could have 'testified' like any prophetess of old.
Robert meanwhile, his hand slipped into hers, was thinking of Wielandt's talk, and of some
      racy stories of Berlin celebrities told by a young attaché who had joined their
      group. His lips were lightly smiling, his brow serene.
But as he helped her down from the cab, and they stood in the hall together, he noticed the
      pale discomposure of her looks. Instantly the familiar dread and pain returned upon him.
'Did you like it, Catherine?' he asked her, with something like timidity, as they stood
      together by their bedroom fire.
She sank into a low chair and sat a moment staring at the blaze. He was startled by her look
      of suffering, and, kneeling, he put his arms tenderly round her.
'Oh, Robert, Robert!' she cried, falling on his neck.
'What is it?' he asked, kissing her hair.
'I seem all at sea,' she said in a choked voice, her face hidden,—'the old landmarks
      swallowed up! I am always judging and condemning,—always protesting. What am I that I should
      judge? But how—how—can I help it?'
She drew herself away from him, once more looking into the fire with drawn brows.
'Darling, the world is full of difference. Men and women take life in different ways. Don't
      be so sure yours is the only right one.'
He spoke with a moved gentleness, taking her hand the while.
'"This is the way, walk ye in it!"' she said presently, with strong, almost stern
      emphasis. 'Oh, those women, and that talk! Hateful!'
He rose and looked down on her from the mantelpiece. Within him was a movement of
      impatience, repressed almost at once by the thought of that long night at Murewell, when he
      had vowed to himself to 'make amends'!
And if that memory had not intervened she would still have disarmed him wholly.
'Listen!' she said to him suddenly, her eyes kindling with a strange childish pleasure. 'Do
      you hear the wind, the west wind? Do you remember how it used to shake the house, how it used
      to come sweeping through the trees in the wood-path? It must be trying the study window now,
      blowing the vine against it.'
A yearning passion breathed through every feature. It seemed to him she saw nothing before
      her. Her longing soul was back in the old haunts, surrounded by the old loved forms and
      sounds. It went to his heart. He tried to soothe her with
       the tenderest words remorseful love could find. But the conflict of feeling—grief,
      rebellion, doubt, self-judgment—would not be soothed, and long after she had made him leave
      her and he had fallen asleep, she knelt on, a white and rigid figure in the dying firelight,
      the wind shaking the old house, the eternal murmur of London booming outside.
