
CHAPTER XVII
Murewell Rectory during the next forty-eight hours was the scene of much that might have
      been of interest to a psychologist gifted with the power of divining his neighbours.
In the first place Catherine's terrors were all alive again
       Robert had never seen her so moved since those days of storm and stress before
      their engagement.
'I cannot bear it!' she said to Robert at night in their room. 'I cannot bear it! I hear it
      always in my ears: "What hast thou done with thy sister?" Oh, Robert, don't mind, dear, though
      he is your friend. My father would have shrunk from him with horror—An alien from the
       household of faith! An enemy to the Cross of Christ!'
She flung out the words with low intense emphasis and frowning brow, standing rigid by the
      window, her hands locked behind her. Robert stood by her much perplexed, feeling himself a
      good deal of a culprit, but inwardly conscious that he knew a great deal more about Langham
      than she did.
'My dear wifie,' he said to her, 'I am certain Langham has no intention of marrying.'
'Then more shame for him,' cried Catherine, flushing. 'They could not have looked more
      conscious, Robert, when I found them together, if he had just proposed.'
'What, in five days?' said Robert, more than half inclined to banter his wife. Then he fell
      into meditation as Catherine made no answer. 'I believe with men of that sort,' he said at
      last, 'relations to women are never more than half-real—always more or less literature—acting.
      Langham is tasting an experience, to be bottled up for future use.'
It need hardly be said, however, that Catherine got small consolation out of this point of
      view. It seemed to her Robert did not take the matter quite rightly.
'After all, darling,' he said at last, kissing her, 'you can act dragon splendidly; you have
      already—so can I. And you really cannot make me believe in anything very tragic in a
      week.'
But Catherine was conscious that she had already played the dragon hard, to very little
      purpose. In the forty hours that intervened between the scene in the garden and the squire's
      dinner-party, Robert was always wanting to carry off Langham, Catherine was always asking
      Rose's help in some household business or other. In vain. Langham said to himself calmly, this
      time, that Elsmere and his wife were making a foolish mistake in supposing that his friendship
      with Miss Leyburn was anything to be alarmed about, that they would soon be amply convinced of
      it themselves, and meanwhile he should take his own way. And as for Rose, they had no sooner
      turned back all three from the house to the garden than she had divined everything in
      Catherine's mind, and set herself against her sister with a wilful force in which many a past
      irritation found expression.
How Catherine hated the music of that week! It seemed to her she never opened the
      drawing-room door but she saw Langham at the piano, his head with its crown of glossy, curling
      black hair, and his eyes lit with unwonted gleams of laughter
       and sympathy, turned towards Rose, who was either chatting wildly to him, mimicking
      the airs of some professional, or taking off the ways of some famous teacher; or else, which
      was worse, playing with all her soul, flooding the house with sound—now as soft and delicate
      as first love, now as full and grand as storm waves on an angry coast. And the sister going
      with compressed lip to her work-table would recognise sorely that never had the girl looked so
      handsome, and never had the lightnings of a wayward genius played so finely about her.
As to Langham, it may well be believed that after the scene in the garden he had rated,
      satirised, examined himself in the most approved introspective style. One half of him declared
      that scene to have been the heights of melodramatic absurdity; the other thought of it with a
      thrill of tender gratitude towards the young pitiful creature who had evoked it. After all,
      why, because he was alone in the world and must remain so, should he feel bound to refuse this
      one gift of the gods, the delicate passing gift of a girl's—a child's friendship? As for her,
      the man's very real, though wholly morbid, modesty scouted the notion of love on her side.
       He was a likely person for a beauty on the threshold of life and success to fall in
      love with; but she meant to be kind to him, and he smiled a little inward indulgent smile over
      her very evident compassion, her very evident intention of reforming him, reconciling him to
      life. And, finally, he was incapable of any further resistance. He had gone too far with her.
      Let her do what she would with him, dear child, with the sharp tongue and the soft heart, and
      the touch of genius and brilliancy which made her future so interesting! He called his age and
      his disillusions to the rescue; he posed to himself as stooping to her in some sort of
      elder-brotherly fashion; and if every now and then some disturbing memory of that strange
      scene between them would come to make his present rôle less plausible, or some whim of hers
      made it difficult to play, why then at bottom there was always the consciousness that sixty
      hours, or thereabouts, would see him safely settled in that morning train to London.
      Throughout it is probable that that morning train occupied the saving background of his
      thoughts.
The two days passed by, and the squire's dinner-party arrived. About seven on the Thursday
      evening a party of four might have been seen hurrying across the park—Langham and Catherine in
      front, Elsmere and Rose behind. Catherine had arranged it so, and Langham, who understood
      perfectly that his friendship with her young sister was not at all to Mrs. Elsmere's taste,
      and who had by now taken as much of a dislike to her as his nature was capable of, was
      certainly doing nothing to make his walk with her otherwise than difficult. And every now and
      then some languid epigram would bring Catherine's eyes on him with a fiery gleam in their gray
      depths. Oh, fourteen more hours and she would have shut the rectory gate on
       this most unwelcome of intruders! She had never felt so vindictively anxious to see
      the last of any one in her life. There was in her a vehemence of antagonism to the man's
      manner, his pessimism, his infidelity, his very ways of speaking and looking, which astonished
      even herself.
Robert's eager soul meanwhile, for once irresponsive to Catherine's, was full of nothing but
      the squire. At last the moment was come, and that dumb spiritual friendship he had formed
      through these long months with the philosopher and the savant was to be tested by sight and
      speech of the man. He bade himself a hundred times pitch his expectations low. But curiosity
      and hope were keen, in spite of everything.
Ah, those parish worries! Robert caught the smoke of Mile End in the distance, curling above
      the twilight woods, and laid about him vigorously with his stick on the squire's shrubs, as he
      thought of those poisonous hovels, those ruined lives! But, after all, it might be mere
      ignorance, and that wretch Henslowe might have been merely trading on his master's morbid love
      of solitude.
And then—all men have their natural conceits. Robert Elsmere would not have been the very
      human creature he was if, half-consciously, he had not counted a good deal on his own powers
      of influence. Life had been to him so far one long social success of the best kind. Very
      likely as he walked on to the great house over whose threshold lay the answer to the enigma of
      months, his mind gradually filled with some naïve young dream of winning the squire, playing
      him with all sorts of honest arts, beguiling him back to life—to his kind.
Those friendly messages of his through Mrs. Darcy had been very pleasant.
'I wonder whether my Oxford friends have been doing me a good turn with the squire,' he said
      to Rose, laughing. 'He knows the provost, of course. If they talked me over it is to be hoped
      my scholarship didn't come up. Precious little the provost used to think of my abilities for
      Greek prose!'
Rose yawned a little behind her gloved hand. Robert had already talked a good deal about the
      squire, and he was certainly the only person in the group who was thinking of him. Even
      Catherine, absorbed in other anxieties, had forgotten to feel any thrill at their approaching
      introduction to the man who must of necessity mean so much to herself and Robert.
'Mr. and Mrs. Robert Elsmere,' said the butler, throwing open the carved and gilded
      doors.
Catherine—following her husband, her fine grave head and beautiful neck held a little more
      erect than usual—was at first conscious of nothing but the dazzle of western light which
      flooded the room, striking the stands of Japanese lilies, and the white figure of a clown in
      the famous Watteau opposite the window.


Then she found herself greeted by Mrs. Darcy, whose odd habit of holding her lace
      handkerchief in her right hand on festive occasions only left her two fingers for her guests.
      The mistress of the Hall—as diminutive and elf-like as ever in spite of the added dignity of
      her sweeping silk and the draperies of black lace with which her tiny head was adorned—kept
      tight hold of Catherine, and called a gentleman standing in a group just behind her.
'Roger, here are Mr. and Mrs. Robert Elsmere. Mr. Elsmere, the squire remembers you in
      petticoats, and I'm not sure that I don't too.'
Robert, smiling, looked beyond her to the advancing figure of the squire, but if Mr.
      Wendover heard his sister's remark he took no notice of it. He held out his hand stiffly to
      Robert, bowed to Catherine and Rose before extending to them the same formal greeting, and
      just recognised Langham as having met him at Oxford.
Having done so he turned back to the knot of people with whom he had been engaged on their
      entrance. His manner had been reserve itself. The hauteur of the grandee on his own
      ground was clearly marked in it, and Robert could not help fancying that towards himself there
      had even been something more. And not one of those phrases which, under the circumstances,
      would have been so easy and so gracious, as to Robert's childish connection with the place, or
      as to the squire's remembrance of his father, even though Mrs. Darcy had given him a special
      opening of the kind.
The young rector instinctively drew himself together, like one who has received a blow, as
      he moved across to the other side of the fireplace to shake hands with the worthy family
      doctor, old Meyrick, who was already well known to him. Catherine, in some discomfort, for she
      too had felt their reception at the squire's hands to be a chilling one, sat down to talk to
      Mrs. Darcy, disagreeably conscious the while that Rose and Langham left to themselves were
      practically tête-à-tête, and that, moreover, a large stand of flowers formed a
      partial screen between her and them. She could see, however, the gleam of Rose's upstretched
      neck, as Langham, who was leaning on the piano beside her, bent down to talk to her; and when
      she looked next she caught a smiling motion of Langham's head and eyes towards the Romney
      portrait of Mr. Wendover's grandmother, and was certain when he stooped afterwards to say
      something to his companion, that he was commenting on a certain surface likeness there was
      between her and the young auburn-haired beauty of the picture. Hateful! And they would be sent
      down to dinner together to a certainty.
The other guests were Lady Charlotte Wynnstay, a cousin of the squire—a tall, imperious,
      loud-voiced woman, famous in London society for her relationships, her audacity, and the
       salon which in one way or another she managed to collect round her;
       her dark, thin, irritable-looking husband; two neighbouring clerics—the first, by
      name Longstaffe, a somewhat inferior specimen of the cloth, whom Robert cordially disliked;
      and the other, Mr. Bickerton, a gentle Evangelical, one of those men who help to ease the
      harshness of a cross-grained world, and to reconcile the cleverer or more impatient folk in it
      to the worries of living.
Lady Charlotte was already known by name to the Elsmeres as the aunt of one of their chief
      friends of the neighbourhood—the wife of a neighbouring squire whose property joined that of
      Murewell Hall, one Lady Helen Varley, of whom more presently. Lady Charlotte was the sister of
      the Duke of Sedbergh, one of the greatest of dukes, and the sister also of Lady Helen's
      mother, Lady Wanless. Lady Wanless had died prematurely, and her two younger children, Helen
      and Hugh Flaxman, creatures both of them of unusually fine and fiery quality, had owed a good
      deal to their aunt. There were family alliances between the Sedberghs and the Wendovers, and
      Lady Charlotte made a point of keeping up with the squire. She adored cynics and people who
      said piquant things, and it amused her to make her large tyrannous hand felt by the squire's
      timid, crack-brained, ridiculous little sister.
As to Dr. Meyrick, he was tall and gaunt as Don Quixote. His gray hair made a ragged fringe
      round his straight-backed head; he wore an old-fashioned neck-cloth; his long body had a
      perpetual stoop, as though of deference, and his spectacled look of mild attentiveness had
      nothing in common with that medical self-assurance with which we are all nowadays so familiar.
      Robert noticed presently that when he addressed Mrs. Darcy he said 'Ma'am,' making no bones at
      all about it; and his manner generally was the manner of one to whom class distinctions were
      the profoundest reality, and no burden at all on a naturally humble temper. Dr. Baker, of
      Whindale, accustomed to trouncing Mrs. Seaton, would have thought him a poor creature.
When dinner was announced, Robert found himself assigned to Mrs. Darcy; the squire took Lady
      Charlotte. Catherine fell to Mr. Bickerton, Rose to Mr. Wynnstay, and the rest found their way
      in as best they could. Catherine seeing the distribution was happy for a moment, till she
      found that if Rose was covered on her right she was exposed to the full fire of the enemy on
      her left, in other words that Langham was placed between her and Dr. Meyrick.
'Are your spirits damped at all by this magnificence?' Langham said to his neighbour as they
      sat down. The table was entirely covered with Japanese lilies, save for the splendid silver
      candelabra from which the light flashed, first on to the faces of the guests, and then on to
      those of the family portraits, hung thickly round the room. A roof embossed with gilded Tudor
      roses on a ground of black oak hung above them; a rose-
      water dish in which the Merry Monarch had once dipped his hands, and which bore a
      record of the fact in the inscription on its sides, stood before them; and the servants were
      distributing to each guest silver soup-plates which had been the gift of Sarah, Duchess of
      Marlborough, in some moment of generosity or calculation, to the Wendover of her day.
'Oh dear, no!' said Rose carelessly. 'I don't know how it is, I think I must have been born
      for a palace.'
Langham looked at her, at the daring harmony of colour made by the reddish gold of her hair,
      the warm whiteness of her skin, and the brown-pink tints of her dress, at the crystals playing
      the part of diamonds on her beautiful neck, and remembered Robert's remarks to him. The same
      irony mingled with the same bitterness returned to him, and the elder brother's attitude
      became once more temporarily difficult. 'Who is your neighbour?' he inquired of her
      presently.
'Lady Charlotte's husband,' she answered mischievously, under her breath. 'One needn't know
      much more about him I imagine!'
'And that man opposite?'
'Robert's pet aversion,' she said calmly, without a change of countenance, so that Mr.
      Longstaffe opposite, who was studying her as he always studied pretty young women, stared at
      her through her remark in sublime ignorance of its bearing.
'And your sister's neighbour?'
'I can't hit him off in a sentence, he's too good!' said Rose laughing; 'all I can say is
      that Mrs. Bickerton has too many children, and the children have too many ailments for her
      ever to dine out.'
'That will do; I see the existence,' said Langham with a shrug. 'But he has the look of an
      apostle, though a rather hunted one. Probably nobody here, except Robert, is fit to tie his
      shoes.'
'The squire could hardly be called empressé,' said Rose, after a second, with a
      curl of her red lips. Mr. Wynnstay was still safely engaged with Mrs. Darcy, and there was a
      buzz of talk largely sustained by Lady Charlotte.
'No,' Langham admitted; 'the manners I thought were not quite equal to the house.'
'What possible reason could he have for treating Robert with those airs?' said Rose
      indignantly, ready enough in girl fashion to defend her belongings against the outer world.
      'He ought to be only too glad to have the opportunity of knowing him and making friends with
      him.'
'You are a sister worth having;' and Langham smiled at her as she leant back in her chair,
      her white arms and wrists lying on her lap, and her slightly flushed face turned towards him.
      They had been on these pleasant terms of camaraderie all day, and the intimacy
      between them had been still making strides.
'Do you imagine I don't appreciate Robert because I make
       bad jokes about the choir and the clothing club?' she asked him, with a little
      quick repentance passing like a shadow through her eyes. 'I always feel I play an odious part
      here. I can't like it—I can't—their life. I should hate it! And yet——'
She sighed remorsefully, and Langham, who five minutes before could have wished her to be
      always smiling, could now have almost asked to fix her as she was: the eyes veiled, the soft
      lips relaxed in this passing instant of gravity.
'Ah! I forgot—' and she looked up again with light bewitching appeal—'there is still that
      question, my poor little question of Sunday night, when I was in that fine moral frame of mind
      and you were near giving me, I believe, the only good advice you ever gave in your life,—how
      shamefully you have treated it!'
One brilliant look, which Catherine for her torment caught from the other side of the table,
      and then in an instant the quick face changed and stiffened. Mr. Wynnstay was speaking to her,
      and Langham was left to the intermittent mercies of Dr. Meyrick, who though glad to talk, was
      also quite content, apparently, to judge from the radiant placidity of his look, to examine
      his wine, study his menu, and enjoy his entrées in silence, undisturbed by
      the uncertain pleasures of conversation.
Robert, meanwhile, during the first few minutes, in which Mr. Wynnstay had been engaged in
      some family talk with Mrs. Darcy, had been allowing himself a little deliberate study of Mr.
      Wendover across what seemed the safe distance of a long table. The squire was talking shortly
      and abruptly, yet with occasional flashes of shrill ungainly laughter, to Lady Charlotte, who
      seemed to have no sort of fear of him and to find him good company, and every now and then
      Robert saw him turn to Catherine on the other side of him, and with an obvious change of
      manner address some formal and constrained remark to her.
Mr. Wendover was a man of middle height and loose bony frame, of which, as Robert had
      noticed in the drawing-room, all the lower half had a thin and shrunken look. But the
      shoulders, which had the scholar's stoop, and the head were massive and squarely outlined. The
      head was specially remarkable for its great breadth and comparative flatness above the eyes,
      and for the way in which the head itself dwarfed the face, which, as contrasted with the large
      angularity of the skull, had a pinched and drawn look. The hair was reddish-gray, the eyes
      small, but deep-set under fine brows, and the thin-lipped wrinkled mouth and long chin had a
      look of hard sarcastic strength.
Generally the countenance was that of an old man, the furrows were deep, the skin brown and
      shrivelled. But the alertness and force of the man's whole expression showed that,
       if the body was beginning to fail, the mind was as fresh and masterful as ever. His
      hair, worn rather longer than usual, his loosely-fitting dress and slouching carriage gave him
      an un-English look. In general he impressed Robert as a sort of curious combination of the
      foreign savant with the English grandee, for while his manner showed a considerable
      consciousness of birth and social importance, the gulf between him and the ordinary English
      country gentleman could hardly have been greater, whether in points of appearance or, as
      Robert very well knew, in points of social conduct. And as Robert watched him, his thoughts
      flew back again to the library, to this man's past, to all that those eyes had seen and those
      hands had touched. He felt already a mysterious, almost a yearning, sense of acquaintance with
      the being who had just received him with such chilling, such unexpected, indifference.
The squire's manners, no doubt, were notorious, but even so, his reception of the new rector
      of the parish, the son of a man intimately connected for years with the place, and with his
      father, and to whom he had himself shown what was for him considerable civility by letter and
      message, was sufficiently startling.
Robert, however, had no time to speculate on the causes of it, for Mrs. Darcy, released from
      Mr. Wynnstay, threw herself with glee on to her longed-for prey, the young and
      interesting-looking rector. First of all she cross-examined him as to his literary
      employments, and when by dint of much questioning she had forced particulars from him,
      Robert's mouth twitched as he watched her scuttling away from the subject, seized evidently
      with internal terrors lest she should have precipitated herself beyond hope of rescue into the
      jaws of the sixth century. Then with a view to regaining the lead and opening another and more
      promising vein, she asked him his opinion of Lady Selden's last novel, Love in a
       Marsh; and when he confessed ignorance she paused a moment, fork in hand, her small
      wrinkled face looking almost as bewildered as when, three minutes before, her rashness had
      well-nigh brought her face to face with Gregory of Tours as a topic of conversation.
But she was not daunted long. With little airs and bridlings infinitely diverting, she
      exchanged inquiry for the most beguiling confidence. She could appreciate 'clever men,' she
      said, for she—she too—was literary. Did Mr. Elsmere know—this in a hurried whisper, with
      sidelong glances to see that Mr. Wynnstay was safely occupied with Rose, and the squire with
      Lady Charlotte—that she had once written a novel?
Robert, who had been posted up in many things concerning the neighbourhood by Lady Helen
      Varley, could answer most truly that he had. Whereupon Mrs. Darcy beamed all over.
'Ah! but you haven't read it,' she said regretfully. 'It was when I was Maid of Honour, you
      know. No Maid of Honour had ever written a novel before. It was quite an event. Dear
       Prince Albert borrowed a copy of me one night to read in bed—I have it still, with
      the page turned down where he left off.' She hesitated. 'It was only in the second chapter,'
      she said at last with a fine truthfulness, 'but you know he was so busy, all the Queen's work
      to do, of course, besides his own—poor man!'
Robert implored her to lend him the work, and Mrs. Darcy, with blushes which made her more
      weird than ever, consented.
Then there was a pause, filled by an acid altercation between Lady Charlotte and her
      husband, who had not found Rose as grateful for his attentions as, in his opinion, a pink and
      white nobody at a country dinner-party ought to be, and was glad of the diversion afforded him
      by some aggressive remark of his wife. He and she differed on three main points—politics; the
      decoration of their London house, Mr. Wynnstay being a lover of Louis Quinze, and Lady
      Charlotte a preacher of Morris; and the composition of their dinner-parties. Lady Charlotte,
      in the pursuit of amusement and notoriety, was fond of flooding the domestic hearth with all
      the people possessed of any sort of a name for any sort of a reason in London. Mr. Wynnstay
      loathed such promiscuity; and the company in which his wife compelled him to drink his wine
      had seriously soured a small irritable Conservative with more family pride than either nerves
      or digestion.
During the whole passage of arms, Mrs. Darcy watched Elsmere, cat-and-mouse fashion, with a
      further confidence burning within her, and as soon as there was once more a general burst of
      talk, she pounced upon him afresh. Would he like to know that after thirty years she had just
      finished her second novel, unbeknown to her brother—as she mentioned him the little
      face darkened, took a strange bitterness—and it was just about to be entrusted to the post and
      a publisher?
Robert was all interest, of course, and inquired the subject. Mrs. Darcy expanded still
      more—could, in fact, have hugged him. But, just as she was launching into the plot a thought,
      apparently a scruple of conscience, struck her.
'Do you remember,' she began, looking at him a little darkly, askance, 'what I said about my
      hobbies the other day? Now, Mr. Elsmere, will you tell me—don't mind me—don't be polite—have
      you ever heard people tell stories of me? Have you ever, for instance, heard them call me
      a—a—tuft-hunter?'
'Never!' said Robert heartily.
'They might,' she said, sighing. 'I am a tuft-hunter. I can't help it. And yet we
       are a good family, you know. I suppose it was that year at Court, and that horrid
      Warham afterwards. Twenty years in a cathedral town—and a very little cathedral town,
      after Windsor, and Buckingham Palace, and dear Lord Melbourne! Every year I came up to town to
      stay with my father for a month in the season, and if it hadn't been for that
       I should have died—my husband knew I should. It was the world, the flesh, and the
      devil, of course, but it couldn't be helped. But now,' and she looked plaintively at her
      companion, as though challenging him to a candid reply: 'You would be more
      interesting, wouldn't you, to tell the truth, if you had a handle to your name?'
'Immeasurably,' cried Robert, stifling his laughter with immense difficulty, as he saw she
      had no inclination to laugh.
'Well, yes, you know. But it isn't right;' and again she sighed. 'And so I have been writing
      this novel just for that. It is called—what do you think?—"Mr. Jones." Mr. Jones is my
      hero—it's so good for me, you know, to think about a Mr. Jones.'
She looked beamingly at him. 'It must be indeed! Have you endowed him with every
      virtue?'
'Oh yes, and in the end, you know—' and she bent forward eagerly—'it all comes right. His
      father didn't die in Brazil without children after all, and the title——'
'What!' cried Robert, 'so he wasn't Mr. Jones?'
Mrs. Darcy looked a little conscious.
'Well, no,' she said guiltily, 'not just at the end. But it really doesn't
      matter—not to the story.'
Robert shook his head, with a look of protest as admonitory as he could make it, which
      evoked in her an answering expression of anxiety. But just at that moment a loud wave of
      conversation and of laughter seemed to sweep down upon them from the other end of the table,
      and their little private eddy was effaced. The squire had been telling an anecdote, and his
      clerical neighbours had been laughing at it.
'Ah!' cried Mr. Longstaffe, throwing himself back in his chair with a chuckle, 'that was an
      Archbishop worth having!'
'A curious story,' said Mr. Bickerton, benevolently, the point of it, however, to tell the
      truth, not being altogether clear to him. It seemed to Robert that the squire's keen eye, as
      he sat looking down the table, with his large nervous hands clasped before him, was specially
      fixed upon himself.
'May we hear the story?' he said, bending forward. Catherine, faintly smiling in her corner
      beside the host, was looking a little flushed and moved out of her ordinary quiet.
'It is a story of Archbishop Manners Sutton,' said Mr. Wendover, in his dry nasal voice.
      'You probably know it, Mr. Elsmere. After Bishop Heber's consecration to the See of Calcutta,
      it fell to the Archbishop to make a valedictory speech, in the course of the luncheon at
      Lambeth which followed the ceremony. "I have very little advice to give you as to your future
      career," he said to the young bishop, "but all that experience has given me I hand on to you.
      Place before your eyes two precepts, and two only. One is, Preach the Gospel; and the other
       is—Put down enthusiasm!"'
There was a sudden gleam of steely animation in the squire's
       look as he told his story, his eye all the while fixed on Robert. Robert divined in
      a moment that the story had been re-told for his special benefit, and that in some unexplained
      way the relations between him and the squire were already biassed. He smiled a little with
      faint politeness, and falling back into his place made no comment on the squire's anecdote.
      Lady Charlotte's eyeglass, having adjusted itself for a moment to the distant figure of the
      rector, with regard to whom she had been asking Dr. Meyrick for particulars, quite unmindful
      of Catherine's neighbourhood, turned back again towards the squire.
'An unblushing old worldling, I should call your Archbishop,' she said briskly. 'And a very
      good thing for him that he lived when he did. Our modern good people would have dusted his
      apron for him.'
Lady Charlotte prided herself on these vigorous forms of speech, and the squire's
      neighbourhood generally called out an unusual crop of them. The squire was still sitting with
      his hands on the table, his great brows bent, surveying his guests.
'Oh, of course all the sensible men are dead!' he said indifferently. 'But that is a pet
      saying of mine—the Church of England in a nutshell.'
Robert flushed, and after a moment's hesitation bent forward.
'What do you suppose,' he asked quietly, 'your Archbishop meant, Mr. Wendover, by
      enthusiasm? Nonconformity, I imagine.'
'Oh, very possibly!' and again Robert found the hawk-like glance concentrated on himself.
      'But I like to give his remark a much wider extension. One may make it a maxim of general
      experience, and take it as fitting all the fools with a mission who have teased our
      generation—all your Kingsleys, and Maurices, and Ruskins—every one bent upon making any sort
      of aimless commotion, which may serve him both as an investment for the next world, and an
      advertisement for this.'
'Upon my word, squire,' said Lady Charlotte, 'I hope you don't expect Mr. Elsmere to agree
      with you?'
Mr. Wendover made her a little bow.
'I have very little sanguineness of any sort in my composition,' he said drily.
'I should like to know,' said Robert, taking no notice of this by-play; 'I should like to
      know, Mr. Wendover, leaving the Archbishop out of count, what you understand by this
      word enthusiasm in this maxim of yours?'
'An excellent manner,' thought Lady Charlotte, who, for all her noisiness, was an extremely
      shrewd woman, 'an excellent manner and an unprovoked attack.'
Catherine's trained eye, however, had detected signs in Robert's look and bearing which were
      lost on Lady Charlotte, and which made her look nervously on. As to the rest of the table,
      they had all fallen to watching the 'break' between the new rector and their host with a good
      deal of curiosity.


The squire paused a moment before replying,—
'It is not easy to put it tersely,' he said at last; 'but I may define it, perhaps, as the
      mania for mending the roof of your right-hand neighbour with straw torn off the roof of your
      left-hand neighbour; the custom, in short, of robbing Peter to propitiate Paul.'
'Precisely,' said Mr. Wynnstay warmly; 'all the ridiculous Radical nostrums of the last
      fifty years—you have hit them off exactly. Sometimes you rob more and propitiate less;
      sometimes you rob less and propitiate more. But the principle is always the same.' And mindful
      of all those intolerable evenings, when these same Radical nostrums had been forced down his
      throat at his own table, he threw a pugnacious look at his wife, who smiled back serenely in
      reply. There is small redress indeed for these things, when out of the common household stock
      the wife possesses most of the money, and a vast proportion of the brains.
'And the cynic takes pleasure in observing,' interrupted the squire, 'that the man who
      effects the change of balance does it in the loftiest manner, and profits in the vulgarest
      way. Other trades may fail. The agitator is always sure of his market.'
He spoke with a harsh contemptuous insistence which was gradually setting every nerve in
      Robert's body tingling. He bent forward again, his long thin frame and boyish
      bright-complexioned face making an effective contrast to the squire's bronzed and wrinkled
      squareness.
'Oh, if you and Mr. Wynnstay are prepared to draw an indictment against your generation and
      all its works, I have no more to say,' he said, smiling still, though his voice had risen a
      little in spite of himself. 'I should be content to withdraw with my Burke into the majority.
      I imagined your attack on enthusiasm had a narrower scope, but if it is to be made synonymous
      with social progress I give up. The subject is too big. Only——'
He hesitated. Mr. Wynnstay was studying him with somewhat insolent coolness; Lady
      Charlotte's eyeglass never wavered from his face, and he felt through every fibre the tender
      timid admonitions of his wife's eyes.
'However,' he went on after an instant, 'I imagine that we should find it difficult anyhow
      to discover common ground. I regard your Archbishop's maxim, Mr. Wendover,' and his tone
      quickened and grew louder, 'as first of all a contradiction in terms; and in the next place,
      to me, almost all enthusiasms are respectable!'
'You are one of those people, I see,' returned Mr. Wendover, after a pause, with the same
      nasal emphasis and the same hauteur, 'who imagine we owe civilisation to the heart;
      that mankind has felt its way—literally. The school of the majority, of course—I
      admit it amply. I, on the other hand, am with the benighted minority who believe that the
      world, so far as it has
       lived to any purpose, has lived by the head,' and he flung the noun at
      Robert scornfully. 'But I am quite aware that in a world of claptrap the philosopher gets all
      the kicks, and the philanthropists, to give them their own label, all the halfpence.'
The impassive tone had gradually warmed to a heat which was unmistakable. Lady Charlotte
      looked on with increasing relish. To her all society was a comedy played for her
      entertainment, and she detected something more dramatic than usual in the juxtaposition of
      these two men. That young rector might be worth looking after. The dinners in Martin Street
      were alarmingly in want of fresh blood. As for poor Mr. Bickerton, he had begun to talk
      hastily to Catherine, with a sense of something tumbling about his ears; while Mr. Longstaffe,
      eyeglass in hand, surveyed the table with a distinct sense of pleasurable entertainment. He
      had not seen much of Elsmere yet, but it was as clear as daylight that the man was a
      firebrand, and should be kept in order.
Meanwhile there was a pause between the two main disputants; the storm-clouds were deepening
      outside, and rain had begun to patter on the windows. Mrs. Darcy was just calling attention to
      the weather when the squire unexpectedly returned to the charge.
'The one necessary thing in life,' he said, turning to Lady Charlotte, a slight irritating
      smile playing round his strong mouth, 'is—not to be duped. Put too much faith in these fine
      things the altruists talk of, and you arrive one day at the condition of Louis XIV. after the
      battle of Ramillies: "Dieu a donc oublié tout ce que j'ai fait pour lui?" Read your Renan;
      remind yourself at every turn that it is quite possible after all the egotist may
      turn out to be in the right of it, and you will find at any rate that the world gets on
      excellently well without your blundering efforts to set it straight. And so we get back to the
      Archbishop's maxim—adapted, no doubt, to English requirements,' and he shrugged his great
      shoulders expressively: 'Pace Mr. Elsmere, of course, and the rest of our clerical
      friends!'
Again he looked down the table, and the strident voice sounded harsher than ever as it rose
      above the sudden noise of the storm outside. Robert's bright eyes were fixed on the squire,
      and before Mr. Wendover stopped Catherine could see the words of reply trembling on his
      lips.
'I am well content,' he said, with a curious dry intensity of tone. 'I give you your Renan.
      Only leave us poor dupes our illusions. We will not quarrel with the division. With you all
      the cynics of history; with us all the "scorners of the ground" from the world's beginning
      until now!'
The squire make a quick impatient movement. Mr. Wynnstay looked significantly at his wife,
      who dropped her eyeglass with a little irrepressible smile.
As for Robert, leaning forward with hastened breath, it
       seemed to him that his eyes and the squire's crossed like swords. In Robert's mind
      there had arisen a sudden passion of antagonism. Before his eyes there was a vision of a child
      in a stifling room, struggling with mortal disease, imposed upon her, as he hotly reminded
      himself, by this man's culpable neglect. The dinner-party, the splendour of the room, the
      conversation, excited a kind of disgust in him. If it were not for Catherine's pale face
      opposite, he could hardly have maintained his self-control.
Mrs. Darcy, a little bewildered, and feeling that things were not going particularly well,
      thought it best to interfere.
'Roger,' she said plaintively, 'you must not be so philosophical. It's too hot! He used to
      talk like that,' she went on, bending over to Mr. Wynnstay, 'to the French priests who came to
      see us last winter in Paris. They never minded a bit—they used to laugh. "Monsieur votre
      frère, madame, c'est un homme qui a trop lu," they would say to me when I gave them their
      coffee. Oh, they were such dears, those old priests! Roger said they had great hopes of
      me.'
The chatter was welcome, the conversation broke up. The squire turned to Lady Charlotte, and
      Rose to Langham.
'Why didn't you support Robert?' she said to him, impulsively, with a dissatisfied face. 'He
      was alone, against the table!'
'What good should I have done him?' he asked, with a shrug. 'And pray, my lady confessor,
      what enthusiasms do you suspect me of?'
He looked at her intently. It seemed to her they were by the gate again—the touch of his
      lips on her hand. She turned from him hastily to stoop for her fan which had slipped away. It
      was only Catherine who, for her annoyance, saw the scarlet flush leap into the fair face. An
      instant later Mrs. Darcy had given the signal.
