
CHAPTER XXVIII
In half an hour from the time Mr. Grey's door closed upon him, Elsmere had caught a
      convenient cross-country train, and had left the Oxford towers and spires, the shrunken summer
      Isis, and the flat hot river meadows far behind him. He had meant to stay at Merton, as we
      know, for the night. Now, his one thought was to get back to Catherine. The urgency of Mr.
      Grey's words was upon him, and love had a miserable pang that it should have needed to be
      urged.
By eight o'clock he was again at Churton. There were no carriages waiting at the little
      station, but the thought of the walk across the darkening common through the August moonrise
      had been a refreshment to him in the heat and crowd of the train. He hurried through the small
      town, where the streets were full of summer idlers, and the lamps were twinkling in the still
      balmy air, along a dusty stretch of road, leaving man and his dwellings farther and farther to
      the rear of him, till at last he emerged on a boundless tract of common, and struck to the
      right into a cart-track leading to Murewell.
He was on the top of a high sandy ridge, looking west and north, over a wide evening world
      of heather and wood and hill. To the right, far ahead, across the misty lower grounds into
      which he was soon to plunge, rose the woods of Murewell,
       black and massive in the twilight distance. To the left, but on a nearer plane, the
      undulating common stretching downwards from where he stood rose suddenly towards a height
      crowned with a group of gaunt and jagged firs—landmarks for all the plain—of which every
      ghostly bough and crest was now sharply outlined against a luminous sky. For the wide heaven
      in front of him was still delicately glowing in all its under parts with soft harmonies of
      dusky red or blue, while in its higher zone the same tract of sky was closely covered with the
      finest network of pearl-white cloud, suffused at the moment with a silver radiance so intense
      that a spectator might almost have dreamed the moon had forgotten its familiar place of
      rising, and was about to mount into a startled expectant west. Not a light in all the wide
      expanse, and for a while not a sound of human life, save the beat of Robert's step, or the
      occasional tap of his stick against the pebbles of the road.
Presently he reached the edge of the ridge whence the rough track he was following sank
      sharply to the lower levels. Here was a marvellous point of view, and the rector stood a
      moment, beside a bare weather-blasted fir, a ghostly shadow thrown behind him. All around the
      gorse and heather seemed still radiating light, as though the air had been so drenched in
      sunshine that even long after the sun had vanished the invading darkness found itself still
      unable to win firm possession of earth and sky. Every little stone in the sandy road was still
      weirdly visible; the colour of the heather, now in lavish bloom, could be felt though hardly
      seen.
Before him melted line after line of woodland, broken by hollow after hollow, filled with
      vaporous wreaths of mist. About him were the sounds of a wild nature. The air was resonant
      with the purring of the night-jars, and every now and then he caught the loud clap of their
      wings as they swayed unsteadily through the furze and bracken. Overhead a trio of wild ducks
      flew across, from pond to pond, their hoarse cry descending through the darkness. The
      partridges on the hill called to each other, and certain sharp sounds betrayed to the solitary
      listener the presence of a flock of swans on a neighbouring pool.
The rector felt himself alone on a wide earth. It was almost with a start of pleasure that
      he caught at last the barking of dogs on a few distant farms, or the dim thunderous rush of a
      train through the wide wooded landscape beyond the heath. Behind that frowning mass of wood
      lay the rectory. The lights must be lit in the little drawing-room; Catherine must be sitting
      by the lamp, her fine head bent over book or work, grieving for him perhaps, her anxious
      expectant heart going out to him through the dark. He thinks of the village lying wrapped in
      the peace of the August night, the lamp rays from shop-front or casement streaming out on to
      the green; he thinks of his child, of his dead mother, feeling heavy and
       bitter within him all the time the message of separation and exile.
But his mood was no longer one of mere dread, of helpless pain, of miserable self-scorn.
      Contact with Henry Grey had brought him that rekindling of the flame of conscience, that
      medicinal stirring of the soul's waters, which is the most precious boon that man can give to
      man. In that sense which attaches to every successive resurrection of our best life from the
      shades of despair or selfishness, he had that day, almost that hour, been born again. He was
      no longer filled mainly with the sense of personal failure, with scorn for his own blundering
      impetuous temper, so lacking in prescience and in balance; or, in respect to his wife, with
      such an anguished impotent remorse. He was nerved and braced; whatever oscillations the mind
      might go through in its search for another equilibrium, to-night there was a moment of calm.
      The earth to him was once more full of God, existence full of value.
'The things I have always loved, I love still!' he had said to Mr. Grey. And in this healing
      darkness it was as if the old loves, the old familiar images of thought, returned to him
      new-clad, re-entering the desolate heart in a white-winged procession of consolation. On the
      heath beside him the Christ stood once more, and as the disciple felt the sacred presence he
      could bear for the first time to let the chafing pent-up current of love flow into the new
      channels, so painfully prepared for it by the toil of thought. 'Either God or an
       impostor.' What scorn the heart, the intellect, threw on the alternative! Not in the
      dress of speculations which represent the product of long past, long superseded looms of human
      thought, but in the guise of common manhood, laden like his fellows with the pathetic weight
      of human weakness and human ignorance, the Master moves towards him—
'Like you, my son, I struggled and I prayed. Like you, I had my days of doubt and nights
       of wrestling. I had my dreams, my delusions, with my fellows. I was weak; I suffered; I died.
       But God was in me, and the courage, the patience, the love He gave to me, the scenes of the
       poor human life He inspired, have become by His will the world's eternal lesson—man's primer
       of Divine things, hung high in the eyes of all, simple and wise, that all may see and all may
       learn. Take it to your heart again—that life, that pain, of mine! Use it to new ends;
       apprehend it in new ways; but knowledge shall not take it from you; and love, instead of
       weakening or forgetting, if it be but faithful, shall find ever fresh power of realising and
       renewing itself.'
So said the vision; and carrying the passion of it deep in his heart the rector went his
      way, down the long stony hill, past the solitary farm amid the trees at the foot of it, across
      the grassy common beyond, with its sentinel clumps of beeches, past an ethereal string of tiny
      lakes just touched by the moonrise, beside some of the first cottages of Murewell, up the
      hill,
       with pulse beating and step quickening, and round into the stretch of road leading
      to his own gate.
As soon as he had passed the screen made by the shrubs on the lawn, he saw it all as he had
      seen it in his waking dream on the common—the lamplight, the open windows, the white muslin
      curtains swaying a little in the soft evening air, and Catherine's figure seen dimly through
      them.
The noise of the gate, however—of the steps on the drive—had startled her. He saw her rise
      quickly from her low chair, put some work down beside her, and move in haste to the
      window.
'Robert!' she cried in amazement.
'Yes,' he answered, still some yards from her, his voice coming strangely to her out of the
      moonlit darkness. 'I did my errand early; I found I could get back; and here I am.'
She flew to the door, opened it, and felt herself caught in his arms.
'Robert, you are quite damp!' she said, fluttering and shrinking, for all her sweet habitual
      gravity of manner—was it the passion of that yearning embrace? 'Have you walked?'
'Yes. It is the dew on the common, I suppose. The grass was drenched.'
'Will you have some food? They can bring back the supper directly.'
'I don't want any food now,' he said, hanging up his hat. 'I got some lunch in town, and a
      cup of soup at Reading coming back. Perhaps you will give me some tea soon—not yet.'
He came up to her, pushing back the thick disordered locks of hair from his eyes with one
      hand, the other held out to her. As he came under the light of the hall lamp she was so
      startled by the gray pallor of the face that she caught hold of his outstretched hand with
      both hers. What she said he never knew—her look was enough. He put his arm round her, and as
      he opened the drawing-room door holding her pressed against him, she felt the desperate
      agitation in him penetrating, beating against an almost iron self-control of manner. He shut
      the door behind them.
'Robert, dear Robert!' she said, clinging to him, 'there is bad news,—tell me—there is
      something to tell me! Oh! what is it—what is it?'
It was almost like a child's wail. His brow contracted still more painfully.
'My darling,' he said; 'my darling—my dear dear wife!' and he bent his head down to her as
      she lay against his breast, kissing her hair with a passion of pity, of remorse, of
      tenderness, which seemed to rend his whole nature.
'Tell me—tell me—Robert!'


He guided her gently across the room, past the sofa over which her work lay scattered, past
      the flower-table, now a many-coloured mass of roses, which was her especial pride, past the
      remains of a brick castle which had delighted Mary's wondering eyes and mischievous fingers an
      hour or two before, to a low chair by the open window looking on the wide moonlit expanse of
      cornfield. He put her into it, walked to the window on the other side of the room, shut it,
      and drew down the blind. Then he went back to her, and sank down beside her, kneeling, her
      hands in his.
'My dear wife—you have loved me—you do love me?'
She could not answer, she could only press his hands with her cold fingers, with a look and
      gesture that implored him to speak.
'Catherine,' he said, still kneeling before her, 'you remember that night you came down to
      me in the study, the night I told you I was in trouble and you could not help me. Did you
      guess from what I said what the trouble was?'
'Yes,' she answered, trembling, 'yes, I did, Robert; I thought you were
      depressed—troubled—about religion.'
'And I know,' he said with an outburst of feeling, kissing her hands as they lay in his—'I
      know very well that you went upstairs and prayed for me, my white-souled angel! But Catherine,
      the trouble grew—it got blacker and blacker. You were there beside me, and you could not help
      me. I dared not tell you about it; I could only struggle on alone, so terribly alone,
      sometimes; and now I am beaten, beaten. And I come to you to ask you to help me in the only
      thing that remains to me. Help me, Catherine, to be an honest man—to follow conscience—to say
      and do the truth!'
'Robert,' she said piteously, deadly pale, 'I don't understand.'
'Oh, my poor darling!' he cried, with a kind of moan of pity and misery. Then still holding
      her, he said, with strong deliberate emphasis, looking into the gray-blue eyes—the quivering
      face so full of austerity and delicacy,—
'For six or seven months, Catherine—really for much longer, though I never knew it—I have
      been fighting with doubt—doubt of orthodox Christianity—doubt of what the Church
      teaches—of what I have to say and preach every Sunday. First it crept on me I knew not how.
      Then the weight grew heavier, and I began to struggle with it. I felt I must struggle with it.
      Many men, I suppose, in my position would have trampled on their doubts—would have regarded
      them as sin in themselves, would have felt it their duty to ignore them as much as possible,
      trusting to time and God's help. I could not ignore them. The thought of questioning
      the most sacred beliefs that you and I'—and his voice faltered a moment—'held in common was
      misery to me. On the other hand, I knew myself. I knew that I could no more go on living to
      any purpose, with a whole
       region of the mind shut up, as it were, barred away from the rest of me, than I
      could go on living with a secret between myself and you. I could not hold my faith by a mere
      tenure of tyranny and fear. Faith that is not free—that is not the faith of the whole
      creature, body, soul, and intellect—seemed to me a faith worthless both to God and man!'
Catherine looked at him stupefied. The world seemed to be turning round her. Infinitely more
      terrible than his actual words was the accent running through words and tone and gesture—the
      accent of irreparableness, as of something dismally done and finished. What
      did it all mean? For what had he brought her there? She sat stunned, realising with awful
      force the feebleness, the inadequacy, of her own fears.
He, meanwhile, had paused a moment, meeting her gaze with those yearning sunken eyes. Then
      he went on, his voice changing a little,—
'But if I had wished it ever so much, I could not have helped myself. The process, so to
      speak, had gone too far by the time I knew where I was. I think the change must have begun
      before the Mile End time. Looking back, I see the foundations were laid in—in—the work of last
      winter.'
She shivered. He stooped and kissed her hands again passionately. 'Am I poisoning even the
      memory of our past for you?' he cried. Then, restraining himself at once, he hurried on again:
      'After Mile End you remember I began to see much of the squire. Oh, my wife, don't look at me
      so! It was not his doing in any true sense. I am not such a weak shuttlecock as that! But
      being where I was before our intimacy began, his influence hastened everything. I don't wish
      to minimise it. I was not made to stand alone!'
And again that bitter, perplexed, half-scornful sense of his own pliancy at the hands of
      circumstance as compared with the rigidity of other men descended upon him. Catherine made a
      faint movement as though to draw her hands away.
'Was it well,' she said, in a voice which sounded like a harsh echo of her own, 'was it
      right for a clergyman to discuss sacred things—with such a man?'
He let her hands go, guided for the moment by a delicate imperious instinct which bade him
      appeal to something else than love. Rising, he sat down opposite to her on the low window
      seat, while she sank back into her chair, her fingers clinging to the arm of it, the lamplight
      far behind deepening all the shadows of the face, the hollows in the cheeks, the line of
      experience and will about the mouth. The stupor in which she had just listened to him was
      beginning to break up. Wild forces of condemnation and resistance were rising in her; and he
      knew it. He knew, too, that as yet she only half realised the situation, and that blow after
      blow still remained to him to deal.
'Was it right that I should discuss religious matters with
       the squire?' he repeated, his face resting on his hands. 'What are religious
      matters, Catherine, and what are not?'
Then, still controlling himself rigidly, his eyes fixed on the shadowy face of his wife, his
      ear catching her quick uneven breath, he went once more through the dismal history of the last
      few months, dwelling on his state of thought before the intimacy with Mr. Wendover began, on
      his first attempts to escape the squire's influence, on his gradual pitiful surrender. Then he
      told the story of the last memorable walk before the squire's journey, of the moment in the
      study afterwards, and of the months of feverish reading and wrestling which had followed.
      Half-way through it a new despair seized him. What was the good of all he was saying? He was
      speaking a language she did not really understand. What were all these critical and literary
      considerations to her?
The rigidity of her silence showed him that her sympathy was not with him, that in
      comparison with the vibrating protest of her own passionate faith which must be now ringing
      through her, whatever he could urge must seem to her the merest culpable trifling with the
      soul's awful destinies. In an instant of tumultuous speech he could not convey to her the
      temper and results of his own complex training, and on that training, as he very well knew,
      depended the piercing, convincing force of all that he was saying. There were gulfs between
      them—gulfs which, as it seemed to him, in a miserable insight, could never be bridged again.
      Oh, the frightful separateness of experience!
Still he struggled on. He brought the story down to the conversation at the Hall,
      described—in broken words of fire and pain—the moment of spiritual wreck which had come upon
      him in the August lane, his night of struggle, his resolve to go to Mr. Grey. And all through
      he was not so much narrating as pleading a cause, and that not his own, but Love's. Love was
      at the bar, and it was for love that the eloquent voice, the pale varying face, were really
      pleading, through all the long story of intellectual change.
At the mention of Mr. Grey Catherine grew restless; she sat up suddenly, with a cry of
      bitterness.
'Robert, why did you go away from me? It was cruel. I should have known first. He had no
      right—no right!'
She clasped her hands round her knees, her beautiful mouth set and stern. The moon had been
      sailing westward all this time, and as Catherine bent forward the yellow light caught her
      face, and brought out the haggard change in it. He held out his hands to her with a low groan,
      helpless against her reproach, her jealousy. He dared not speak of what Mr. Grey had done for
      him, of the tenderness of his counsel towards her specially. He felt that everything he could
      say would but torture the wounded heart still more.
But she did not notice the outstretched hands. She covered
       her face in silence a moment, as though trying to see her way more clearly through
      the mazes of disaster; and he waited. At last she looked up.
'I cannot follow all you have been saying,' she said, almost harshly. 'I know so little of
      books, I cannot give them the place you do. You say you have convinced yourself the Gospels
      are like other books, full of mistakes, and credulous, like the people of the time; and
      therefore you can't take what they say as you used to take it. But what does it all quite
      mean? Oh, I am not clever—I cannot see my way clear from thing to thing as you do. If there
      are mistakes, does it matter so—so—terribly to you?' and she faltered. 'Do you think
       nothing is true because something may be false? Did not—did not—Jesus still live,
      and die, and rise again?—can you doubt—do you doubt—that He rose—that He is
      God—that He is in heaven—that we shall see Him?'
She threw an intensity into every word, which made the short breathless questions thrill
      through him, through the nature saturated and steeped as hers was in Christian association,
      with a bitter accusing force. But he did not flinch from them.
'I can believe no longer in an Incarnation and Resurrection,' he said slowly, but with a
      resolute plainness. 'Christ is risen in our hearts, in the Christian life of charity. Miracle
      is a natural product of human feeling and imagination; and God was in Jesus—pre-eminently, as
      He is in all great souls, but not otherwise—not otherwise in kind than He is in me or
      you.'
His voice dropped to a whisper. She grew paler and paler.
'So to you,' she said presently in the same strange altered voice. 'My father—when I saw
      that light on his face before he died, when I heard him cry, "Master, I come!" was
      dying—deceived—deluded. Perhaps even,' and she trembled, 'you think it ends here—our life—our
      love?'
It was agony to him to see her driving herself through this piteous catechism. The lantern
      of memory flashed a moment on to the immortal picture of Faust and Margaret. Was it not only
      that winter they had read the scene together?
Forcibly he possessed himself once more of those closely locked hands, pressing their
      coldness on his own burning eyes and forehead in hopeless silence.
'Do you, Robert?' she repeated insistently.
'I know nothing,' he said, his eyes still hidden. 'I know nothing! But I trust God with all
      that is dearest to me, with our love, with the soul that is His breath, His work in us!'
The pressure of her despair seemed to be wringing his own faith out of him, forcing into
      definiteness things and thoughts that had been lying in an accepted, even a welcomed,
      obscurity.


She tried again to draw her hands away, but he would not let them go. 'And the end of it
      all, Robert?' she said—'the end of it?'
Never did he forget the note of that question, the desolation of it, the indefinable change
      of accent. It drove him into a harsh abruptness of reply.
'The end of it—so far—must be, if I remain an honest man, that I must give up my living,
      that I must cease to be a minister of the Church of England. What the course of our life after
      that shall be is in your hands—absolutely.'
She caught her breath painfully. His heart was breaking for her, and yet there was something
      in her manner now which kept down caresses and repressed all words.
Suddenly, however, as he sat there mutely watching her, he found her at his knees, her dear
      arms around him, her face against his breast.
'Robert, my husband, my darling, it cannot be! It is a madness—a delusion. God is
      trying you, and me! You cannot be planning so to desert Him, so to deny Christ—you cannot, my
      husband. Come away with me, away from books and work, into some quiet place where He can make
      Himself heard. You are overdone, overdriven. Do nothing now—say nothing—except to me. Be
      patient a little, and He will give you back Himself! What can books and arguments matter to
      you or me? Have we not known and felt Him as He is—have we not, Robert?
      Come!'
She pushed herself backwards, smiling at him with an exquisite tenderness. The tears were
      streaming down her cheeks. They were wet on his own. Another moment and Robert would have lost
      the only clue which remained to him through the mists of this bewildering world. He would have
      yielded again as he had many times yielded before, for infinitely less reason, to the urgent
      pressure of another's individuality, and having jeopardised love for truth, he would now have
      murdered—or tried to murder—in himself the sense of truth for love.
But he did neither.
Holding her close pressed against him, he said in breaks of intense speech: 'If you wish,
      Catherine, I will wait—I will wait till you bid me speak—but I warn you—there is something
      dead in me—something gone and broken. It can never live again—except in forms which now it
      would only pain you more to think of. It is not that I think differently of this point or that
      point—but of life and religion altogether. I see God's purposes in quite other proportions as
      it were. Christianity seems to me something small and local. Behind it, around it—including
      it—I see the great drama of the world, sweeping on—led by God—from change to change, from act
      to act. It is not that Christianity is false, but that it is only an imperfect human
      reflection of a part of truth. Truth has never been, can never be, contained in any one creed
      or system!'


She heard, but through her exhaustion, through the bitter sinking of hope, she only half
      understood. Only she realised that she and he were alike helpless—both struggling in the grip
      of some force outside themselves, inexorable, ineluctable.
Robert felt her arms relaxing, felt the dead weight of her form against him. He raised her
      to her feet, he half carried her to the door, and on to the stairs. She was nearly fainting,
      but her will held it at bay. He threw open the door of their room, led her in, lifted
      her—unresisting—on to the bed. Then her head fell to one side, and her lips grew ashen. In an
      instant or two he had done for her all that his medical knowledge could suggest with rapid
      decided hands. She was not quite unconscious; she drew up round her, as though with a strong
      vague sense of chill, the shawl he laid over her, and gradually the slightest shade of colour
      came back to her lips. But as soon as she opened her eyes and met those of Robert fixed upon
      her, the heavy lids dropped again.
'Would you rather be alone?' he said to her, kneeling beside her.
She made a faint affirmative movement of the head, and the cold hand he had been chafing
      tried feebly to withdraw itself. He rose at once, and stood a moment beside her, looking down
      at her. Then he went.
