
  CHAPTER IV.
It was impossible to pass an hour in the society of Sir Arthur Dunbar, without seeing much to
     admire, and much also to love,—there was a sturdy, resolute, old-fashioned sense of honor in
     all his actions, tempered by the kindest and most considerate attention to the feelings, as
     well as to the interest of all with whom he might be associated, and his sentiments were
     tinctured by a generous liberality, only limited in action by the rigid restraints consequent
     on a very narrow income, which he had never been known to exceed, though he was often heard
     jocularly to remark, that the surplus, after his yearly accounts were paid, would scarcely buy
     him a pair of gloves.
Though the fire of Sir Arthur's eyes had been quenched by approaching blindness, and his
     weather-beaten countenance had been scarred in battle, and hardened by facing every tempest
     which had blown for half a century, yet his aspect had an air of habitual distinction and
     conscious dignity which commanded instant respect. There was an energy in the expression of his
     feelings, and a straightforward pursuit of what he thought right in all his actions, which gave
     him a singular influence over the affections and the conduct of those with whom he wished to
     associate, and the admirable use he made of which no one afterwards ever had cause to regret.
     His early life had been one full of action and of vigorous exertion, seeking, with
     old-fashioned patriotism, the honor of his country, more than the promotion of his own
     interests; but in advanced years, when no longer able publicly to distinguish himself, he
     directed his time and talents to the diffusion of happiness at home, and to a zealous,
     diligent, and humble preparation for that long and quiet home to which he believed himself
     rapidly approaching, and which he contemplated with the best of all philosophy,—that of a truly
     devoted Christian.
With all the blunt frankness of his sailor-like manner, Sir Arthur could nevertheless testify
     an almost feminine gentleness and sympathy towards the unfortunate. He was often discovered to
     have exerted clandestinely a degree of activity and zeal in serving the needy and desolate,
     which to a mind less eager and generous, would have seemed almost incredible,—he never
     lacerated the feelings of those who came to him for comfort, by attempting to convince the
     sufferer, as most people begin by doing, on such occasions, that the misfortune, whatever it
     be, is all his own fault,—and he was quite as ready, as well as better pleased, to rejoice with
     those that rejoiced, than to weep with those that wept, without ever, at any period of life,
     having found a place for envy in his kindest of hearts, which

"Turn'd at the touch of joy or woe,
And turning trembled too."

With a good humored smile at his own credulity in having believed that Louis De Crespigny
     could ever be serious in proposing to sacrifice a day of his gay and busy life, to a prosing
     tete-a-tete on the sea-beach with an old man like himself, Sir Arthur dismissed the subject
     from his thoughts, and finally relinquished all hope of seeing his young friend, after a short
     soliloquy, in which he ended, by slyly hoping that the gay Cornet would never cause those who
     might feel it more, to regret his having jilted them.
Not many days following, the Admiral had retired at his usual early hour to bed, and after
     some time passed in profound repose, he was suddenly startled into wakefulness at the dawn of
     day, while the watchman was calling the hour of "Past four o'clock," by a loud and vehement
     knocking at the front-door of his house, accompanied by the most fearful and vociferous
     out-cries of "murder!" It was the sharp, shrill tone of a woman in the agony of fear, becoming
     more and more vehement at every repetition of the cry, while Sir Arthur dressed with the
     rapidity of a practised seaman, and hurried down stairs, where he found his maid-of-all-work,
     and his man-of-all-work, already assembled in breathless consternation round a trembling,
     terrified-looking servant girl, whose eyes were gleaming with an expression of frantic alarm,
     while, from her incoherent exclamations, Sir Arthur could only gather that some act of
     unutterable horror had been perpetrated in an opposite house, the windows of which were all
     partially closed, except one in the upper story, which was wide open, and seemed to be much
     broken and shattered.
Without waiting another moment to investigate the business, Sir Arthur strode across the
     street, hurried in at the open door, and guided by a momentary cry of childish distress, he
     mounted the staircase, with an activity beyond his years, three steps at a time, and
     precipitately entered the nearest room he could find. There he paused for a moment on finding
     himself in a splendidly-furnished bed-room, adorned with a degree of taste and elegance, far
     excelling what was customary in so obscure-looking a lodging, and the Admiral was about hastily
     to withdraw, when he became suddenly transfixed to the spot, and his eye seemed perfectly
     blasted by the spectacle which met his agitated and astonished gaze, while several moments
     elapsed before he had nerve to advance, and ascertain the reality of a scene, which filled him
     with horror.
On a magnificent couch, the rich coverlet of which was drenched in blood, that had sprinkled
     the floor, and spouted to the very roof of the room, lay the cold stiffened corpse of a young
     female, whose head seemed to have been nearly severed from her body, while a violent contusion
     appeared upon her forehead. The wrist of her right hand, with which she had probably attempted
     to defend herself, had also been deeply cut, and in her hand she grasped a quantity of dark
     hair, which seemed to have been torn from the head of her assassin in the struggle for life.
     Her teeth were clenched, and her eye-balls were starting from their sockets with a look of
     agonised fear, most appalling to behold, and her long fair hair which lay in disordered billows
     on her shoulders, were matted with gore.
A table near the bed had been overturned and broken,—a knife of very peculiar form, bent and
     distorted, lay conspicuously upon the pillow, as if placed there on purpose to attract notice,
     and the carpet, on which a pool of congealed blood had gathered, was likewise strewed with
     money, rings, bijouterie, trinkets, and plate.
Nestled in a little crib, close beside the murdered woman, but plunged in a slumber so
     profound, that it could not be natural, slept undisturbed and uninjured, a lovely boy of about
     eight years old. His head rested on his arm, and a clustering profusion of jetty black hair
     fell over his blooming countenance, in which there was a look of almost death-like repose.
     Awakened with the utmost difficulty by Sir Arthur, the child, who appeared to be of wondrous
     beauty, opened for a moment, a pair of bright blue, star-like eyes, and with a cry of terror,
     called for his mother, but a moment afterwards, overcome by irresistible drowsiness, his rosy
     cheek dropped upon the pillow, his heavy eyes were closed, and he relapsed into the same
     strange, mysterious insensibility as before.
It was a fearful sight, that young mother, with her look of ghastly agony turned towards the
     ruddy healthful countenance of her child in his peaceful slumbers, and it was evident that her
     last thought had been for him, as his clothes were still convulsively held in her left hand,
     while a vain attempt had obviously been made to tear them asunder,—many deep cuts being visible
     on the child's night-gown, though his person had been left uninjured.
Sir Arthur compassionately snatched the boy up in his arms, to hurry him away from the
     dreadful scene, and called the watchman, who instantly raised an alarm, and summoned the whole
     neighborhood to his assistance, when before ten minutes had elapsed, the room was filled with a
     crowd of agitated spectators, scared by the tremendous event, and crowding around the bed in
     every attitude of astonishment, terror, and commiseration, uttering exclamations of alarm,
     gazing helplessly at the frightful spectacle, and forming a thousand conjectures respecting the
     tragical event, instead of attempting to give any rational assistance.
"Not a moment is to be lost!" said Sir Arthur, in the steady authoritive tone of one
     accustomed in great emergencies, to command, "Where are the other servants?" asked he, turning
     to the girl who had first given an alarm, "and where is your master?"
"I have no master, Sir!" replied she in a low incoherent whisper. "I think the lady was not
     married; but perhaps, Sir, she might be! A gentleman called here last week."
"What was he like?" asked Sir Arthur, earnestly.
"A sort of clergyman, or gentleman, Sir! I don't know nothing about him, but he visited
     sometimes at this here house. No good ever came of it though, for my poor young mistress was
     always in sore distress after he'd be gone away. Last time there be much loud talking and
     argufying in the parlor, but it was none of my business to listen. I never pays no attention to
     what the quality says!"
"Here is a most disastrous business!" exclaimed Sir Arthur, in a deep and solemn tone, while
     he glanced at the crowd of white, livid, ashy faces, collected around him. "Let us remember, my
     friends, that every trifle we can observe here, may be of the utmost importance in bringing
     this dreadful mystery to light. Touch nothing, but have all your eyes about you to detect what
     you can, and let us instantly search the house."
With the little boy in his arms, who had awakened, bewildered and terrified by the sight of
     so many strangers, Sir Arthur, followed by the whole troop of spectators, who huddled together
     with evident symptoms of fearful apprehension, proceeded minutely to scrutinize the whole
     house.
In one apartment on the garret floor, belonging, as the terrified housemaid declared, to a
     person who had been taken in, she believed out of charity, to teach the little boy, the bed was
     disordered, as if the sleeper, when hastily rising, had thrown the bed-clothes almost upon the
     floor. The window-frame was broken to shivers, by some one violently forcing his way out; but
     no other sign appeared of the room having been inhabited. Not an article of clothing could be
     found in the drawers; not a book or a paper; and the search was about to be abandoned, when Sir
     Arthur perceived in an obscure corner of the room, a man's glove, stained with blood, and a red
     silk handkerchief, from which the initials had evidently been erased with great care, though he
     hoped that some one more accustomed to such investigations might yet be able to trace them.
The next room which Sir Arthur attempted to enter had the door double-locked; and though the
     party which accompanied him made a noise of knocking and hammering that might have raised the
     dead, no answer was returned, till at length, losing all patience, they broke it open, and
     impetuously rushed forward, all gazing eagerly around, as if they expected an immediate denouement of the mystery to take place; but some of those who were
     foremost shrunk back in astonishment, and hastily made way for Sir Arthur, while the servant
     girl earnestly whispered in his ear, with a look of anxiety and alarm, "This is Sarah
     Davenport's room! the child's maid! Better not disturb her, Sir! She is sometimes hardly right
     in her mind I think!"
When Sir Arthur, disregarding the simple girl's warning, advanced, he perceived with surprise
     a very young woman, scarcely twenty, who started up in bed, with a look of bewildered
     perplexity, as he approached, asking in accents of tremulous alarm, what had occurred to cause
     this extraordinary disturbance. Her cheek was of an ashy paleness, her very lips were blanched,
     and her voice sounded husky and hollow with agitation; but all this might be attributed to so
     sudden an inroad of strangers, while again and again she asked with quivering accents, whether
     any accident had occurred, and why they all appeared so alarmed.
"At all events, my darling boy is safe!" added she, holding out her arms to the child, who
     instantly recoiled from her, with looks of unequivocal terror, and hiding his face on the
     shoulder of Sir Arthur, he sobbed aloud with a degree of passionate grief and agitation which
     seemed almost beyond his years. The observant eye of Sir Arthur perceived that a dark scowl of
     malignity flitted for a moment across the beautiful features of Sarah, whose brow became
     singularly contracted over her flashing eyes; but making an effort instantly to recover
     herself, she averted her countenance, and added in a subdued voice of assumed tranquillity,
     "The child never knows me in a cap! I forgot to take it off, but the hurry of seeing so many
     strangers has confused me!"
In an instant she snatched off her night-cap, when her shoulders and neck became covered with
     a cloud of dark massy ringlets, floating down below her waist, and shading her pallid
     countenance, which had assumed an expression of livid horror, and unnatural wildness. "Let him
     come to me now!" added she again, stretching out her arms with a ghastly smile; but the boy
     struggled more vehemently than before, and clung to Sir Arthur with a tenacity and confidence,
     which deeply touched the old veteran's heart, who tried to soothe the terrified child by every
     endearment which his kind nature could suggest, while his attention was nevertheless enchained
     by observing the rigid, marble look of the young woman's countenance; the dragged and
     corpse-like appearance which stole over her features, as if she had suffered a stroke of
     paralysis.
"You have been frightened enough already, poor boy!" said Sir Arthur, soothingly. "No one
     shall hurt you! With me at least you are safe! Stay where you are, and do not be alarmed! No
     one shall touch you but myself!"
The child seemed to understand Sir Arthur's promise of protection, and his head drooped
     sleepily down, while his eyes again closed in that deep unnatural slumber, from which he had
     been with so much difficulty aroused, till at length,

"Now like a shutting flower, the senses close,
And on him lies the beauty of repose."

"Young woman!" said Sir Arthur, bending a look of penetrating scrutiny on Sarah Davenport,
     "how came you to be quietly asleep, and partly dressed too! while your mistress was murdered in
     the room immediately below! Did you hear no disturbance? Was no alarm given?"
"My mistress!" exclaimed Sarah, clasping her hands in an attitude of astonishment, and
     speaking as if every word would choke her, though not a muscle of her face was altered from the
     fixed and rigid look it had previously worn. "Oh! what will become of me!"
"What will become of you!" exclaimed Sir Arthur sternly, fixing his penetrating eye upon her.
     "Think rather of your murdered mistress! Come, come, girl! you performed that start very well;
     but I know good acting! I greatly fear you are more concerned in this horrid business than we
     at first suspected, and much more than you would wish to acknowledge. Get up instantly, and
     follow me!"
There was something fearful and appalling in the silence which reigned among the many persons
     who had gathered around, when Sarah, as a prisoner, was led into the chamber of death. A look
     of shuddering horror distorted for a moment her pale and haggard countenance, when she was
     unwillingly drawn forward to the place where her deceased mistress lay, and Sir Arthur, with
     silent solemnity, pointed to the ghastly spectacle. His eyes were intensely and most mournfully
     fixed on the prisoner's sullen and nearly livid countenance, while she silently clung to a
     chair to support herself.
Sarah appeared neither startled nor astonished after the first thrill of horror, but with a
     cold stony look of almost preternatural calmness, she muttered to herself in a low tone, which
     became nevertheless distinctly audible to all the spectators, and was evidently meant to be
     heard,—
"Why am I brought here! I know nothing, about this! The poor lady has committed suicide! No
     wonder! She often wished herself dead! She had a miserable life of it, and has got rest at
     last! I wish!" added Sarah suddenly, with vehement, almost frantic energy, "O how I wish that I
     could change places with her! O that I could be that cold, senseless image, without memory or
     feeling, without hope or fear, shut up from living wretchedness in everlasting sleep!"
"Let us hope that the Almighty has in mercy received her never-dying soul, and that in His
     own good time He will reveal the guilty assassins who sent her so suddenly to judgment," said
     Sir Arthur solemnly. "Unburden your own mind now, by confessing all, and be assured it will
     relieve the agony you are so evidently suffering. Murder is like fire, it cannot be smothered
     long."
"I know nothing! What could I know!" replied Sarah hurriedly. "She has destroyed herself, or
     thieves have broken into the house and robbed her. Could I help that?"
"No one has broken into this house," replied Sir Arthur, scanning the expression of her fixed
     and apparently unalterable features. "But you can perhaps tell us who escaped by that shattered
     window above? Not a lock is broken—not a door is injured—not a trinket seems missing, among the
     many scattered around the room. Here is money in abundance, if gold had been the inducement!
     Some other motive has provoked this crime—jealousy perhaps—or revenge——"
At the last word an angry hectic rushed over the face, arms, and neck of the prisoner, and
     her eye glittered for a moment with an unnatural fire, which rapidly faded away, leaving her as
     pale and death-like as the corpse beside which she stood, and on which her eye now rested with
     a look of cold and passionless indifference.
"It was only yesterday that she wished herself dead! this is her own doing!" said Sarah,
     turning away. "Why am I brought here! This is too dreadful! too shocking! It will drive me
     mad—it will! it will!" added she, with rising agitation; and then suddenly bursting in a
     hideous maniacal laugh, which rang with fearful sound through the gloomy chamber, and caused
     the horror-struck spectators to fall hastily back, "I would have saved her! I would! What woman
     ever sheds blood! but it was too late! I would have saved her, as I saved the child; but it was
     done—kill me! kill me! if you have any mercy, let me die! let me hide myself in the grave for
     ever!" Saying these words, with a scream of agony, she fell upon the floor in violent
     convulsions, from which it was nearly an hour before she entirely recovered, when faint, weak,
     and exhausted, Sir Arthur suggested that she could be carried to bed; but before she left the
     room, anxious, if possible, to elucidate the mystery, and to gain some clue for pursuing the
     actual murderer, he detained Sarah during a moment, and desired that a glass of water might be
     brought for her, hoping that the violent emotion she had betrayed might lead her to a full
     confession. Laying his hand then upon her arm, in tones of deep and awful solemnity, he looked
     at her, and pointed once more to the corpse, saying,—
"By a dark and harrowing crime those lips are sealed in the silence of death! What a tale
     they could disclose, if they might but once describe all that passed in this room a few hours
     ago! Those very walls have echoed this very night to her cries! You alone seem able to throw
     any light upon the horrid deed. You could tell all, or I am greatly mistaken. We shall yet
     know, at the day of judgment, if not sooner, how this fearful act was done. Consider, Sarah
     Davenport, that undying remorse will pursue you through life, and be the fitting tenant of your
     soul, unless by timely repentance you avert the fearful doom, and hereafter your heart will be
     tortured by the pangs of eternal despair. Unfortunate woman! consider now, or during the long
     period of your approaching imprisonment, whether it be better to repent and confess at once, or
     to confess and suffer everlastingly."
Not a word or look gave evidence that Sarah so much as heard Sir Arthur speak. Her large eyes
     were vacantly fixed on the ground, her hands were firmly clenched, and her teeth were set with
     an air of resolute determination, when, after a silence of several minutes, during which her
     very stillness was frightful, supported by some of the strangers around, she walked with almost
     mechanical unconsciousness out of the room.
Again and again the house was searched that day—the very floors and wainscots torn up; but
     not a trace could be discovered to throw light upon the cause or circumstances of this
     disastrous event; and equally remarkable was it, that no hint could be obtained of who or what
     the murdered lady had been. There were books on the table in various languages, but not one
     retained any name written on the boards, though it was evident that on some a coat of arms had
     once been pasted, and subsequently defaced. Not a letter or paper could be found with either
     signature or direction, though one or two notes were discovered beneath the pillow of the bed,
     all anonymous, but written in a similar hand, and containing nothing that could identify the
     writer; and several sketches of the child, beautifully executed in various attitudes, were
     found in a portfolio, beside which were written many simple verses, containing the most fervent
     expressions of tender affection and anxious solicitude for the boy, and the most passionate
     bursts of melancholy, but all conceived in general terms, which baffled the researches of
     curiosity.
"This hand is disguised, yet surely I have seen it before," said Sir Arthur, musingly
     examining the anonymous notes, which related chiefly to remittances of money. "The face of that
     appalling spectacle sometimes seems also familiar to me. Have I not met with it already, or is
     this only the delusion of an excited mind? These deep and prominent eyelids—the small aquiline
     nose—the delicately-pencilled eye-brows—and that month of perfect grace and beauty, which seems
     still almost to speak without a tongue, in the language of heart-broken misery, telling of
     deceived affections—of blighted hopes—of unpitied and solitary tears."
Sir Arthur seated himself on a chair beside the couch for some moments in agitated
     reflection, vainly endeavoring to collect his thoughts, and form them into some tangible
     remembrance. "It is a strange and bewildering sensation, to look at the mute features of this
     death-like image, and to feel as if once she had been known to me in her days of youth and
     bloom. A vague harassing perplexity besets me in trying to realize the floating and flickering
     remembrance, which dimly mock my efforts to catch them. It seems like starting out on a dark
     night, and trying to distinguish some busy scene, where figures and lights appear, and vanish
     again before they can be identified. Where have we met before? Surely in some dream of former
     days I once beheld those fixed and glassy eyes lighted up with intelligence! but my treacherous
     memory will not help me—it recalls enough to torture me with perplexity, and not enough to be
     of any actual avail."
Sir Arthur wearied himself with intense efforts to identify the lineaments before him, but in
     vain. They were lovely indeed, and many a stranger came likewise to try whether they could be
     recognised, but without success. The fearful story circulated like wild-fire—the excitement and
     curiosity it produced became intense; but not a gleam of light was thrown upon the dark and
     mysterious event.
Among the many who hurried to behold the murdered woman before her remains were disturbed,
     two gentlemen arrived one evening after dusk, and having ascertained that neither the Admiral
     nor any other stranger was in the house, they gave Sir Arthur's servant, Martin, who was in
     attendance, a handsome donation, and desiring him not to follow, hurried up stairs, and
     remained in the room alone for several minutes. Both were much muffled up, and evidently
     avoided any scrutiny of their countenances; but they seemed greatly agitated on leaving the
     room; and as they hastened past Martin, and threw themselves into a hackney coach which awaited
     them at some distance, one of the party had appeared so overcome, that he could not walk
     without support. Much conjecture was aroused by this incident, which seemed to increase the
     mystery and interest attached to the melancholy circumstances, and not a doubt could be
     entertained that these untimely visitors had a more than common connection with the affair, but
     of what nature, and to what degree, could only admit of very vague conjecture.
Nothing could exceed the active interest taken in all the proceedings by Sir Arthur, who
     seemed to forget all his years and infirmities, while keenly promoting the cause of truth and
     justice. Much as he had formerly bemoaned the trouble entailed upon him by deceased friends,
     many of whom had bequeathed their estates and children to his guardianship, he felt on this
     occasion, a pity so intense, for the nameless, friendless, and helpless boy, thus unexpectedly
     and tragically thrown on his compassion, that he publicly pledged himself to harbor and protect
     the child in the mean time, trusting that some connections might at last be found, to whom he
     more naturally belonged. "Life has had a mournful commencement for him, poor boy! His days are
     dark, and his friends are few," said Sir Arthur, with a strong emotion of pity, "but we must
     hope for the best hereafter, and do the best that can be done in the mean time, trusting that a
     wise Providence, who cast him on my care and kindness, will also watch over his future
     welfare."
On the night previous to that appointed by Sir Arthur for committing to the grave the last
     remains of the murdered lady, he who had so often faced death in every form, and "kiss'd the
     mouth of a cannon in battle," yet felt himself awed and deeply affected in contemplating the
     solemn preparations for committing to the tomb one so young, so deeply injured, and so
     apparently unlamented. It was with mournful and mysterious wonder that he stood beside the
     corpse, and contemplated that mortal frame, from which the spirit had been so suddenly and so
     cruelly driven; and he could not but imagine the scenes of love and joy which those eyes had
     once probably looked upon—the busy thoughts that had hurried through that lifeless head—the
     warm affections that had flowed through that heart, now for ever at rest.
While yet his mind was dwelling with painful interest on all the thoughts which crowded
     through his fancy, Martin hastily entered the room, and in an agitated voice requested Sir
     Arthur's immediate presence in the entrance-hall, as some persons were there who had orders to
     communicate only with himself.
On arriving in the passage, Sir Arthur was astonished, and almost startled, to find several
     porters in the passage, carrying a coffin magnificently decorated, and covered with a velvet
     pall, on the summit of which was conspicuously placed a large brass plate, with the date of the
     murder engraved, and bearing no other inscription, but these two words in German
     characters—
My Wife.
"This is strange!" said Sir Arthur, turning anxiously to the men. "Who sent you here?"
"A gentleman left his orders with the undertaker, Sir. No questions were to be asked; and he
     paid for everything at once, leaving neither name nor direction," said the man who seemed to
     have charge of the business. "We know nothing of him; but he desired us to deliver this note
     into your own hands, and perhaps it may tell you more."
Sir Arthur hastily tore open the letter offered to him, giving an impatient glance at the
     handwriting, which was exactly similar to that of the anonymous notes he had already so
     carefully and so vainly scrutinized. He was astonished; and solemn as the occasion was, almost
     amused to observe that his name and direction had been carefully cut out of the newspaper
     paragraph which he quarrelled with some weeks before at the Club, and that this unknown
     correspondent, to prevent the possibility of his writing being detected by those who examined
     the outside, had pasted these printed letters on the cover, "Sir Arthur Dunbar, Portobello."
     The packet was sealed with a plain impression on black wax; the paper bore a broad black
     border; and there was an evident tremulousness in the pen which had inscribed these words:—
"Enclosed is the sum of £200, for the benefit of Sir Arthur Dunbar's adopted ward, Henry De
     Lancey. The same amount shall be transmitted annually, so long as no effort is made to trace
     from whence it originates; and the day he comes of age, it shall be increased to £500 per
     annum. The first attempt to find out his connections will be detected, and shall put a final
     period to all intercourse. The unfortunate woman was married to one who remained ignorant, till
     a few hours ago, of the circumstances attending her death. She disgraced his name, and
     abandoned his house; nevertheless her child may one day, perhaps, be acknowledged; and the
     whole expenses of his education shall be liberally defrayed, till he is grown up and has chosen
     a profession."
It was a strange, cold, heartless communication from a parent, without one expression of
     relenting affection, one word of solicitude for his happiness, or one expression of gratitude
     to Sir Arthur for taking upon himself so arduous a charge; but still it was to a certain extent
     most satisfactory, the Admiral being relieved of a great perplexity, by having thus ascertained
     in what rank of life the interesting boy should be educated, as he felt justified now in
     obtaining for him the highest cultivation, an advantage to which he attached the utmost
     importance, often repeating his favorite aphorism, that "principle is the helm, and learning
     the main-sail, which carries a young man forward in life; but both would be useless, unless the
     wind, which 'bloweth where it listeth,' be sent from Heaven to guide and direct him safely into
     harbor."
