
  CHAPTER VII.
Marion's sister, Agnes, five years older than herself, after being distinguished as the best
     musician, best sketcher, best linguist, best everything, at Mrs. Penfold's, had left school
     with no real knowledge, except of the most frivolous kind, accidentally gathered in
     conversation, and repeated again in society like a parrot. Formed to excite the most rapturous
     admiration, by the gorgeous magnificence of her almost regal beauty, art had acted the part of
     the Fairy Bountiful in forming Agnes, while nature had showered her choicest gifts on
     Marion.
Agnes was brilliant without being interesting, and dazzling without being attractive, for her
     mind seemed irremediably and incorrigibly vulgar, selfish, and vain. A good actress, an
     inimitable mimic, and incomparable in a tableau, she assumed generally a queen-like dignity of
     manner, "stalking through life," as Sir Arthur said, "with an assured and stately step, as if
     practising for her appearance as a Duchess at the next coronation."
Admiration seemed to Agnes the only pleasure of life, and amusement its only business; while,
     if ever she had possessed any sensibility, it was frittered away on the fictitious sorrows of
     the Adelines and Julias in the volumes which she read with surpassing diligence from a
     circulating library; though, in all other respects, Agnes wasted her time amidst such listless
     idleness, that she might have let her nails grow, like those of a Chinese mandarin, to testify
     how literally she did nothing.
No one, certainly, could excel Agnes in turning up her hands and eyes at the faults of
     others; but those who trace nothing except evil in their companions, have seldom much good in
     themselves. Marion found it one of the most important and pleasing studies in the world, to
     comprehend the character and temper of her friends and connexions, besides her own, with a wish
     to render herself suitable to them, as her mind, pliable without weakness, was bent on
     constantly yielding her own wishes to those she loved; but this unobtrusive generosity was only
     a subject of satirical remark to her sister, who could neither understand nor believe in
     Marion's utter singleness of heart and disinterestedness; her own sole aim being selfish
     indulgence, and her sole rule to obtain it in the easiest possible way.
Self-love was the ruling passion of Agnes; love of others the quickening principle, or rather
     impulse with Marion, who would have zealously planted flowers for even strangers to enjoy; but
     Agnes would have plucked all those of her friends, and scarcely taken the trouble to rear any
     even for her own use. Agnes, cold, vain, heartless, and self-sufficient, thought she was made
     only for this world, and this world for her, and for such as herself, young, gay, rich, and
     lovely, while all others were mere intruders on the creation. But Marion, on the contrary,
     followed the dictates of her own heart, in wishing to do good of every kind to every person,
     while still she had learned to aim above nature, to that high standard of Christian perfection,
     so exalted, that those who have gained the most elevated human attainment in virtue and
     excellence, must still consider the structure of their minds, however beautifully decorated
     with generous sympathies and kind emotions, as being only begun, while they perseveringly
     aspire upwards, even to the measurement of that Divine Being who left us an example that we
     should follow his steps.
Agnes had now been, for three seasons, the reigning beauty of Edinburgh! There it is the
     privilege of every tolerable-looking girl to be considered in her own set pre-eminent, during
     the first winter after she is introduced; but though the public eye usually grows weary of the
     same features, however perfect, during a second campaign, Agnes had apparently taken out a
     diploma of beauty, the reputation for which seemed confirmed to others by her own thorough
     conviction of being completely unrivalled, and by the exulting consciousness she displayed of
     her own supreme loveliness. Three seasons of tumultuous joy, triumph, and conquest, had already
     succeeded each other, during which Agnes was, to use her own expression, "fiercely gay," yet
     still no younger rival had appeared to eclipse the dazzling array of her charms; and not a
     whisper was heard that the freshness of her Raphael-like beauty was at all impaired; nor were
     any ladies ever heard to "wonder" what gentlemen could possibly see to admire in Agnes Dunbar,
     as not a dissenting voice had yet ventured to make itself audible on that subject.
Agnes began life with that perfect confidence in her own knowledge of the world, universally
     felt by young ladies under twenty, especially when they have seen very little of it, and with a
     thousand schemes and projects of perfect happiness. Though one after another her castles of
     cards fell to the ground, still, in the exercise of persevering energy, she rebuilt the edifice
     again with new materials, and on what she imagined a better construction, but still in every
     instance, to her own unutterable astonishment, she found that most unaccountably, "hope told a
     flattering tale!"
Considering every officer she danced with as a hero, and every gentleman who paid her a
     compliment as a lover, Agnes wasted her first season, as most young ladies do, in flirting with
     scarlet uniforms, the inhabitants of which were generally so much alike in ideas and
     conversation, that if blindfolded, she might have found it difficult or impossible to
     distinguish which of her countless red and gold admirers happened at the moment to be "doing
     the agreeable."
All her military victims were dying to know what Agnes thought of their brother officers;
     whether she intended to adorn the next ball by her presence, or the next concert; how she liked
     their military band; if she proposed patronising their night at the theatre; whether she
     preferred a galope fast or slow; how she thought the colonel's daughter looked on
     horseback; whether she did not think it barbarously tyrannical of the commander-in-chief to
     insist on their all wearing uniforms; how she liked the new regulation jacket; and above all,
     whether she thought the order for their wearing mustachios an improvement or not!
To all these subjects, and many more of similar import, Agnes lent her very profound
     attention, not only during the discussion, but in many a solitary hour, while her whole head,
     heart, and understanding were crowded with the recollection of epaulettes, mustachios, spurs,
     and gold lace, and she privately believed that the supreme felicity of earth,—all the most
     refined sensibilities of life, and all its brightest joys, were to be found at Piershill
     Barracks.
Sir Patrick laughingly alleged that Agnes had rehearsed a set of prepared conversations
     suited to every different occasion,—a musical conversation for amateurs, full of crotchets and
     quavers—a hunting conversation about foxes, dogs, and steeple-chases,—a Court of Session
     conversation for the lawyers,—and a dragoon conversation, discussing at great length whether
     officers should dance with spurs or without them, and in which she had been known to enumerate
     correctly, the facings of every regiment in Her Majesty's service.
Her brother often and loudly declared that nothing is more perfectly hopeless, than for any
     young lady to expect a serious attachment from an officer actually quartered with his regiment,
     as it was against all rule, and contrary to all nature or custom, for Cupid to attack the army.
     The mess-table, he assured her, invariably sets its face against matrimony, and the mess-table
     conversation was an ordeal, through which he protested that few young ladies could wish their
     names to pass; but nevertheless, Agnes, full of groundless expectations and lively vanity,
     continued to endure a succession of heart-rending and unaccountable disappointments, from very
     promising military admirers, who had stolen her bouquets, listened to her music, and drunk Sir
     Patrick's claret month after month; but no sooner did marching orders come for Dublin, Leeds,
     or Canada, than these interesting affairs came to an untimely end with a P.P.C. card, or a sort
     of never-expect-to-meet-again bow, and Agnes was left with the army-list in her hand, wondering
     what regiment would come next, and whether there were many unmarried officers in it.
"How amusing it is," said Agnes, in a confidential mood, one day to Clara and Caroline, "when
     I walk about with Captain De Crespigny at the promenades or balls, and see all the other beaux
     looking angry or disappointed!"
"Nothing on earth is so charming, I suppose, as to be a beauty!" exclaimed Caroline, with a
     good-humored sigh, and a look of comic humility, "I would sacrifice ten years of my life to be
     admired for one! To hear people saying, 'Have you seen the lovely Miss Smythe? Is Miss Smythe
     to show herself at Lady Towercliffe's party?' and then, like you, Agnes, to have all the beaux
     dying for me!"
"I would rather be married for any attraction in the world, than mere beauty," said Clara,
     earnestly; "even money is a more tolerable motive. How insufferable it would be to live with a
     person whose affection depended on whether your hair were well dressed, or your shoes well
     made!"
"That is the very thing I should like!" exclaimed Agnes, "to see it considered of the
     greatest consequence whether I wore pink or blue, and whether it were one of my well-looking
     days or not!"
"But then, Agnes, your well-looking days would occur seldomer and seldomer, while during the
     very periods of illness and depression, when attention and kindness are most needed, a
     fastidious husband would feel injured if your complexion were not at its best," replied Clara,
     laughing. "No! no! give me the happiness that will, as my milliner says, 'wash and wear
     well!'—good fire-side domestic comfort."
"Comfort! I hate comfort!" said Agnes, indignantly, "a stupid, detestable word, as opposite
     to real happiness as night is to day! I shall be satisfied with nothing short of felicity."
"But felicity can last only a day, while peace and comfort may be enjoyed for life," replied
     Clara. "In talking of marriage, you seem to think of nothing beyond the honey-moon, and to
     forget the hours, days, and years of actual life that must follow!"
"It is absolute nonsense looking so far out to sea as you do, Clara," said Agnes,
     impatiently. "How I shall enjoy, next winter, perhaps, chaperoning you both to parties if I can
     find any fascinating victim, tall, thin, and handsome enough to please me."
"But surely you would not, for any consideration, marry yet!" exclaimed Caroline. "Lady
     Towercliffe says that the holiday of a girl's life is from the time she leaves school till the
     day she marries, and you should enjoy ten years at least, Agnes, before you are tempted to
     begin the cares of life."
"Cares!" exclaimed Agnes, with a contemptuous laugh, "I do not mean ever to take any cares
     upon myself! but, as Captain De Crespigny very sensibly observed yesterday, the husband worthy
     of me should be made on purpose. In the first place, he must be rich, for I have a scruple of
     conscience in ever witnessing a poor marriage, where, after the wedding-cake has been eaten,
     there is nothing else left. In everything,—even in the mere choice of a ribbon,—I am
     fastidious, and would rather not have a thing at all, than dispense with getting precisely what
     I like. My intended, then, must have been educated at Eton, for I do think the ugliest bit of
     human nature on earth is a Scotch school-boy of about fourteen. He must have such a foot! so
     small! oh! no foot at all. He must employ Buckmaster the tailor, get his shoes from Paris, and
     never wear the same gloves twice. He must——"
"My dear Agnes! this should be all put into the contract!" said Clara, laughing. "It
     perfectly ruins me to hear you talk so extravagantly; and, besides, pray be warned in time of
     your own probable fate, that the beauty of a family, or the beauty of a winter, is said always
     to make a poor marriage. I never could understand the reason of that; but Lady Towercliffe
     says, men are perverse beings, who like to criticise and undervalue a professed beauty, while,
     in the mean time, they are taken by surprise, and fall in love unexpectedly with some obscure
     girl, whose charms they discover, or fancy for themselves, and whom, probably, not another man
     living ever thought tolerable."
"For my part," said Caroline, "I shall wait till a person can be found as handsome as Sir
     Patrick, as agreeable as you tell me Captain De Crespigny is, as clever as Mr. Granville, as
     merry as young De Lancey——"
"And as rich as Lord Doncaster!" interrupted Agnes.
"No! no!—, a hundred times no!" replied Caroline, coloring, speaking in a singular tone of
     asperity, "I hate and abhor money as a consideration in marrying! I wish money had never been
     invented! It becomes a misery for those who have too much, as well as for those who have too
     little."
"Well! give me money," said Agnes, laughing. "And let me tell you, Caroline, that even if you
     have eight or ten thousand pounds, which is probably the utmost, you will find it no great
     inconvenience during the long run of life. Money has its merits, and I should be afraid to
     marry any man, even the most romantic of my lovers, if it involved the necessity for his
     sacrificing one of his usual comforts;—if it obliged him to drink his bottle of sherry instead
     of claret every day, I am not quite sure that he would never begin to grumble! They tell me it
     should be considered a man does not wish himself twice every day unmarried again. No, no money,
     is no bad thing, and if you have any to spare, pray let me have the surplus."
"Who, and what are Mrs. and Miss Smythe?" was a frequent question of Agnes to herself, never
     apparently to obtain a satisfactory answer. On Caroline leaving school, her aunt had taken a
     villa at Portobello, where the two English strangers excited extreme attention, more from their
     evident desire to avoid it, than from any thing very remarkable in their appearance or manner,
     though Mrs. Smythe was certainly of that genus old maid so common in England, with a
     handsome independence, a suite of servants, a pony-carriage, most splendid dress, and some
     pretensions still to youth and beauty, as any fragment of good looks that yet remained she most
     liberally displayed; while her manner had a flirting tone of coquetry most unsuitable to her
     apparent age, forming a singular contrast to the quaker-like simplicity of Caroline's
     dress.
There was a singular contrast between the gravity of costume affected by Miss Smythe, and the
     keen festivity of spirit with which she entered into every scheme of amusement, or even, it
     might be said, of mischief. Her vivacity was occasionally almost overpowering, her fancy lively
     beyond example, while with her brilliant, yet interesting animation, there was mingled a rare
     acuteness of mind, a swift comprehension, and an innate passion for all that was amiable and
     beautiful, which gave liveliness and vigor to what she said, though the rapidity of her mind
     sometimes led Caroline to a false estimate of persons and circumstances, as she always judged
     or acted from instantaneous impulse; yet there was a generous frankness in her disposition,
     which captivated those who knew her, and a graceful simplicity in all she did, which gave it
     interest; for, without intention, there was something in all her thoughts and actions striking
     and peculiar.
Her features, though irregular, attracted and enchained the eye, from the magical variety of
     their expression, and though an amateur of mere beauty might have been surprised and perplexed
     to divine why her light grey eyes, pale cheeks, and chestnut hair could beguile his attention
     away from the more perfect contour of others, the amateur of physiognomy was delighted to find
     there an ever-varying source of interest in watching the bright emanations of thought, feeling,
     and vivacity, which glittered or sparkled in her eye, or played about her mouth.
When Mrs. Smythe first settled at Portobello, scarcely a week of gossiping, wonder, and
     conjecture had elapsed, in the little community around, when she requested to have an interview
     with Sir Arthur alone, which took place immediately, and must have excited much interest in his
     mind, as the Admiral remained silent and abstracted during the whole subsequent evening, while
     he strolled slowly up and down the drawing-room, "pacing the quarter-deck," as he called it,
     for a length of time; and, after being closeted some hours the following day with Mrs. Smythe
     and his confidential agent, they proceeded to a magistrate's house together, with whom they
     requested a private conference, the purport of which did not transpire.
From that day, an intimacy, amounting to friendship, was established between Sir Arthur and
     the two ladies, who seemed on all occasions to look to him for advice and protection, and in
     whose house they spent a part of every day, to the unspeakable delight of Henry De Lancey, who
     was charmed, on his return from college, to find so agreeable an addition to the small circle
     at Seabeach Cottage.
"Years rush by us like the wind;" and how rapid seems the transition from boyhood to mature
     years! Henry had early attained an extraordinary development of mind and appearance, a strength
     of intellect and a decision of purpose which seemed to Sir Arthur almost precocious, while
     every day discovered some new talent, or enlarged those he already possessed, for his mind
     seemed ever on the wing and full of energy. "Either he is nobly born, or nature has a nobility
     of her own," thought the Admiral, when viewing the character of his young protege, as it
     gradually arose to personal and intellectual supremacy. His mind was ardent, courageous, and
     deeply contemplative, full of generous impulses, but apt to view all that happened to himself
     through an exaggerated medium. His mysterious history, and the fascination of his manner and
     appearance cast a spell over the interest and affections of all who beheld his countenance, or
     heard the sound of his harmonious voice. With a strikingly handsome person, he had already
     acquired a decided air of fashion and refinement, while a bright vein of almost chivalrous
     romance which enlivened his mind was subdued by a poetical temperament, inclining him to dwell
     much on melancholy musings, relating to the strange circumstances of his own early history.
     Keenly sensitive to kindness or neglect, his love and gratitude to Sir Arthur were without
     bounds, and his brotherly affection for Marion was tinged with the natural enthusiasm of his
     disposition, but before long the warmest and deepest feelings of his nature were secretly
     concentrated on the gay, giddy, and fascinating Caroline Smythe. Every scrap of paper that came
     in his way became covered with sketches of her buoyant figure and graceful profile, in a
     variety of animated attitudes; or, on other occasions, verses in Latin or English, little
     better certainly than the nonsense verses at school, immortalised her charms.
Young as he was, however, Henry's spirit recoiled already from the danger of loving too well,
     or being beloved by any, when he was taught, in hours of solitary reflection, to remember that
     principle and honor must forbid him to seek a mutual attachment, while his name and station
     remained unknown, and, perhaps, disgraceful. There was a bewildering power in Caroline's
     society, which chained him to her side wherever they met, while, contrary to his resolutions
     and wishes, his every look, smile, word, and action became steeped in love. Often and severely
     did he upbraid himself for this vain and dangerous indulgence, but he seemed spell-bound and
     unable to remember, in her presence, any thing but the delight of listening to her gay sallies
     and her delicious laugh; though the mirth of her young eyes became veiled often by a look of
     care as sudden as it was to him unaccountable, being so foreign to the sparkling, almost
     mischievous gaiety of her nature.
Henry's devoted, and nearly boyish attachment, raised in his heart many a high aspiration
     after future distinction, many a bright hope of honor, promotion, and usefulness. The model for
     his imitation in every thing noble and distinguished was Sir Arthur, and he resolved to
     sacrifice love itself, till he had attained, like him, a name and a station for himself. The
     very sound of Sir Arthur's step, the very tones of his voice, were dear to him; and, casting
     aside every softer emotion connected with his romantic reveries respecting Caroline, he became
     impatient to face the bitter blasts of the world's trials, taking his beloved benefactor for
     his example, and the Holy Scriptures as his guide.
"Perhaps," thought he, allowing his young mind to wander away from the dull inexorable
     realities of life, while a rapturous smile of anticipated joy lighted up his countenance.
     "Perhaps, when honor and distinction have at last crowned my efforts, I may yet be acknowledged
     in the face of the world, by those connexions who have now so mysteriously cast me off. Perhaps
     Caroline herself may at last be proud to return that fervent attachment, of which she has not
     yet even a suspicion! The old proverb says, 'all men know what they are, but none know what
     they shall be!' I know neither the one nor the other; but I must not be satisfied with vaguely
     coveting learning, honor, or usefulness hereafter, contemplating like a mere child the end
     without the way, but seek them energetically. Nothing is impossible to those who persevere!
     This may and must be a rough world of difficulty to me, but amidst a thousand buffetings and
     humiliations to come, I feel an undying hope of success, while even in this scene of hard and
     trying discipline, my best comfort and encouragement shall ever be drawn from the august truths
     of religion, in all their awfulness and solemn obligations."
Knowledge is power, and knowledge of character is the greatest power of all; but Henry, in
     general very penetrating, was perplexed by the flirting, light-headed manner of Mrs. Smythe,
     whenever she was in the society of gentlemen her own contemporaries in age, and the grave,
     deferential manner she adopted towards her young companion, whom she seemed to treat almost
     inadvertently as her superior, though the slightest indication of her doing so usually brought
     the color of Caroline in vivid flashes to her cheek, and caused an appearance of mutual
     embarrassment between the aunt and niece, which surprised and puzzled him. Their extraordinary
     munificence to the poor and public charities also astonished him, as that appeared so widely
     disproportioned to their visible means and usual expenditure, though it seemed only to please
     without surprising Sir Arthur, who was accustomed to give so liberally himself, that Henry
     sometimes feared he encouraged his newly-found friends in a degree of lavish extravagance
     inconsistent with the ordinary means of single ladies; yet all was given with a graceful
     negligent indifference to the vulgar subject of pounds, shillings, and pence, quite
     unprecedented. Subscriptions to church extension, missionaries, schools, Bibles, blankets,
     food, clothing, coals, money, and medicine, were scattered around them with unsparing
     profusion, though it appeared to Henry, that, in the case of Mrs. Smythe herself, whose name
     always appeared ostensibly on the list as the larger contributor, there was less alacrity in
     giving, than in Caroline, who seemed to be purse-bearer for both, and always defrayed the whole
     amount.
Among the many things which surprised Henry in Mrs. and Miss Smythe, nothing had that effect
     more than the keen, intense, and rather satirical interest with which both ladies gathered up
     every particular relating to the manners, flirtations and adventures of Captain De Crespigny,
     though it was evident, that while both ladies could relate every particular of his former
     history and character, neither knew him by sight. Mrs. Smythe mentioned rather contemptuously
     some vague recollections of him formerly, as a pert, awkward school-boy, while, to Henry's
     increasing perplexity, the young lady's color visibly rose to carnation whenever he was
     unexpectedly named, and her eyes usually glittered with a suppressed smile, if any anecdote or
     description in Sir Arthur's conversation related to him, till at length the curiosity which had
     so long been evidently fermenting in the minds of Mrs. and Miss Smythe, exploded one day in the
     form of an eager request, that Sir Arthur would invite Captain De Crespigny to meet them at
     dinner.
Marion and Henry were amused at the laughing alacrity with which Sir Arthur at once
     consented, and they observed, after the note was despatched, that many a whispered consultation
     took place, and many a lively jest passed among the lively trio, to which they were not made a
     party; while the two ladies appeared evidently in extacies of amusement at their anticipated
     introduction. Marion would have given worlds to witness the scene; but her furlough from Mrs.
     Penfold's had expired on the very day of Sir Arthur's party, and she was most unwillingly
     deposited in a carriage with her baggage, at the moment when Captain De Crespigny alighted, in
     full huzzar uniform, out of the minibus which had conveyed him from Piershill.
The Admiral's party was exceedingly small and select; but the guests appeared all in gay,
     buoyant spirits; while Captain De Crespigny, seeing but one young lady in the room, looked upon
     himself as her natural property, and handed her to dinner, though no formal presentation had
     taken place.
With Caroline he was, before long, flirting to the top of his bent, while she assumed a
     charming look of consciousness when he addressed her, receiving the whole artillery of his
     small talk and civilities with the most interesting expression of naivete, though once Henry
     observed in her smile so odd a mixture of mirth and malice, while, at the same time, a look of
     covert humor lurked in her eye, and quivered on her lip, that he could not but wonder at the
     grave, demure look which she affected.
Nothing was ever more enchanting to Captain De Crespigny than the blushing, averted looks
     with which Caroline listened to all his insinuated admiration; while now and then she nodded
     and smiled with the prettiest air of incredulity imaginable, if he professed it more openly.
     Occasionally, however, Captain De Crespigny was almost put out of countenance by her unexpected
     replies, or very mal-apropos questions, which gradually led him on, he scarcely knew how, into
     flirting perfectly a'loutrance, while opportunities seemed purposely
     afforded him with a degree of tact perfectly incredible in one so young, and apparently
     unsophisticated, to say even more than he ever said before. With a gay, laughing animation,
     almost amounting to silliness, the young lady archly doubted his sincerity, admired his wit,
     and slyly misunderstood all his compliments, till he was obliged to repeat his meaning and
     explain his insinuations, making his professions and speeches all so exceedingly plain and
     undisguised, that, to his own astonishment, he found himself positively making love, on a very
     few hours' acquaintance, with a degree of explicitness which had never occurred to him in the
     whole course of his practice before.
In the evening, Caroline was, after many entreaties, prevailed on to favor Captain De
     Crespigny with a song; and never had he been so completely perplexed as by those with which the
     young lady, preserving a look of most imperturbable gravity, proceeded to favor him. She seemed
     to have a dozen different voices, and half-a-dozen different styles of performance, but had
     evidently been well taught, and displayed occasionally some beautiful notes. At first her tones
     were clear and sharp, accompanied by the strangest flourishes and cadences that Captain De
     Crespigny had ever heard or imagined. In the next song, her voice was low and husky, while her
     eyes were most sentimentally elevated to the ceiling, with a sort of St. Cecilia expression,
     rather partaking, however, of the ludicrous, and in her voice another like a mouse in a
     cupboard. At one time her tone reminded him of a well-known singer at Vauxhall; at another, he
     felt persuaded she was taking off Clara Novello; occasionally there was so considerable a tinge
     of the brogue, that he became convinced she must be Irish, and she ended by singing "The Dog's
     Meat Man," in a tone out-screaming a peacock, but adopting the air and attitude of a Catalani,
     and concluded with looking exultingly round in expectation of rapturous applause, which Sir
     Arthur bestowed in abundance, and Captain De Crespigny in comparative moderation, being, for
     the first time in his life, at a loss to know whether he were treated on this occasion in jest
     or in earnest.
Repeated subsequent visits at Seabeach Cottage continued the intimacy which Captain De
     Crespigny had so oddly begun, and his curiosity became more and more piqued by the singularity
     of Miss Smythe's manner and conversation. She displayed, along with a most extravagant love of
     amusement, a genius for satire and mimicry quite unprecedented, and in which she most freely
     indulged. Many a scene was acted over by her, and supported by Henry, with astonishing talent
     and vivacity; for both seemed to have a similar propensity, being able, after an hour's
     intercourse with any individual, to imitate his whole peculiarities with almost magical
     precision—to follow, in an imaginary conversation, the very train of his ideas, and to
     represent every little trick or habitual expression, every turn of the head, and every tone of
     the voice, with a gay look of mockery which would have made their fortunes on the stage.
One evening, Sir Arthur having delivered up to his young friends the key of an old chest,
     filled with velvet coats and brocaded silk dresses, formerly worn by his bye-gone ancestors,
     Caroline, Henry, and Captain De Crespigny amused themselves by grouping some beautiful
     tableaux, and by acting charades. At one time, both the gentlemen appeared in similar costumes,
     as Shakespeare's two Dominos in the Comedy of Errors, when Sir Arthur suddenly exclaimed, as if
     he had made some great discovery, "How very strange that I never before observed the likeness
     between you two good-looking young fellows! I declare it is quite remarkable! If you were
     brothers in reality as well as in pretence, it could scarcely be more striking! Do pray Captain
     De Crespigny, turn your profile more towards Mrs. Smythe, that she may see what I mean!"
Henry laughingly received these remarks as an undoubted compliment, and bowed with
     good-humored grace to Sir Arthur, who observed with astonishment that Captain De Crespigny's
     color rushed to his very temples, and receded again, leaving his countenance pale and almost
     ghastly, while he suddenly broke off the entertainment, and strode up to the fire-place, where
     for some minutes he stood, with his back to the company, in evident agitation, while a dead
     silence ensued.
"Well!" whispered Sir Arthur to Caroline, "I have often been told that people are never
     pleased with a likeness, but certainly Louis De Crespigny is the most conceited of men to feel
     so intolerably angry at being compared to my young friend here. There are certainly
     worse-looking people in the world than Henry!" added the Admiral, with a look of partial
     affection. "And it was no such insult as De Crespigny seems to think, when I paid him the
     compliment, to say that he resembled my boy, who is in every respect the pride of my
     heart."
"I wish the Captain may never meet with a greater mortification," replied Caroline, laughing;
     "and I am sure he would be much the better of a few pretty severe ones to keep him in his
     senses!"
Henry meantime had observed with good-humored surprise, and no small degree of perplexity,
     the excitement, so disproportioned to the occasion, into which Captain De Crespigny had been
     thrown by Sir Arthur's remark, but with boyish frankness he instantly went up to him, saying,
     in a lively and rallying tone,
"I am sure Sir Arthur did not mean anything personal, Captain De Crespigny; but his remark
     only proves my uncommon skill in assuming a likeness to any one I please. My success in
     disguising myself at college, was often beyond my intentions or utmost hopes. You would not
     know me yourself, if I represented an old man, or a French hair-dresser, as I have sometimes
     done!"
"Indeed!" replied Captain De Crespigny, trying to recover himself, "I should think there was
     not the dress upon earth in which I would not know you again!"
"Well! some day perhaps, as a beggar, I may, with your leave, beguile you of
     half-a-crown."
"It would be a clever beggar who succeeded in that! but I defy you there. Half-a-crown! why!
     I have only as much as that to keep me till midsummer! You have my free leave to try me at any
     time, or in any way you please, and my pardon for all your success!"
"I can only say," interposed Sir Arthur, "that the impudent rascal brought real tears into my
     eyes, not long ago, by a story he trumped up at my door, which would have deceived the whole
     Medicity Society. He can make himself appear as old as myself,—and I declare one day he looked
     not very unlike your uncle, Lord Doncaster!"
A vivid flush passed over the whole forehead and features of Captain De Crespigny at these
     words; but assuming a sudden tone of liveliness and vivacity, he summoned Henry to continue
     their entertainments for the evening, which were to be concluded by acting a proverb of which
     Sir Arthur and his guests were to discover the design. Miss Smythe, dressed in cottage costume,
     seated herself pensively on a stool, after which Captain De Crespigny, equipped with a bow in
     his hand, and carrying on his back a quiver filled with all the old pens in the house, to
     represent arrows, entered in the character of Love, and was about to aim his darts at the
     peasant girl, when Henry, disguised in a tattered old cloak, to personate Poverty, limped
     slowly into the room. On seeing this beggarly apparition, Cupid, pushing his hair up till it
     stood on end, assumed an expression of comic horror, and with a shriek of dismay, rushed to the
     window, as if about to jump out.
The whole party laughed heartily, and declared that the denouement of
     this piece contained a most salutary lesson against a mere love-match; and Sir Arthur said, for
     his own part he would attend to the warning,—that all portionless young ladies might consider
     the case hopeless with him, and he trusted every one present intended to be equally
     prudent!
"Yes! most assuredly!" exclaimed Captain De Crespigny, "I am almost tempted how to take my
     uncle's advice, and propose to my cousin, Miss Howard, the heiress, though love flies out of
     the window whenever I think of her. She was a little, pert, red-fingered, flaxen-haired child,
     when we parted last! The memory of that girl often haunts me like a night-mare since; for my
     poor mother, on her death-bed, got a promise made about our being married, or something of that
     kind. I never heard the particulars; but I believe we were to be made acquainted, and refuse
     one another, before either of us could accept any one else; but I should think there could be
     little chance of anything that depended on my being refused."
Captain De Crespigny was bowing himself off late in the evening, and taking a very particular
     leave of Miss Smythe, having called up all his most fascinating graces for the occasion, while
     he felt inwardly gratified by the pleasing conviction that another had been added to the list
     of young ladies whom he had made miserable for life, when he was surprised to observe her mouth
     perfectly quivering with suppressed laughter, and an arch, satirical gleam in her eye for which
     he could not account, though it made him feel somewhat uncomfortable and dissatisfied. If it
     were possible that any one could be laughing at him, she certainly was! A world of most
     intolerable ridicule appeared in her expression—an air almost of contempt! and he turned to
     leave the room with a feeling of mortification and anger which he was ashamed to allow even to
     himself.
When Captain De Crespigny hurriedly opened the drawing-room door, near which he and Caroline
     had been standing, he was surprised to see a person lurking close behind it, who darted
     instantly away, and disappeared; but before the intruder was out of sight, an exclamation of
     terror and dismay escaped from the lips of Caroline, who rushed towards Sir Arthur, exclaiming,
     in accents of almost frantic alarm, "He is there! he is there! Oh! save me, Sir Arthur! he is
     there! That horrid, dreadful man! he is there! Stop him! stop him!"
Captain De Crespigny instinctively ran in pursuit of the retreating figure, and eagerly
     attempted to seize him; but the fugitive instantaneously opened the house door, and escaped in
     the darkness, while, apparently to intimidate his pursuer, he fired a pistol in the air, and
     waved another above his head with frantic gestures of rage and violence.
"It is beyond all measure extraordinary how he got into the house!" exclaimed Sir Arthur, in
     discussing the event with an aspect of grave perplexity. "My doors are most systematically
     locked after dusk, and not a window is unbarred, yet the locks are unbroken and the bars
     untouched!"
"There is something next to supernatural in the way he invariably finds us out, and gets
     access everywhere," said Mrs. Smythe, in almost breathless agitation. "One would imagine he had
     some unearthly accomplice to discover where we are concealed, and to assist him in escaping the
     vigilance of the police. Night and day we have been liable to his incursions. In town or
     country—in the drawing-room, or beside our carriage—in church, or going to a party—there he is,
     lurking secretly near us, or terrifying Caroline by his sudden disappearance, and gliding away
     like a shadow. He baffles every attempt to overtake or arrest him, but seems for ever on the
     watch! Sometimes he used to make his presence known by throwing a stone at our windows; often
     at midnight, by singing hoarsely beneath them, and even occasionally by firing a pistol in the
     air; but I did hope in this remote corner we might have enjoyed peace and safety. How are we
     ever to venture home?"
"I shall escort you with the whole party in close phalanx," replied Sir Arthur, trying to
     assume a rallying tone. "Old Martin and myself are quite invulnerable, and I only wish my
     secretary were here also, as he would be a host in himself; but he is absent on a month's
     leave, and for the first time in my life I miss him."
The night being impenetrably dark, and not a sound to be heard but the echo of their
     footsteps on the gravel, when Mrs. Smythe alighted from the carriage to walk across the garden
     leading towards her house. Sir Arthur immediately desired the servants to bring out lights,
     when one of the candles having flared up suddenly near Caroline, she thought she perceived the
     madman close beside her, lurking behind the stem of a large tree. The dark shadows concealed
     all but his face, in which there gleamed a look of maniacal triumph and malignity, while
     rushing close up to Captain De Crespigny, he said, in a threatening tone, low and distinct, "He
     who crosses my path shall die!" and instantly disappeared through the hedge. When Miss Smythe,
     on hearing his voice, with a stifled scream of terror fled into the house, again that loud and
     fiendish laugh, which she had already heard once, arose behind her, and rung through the night
     air in tones of high delirium, causing a cold shudder to thrill through the hearts of even the
     boldest among her companions, while they hastily followed her, and having placed the trembling
     girl in apparent safety, soon after took leave, charging the servants to chain and double-lock
     the door.
It was some hours before Caroline could sufficiently compose her mind to retire; but after
     the house was sufficiently quiet, and the servants in bed, she sat up reading, with the hope
     that her nerves might become less painfully agitated. The slightest noise caused her heart to
     beat almost audibly, and she was conscious that a mouse rattling in the wainscot would have
     caused her to faint. Mrs. Smythe could scarcely be prevailed upon to leave her alone; but as
     they both slept on the drawing-room floor, only divided by a thin partition, Caroline induced
     her, at a late hour, to withdraw, while not a sound now disturbed the deep repose of nature,
     but "the wailing sorrows of some midnight bird."
The moon had arisen, shining with softened radiance into her apartment, when Miss Smythe
     arose from her devotions, and she could not but think at the moment what a bright emblem of her
     divine Saviour that glorious luminary presented to the mind, not glowing, like the sun, with a
     radiance which no human eye can gaze upon, but reflecting upon the darkened earth a mild,
     subdued refulgence, perfectly suited for the steady contemplation of those whom it had arisen
     to benefit and cheer.

Nature was hush'd, as if her works ador'd
The night-felt presence of creation's Lord.

Pleased with such thoughts, a gradual composure stole over her senses, and Caroline, at
     length, seeing her candle nearly burned out, consequently determined to retire for the night.
     Not a sound was to be heard in the house, but her own light step, as she moved about the
     room,—the very opening of a drawer, or the shutting of her book, sounded unnaturally loud,
     jarring upon her nerves with a startling effect,—the shadows in the more distant part of the
     room looked darker than usual, and the least moan of the wind increased the painful tension of
     her nerves to agony. Scarcely had she begun to undress, when a sudden noise not far off caused
     her to start with convulsive terror; her heart became chilled with apprehension, the
     candlestick which she carried in her hand fell to the ground, the light was extinguished, and
     she stood trembling and alone in total, impenetrable darkness.
Caroline tried to persuade herself that the sound must have been produced by her own
     fancy,—she looked around, and all was quiet,—she listened, and all was perfectly still,—she
     reasoned with herself, and became resolute to try whether sleep might not plunge her into
     forgetfulness and peace, when her attention was accidentally attracted towards one of the
     windows, where the bright moonbeams rested on an object which seemed to blast her eyes with
     horror, and paralyzed her at once in a speechless agony of fear. The top of a ladder rested on
     the window-sill, upon the summit of which stood the dark figure of a man, his face plastered so
     close upon the glass, that his nose was perfectly flattened against it, and his hands raised in
     a menacing attitude towards her. The instant he saw, by Caroline's look of frantic alarm, that
     she had seen him, he dashed in the window-frame by a single stroke of his powerful arm, and
     seemed about to make a forcible entrance, when Miss Smythe, with the energy of despair, threw
     open the door, and fled, calling aloud, in the sharp, shrill accents of desperation, for
     help.
The servants were speedily assembled around her, and the instant she felt herself in
     comparative safety, nature could sustain no more, but, convulsed in every nerve, and throwing
     herself into the arms of Mrs. Smythe, with a cry of thankfulness and agitation, she
     fainted.
An instant alarm was given in the neighborhood, a diligent search was made, and the police
     for several days exerted their utmost activity to detect the miscreant, but in vain. Not a
     trace remained to convince Caroline that the whole had not been a hideous dream, except that
     the ladder had been left standing at her window, and turned out to have been stolen from a
     neighboring garden. The window-frame exhibited a frightful picture of devastation, being
     literally broken to fragments, and at some distance in the garden a loaded pistol was
     discovered, perfectly new, which it was hoped might lead to a discovery, by the police tracing
     out the maker and purchaser, seeing that it had been so recently obtained.
