
  CHAPTER XXXVI.
Though the leaders of fashion have decided that it looks greedy and gormandizing to be
     punctually ready for dinner, yet, at the Granby Hotel, no sooner does the clock strike five
     than the bell rings, and the instantaneous rush of company which then takes place towards the
     dining-room can only be compared to a congregation hurrying out of church, or a flock of
     chickens in a poultry-yard assembling to be fed. Doors fly open,—guests are seen precipitating
     themselves headlong down stairs,—elderly matrons advance, leaning on their gouty, red-faced
     husbands,—troops of marriageable daughters follow,—and solitary gentlemen are visible,
     strolling forward in all the unencumbered independence of having no one to care for but
     themselves. The noise-meter then rises to a deafening pitch, when, to the din of a hundred
     tongues, is added the jingling of glasses, plates, knives, and forks, while the long
     serpent-like procession winds slowly into the room, and gradually subsides into places.
Amidst the moving mass of strangely mingled personages, Captain De Crespigny had offered his
     arm to Marion, which she did not seem to observe, but led forward Sir Arthur, while all eyes
     were turned upon Agnes, who walked beside Lord Doncaster, with burning cheeks and downcast
     eyes, yet affecting to look superbly dignified.
Sir Patrick, in the mean time, always on the qui vive for variety and
     adventure, entreated Mrs. O'Donoghoe's permission to sit between her and the young lady under
     charge, who attracted his especial notice because she so obviously suffered from that
     apprehension of being conspicuous, common to strangers on their first appearance at a public
     table, and was dressed with a degree of plainness which amounted almost to eccentricity.
"I lose no time in making new acquaintances here," whispered he aside to Mrs. O'Donoghoe,
     with a glance at her timid companion, who had become a perfect aurora of blushes as she seated
     herself at the table. "Our short visits at Harrowgate scarcely leave me five minutes to spare
     for each new face."
"Then I hope you do most of the conversation yourself, for I suspect the young lady, who was
     placed under my chaperonage by Mr. Crawford, is not so much accustomed to live upon
     airy nothings, and to run up impromptu intimacies as you are."
"The sooner she begins then, the better. I have a thousand things to say to her!"
"Perhaps she may not have time for above five hundred of them. You must talk to her like a
     dialogue book, supplying both the questions and the answers; for, as far as my experience goes,
     she seems to be shockingly silent and nervous. Are you generally reckoned amusing?"
"Everybody agrees in considering me so, and many people think me quite the reverse, but I can
     be either the one or the other, on a moment's notice."
"Indeed! a little of both, and a great deal to spare! I imagine it all depends on which way
     the wind blows!"
"Exactly! I am sentimental in a westerly breeze,—cutting and sarcastic in an east wind,—noisy
     and boisterous in a northern blast,—and during 'a southerly wind and a cloudy day,' the genius
     of nonsense takes possession of me so completely, that I have bestowed on myself the privilege
     of saying whatever I think."
"How shocking! I do not particularly fancy you in any of these moods!"
"Adagio! do not condemn me yet! choose your own subject, concerts, sermons, pic-nics, dress,
     Harrowgate water, or the last new novel, nothing comes amiss to me! I mean soon to publish a
     weekly programme of the five or six subjects to which all conversation at the Granby is usually
     limited; a complete set of the questions invariably asked by all the visitors every day, with a
     sketch of the most appropriate answers. For my own part, all my replies are given by rote, and
     it puts me out entirely, if the inquiry whether I have been at Ripley, comes before the
     question how I like the waters, or who was the last arrival, which is, a propos, the
     only subject on which I am not very well informed."
Sir Patrick saying these words, gave a sly glance towards his left hand, where the young
      incognita sat, without apparently listening to what passed, and as she seemed at the
     moment to be looking another way, Mrs. O'Donoghoe archly turned round the label on her bottle
     of wine, so that the young baronet could read that it bore, according to custom, the name of
     its proprietor 'Miss Smythe.'
Nothing could be a more complete balk to curiosity than such a name. Sir Patrick had already
     known seven Mrs. Smythes. His washerwoman was Mrs. Smith,—his sister's governess had been a
     Miss Smith,—two Captains in his own regiment had gloried in the name of Smyth,—and his old
     Colonel's widow was Mrs. Smith. There was no individuality in the name, but a whisper had
     reached him in the morning that a Miss Smith, the authoress of several popular romances, was
     expected at Harrowgate, and a horrible apprehension crossed his mind that, young as she looked,
     this might actually be the culprit, his surmises respecting which he could not but whisper to
     the laughing widow, adding, with a look of comical consternation—
"Only think how my portrait will look in her next book! There is no escape, unless I faint
     away immediately and am carried out! We must remain together now as long as I stay at
     Harrowgate, for no change of place is allowed. Even if you and I quarrel, there is no remedy!
     It is like connubial felicity, we are settled here permanently, for better or for worse."
"It might certainly be worse! I am tolerably resigned to my fate, for I sat till lately among
     the dullest set of hum-drum bores who ever ate a potato; but you are so clever, I always become
     clever in your company."
"That is a novelty, I suppose?"
"Why, for that matter, my mind is like a piano-forte, which requires to be skilfully played
     upon," replied the widow, gayly. "I have often been offered large annuities by people, merely
     to live in their houses and entertain them, but lately I was in danger of falling into a state
     of sensible, every-day dullness."
"Impossible!"
"You may doubt it—anybody would—but actually, yesterday, talking to Lord Wigton, I was
     threatened with a fit of prosing! a thing I never was subject to, and I never heard it had been
     in our family! Whether do you dislike most, a professed wit, or a professed proser, Sir
     Patrick?"
"My favorite society is any old lady of seventy, who has met with great misfortunes!"
"Well, I am not much upon that pattern, certainly, but fifty years hence, we might make an
     appointment, perhaps, to meet here again."
"How many succession of visitors will before then have flourished in this house, and
     vanished. Even after the interval of one season, a visitor's return is like coming back from
     the grave. Nothing is remembered of either yourself or your cotemporaries. Guests, waiters,
     landlords, and even boots, have all disappeared."
"Very affecting, indeed," said Mrs. O'Donoghoe; "but half the dinner has disappeared during
     that long moral discourse of yours, Sir Patrick. Among the transitory things in this house,
     pray enumerate, another time, the entre-mets and vegetables."
"Pardon me—these dishes re-appear only too often. I have known some of those pies intimately
     for several days. In our regiment, we called such revivals 'old clothes,' and it really is too
     bad treating ninety deserving people so ill."
"I should like to live upon the diet of a chameleon! Eating is a vulgar necessity which the
     mind despises," observed Mrs. O'Donoghoe, helping herself to a pate;
     "but some of the company here seem ne pour la digestion, talking love
     and sentiment over a haunch of venison. Mr. Crawford tells me that an Indian dinner party lasts
     twelve hours, and people who sit down as thin as skeletons, rise from table quite
     corpulent."
"It certainly does require the aid of refined conversation to keep up our self-respect in a
     scene of such gormandizing. For my own part, I live upon anti-pastry principles, and am also a
     no-vegetable man; but I wish haunches of venison had never been invented! I made fifteen mortal
     enemies by the last I carved in this house, because no one thought I had given him the best
     slice," observed Sir Patrick. "I wish all men like old Doncaster, who eat more good things in a
     day than they say in a year, would dine alone."
"But I think," said Mr. Crawford, "that the habit of meeting at meals is one of our most
     excellent social customs! If each individual in a family were merely to snatch a morsel when
     hungry, there would be no re-union, and often no intimacy among members even of the same
     household. I like frequently to trace the usefulness of old established customs, which have
     been sanctioned by successive generations, because the advantages are always so much greater
     than they at first appear, that it has now become quite a sufficient reason for me to respect
     any custom, when I find that it is an old one."
"I take the liberty of thinking quite the reverse!" said Sir Patrick. "Change is the very
     essence of enjoyment! change of habits, change of company, and change of air, are all equally
     necessary, and I never have a guinea in the world without instantly getting it changed. That
     custom will make a scarcity of silver at the bank, when I marry the heiress, Miss Howard."
"You!" exclaimed Mr. Crawford, his very wig standing on end with surprise, while the young
     lady next him colored to the very tip of her fingers.
"I beg your pardon," said Sir Patrick, turning to her with one of his most winning smiles. "I
     thought you gave symptoms of speaking."
A torrent of blushes being her only reply, he began to doubt whether she had the faculty of
     speech at all, and having decided at last that the young lady was either a statue or an idiot,
     he turned to his more accessible neighbor, muttering in an under tone, "Mute as a fish! An
     exhausted receiver! I never saw such a genius for shyness! Her very cap-strings are blushing!
     But about Miss Howard, my friend De Crespigny, who was born and educated for the very purpose
     of marrying his cousin, wishes me to take her off his hands, and if I could have sold myself,
     which I cannot, she might have done. I am told she is very romantic, so he and I agreed once to
     get up an amicable duel for her, and after that I was to waylay the mad cousin who persecutes
     her, and horse-whip him!"
"Nothing like spirited beginning," said Mr. Crawford, in agonies of risibility, while the
     young lady on Sir Patrick's other side, after an evident struggle, during which the
     ever-deepening color in her cheek became perfectly scarlet, at length burst into an
     uncontrollable fit of laughter, so full of fun and glee, that the young baronet instinctively
     joined her, though amazed and perplexed beyond measure by the oddity of her manner, and by her
     unspeakable silence. "Your love," added Mr. Crawford, "is to be more in the heroic than in the
     pastoral style."
"Never was there a Captain of Huzzars so preternaturally in love at first sight, as I should
     have been. De Crespigny tells me she is first cousin to Crœsus! has land in every country, gold
     in every bank, the mines of Golconda for a part of her portion, carries a million of money in
     each pocket, and changes horses three times in driving across her own estate! I should think
     myself rich to be five minutes in her company."
"I see you are half in joke, and wholly in earnest," said Mrs. O'Donoghoe. "But some
     gentlemen certainly do speculate in matrimony, exactly as they would in the public stocks. So
     my poor husband used to say before he left me so handsomely provided for. As for Miss Howard's
     hundred lovers, they will have but one idea amongst them—money! money! money!"
"Love for an heiress certainly has the most solid of all foundations. How much better to be
     married for your fortune than for your dancing or singing—your pedigree or connections! There
     can be no mistake in pounds, shillings, and pence! De Crespigny tells me she is said to be not
     only very rich, but very plain, therefore as people generally marry their opposites, we shall
     suit exactly."
The timid young lady had now fallen into a perfect paroxysm of blushes, and an extraordinary
     twitching about her mouth betrayed the last extreme of nervousness, though whether her
     agitation were not of a risible nature, Sir Patrick felt somewhat perplexed to decide,
     especially as she was seized with a fit of coughing which appeared almost like laughter, while
     she hastily drank up the water in her finger-glass, threw salt over her pudding, and committed
     a dozen of absurdities, which caused the young Baronet to ask himself whether she were in
     possession of her fifty senses. A moment afterwards, Sir Patrick felt his arm convulsively
     grasped by the young lady, as if for protection, while a half-suppressed scream burst from her
     lips, and she clung to him with an aspect of breathless terror, her lips parted, her cheeks
     livid, and her eyes almost startling from her head, as she gazed anxiously after the receding
     figure of a man who was hastily leaving the room.
Sir Patrick, when thus unexpectedly appealed to, started from his seat to offer assistance,
     though at a loss how to act, when, seeing Miss Smythe's countenance become of a ghastly
     paleness, he rapidly poured out a tumbler of water, and held it to her lips, proposing, at the
     same time, to support her out of the room.
"No, no! I am better here!" replied she, in trembling accents.
"I—I need society! I am so nervous! It must have been some dreadful mistake! Excuse me, I
     would rather remain!"
Mr. Crawford, in the mean time, had rushed hastily out of the room; and, having now returned,
     he made a signal, as if desirous to escort her also; but to this implied proposal the young
     lady only answered by an almost imperceptible shake of the head, while she fixed her eyes on
     her plate, resolved, apparently, to remain stationary. To the great surprise of Sir Patrick,
     two tall footmen, in plain livery, now placed themselves behind her chair; and, having
     afterwards closely followed her when the ladies retired to tea, they were observed lounging
     about in the lobby during the rest of that evening.
"What could be the meaning of such a scene?" asked Mrs. O'Donoghoe, in an undertone of
     extreme curiosity. "Can you conceive, Sir Patrick, why the young lady started in that
     extraordinary way?"
"Yes!" whispered he confidentially. "I can explain, but do not mention this. It was
     because—she couldn't help it! There is a sublime mystery of some kind at work here! I cannot
     dive into it! Suppose she were to turn out Miss Howard Smytheson incog.!"
"Oh no! that is impossible! Her aunt was coming with her, who is one of my most intimate
     friends!"
Never had anybody so many most intimate friends, as Mrs. O'Donoghoe. Every person she met for
     half-an-hour, had the honor to be so designated, and if a gentleman were distinguished by the
     appellation, it was generally followed by a very plain insinuation that she had refused him. Of
     late, however, Mrs. O'Donoghoe had been more cautious in such assertions, having been
     discredited in one of her many forgeries on the bank of truth, by its being proved, that she
     boasted of a proposal from Mr. Crawford three weeks after it became known that he was already
     engaged to his second wife. Such accidents happen, however, in the best-regulated families!
