
  CHAPTER XLI.
With all the acute susceptibilities of youth, Marion now experienced, for the first time,
     what it was to watch over an almost hopeless illness, and, with a shuddering sensation of
     unutterable woe, she tried to obtain that comfort from above, which nothing on earth could
     supply. Days passed slowly on, the longest and most melancholy she had ever known, while most
     of her hours were spent in prayer, but all around was gloom. Nothing could be more oppressive
     to her than the subdued whisper and stealthy step of Sir Arthur's attendants, his vacant seat,
     his darkened room, the mute and solemn looks of his physician, and, above all, the inward
     anguish with which, hour after hour, she sat with his hand in hers, watching the fluctuations
     of his feeble pulse, observing with awe and grief the pale ensigns of death gathering over his
     features, and feeling as if every labored breath he drew gave him but a momentary reprieve from
     the grave, while she could not bear to contemplate the probability of burying with her beloved
     uncle, all the dear and tender ties that bound them to each other.
With no one to console her, and nothing on earth to screen her from the desolating blast of
     grief, the whole fabric of her worldly happiness seemed crumbling to dust. Her heart was like
     an exhausted receiver, and her spirit sank, yet no inducement could have withdrawn her for an
     hour from that scene of solemn, deep, and awful melancholy. Throughout the long, dreary hours
     of night, each of which seemed an eternity of anxious care, Marion felt too deeply impressed
     with the solemnity around for the indulgence of any violent emotion. Nothing is so silent as
     intense feeling! Stunned and stupified by the sudden affliction, a wild chaos of sorrow, fear,
     and amazement rushed through her young mind, filling her with agony, which tears could not
     relieve; but now was the time for that supernatural aid given by Divine grace to the humble,
     believing Christian. In silent, speechless prayer, Marion found her first and only relief; then
     she felt that her heart was read, and her sorrows pitied, by One who has shared every human
     grief, carried every human sorrow, and to whom the suffering sinner never applies in vain.
One morning, the grey light of dawn stole through a crevice of the shutters, while, in her
     lonely silence, Marion felt as if the whole world were in a trance, and not a sound was heard,
     but the slow ticking of the clock, reminding her that time and death are forever advancing. She
     sat watching every minute change of that beloved countenance shattered by sickness, and
     evidently sinking in decay, when Sir Arthur unexpectedly opened his eyes, which once more
     beamed with intelligence, as he fixed them with a look of touching mournfulness on Marion, and
     called her by name. That voice, which had so long been dear to her, now sounded strange and
     unnatural, being palsied by weakness, while the glassiness of the grave was in his eye; but
     Marion, forcibly subduing all appearance of emotion, stooped down, and, with a momentary gleam
     of hope, kissed his pale forehead.
"Marion! we have loved each other well," said he feebly, extending his hand to her. "For your
     sake I would stay, old and weary as I am, but the far better will of God is otherwise. Before
     that clock strikes again, I shall be in a better world."
Marion covered her face with her hands and attempted not to speak, for she saw that the sure
     hand of time, and the heavier hand of sorrow, had indeed done their work. It was but too
     evident that Sir Arthur would never see another night, for he was about to awaken in the mighty
     dawn of eternity, where no darkness ever would follow. The frail, old, worn-out tenement of his
     body, so full of infirmities, was now to enter its rest; his head, whitened with age and
     suffering, had been anointed with peace, and, having partaken with cheerful thankfulness of the
     banquet of life, he was evidently willing to make way, that others might fill his place; not
     disgusted or dissatisfied with existence, but thankful that he had tasted better joys than
     those of earth, and desiring to enjoy them at last in never-ending perfection. A mysterious
     conviction is generally given to the dying, when their disease becomes mortal, but though
     nature shrank at first from the solemn change, religion supported the powerful mind of Sir
     Arthur, who added, in a tone of commanding calmness, while a beam of ineffable peace overspread
     his countenance,
"You are now my sole earthly care—as you are my only earthly comfort. It breaks my heart to
     leave my Marion worse than alone, while Patrick and Agnes remorsely pursue their own pleasure,
     careless how you are trampled down in their wild career."
"Dear uncle!" whispered Marion, wishing to soothe him, "you consigned me to the care of
     Richard Granville, and year after year, while we live, you shall be remembered by us both with
     the affection and gratitude of children to a parent."
"I did hope, my dear girl, that I should have lived to understand his conduct, and even now,
     while standing in the gloomy porch of death, it would cheer me to see him and dear Henry again.
     If Granville be the man I believe him, he will come immediately to see you now, and all will be
     satisfactorily explained—if not, the world is worse than I thought."
"If Richard is alive, he will come, dear uncle—but oh! what a meeting it would be, without
     you!"
"Take comfort, dear Marion. Think of me often, but let it be with consolation. My long life
     seems but a span! May yours be blessed with every affection of this world—with every hope for
     eternity—and may your death-bed be attended by one as dear and affectionate as mine is. May
     your eyes be closed in the same undoubting faith, and may I be permitted to meet you on the
     very threshold of heaven, and in the august presence of Him, whom 'not having seen, we love,
     and in whom believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.'"
With a face livid as death, Marion choked back her sobs and restrained her tears, while she
     listened to every faltering word Sir Arthur said, as if her life depended on hearing him. When
     he became silent from exhaustion, she attempted to whisper a few broken expressions of grief
     and affection in his ear. Unable, however, to think or speak under the weight of her sorrow,
     she might have been mistaken for a corpse, but for the look of living agony in her eye, while
     struggling with a sorrow which tears or lamentations could not have expressed, and could not
     have relieved.
At length Sir Arthur's breathing became uncertain—his majestic chest heaved convulsively—a
     damp, cold dew broke out on his forehead—the heart which had beat with every kind and noble
     emotion, could beat no more—and, giving a last glance of fond affection at Marion, a grey, ashy
     hue stole over his features, and his countenance assumed that strange, peculiar aspect which is
     seen in death, and in death only. Marion saw it, and long afterwards that look was forever
     before her sight. Nothing in all the earth is so unutterly sublime as death. Strange and solemn
     was the mysterious horror, the inexplicable wonder, with which Marion, for the first time,
     witnessed the soul forsaking its earthly tabernacle. Day after day, when she returned to watch
     beside all that now remained of her earliest and kindest friend, while her heart seemed
     scorched and seared with grief, she gazed on the mortal form in ruins before her—its light
     extinguished—its tenant departed—its whole nature in a moment transformed—and, forgetting
     sometimes for a moment her own grief, her loneliness, her deep and fearful bereavements, she
     thought but of that purified spirit now emancipated into the regions of eternal glory, and
     almost longed for the period when she also might become as indifferent to things of time as the
     inanimate corpse beside her. Often, however, she tried, with an eye of faith, to look beyond
     the portals of the tomb, remembering that death is to a Christian, like the setting of the sun,
     for while lost to human sight, he still exists and shines with unfading glory and everlasting
     brightness.
When Sir Arthur's remains were placed in the coffin, Marion felt as if the last link were
     severed between them. His better part had, indeed, already departed, but the cold image before
     her was still associated with all she had ever known of happiness or affection, yet, in the
     strong agony of her grief, when all seemed a gloomy chaos of solitary desolation, she felt
     consoled by reflecting that her own devoted care had assisted in smoothing his passage to the
     grave; and she could not but think how great must be the joys of another world, when such
     affliction as her's was not worthy to be compared with them. A wide horizon of sorrow seemed
     before her, long days of loneliness and longer nights of grief; while, though young in years,
     she already felt old in affliction, for a blight and a mildew were upon her spirit. Marion's
     sanguine mind and ardent feelings had nothing near her on which to rest, the whole energy of
     her being, for the time, seemed crushed and withered; the future appeared to stretch before her
     mind in a long vista of moving shadows, and the memory of past happiness, like gold in the hand
     of a drowning man, sank her only the deeper in grief. Her beloved uncle seemed still to be
     everywhere—yet she saw him not. In all the earth there was not a thought which did not pierce
     her, or a worldly hope which did not now bring an icy chilliness to her heart—for a dark cloud
     had fallen between her and all those whose affection once adorned her existence.
It was now that Marion, like a tempest-tossed vessel, surrounded by darkness and fear, turned
     for direction and help to that steady and benignant light burning at a distance, which alone
     could direct her into a haven of rest. Her sorrow became gradually illuminated by hope and
     peace. She clung to every shattered wreck of happiness which remained, and sinking on her
     knees, she felt that no one could ever be completely alone, or completely miserable, who
     rightly used the privilege of speaking her wishes in prayer to that great and holy Being, who
     is the father and the friend of all his earth-born children. Marion had long believed that the
     happiest life is that most conformed to the will of God—that grief arises from not believing
     whatever is appointed to be really best; and now she found in the Bible that comfort which is
     nowhere else to be gained. The deepest emotions of this world remain unseen and unknown to all
     around; for the strength of character which gives power to feel, gives power also to hide, and
     there is a modesty in real sensibility, which admits not of display; but Marion, cut off now
     from all the tenderest sympathies of life, became the more zealous and diligent in preparing
     for that hour when "mourned and mourner lie together in repose."

Oh! if belov'd ones from their hallow'd sphere,
May witness warm affection's faithful tear,
At this deep hour, they hear the mourner's sigh,
And waft a blessing from their homes on high.

