
  CHAPTER XXXIV.
High Harrowgate, where the more aristocratic strangers and invalids annually resort, is
     nearly two miles distant from the mineral well, and from Low Harrowgate, which is infested by
     the more inveterate class of water drinkers. Placed far from the offensive odour of the
     medicated spring, on an elevated common, which still remains bare in all the uncultivated
     barrenness of nature, the broad green expanse is surrounded on every side by a wreath of
     miscellaneous buildings of every size and shape, cottages, shops, lodgings, houses, villas, and
     hotels, all marshalled in a row, and, like guests at the ordinary, mingled without order or
     distinction; while, elevated above all, and conspicuous for its whitewashed front and
     innumerable windows, stood the extensive building in which Sir Arthur had his sleeping
     apartments. Its aspect was extremely ancient, with a venerable stone roof peculiar to old
     times, and testifying to its great antiquity; while the more modern slates, or even thatch, on
     the surrounding dwellings, indicated a recent construction.
At High Harrowgate, a crowd of large consequential-looking hotels may be observed on every
     side, all unusually extensive in their accommodation, and apparently of nearly equal calibre;
     but visitors, after residing there some time, become aware that to those who prescribe gaiety,
     as well as more salubrious air and water for themselves, there are but three hotels in
     Harrowgate. Invalids may be ill anywhere, and personages who wish to be exceedingly exclusive
     retreat into private lodgings; but for anything that can be dignified with the name of society
     at an ordinary, the Granby, the Crown, and the Dragon, have by mutual agreement, established a
     singular monopoly, giving balls every alternate night, to which the guests in each house are
     reciprocally invited; the ladies and gentlemen of the Granby and Crown requesting the honor of
     being patronized at a ball on the following night; and each hotel provides a carriage for the
     transportation of its own party, in case any of the distinguished guests should happen by
     chance not to have brought their private carriages. Meantime, it is rather arbitrarily taken
     for granted, that there are neither ladies nor gentlemen at Gascognes, Queen's, the White Swan,
     or the Black; but residents at these houses are allowed to appear on sufferance, though not as
     invited guests; being merely "winked at."
At a Harrowgate dinner the travellers take precedence more according to the length of their
     bills than by any other criterion, those who have resided a month in the hotel going before
     those who have resided only a week, and the visitors of a week being far in advance of all who
     arrived the day before. A Peer of the realm must sit below his tailor, if he arrived at the
     house after him, and no dispute about places can arise, as each individual's name is accurately
     ascertained in the morning, and a plate turned upside down on the table opposite where he is
     intended to sit, with his name distinctly written in ink on the china. A label is also attached
     to each bottle of wine, exhibiting, not the name of the wine, but the name of its owner, and
     half an hour before dinner, all the gossiping world at each inn, may be observed slowly pacing
     round the table, and carefully reading the name, style, and title of those with whom they are
     about to dine, illustrating their remarks by exchanging biographical anecdotes and remembrances
     connected with each successive person, as he comes under discussion. Thus, though many arrive
     at Harrowgate strangers whose "names were never heard," yet, after passing through the ordeal
     of this gossiping committee, stories and circumstances are gradually discovered or invented, by
     which each individual is in some degree identified.
Between High and Low Harrowgate, besides a broad, circuitous high-road, two pleasant rural
     paths lead through the fields, on which a gaily-dressed crowd may be seen from peep of day in
     the morning, hurrying along in rapid succession to the well, with looks of anticipated disgust
     in the prospect of that strange compound of horrors which they are about to swallow, only
     comparable to the washings of an old gun-barrel. As Sir Arthur remarked, these waters seemed to
     have been invented for the especial affliction of elderly gentlemen, processions of whom might
     be observed drinking tuns of water, in order that complexions evidently much the worse of wear
     might in the process of renovation, be mended, cleaned, dyed, and repaired, till they looked as
     good as new; and though the Admiral complained that, to his uncomfortable feelings, it always
     seemed as if he had swallowed the tumbler itself, yet he valiantly persevered in daily drinking
     bumpers to his own health, saying that what was good for so many others, would be good for his
     complaint, if he had one, though, except old age and blindness, he was conscious of none.
In consequence of Sir Patrick's bet with Mrs. O'Donoghoe, he was on the alert at an early
     hour before breakfast the next morning, to ascertain who the incognitos were in the garden
     room. For nearly an hour he sauntered on the common within sight of the Granby, exchanging gay
     observations with those who passed, listening with a satirical smile to Lord Wigton, who was
     practising to desperation some of Rossini's airs at an open window, and watching with
     astonishment the repulsive stranger of the preceding evening, who, closely buttoned up in a
     military surtout, with his hat slouched over his face, was rapidly pacing up and down, with
     ceaseless perseverance, close to the garden room, with his eye fixed upon the windows and
     doors, making apparently so accurate a survey of those private apartments, that had it been by
     night instead of by day, he might almost have been arrested on suspicion of intending to
     attempt a burglarious entrance.
Not a mouse seemed stirring within these rooms, the blinds were all drawn down, and the doors
     all closed, but still the stranger paced rapidly up and down, casting many impatient, irritable
     glances upwards on the silent walls, yet keeping himself so concealed that no one, looking
     suddenly out, could have perceived him lurking there. Sir Patrick now, for the first time,
     suspected that he did not belong to the party within, and became more and more interested in
     observing his various eccentric movements, which betrayed a high state of excitement, till at
     length, finding himself watched, with the quickness of lightning he suddenly vanished round a
     projecting corner of the building, though a few moments afterwards Sir Patrick perceived that
     he was concealed in a thicket of trees not far off, where he could still keep his eye fastened
     on the windows with unswerving steadiness.
Parties, meantime, hurried onwards to Low Harrowgate to do duty at the well, while some of
     the loungers had already returned, being full charged with their quantum of water, and all very
     loudly expressing their astonishment that Sir Patrick had not yet set forth to hear the
     military band, which was reported to be playing "beautifully! enchantingly! or detestably!"
     according to the humor of those who spoke.
The crowd was on this day so excessive, that the old well had been completely exhausted, and
     alarming apprehensions were entertained by the invalids, of a scarcity for the later visitors,
     but still Sir Patrick stirred not! Though not usually endowed with excessive interest in any
     affairs but his own, the movements of the mysterious stranger, and his look of feverish
     anxiety, engrossed almost the whole of Sir Patrick's thoughts, though, to avoid any appearance
     of espionage, he kept up a lively dialogue with Mrs. O'Donoghoe and Captain De Crespigny.
Marion in the mean time had been exceedingly amused by the scene which usually takes place at
     the well, where every face seemed as if laboring under the nausea of sea-sickness, and she
     stood for some time with Sir Arthur and Mr. Granville, laughingly studying physiognomy, as
     parties arrived in rapid succession, threw off a tumbler of smoking horrors, and instantly
     departed, while a row of shabbily-dressed women, standing behind a stone counter, hurriedly
     filled the glasses, and handed them over in a long wooden ladle, to the expectant invalids, one
     by one, who were waiting patiently or impatiently for their turn. Each of the great hotels had
     an emissary appointed here, whose business it was to attend on their respective guests with the
     proper allowance of water, and it seemed as if these old women knew by a sort of instinct those
     who belonged to their own house; but an angry contest having taken place respecting one
     gentleman, who was obliged to wait with resignation or without it, till the belligerent parties
     had decided whose privilege it was to kill or cure him, Marion's attention was more peculiarly
     attracted to the spot, where one of the women who assisted in serving out the general beverage
     had been hitherto screened from her notice. Her face was excessively muffled up, but in the
     little that remained visible, traces of beauty still remained, though her features were so
     attuned to suffering, that Marion with wonder and pity contemplated so pale and ghastly a form.
     At length a dim idea stole into her mind, that surely she had seen that face before, but while
     the floating remembrance yet continued to flicker indistinctly through her mind, the
     wretched-looking woman, with a startled glance, had vanished.
"Patrick!" whispered Marion, turning to take her brother's arm, "do patronize me for one
     minute! Did you observe that melancholy-looking woman at the well? I never saw so blighted a
     countenance! What can the sorrows be that stamped such a look of ghastly woe upon these
     beautiful features?"
Marion looked up for a reply, and started to find that she had inadvertently taken the arm of
     Captain De Crespigny, whose usual vivacity and presence of mind seemed at this moment to have
     entirely forsaken him. His eyes were straining after the receding figure of the stranger, with
     an air of eager astonishment and alarm, while his countenance had become white as death. In a
     moment, however, he recovered himself, when Marion, with an exclamation of surprise, had drawn
     away her hand, making a hurried apology for her mistake.
"Did you not recognise her?" asked he, in accents of almost tremulous agitation. "It could be
     no one else! Surely that must have been—Dixon?"
"It was!" exclaimed Marion, breathlessly. "How has she come here? what can she want? where is
     Agnes?"
"This must be inquired into!" muttered Captain De Crespigny, almost inaudibly; and then
     resuming his usual careless vivacity of tone and manner, he entreated Marion to let him benefit
     by the fortunate resemblance of his dress to Sir Patrick's, and still continue to escort her.
     "I envy Dunbar for the privilege whenever he enjoys it, for you shun me like a rattle-snake,"
     added he, in his most insinuating tone; "yet I would not for worlds be your brother."
"It is but a troublesome office," replied Marion, looking anxiously round for Sir Arthur, who
     had walked on a few minutes before, leaning on Mr. Granville, and most impatiently did she long
     for their return, being always on the alert to shun Captain De Crespigny without appearing to
     do so. Though, like all other persons, amused and enlivened by his whimsical and diverting
     style of conversation, which had more even in the manner than in the words, and though with any
     friend of her brother's it pained her courteous nature to be otherwise than frank and good
     humored, yet she made a principle of unobtrusively evading his assiduities, not only because
     his conduct to Agnes had been and still continued unpardonably dishonorable, but she felt
     indignant to think that he was disposed to beguile his leisure by also captivating and deluding
     herself. It was obvious that whenever she entered the room, he became silent and embarrassed
     with every one else, and took the first opportunity of devoting himself exclusively to her. Not
     giving one shadow of belief to all his professions, when Marion was obliged to listen, she did
     so with unconcealed indignation on finding the same insinuations of attachment made to herself
     which had been repeated to her formerly with triumphant credulity by Agnes. Marion thoroughly
     despised his double dealing and ungenerous trifling, while feeling nothing for him on that
     score but contempt, she could almost have rejoiced that he wasted his efforts to be
     irresistible on one who, being so fully aware of his character, could incur no danger from the
     fascinations which had been fatal to the peace of many. Safe in the consciousness of a hallowed
     attachment to Mr. Granville, and convinced that Captain De Crespigny was incapable of a single
     genuine feeling, she could scarcely have considered it necessary even to be repulsive in her
     manner; but it seemed due to Agnes as much as possible to avoid him, knowing that her sister
     had not yet been able entirely to divest herself of a lingering belief that the professions
     which were false to all others were sincere to herself.
For the first time in his whole acquaintance with lady-kind, Captain De Crespigny felt
     doubtful and diffident of his own fascinations, and for the first time also he felt himself
     really and undeniably in love, as the transparent single-hearted excellence of Marion's
     character seemed, when compared with the hackneyed and artificial mind of her sister, and all
     other girls, like the difference between a pure mountain breeze and a London fog. The
     attachment he so often affected had now become genuine, and the feelings he formerly invented
     for amusement, and expressed with the utmost fluency, were now so real, that they could
     scarcely be spoken at all; for language seemed to fail him when he addressed Marion, and every
     day, as it increased his attachment, diminished his hope. She had no vulgar love of admiration;
     and Captain De Crespigny was mortified to perceive, that while the color mounted to her cheek
     at the slightest evidence of affection from her uncle or brother, all his own hints of a
     preference, all his fascinating attentions and irresistible speeches, were listened to with the
     same smiling good humor as if they had been devoted to a third person. Marion always made some
     ready reply, without a soupcon of embarrassment, and seemed to take
     compliments, reproaches, love, or despair, all as matters of course, which must inevitably be
     listened to with the same indulgent consideration she would have bestowed on Lord Doncaster's
     lamentations respecting his last attack of the gout. She did not even pay him the compliment to
     drop a single stitch in her knitting from agitation or from interest when he spoke to her; but
     all his words passed away like arrows flitting through the air, which leave not a trace
     behind.
Captain De Crespigny became, this morning, more than usually assiduous while they stood
     beside the well, referring to Marion's opinion on every subject, quoting what he remembered her
     formerly to have said, rejoicing in everything that seemed to give her pleasure, regretting the
     most trifling annoyance that fell in her way, approving of all her sentiments, and talking in
     raptures of old Sir Arthur, while eyes, smiles, voice, and manner, all indicated the feelings
     he wished to convey; but Marion merely congratulated herself, that having seen the cards
     already, she knew the game he was playing.
"Miss Dunbar!" said Captain De Crespigny, rushing eagerly forward to pick up a flower which
     the wind had blown out of her bouquet, "may I keep this rose?"
"Certainly! any gentleman may take a flower; but I never give one. There are twenty better in
     the garden."
"I would give all the twenty for this one. This is more precious than anything except the
     hand that gives it. Indeed this is the only rose in the world I care for!"
"The white moss-rose is more fragrant, and not so common," answered Marion, indifferently.
     "That was beautiful an hour since, though rather the worse of wear now."
"I am so unalterable in my preferences, that even though withered and decayed, still it would
     be precious to me, as connected with recollections which I shall cherish till the world's end,
     and till the end of time! Flowers speak a language which words cannot express; and even if mine
     were to fade in an hour, let me enjoy it while I may. This rose does not hoard all its
     sweetness, as you do!"
"Captain De Crespigny, if your conversation has a fault in the world, it is too plain,
     matter-of-fact, and unadorned," said Marion, with a careless laugh. "You have wasted a whole
     summer of lilies and roses upon me during the last five minutes, and I ought to answer you with
     a perfect conservatory in return; but it sounds dreadfully like the double-distilled essence of
     the Minerva press. I thought this very flourishing style of compliment had been worn out now,
     and given over, as old clothes are, to the race of abigails and valets. But here comes my
     sister; and, to speak in your own fashion, remember 'je ne suis pus la rose,
      mais j'ai vecu avec elle.'"
To Marion's astonishment, Agnes merely strolled past, with her eyes earnestly fixed upon
     nothing, and did not interrupt her conversation with Lord Doncaster and the Abbe Mordaunt, by
     whom she was escorted, except to give a smiling nod to Captain De Crespigny, who seemed
     exceedingly surprised at her indifferent "how-d'e-do" manner, and excessively piqued at the
     carelessness she either felt or feigned, saying, in a tone of satirical wonder:
"The Abbe seems to have every probability of gaining a proselyte! He has been very successful
     among the lower orders lately, though; I believe, my uncle's ale and roast beef ought to
     receive great part of the credit; but I cannot be sufficiently astonished at our new
     convert!"
"I must discuss this subject with my sister!" replied Marion, pleased to observe Captain De
     Crespigny so much interested in Agnes. "It is wrong to have delayed so long asking an
     explanation; but I could almost more easily die for those I love, than distress them. My uncle
     would care too much on the subject, and Patrick too little; therefore it must devolve upon me
     to speak. We are to have a long drive, soon. Let me consider! this is Tuesday—to-morrow will be
     Wednesday——"
"How clever of you to find that out! You would certainly have discovered the longitude!"
"No doubt of that! I have discovered a great deal in my time; but in the meanwhile I shall
     talk this over fully with Agnes to-morrow."
"Do not speak of to-morrow, when to-day is the happiest, perhaps, in my life! I wish there
     were no to-morrows! Such an hour as this appears to me like an aloe, which can blossom only
     once in my existence."
"You entertain very moderate expectations of life, therefore I think we may confidently rely
     on your being agreeably surprised by many days as pleasant."
"Then they must be passed in the same society; but Miss Dunbar, it always seems as if you
     would rather say 'Good bye' to me than 'How d'ye do!' You treat me with the most barbarous
     injustice! Your heart never teaches you to understand mine! Is it that you hate or despise me?
     You are so amiable to others, so charming, so everything that I could admire, yet to me your
     smiles are as cold and chilling as a moon-beam on snow. Be severe, satirical, anything but half
     absent and altogether indifferent, while you listen to me only with the ear and not at all with
     the heart. I shall positively be obliged at last to give you up."
"I wish you would! We might be the best of friends as well as cousins, if you would only talk
     to me in an everyday manner, without rehearsing over those absurd Romeo-and-Juliet
     speeches."
"Let us, then, be friends now, and more than friends in time to come."
"Never! O never! Patrick has led you to disbelieve my engagement to another; but at all
     events, Captain De Crespigny, if we lived in separate planets we could not be more entirely
     divided; and even in jest, I cannot allow any one to talk as you do, though I know it is merely
     an unconquerable habit you have of saying the same thing to every young lady,
     indiscriminately."
"What a shocking aspersion! you seem to think me incapable of a single respectable feeling,
     but believe me, since first we met I have scarcely known whether there be another girl in the
     world but yourself! Every moment I can be with you adds something to the value of my
     existence."
"Your civilities are all so complete a burlesque that I need never forget they are in jest!"
     replied Marion, looking considerably bored, and hurrying onwards, while Captain De Crespigny
     buried himself in melancholy silence, and assumed a most perfect attitude of graceful despair.
     Finding the pause rather awkward, she added, in an every day, commonplace tone: "Are you going
     to hear Grisi to-night? I am told that large sums are given for places on the heads of those
     who have already secured seats!"
"If I go to Grisi's concert, the temptation is—not to hear him—that you know very well—too
     well! I have but one object in going anywhere, and that is—to meet you. Esperer aupres de vous vaut mieux que jouir avec tout autre. I must quarrel with that
     little shake of the head. It is a libel on my sincerity! Miss Dunbar, your face is a perfect
     printing press, and publishes all you think! I wish you possessed the magic ring which enabled
     people to know exactly what was thought of them! You are in my debt several months of devoted
     attachment! Little do you guess how often and how deeply your slightest words are pondered,
     remembered, repeated, and dwelt upon in my solitary hours, nor how constantly I wish that the
     man in the moon, who employs his leisure in knitting people together with invisible cords,
     would, for my especial happiness, give us a few stitches."
"It must be his fault that we have been kept so very long together this morning. Where can my
     uncle be?" said Marion, impatiently. "You are aware already, Captain De Crespigny, that I must
     receive all my brother's friends with civility. In that respect his authority shall be obeyed,
     as it is of no use quarreling with the wind, but if you consider me indifferent, that is what I
     am and ought to be, therefore think me so always."
"That very indifference is distracting! Let me acknowledge, Miss Dunbar, that I may have
     deceived others, but you I never even wished to deceive; others I have flattered, but no one
     can flatter you, because nothing can be said equal to what I think. I wish new words could be
     invented to express the ardor of my sentiments! When we are together, the present moment is
     everything! I have neither past nor future, neither hopes nor fears, but what are connected
     with you," said Captain De Crespigny, with hurried impetuosity, while a rush of mingled feeling
     swept across his features. "I forget everything else when you are present, and neither know nor
     care where I go in your absence. I love you as I never loved before and never can again. The
     world, in short, has only two divisions, in my estimation—where you are, and where you are not.
     Despise my attachment if you will, but at least believe in it."
"You grieve me to the very heart," said Marion, in a low, tremulous voice, for there was an
     irresistible air of truth in Captain De Crespigny's manner which startled and shocked her. "I
     never for a single moment could imagine you serious about anything! Life and even its most
     sacred affections seem all in your estimation a mere jest, to be thought of and forgotten with
     a smile. I trust it is so now! I would not for worlds believe you in earnest! You seem really
     to have parted with your senses!"
"Or rather I found them from the moment I learned to appreciate you! Did you never hear, Miss
     Dunbar, that in this world two individuals are always created suitable to each other, who must
     both be miserable unless they become one, and you exactly fill up the beau ideal which has
     haunted me from the hour I left Eton."
"Why? De Crespigny!" exclaimed Sir Patrick, coming forward, "with that melo-dramatic air, you
     seem to be rehearsing a last speech and confession."
"Or rather my first speech and confession," replied he, with a conscious laugh. "And Miss
     Dunbar, I must entreat you not to believe——"
What Captain De Crespigny entreated her not to believe Marion did not wait to hear, as they
     had at last reached the Granby, and she rushed up to her own room, while he, as much astonished
     at his reception as a gentleman could well be, strolled slowly away singing to himself with
     angry asperity,

"If she love me, this believe,
I will die ere she shall grieve;
If she slight me when I woo,
I can scorn and let her go."

