
  CHAPTER XLVII.
Events come in clusters; and the very same day on which Henry was publicly recognised as
     Marquis of Doncaster, Marion received a letter from Sir Patrick, announcing his intention
     immediately to return home. He alluded, with a degree of feeling which surprised and deeply
     affected her, to the death of Sir Arthur, and spoke of happy days yet to come, when he hoped
     she might, at length, be united to "the man whom, above all others on earth, he esteemed the
     most, and liked the best." In reading these words, Marion felt a pang of melancholy sympathy
     for her brother, believing, of course, that they alluded to his friend Captain De Crespigny;
     and deeply did she deplore the grief he was about to suffer, when first he should hear of that
     appalling event which had filled every heart with grief and consternation.
It was on a gloomy evening in the month of February, when the sun, having all day failed to
     disperse a thick fog, had sunk into darkness, that Marion, expecting her brother's return, used
     all the little ingenuity of affection to render his reception cheerful. The fire blazed
     brightly; the tea urn was on the table, and she herself had taken more than usual pains with
     her dress, besides having decked her face with unwonted smiles for the occasion.
When Sir Patrick at last arrived, there was a tone of unusual kindness in his manner to both
     Agnes and Marion, who were surprised by the genuine warmth with which he expressed his
     happiness on seeing them again, and at the subdued melancholy in his voice. The fatal news of
     Captain De Crespigny's death had reached him on the road, and there appeared a profound
     solemnity in his manner when he alluded to it, more affecting than the loudest expressions of
     grief; but it was a subject on which he seemed incapable of speaking; while Marion scarcely
     thought a human countenance could have expressed so much anguish. While Agnes preserved an
     almost statue-like silence, Marion took her brother's hand in her own, and endeavored, by every
     affectionate endearment, to testify her sympathy, till at length he clasped her in his arms,
     saying, in accents almost choked with agitation, "Your sisterly kindness, Marion, has survived
     all my neglect and misconduct. Let me thank you for that; but could it survive if I were to
     tell you of a cruel and heartless treachery?"
"It can survive anything—everything," whispered Marion, earnestly. "Say nothing that
     distresses you, Patrick! Never think of it again!"
"I must not only think of it for ever, Marion, but show my regret by telling you all,"
     replied he, in a tone of deep, concentrated feeling. "But not now, Marion; not yet! I could not
     bear to do so in the full tide of our happiness at meeting. You deserve to be loved as you are
     loved by one who is every way worthy of you."
The color rushed over Marion's countenance, and vanished as rapidly again; but her eyes,
     which had been fixed on those of Sir Patrick with sparkling affection, now fell sadly to the
     ground, while she made no reply, evidently trying to avoid her brother's notice, who seemed
     bent on reading her thoughts.
"Marion," said he, gravely, "to what do you attribute Richard Granville's strange and
     unjustifiable silence?"
"It is strange, Patrick; but I could pledge my life it is not unjustifiable," replied Marion,
     in tremulous accents. "When I gave him my heart, it was with a perfect conviction that he is
     incapable of deceit or dishonor, and I believe him so still. I trust him as I would be trusted
     myself. In this world or in another we shall understand each other again."
Marion's features kindled as she spoke; bright and beautiful tears gathered in her eyes; her
     manner became more energetic; her whole heart seemed on her lips, and the deep melody of her
     voice was eloquence itself, as she advocated the cause of her absent lover.
"But surely, Marion," said Agnes, turning round, as she was about to leave the room, "there
     are pen, ink, and paper to be found on the Continent, if he pleased to use them."
"Yes," added Sir Patrick; "and if Granville ever returns, Marion, you will of course receive
     him coldly, give yourself all the airs of injured merit, and, in short, treat him from the very
     first as a flagrant criminal."
"Not at all, Patrick!" replied Marion, surprised at the lurking smile she traced on her
     brother's countenance. "I place no dependance on my own attractions, or I might indeed despair;
     but my reliance rests on the consistency and generosity of Richard himself, in which I cannot
     be mistaken. The features of his character, like the features of his countenance, are
     unalterable; and I could not believe in his identity, if he were deficient in honor and truth.
     Even at the worst, Patrick," added Marion, while her glittering, wet eye-lashes drooped on her
     glowing cheek, "where we love it is a pleasure to forgive; but my confidence as yet is
     unshaken."
"Then, Marion, you deserve to be happy—happier than I ever was, or ever shall be; and never,
     believe me, had any one a brighter lot in prospect. Those tears have no business there! They
     will soon, I hope, be strangers to your eyes!"
There was a look of joyous emotion in the countenance of Sir Patrick as he spoke, which made
     the heart of Marion leap to her very lips with agitation, while in broken and hurried accents
     he continued,
"I did intend to give you a long and painful explanation of my conduct—to tell you of my
     recent dangerous illness abroad, during which I was attended by the most inestimable of
     friends; to describe how the slow progress of my recovery left me leisure for the counsels and
     conversation of the best of men; to say how the death of De Crespigny has overawed and
     afflicted me, taking the gloss from my whole future existence on earth; and to tell you that
     the loss of Clara Granville, and the last scene we had together, have put a climax to the
     entire change of all my thoughts and feelings in life. I am returned, Marion, now, to do
     justice wherever it is due; by years of careful restriction to discharge the uttermost farthing
     of my debts, and to make two persons happy who deserve it."
A bright, quick flush passed across Marion's cheek, and a bewildering hope darted into her
     mind, when Sir Patrick smilingly added, with a thrilling tremor still in his voice,
"A stranger is waiting for me below, who can explain all better than myself. May he come up?
     I am too much agitated to be distinct!"
Scarcely had her brother left the room, before Marion heard a light, springing step on the
     stairs. The door was flung open; and if joy ever killed, it would have been now, when Marion,
     with almost incredulous astonishment, again beheld Richard Granville; his features lighted up
     by the smile of former days; his eyes radiant with joy, and his countenance almost convulsed
     with agitation, while, giving an exclamation of rapturous delight, he presented himself before
     her.
If Marion's life had depended on her speaking a word, she could not for some moments have
     uttered it; but there is a silent eloquence in deep emotion, more powerful than language; and,
     giddy with excessive astonishment, tears and smiles seemed to struggle for the mastery in her
     countenance, like the summer light and shade upon an aspen tree.
All was mutual confidence, and mutual affection now, while Richard Granville rapidly, and
     almost incoherently, conveyed to Marion's heart the surpassing felicity of his own, telling her
     how the long hours of his absence had each and all of them been counted over with unimaginable
     impatience; that, she had never been a moment absent from his thoughts, and that, having seized
     the first instant to hasten to his happiness, he had now returned to claim his promised bride,
     and in the sight of heaven and earth, to dedicate to her all his earthly affections—to make her
     his own forever.
With a deep sob of gratified emotion, Marion listened; her feelings were strained to the
     uttermost; but she frankly received all his joyful protestations of unchanged and unchangeable
     attachment, and attempted not to conceal her own, saying, in low, tremulous accents, as soon as
     she could command her voice to speak,—
"I think the more of myself for being loved by you. It will take a life-time to testify how
     deeply I value your affection."
"My happiness would be nothing if it could be expressed in words," continued Richard, in
     accents of the deepest tenderness. "But let future years, my Marion, speak for me. It is said
     that no man would willingly consent to live his life exactly over again; but we shall be so
     happy in each other, that nothing would make us hesitate except the hope of a still better life
     to come."
"And now," said Sir Patrick, entering, with some degree of his old vivacity restored, "your
     sails are full set, with a brisk breeze, for the haven of happiness! May you both obtain
     everything you have been disappointed of in former years, and find nothing left to wish for in
     the future."
"That would be misery, rather than happiness," replied Mr. Granville, smiling. "No, Dunbar,
     for myself, and for my Marion, my still dearer self, I trust that we shall contentedly see the
     stream of events flow on, in sunshine or shadow, without a wish to change them. We shall be one
     on earth, one in heaven, and one throughout eternity, confiding in each other with entire and
     unalterable affection; while every action of our lives and every thought of our hearts shall be
     consecrated by implicit obedience to that Beneficent Being who has bestowed on us so much."

Our mutual bond of faith and truth
No time can disengage;
Those blessings of our early youth
Shall cheer our latest age.
Those ills that wait on all below
Shall ne'er be felt by me;
Or gently felt, and only so,
As being shar'd with thee.
Cowper.

THE END.
