
  CHAPTER IX.
Among the companions of Agnes and Marion Dunbar, none was more calculated to excite a feeling
     of enthusiastic tenderness and regard than Clara Granville, whom all approached with a feeling
     of nearly romantic interest, occasioned by the etherealized delicacy of her lovely countenance
     and fragile form. Sir Patrick, from her earliest childhood, had always mentioned Clara in terms
     of such exaggerated enthusiasm, that Agnes, imagining his taste to be very different, believed
     him to be more than half in jest, though his language and manner seemed daily to become more in
     earnest, while in terms of rapture he admired her eloquent and intelligent conversation, so
     different from the flippant nonsense of most girls, and the light gracefulness of her step,
     saying she looked like some beautiful apparition, less encumbered with body, and more endowed
     with spirit, than any one who ever before stepped upon the earth. Her pale golden hair, falling
     like a halo round her fair bright countenance, and the rare beauty of her large downcast eyes,
     which were generally veiled with a look of deep thought and sensibility, gave a charm so
     peculiar to her aspect, that the eye loved to dwell upon it as upon some lovely twilight scene,
     over which the light of heaven was casting its pure and peaceful, yet fading refulgence. None
     looked at Clara without fearing that she could not be long intended for this world, as the
     fervor of her mind and feelings appeared so little in proportion to the extreme delicacy of her
     complexion, which was tinted like a rose-leaf on her transparent cheek, the color flitting with
     every passing emotion. It did indeed seem as if the sword within must quickly wear out the
     scabbard; yet Clara enjoyed society beyond measure, and mingled in it with a zest which caused
     Sir Patrick often to say she must be stronger certainly than she looked, and there was nothing,
     he thought, more odious in a woman than rude health—a sort of rudeness never certainly
     attributable to Miss Granville.
Agnes's favorite aversion had always been Clara, formerly her cotemporary and rival at
     school, though the rivalship was only felt on one side, as Miss Granville would have remained
     unconscious of its very existence, but for the bitter taunts occasionally levelled at her, and
     the tone of evident irritability in which Agnes took it always for granted that the jealousy
     was mutual, attributing thoughts and motives perpetually to her gentle companion, of which so
     amiable and well-regulated a disposition was incapable. It may generally be observed, that many
     more quarrels arise from people wilfully taking offence, than from people wilfully giving it;
     and there is quite as much ill-temper in the one case as in the other. Clara had suffered much
     on account of her every inadvertent word or action being purposely misconstrued; but she very
     properly viewed the annoyance as a salutary lesson in circumspection, before entering the great
     arena of society, and mildly avoided all collision of interests or opinions with Agnes, though
     her whole powers of conciliation on the part of Sir Patrick gave his sister reason to apprehend
     that his affections might by possibility be engaged to her. Nothing could be more painfully
     irritating than the tone of contempt with which Agnes "spoke at" Clara respecting the art and
     cunning with which some manœuvring misses endeavored to push their fortune in the matrimonial
     world, by making advances to gentlemen, which she would despise herself for condescending to,
     and that lookers on see more of the game than is intended. All this was said in such an
     accidental tone, and in such general terms, that no decided notice could be taken of it by
     Clara, who nevertheless felt so painful a consciousness of what was meant and insinuated, that
     she ceased almost entirely to visit Agnes, or to associate with her.
About the time when Mrs. Smythe left Portobello, Sir Patrick returned from spending a month
     at Lady Towercliffe's in Fife, evidently laboring under a depression of spirits very unusual
     with him; and when Agnes, perplexed by observing that he did not attempt to throw off the cloud
     of melancholy, tinged very strongly with ill-humor, which had so suddenly come over him, tried
     to guess or discover the cause, she found it for some time impossible to gain a glimpse of the
     truth, though she asked as many questions as might have filled a volume of Pinnock's
     Catechisms.
At length, after some miscellaneous conversation one day, Agnes inquired for the twentieth
     time whether the party in Fife had been agreeable, when Sir Patrick shortly and drily
     replied,
"Clara Granville was there!"
"But had you any new beauties?"
"Clara Granville!"
"Pshaw! Well, then! were there any agreeable people?"
"Clara Granville!"
"You are beyond all bearing absurd and tormenting, Pat!" continued Agnes, with a contemptuous
     toss of her head; "but I may at least venture with impunity to ask, were any of the ladies well
     dressed?"
"Clara Granville!"
"That ends my curiosity on the subject of your visit," replied Agnes, angrily affecting to
     yawn. "Never try to persuade me you care for Clara. She is the most unflirtable girl in the
     world! As cold as a statue of ice in an east wind! She has the most tiresome style of
     prettiness that can be conceived, with that alabaster paleness, that petrifying calmness of
     manner, and a heart like a cucumber! The very style of her dress is wearying, with not a color
     that one could give a name to; and then her long undertoned tete-a-tete conversations about
     nobody knows what, as dull and monotonous as a dinner-bell, never enlivened with a bit of
     gossip, nor spiced with any scandal! There is a whole "Society for the suppression of vice" in
     her eye every time she looks at one! She would evidently be terrified for the echo of her own
     voice, and never yet committed the indiscretion of a laugh!"
"Are you done?" asked Sir Patrick, in a tone of concentrated anger, which would have silenced
     any one but Agnes.
"Done! I could speak for two hours without telling you half how little I think of Clara
     Granville!" said she, in a paroxysm of eloquence. "One comfort is, however, she will never
     take!"
"But Clara has already 'taken,' as you elegantly express yourself," exclaimed Sir Patrick,
     who had been walking vehemently up and down the room during this tirade from Agnes, and now
     stood opposite to her, with a look of angry defiance. "Clara is surpassingly lovely! Her
     portrait should be the frontispiece to Finden's next Book of Beauty! She has the loveliness of
     a seraph!"
"Certainly, if you mean that she looks as if the first breath of wind would blow her down!
     like an overgrown geranium, that should be tied up to a stick!"
"Clara is delicate and graceful as the first frail blossoms of spring," interrupted Sir
     Patrick. "She has but one fault in the world, and that is, being faultless! Clara is worth a
     whole creation of ordinary girls! That look of mild serenity, and those deep, thoughtful eyes,
     looking as serene as the blue firmament above. Her every attitude is what a Guido might have
     delighted to paint. Agnes, there is music and rapture in every tone of her voice! At Lady
     Towercliffe's no one was looked at, nor spoken to, but Miss Granville! She stole into all
     hearts, without any man guessing his danger till too late! Everybody admired, or, I should
     rather, say, loved her!"
"You are 'everybody,' then, I suppose, for I never heard of any one else, who for half a
     moment thought her tolerable. All this nonsense is merely to tease me, Pat. Do confess it at
     once, and be serious!"
"That I never am when I can help it!"
"Well, then, let it always be a jest and I have no objection to call up a laugh, if it be
     your humor; but I would engage to walk out of the world at once, whenever Clara has a serious,
     downright proposal from any presentable-looking man, such as one would not be ashamed to sit in
     a room with!"
"What do you think of me, Agnes?" asked Sir Patrick, walking straight up to her and looking
     his sister full in the face, with a momentary attempt to be facetious, while his countenance
     betrayed considerable agitation. "Would you be much astonished if I had made her an offer?"
"Nonsense, Pat! I would disown you for a brother! Now, do not look like an ogre at me! You
     will say any absurdity in jest!"
"You know, Agnes, I have been a month in the house lately with Clara!" replied Sir Patrick,
     in a voice which sounded by no means like jest; "and that month was more than a lifetime in
     showing me the worth of a real and heartfelt attachment. Even I, mercenary as I am, could value
     it more than gold! I date the beginning of my existence from the hour I first knew her. There
     is a depth of mind and heart in the character of Clara Granville, utterly incomprehensible to
     ordinary observers. She does everything well, and says everything with a grace peculiarly her
     own. Her manner is the very essence of fascination. Every other person seems coarse and vulgar
     in comparison; and I even feel so myself! I know you will treat me to a cannonade of abuse
     against Clara; but that is no matter now," added Sir Patrick, in a tone of deep dejection;
     "perhaps it may do me good!"
"Wonders occur every hour of every day, but this is the greatest of all!" observed Agnes,
     drily. "I never thought you would commit such a piece of disinterested nonsense, as to fall in
     love, gratis, with any penniless girl, and least of all with Clara. If you were to choose among
     all the young ladies I know, blindfold, you could scarcely choose one more unsuitable! If this
     indeed be true, Clara may be proud of her conquest!"
"She ought!" replied Sir Patrick, glancing at his own magnificent head in a mirror; "but
     being in many respects peculiar, she by no means appreciated the honor as you expect!"
"You are possessed by the very genius of nonsense to-day, Pat! but if such a catch as you
     were to fall in Clara Granville's way, I should like to see her and all her family, not more
     than happy on the occasion!"
"Well, then! open your ears of astonishment, Agnes! She has actually rather refused me than
     otherwise! I am positively more in love with Clara, than language can express! I could pursue
     her to the very ends of the earth! I must, and shall marry her! I would shoot myself to-morrow,
     if I thought there could be doubt of it," exclaimed Sir Patrick, vehemently, while Agnes became
     gradually as grave as night. "Clara at first actually accepted me! She was your sister-in-law
     elect, for three long and happy weeks, and I did not think life could have given me so much to
     live for; but she afterwards most perversely and unaccountably revoked! What do you think was
     the reason, Agnes, of all reasons in the world!"
"I am bad at guessing absurdities," replied Agnes, who would have hurled a more angry answer
     at her brother, had she dared. "Whatever might be the cause, it was very lucky for you, who
     may, if you know your own value, make the first match in the kingdom!"
"Well, then! actually that she thought my religious principles not sufficiently serious! That
     her brother disapproved of my morals and conduct! I offered her any terms! To attend chapel
     with her once every Sunday; to refrain from Sunday dinners, and Sunday travelling! Not even to
     ride out on horseback that day; and, in short, to pass Sir Andrew's whole Sunday bill in my
     house; but it did not satisfy her! What would they have!" continued Sir Patrick, gnawing his
     lip with vexation. "I gave her a carte blanche to put my name down as a
     subscriber to as many tract, missionary, and slave-abolition societies, as she pleased, and
     asked her how many distressed families she wished me to maintain."
"How excessively handsome!" said Agnes, satirically. "All I need say is, it was very
     genteel!"
"Yet Clara persevered in giving me a plump decline! No wonder you look incredulous! I can
     scarcely yet believe it myself! This shall not last, however! I felt piqued at first, and left
     her. I am always too soon, or too late, in all I do; but it must be tried again and again! I
     would rather live without the sun and stars, than without Clara Granville! The very repetition
     of her name is a pleasure! Agnes, what can you do to assist me!"
"Assist! I shall do everything in the world to bring you back your senses, Pat! Rather than
     see that grave, priggish, matter-of-fact, Clara, my sister-in-law, I would——"
Agnes could not, at the moment, think of any illustration sufficiently strong to exemplify
     her abhorrence of such a catastrophe, and twisted her ringlets over her finger for some
     moments, in dignified and portentous silence. At length she said, with an air of supreme
     contempt, "You know, Pat! Clara Granville has not a shilling in the wide world!—never had! At
     school she used to be like a bale of cotton from the manufactories; cotton stockings, pink
     gingham frocks, and horrid grey beaver gloves! She once had a silk dress, and it was turned, I
     think, three times!"
"Fiddlesticks and nonsense! So much the better! She will be an excellent wife for a poor man;
     and poor enough I shall soon be! You need not argue with a milestone, but put a good face on
     the matter in time, Agnes; for during all the four thousand years that men have been falling in
     love, and marrying, I believe no one ever did so merely to please his sister, and I am not the
     man to begin! In most respects, I may, perhaps, be sordidly anxious for money, but in the
     matter of love I have taken the whim of being disinterested. If Clara had the Bank of England
     for her portion, I could not love her more. As for heiresses, I hear the only one worth a
     thought, Miss Howard Smytheson, with her million a-year, is bespoke to order for De
     Crespigny."
"Perhaps he has taken the whim of being disinterested also!" replied Agnes, arranging a
     favorite curl with great complacency at a mirror. "His uncle is very arbitrary; and like all
     uncles, continues for ever to think his nephew a perfect boy. He threatened lately to marry
     himself, if Captain De Crespigny declined! That old dot has some spirit! He seems not to be
     aware that there is such a thing in the world for himself as a refusal; and certainly, Pat, I
     can scarcely fancy the woman in existence who could refuse you. I hardly know whether to wonder
     most that Clara had the opportunity, or that she had the inclination!"
"The whim will soon wear off! She loves me, that is certain; but if even she hated me, it
     would make no difference in my attachment. I like her the better for showing some spirit, and
     great disinterestedness. Clara's conduct was like herself, beautiful. Her affections are mine!
     I see it, and no earthly power can tear her from me! I would follow her to the very grave."
Sir Patrick did not by any means find Clara's resolutions, which were formed upon principle,
     of such very malleable materials as he had prophesied. His own feelings were, on all occasions,
     like a whirlwind; and his eagerness, excited to excess by opposition, became unbounded to meet
     Clara, or to catch the most distant glimpse of her shadow,—but in vain. Day after day he
     contrived to pass beneath her window, but she had adopted invisibility; and evening after
     evening, he obliged Agnes, greatly against her inclination, to send the very kindest notes of
     invitation, which he dictated himself, asking her to the house; but the polite apology which
     invariably returned, might almost have been lithographed, it became so frequently necessary;
     yet still Sir Patrick persevered and hoped, saying one day, in a voice of irritability and
     depression, to Agnes, "It seems as if we were destined never to see Clara again!"
"That would be too much happiness," exclaimed Agnes peevishly; twisting Clara's last reply
     into a thousand shapes and tossing it into the fire. "This is all so like you, Pat! You invent
     a thousand reasons for wishing something till it is obtained, and then you care for it no more!
     If Clara Granville consented, you would be, like Sir Peter Teazle, 'the most miserable man
     alive before people were done wishing you joy!' Men are all so changeable and selfish!"
"Whether are men or women most selfish, I should like to know?"
"Men, decidedly! From six years old, till sixty, they seem born and brought up to think of no
     one's comfort but their own, and they always marry to please themselves!"
"Of course! and very right they should!"
Agnes had now got upon a favorite subject of declamation, the selfishness of mankind,—for
     those who are selfish or ill-tempered themselves, live always under the delusion that they are
     the only persons living entirely exempt from such faults,—but her eloquence now soon left her
     "in possession of the house," as Sir Patrick made a rapid retreat, followed by that very
     effective slamming of the door, so infallible a receipt for obtaining the last word in an
     argument, and for asserting in undoubted terms, a very decided view of the subject in
     question.
Though Sir Patrick Dunbar had long been known as a Tattersall and Doncaster man, yet Clara
     Granville had little suspected that his name was implicated in transactions of rather an
     equivocal complection, while the good-natured half of the world persevered in calling it
     scandal, being unwilling very severely to censure the peccadilloes of the handsomest and most
     agreeable man in their circle of society, living only for the enjoyment of the senses and the
     happiness of the present hour, while he thought it too long a look-out to anticipate what might
     happen the day after to-morrow. In respect to Sir Patrick's reputation, a vague understanding
     seemed to prevail that all was not right, yet no explicit explanation seemed ever to be
     obtained.

Some thing there was—what, none presumed to say,
Clouds lightly passing as the summer day.

There are not only faults in the very best characters, but redeeming qualities also in the
     very worst, and with much selfishness, the result of a perverted education, the handsome and
     fascinating Sir Patrick had naturally a good temper and excitable affections, though these were
     wound up occasionally to the wildest excess, while his fortune was not more recklessly
     squandered than his attachment in the momentary impulse of an hour.
As, therefore, no man is so thoroughly excellent as to be without errors, neither is any
     living mortal so depraved as to be without virtues, and the utmost extreme, in one respect or
     the other, will only be perfected in an eternal world. It often seems to an observer, as if two
     opposite beings had been kneaded into one, since qualities so contradictory may be traced in
     the same individual.
Though Sir Patrick Dunbar was eager and rapacious in acquiring money, and would incur any
     meanness to avoid paying it, he seemed, nevertheless, lavish, and what some people mis-called
     generous, in squandering what he called his own. Though cold and selfish in general, some fine
     impulses had been in his nature, which proved him capable of vehement, persevering, and
     passionate attachment, where his affections, or rather his fancy, had been once engaged; while,
     at the same time, he was more ashamed to testify any feeling than he would have been to commit
     a crime, and endeavored to blind people towards that sensibility which was in reality the
     redeeming point in his character, by talking often with the utmost contempt and even ridicule
     of all those for whom he might have been supposed to feel the weakness of a real
     attachment.
Sir Patrick had indeed been, what his companions called, "fairly caught," by Clara; and his
     heart, till now hermetically sealed against all real confidence and friendship, was now for the
     first time unclosed, in its inmost recesses, while even his hackneyed mind seemed to catch a
     ray of light and warmth from the sunny freshness and purity of Clara's intellectual mind. Her
     intelligent conversation, enlivened by a vein of sly pleasing humor, had completely taken him
     by surprise, being as fresh and gentle as a summer breeze, while her appearance, so young,
     timid, and lovely, caused the eye to rest on her with a sentiment of almost melancholy
     interest. Clara had only emerged from school, finally, a few days before Sir Patrick met her at
     Lady Towercliffe's, and her extreme naivete was her first attraction, though that was
     superseded before long by still greater admiration, while he became hourly more fascinated by
     her melancholy songs and thoughtful conversation.
To Clara, Sir Patrick had only hitherto been known as a school companion of her brother's,
     but so conscientiously did Richard Granville invariably abstain from evil-speaking, that, even
     where justice might have warranted the severest censure, he merely became silent. It is
     observable that, in the wisdom of Providence, nothing is made in vain. Even the very weeds that
     encumber our path have, when under proper restraint, their important uses, and in the mind of
     man, the tendency implanted by nature, to discuss and criticize the conduct of others, has,
     when properly exercised, its own advantages, by acting as a salutary restraint on the conduct
     of those who would otherwise do evil with impunity, and by also giving a timely warning, and
     hanging out a beacon-light to those who would otherwise trust their interest and happiness
     where such confidence was unmerited, and where all contact is dangerous.
Captain De Crespigny's jilting propensities were the less dangerous, from their being so
     generally discussed in society, as few were willing that the unwary should suffer, rather than
     his faults be exposed to censure; but Mr. Granville, by not giving his sister timely warning
     against the dissipated extravagance and almost infidel principles of his old school-companion,
     had now, unfortunately exposed her to a danger he had not anticipated, as it never occurred to
     his imagination, in its wildest fancies, that the reckless, dissolute Sir Patrick, who had long
     sneered at marriage, and even broken that holy tie for others, might find a charm in the pure,
     calm, high-minded Clara, which raised him above his ordinary self, and made him appear all she
     could most like or admire. During their earlier intercourse, she saw nothing in his
     conversation to disapprove, because Sir Patrick most unintentionally deceived her into a belief
     of his being very different from what he really was, owing to the respect with which he treated
     all her opinions; and only when he talked to others, did she become startled occasionally by
     the tone of careless defiance with which he spoke of all those persons and things which she was
     most accustomed to reverence and esteem. Before long, his attachment had become so unbounded,
     that, conscious he could not obtain Clara's hand if she knew his real character, he assumed all
     that seemed most likely to secure her confidence, and, for the pleasure of being with her,
     attended church regularly on Sunday at the village. Clara was astonished at his evident
     ignorance of the forms of devotion; yet knowing his education had been finished by a clergyman,
     she supposed he must have imbibed a due respect for the ordinances; while Lady Towercliffe,
     indulging her usual jobbing propensities, was enchanted to make up a match of any kind in her
     own house, and praised Sir Patrick as the most immaculate and perfect of men.
Clara's intimacy with Sir Patrick had been continually increasing for some time, before his
     attention became so very obvious as to excite her peculiar interest, or to make her conscious
     of a necessity for inquiring into the state of her own heart; but, upon doing so, she became
     instantly aware of the deep hold he had acquired over her thoughts and affections. His frank,
     off-hand, good-humored manner had pleased her, his amusing conversation had enlivened her, and
     at length his ardent professions of attachment interested her deeply, being expressed with all
     the eloquence of natural feeling.
Clara, in the gloomy recesses of Mrs. Penfold's school-room, had learned nothing of the
     world, and her heart at once, therefore, endowed Sir Patrick with all those amiable qualities
     which he assumed, while she yielded herself to the most pleasing of all earthly dreams, that of
     loving and being beloved by one who seemed to deserve and to return her attachment; while her
     sole hesitation in accepting the offer he soon after made of his hand, arose from her doubts,
     whether, in the chief essential to mutual happiness, in religious faith, hope, and morality,
     they were so far of similar mind as to afford a well-grounded prospect of happiness.
In almost undoubting confidence of a satisfactory answer, Clara wrote to consult her brother,
     then studying for holy orders at Oxford, in whose opinion, on all occasions, she implicitly
     relied; and it was with grief and astonishment, which no words could describe, that she
     received a reply, in which Mr. Granville, with affectionate earnestness, reproached himself for
     not having explicitly laid open to her the character of his former companion and ci-devant friend, who was, he grieved to say, a ruined gamester—a bankrupt
     in fame, as much as in fortune, dreaded by the most respectable among women, and shunned by the
     most respectable among men, even by his kind, indulgent, but high-minded uncle, Sir Arthur,—an
     open scoffer frequently at the decencies of life, and still more at its most sacred duties and
     hopes. "Sir Patrick makes no secret of his profligacy," continued Mr. Granville, "showing the
     most flagrant dishonesty in the only way a gentleman can be tempted to do so, by not paying his
     debts, while many poor tradesmen have already been ruined by his extravagance; and he has
     openly entered into a perfect crusade against religion and morality. In short, my dear Clara,
     Sir Patrick is by no means to be trusted with the happiness of another, and least of all with
     yours, being a confirmed roue, still pursuing the very wildest career of unprincipled
     dissipation. Many have already had reason to mourn they ever trusted him or knew him, for he is
     the very reverse of all you believe and wish. It would be extravagant to waste a hope upon the
     reformation of a reckless libertine, who thus outrages every law of God and man; and often have
     you and I agreed, that it was a thing not to be conceived, a woman who rightly valued her
     immortal soul placing herself under the authority and influence of a husband who did not! The
     risk is too great; and how much better to suffer now the sorrow of a separation, than to endure
     the long agony of an unsuitable union, for which your own heart and conscience would
     continually upbraid you. If the tenderest affection of a brother can in any degree compensate
     for the sacrifice, you need not be told, my dear Clara, that I shall bestow it upon you more
     lavishly than ever; and it will be my first earthly wish, as well as my sacred duty, to render
     you happier than you could ever be with a man of principles—, or rather of no principles,—like
     Sir Patrick!"
Had the grave opened at Clara's feet, she could scarcely have been more startled and
     astonished than by the contents of this most unforeseen letter, the first unwelcome line ever
     received from Richard. She could have borne anything but to find her lover unprincipled or
     unworthy; and a wintry chill seemed to gather round her heart, while, with a stifled groan
     which struggled for utterance, she covered her face with her hand, and sank back upon a sofa.
     By a powerful effort, Clara preserved herself from fainting—she was resolved not to faint, and
     she did not—but in the secret chamber of her heart all was darkness, loneliness, and grief.
     Visions of earthly happiness had glittered for a time, in brightest coloring, before her mind;
     but now they must be blotted out by her tears. They all lay prostrate and disfigured at her
     feet, scorched and blasted as if by lightning; and her heart, bewildered by a multitude of
     thoughts and emotions, seemed full almost to bursting.
Clara wept many bitter tears over her letter, and she not only wept but acted. Without delay,
     Clara prepared to return to the relation with whom, during her brother's absence, she usually
     found a home; and before her departure, not only wrote to Sir Patrick, stating in terms of
     touching grief, all her reasons for so suddenly and unwillingly withdrawing from her engagement
     to him; but she had a long and most afflicting interview with him, vainly endeavoring to
     convince her lover, that their total incompatibility of sentiment raised a barrier between
     them, which forbade the possibility of their union.
Sir Patrick became nearly frantic with vexation, while he could not but admire the beautiful
     grace of her manner, and the sorrowful modulations of her voice when she spoke, yet unconscious
     how completely the gentle Clara was ruled by principle as with a sceptre of iron, he seemed
     utterly unable to comprehend why his talking carelessly, or even contemptuously of religion,
     should in any degree affect the preference which she had once confessed for him, and which he
     felt assured she still entertained. With passionate vehemence he urged the depth of his
     attachment, and his total indifference to everything in life but herself, while he warmly
     protested that she, and she only, could complete the reformation which her own influence had
     already begun.
"You love me, Clara, and would cast me off for ever! Impossible! Let us forget all my early
     indiscretions—my vices, then, if it must be so—but why should every leaf of my past life be
     turned over now! Since we met I have been an altered being! I am astonished even at myself! If
     I have deceived you, it is because I deceived myself, but now I am entirely in your power. Use
     it then kindly, and forget all but my attachment; I have staked my whole happiness in life on
     the hope of your accepting me. The wish to deserve you shall be a sufficient motive to fit me
     for all the duties of life. Without you I shall have no object, no hope, not even a home, for
     never more shall I have one unless you share it. Clara, let me throw myself on your compassion,
     if not on your love."
"Oh no!" said Clara, hurriedly, yet with a look of pale and tearful distress, "I dare not
     hesitate! All must be as I have said. It will be most for the happiness of both!"
"Happiness! speak not to me of happiness without you! It is a mockery! Every tie to peace or
     virtue would then be ruptured."
"There are better ties to virtue and stronger," whispered Clara, in a faltering voice, while
     she gasped for utterance, and a glow-like sunset was on her cheek.
"No! no! not for me! There may be amusement, frivolity, gaiety, and dissipation; but I never
     understood the real meaning of happiness till we met. My whole thoughts, feelings, and
     character have been revolutionized to please you, Clara, but your influence alone could snatch
     me from evil—from myself—from all on which I have hitherto wasted my existence. For your sake,
     and for yours alone, I could be all, and more than you wish. Years spent in your society shall
     prove the extent of your influence."
"By trusting to such a hope, many, like me, have wrecked their whole peace both now and
     hereafter," said Clara, trying to speak with firmness, but her voice became almost inaudible.
     "If it were the same thing to will as to do, I have not a doubt of your sincerity; but the mere
     resolution to change established habits, unless the power be derived from above, is only an
     air-built castle to which I dare not trust. It would be easy still to indulge myself in
     romantic schemes of domestic happiness, such as I have lately anticipated, but these hopes
     could only be blossoms without root or durability, unless they arise from firm principles of
     religion. Without such a cement happiness has neither worth nor durability."
"Clara! you have never loved as I do!" exclaimed Sir Patrick reproachfully. "I never did, and
     never can express half what I feel; but you do not yet know the heart you so cruelly
     undervalue! It seems now as if you would rather cut off your hand than bestow it on me!"
"Perhaps in future years—" stammered Clara. "We are both young; and if, for your own sake,
     you alter in some respects, we might yet look forward to—to——"
"Speak not of delay! that is worse than death! I never in my life could endure suspense! No!
     it must—it shall be now, or never!"
"Never, then," replied Clara, in a low, husky, indistinct voice, while, in spite of herself,
     tears rolled over her face. "It ought indeed to be never! Forget me, as if I were already dead!
     I must only consent to pass my life with a confirmed and consistent Christian, completely
     master of himself and of his actions. If we lived for each other, I should have a thousand
     anxieties, regrets, and sorrows, which you could neither foresee nor understand! Oh no! I must
     only love on earth one whom I may hope to love hereafter for ever!"
"Must it be my misfortune, Clara, to have known you?" exclaimed Sir Patrick, with agitated
     energy. "Do you not see that with me, to know excellence is to love it, and that if we were
     constantly together, I should always be like you. The loss of honor, fortune, or reputation, I
     might endure; but your loss I cannot, and will not. Tell me, then, are my whole affections to
     be buried in darkness, never to see a dawn?"
"If my happiness in this world only were at hazard, I would venture all for your sake?"
     replied Clara, in a low, gentle, tremulous voice. "I feel grateful for your attachment—more
     than grateful; but marriage is so very awful and sacred a tie! to devote every early thought,
     every feeling, every hope, every hour of my life to one! I could not and dare not enter on such
     a duty, without a perfect and unalterable confidence. I feel that to be united in love and duty
     where I did not esteem is a misfortune I could not survive—which I could scarcely even wish to
     survive. In giving you my heart, as I have already done, I ventured my all of worldly happiness
     on that one stake, and have lost it; but there are better hopes and higher duties, which bind
     me to follow them, even though death were the consequence."
Sir Patrick clenched his hands vehemently together, while his countenance burned, and
     muttering a curse between his teeth, which chilled the blood of Clara in her veins, he walked
     about the room with rapidly-increasing excitement, till at length stopping before her, he said,
     in accents of angry reproach, "You have spoken my doom, Clara, and only from your own lips
     would I have believed it."
Clara buried her face in her hands, and feeling that her high-wrought fortitude was giving
     way, she hurried towards the door; but as she tremblingly endeavored to open it, Sir Patrick
     again seized her hand, saying, "You are mine, Clara; you are bound by a promise that must not
     be broken!"
"I shall never give myself to another," said she, still hastening away. "Be happy in making
     others happy. May you yet find one who loves you as I have done, and who shall not hereafter
     find the same reasons for giving you up. I shall pray for you, and rejoice in all the good I
     hear. Farewell."
No words could do justice to the silent agony of Clara's young heart, when, in solitary
     grief, she retraced her whole intimacy with Sir Patrick, and reflected that she had bid a last
     adieu to one whom she must not esteem, and yet could not but love. All that this world could
     offer she had rejected for conscience sake. A cold frost seemed to gather around her spirit,
     while, trembling and depressed, she viewed the desolation of all her lately cherished hopes;
     and amidst the ruined fabric of her happiness, she now seemed like some solitary pillar,
     surrounded by the broken fragments of what once supported and adorned it; yet summoning to her
     aid that Christian firmness, which in her amounted to heroism, she gazed on the shattered wreck
     without a wish to restore it at the sacrifice of principle, determined, as far as her sensitive
     nature would admit, to adopt the rule of an aged and experienced Christian, "Hope nothing, fear
     nothing, expect anything, and be prepared for everything!"
