
  CHAPTER XIV.
Marion had a genius for being happy, and much as the unexpected ball had amused her, she
     hurried along the road to Portobello, her cheek dimpling at the recollection of all that had
     passed, while she confidently anticipated one pleasure yet to come from it, the amusement she
     knew Sir Arthur would derive from her adventure; for never did two individuals, when together,
     seem to converse more in accordance with Dr. Johnson's rule, than Marion and her uncle, that
     "the aged should remember that they have been young, and the young that they must yet be
     old."
As Marion arrived within sight of the cottage, her step became more buoyant, and her thoughts
     more joyous, when, seeing Sir Arthur at his open window, she waved her handkerchief to him; and
     Henry, leaping out from a height of about ten feet, ran laughing to meet her, his rich brown
     hair waving in the wind, his color heightened by the exercise, and his eye sparkling with the
     joy of this very unexpected meeting.
While Marion poured out the tea, and poured out, at the same time, a whole flood of
     recollections and circumstances connected with the ball, Sir Arthur equalled her utmost hopes,
     in being amused and enlivened by the description, while he said, in a rallying tone, looking
     fondly at her bright, happy countenance, "My dear Marion, you will never get on in the
     fashionable world! You look too pleased and happy, like a girl in the Christmas holidays. That
     will never do. It is the fashion to be exceedingly fastidious and discontented. You must
     positively give yourself some airs, or I shall have to be angry at you."
"You, uncle Arthur! Do let me see you angry! I cannot fancy such a thing. But pray, publish a
     volume of advice to young ladies on their first coming out. It would be a great pity for the
     rising generation not to benefit by your remarks," said Marion, gaily seating herself at the
     window. "I feel this morning as cheerful as that view of yours from the window, where the waves
     are dancing in sunshine, the ocean one liquid diamond, the sands all sparkling with gladness,
     and the white-winged vessels gliding joyfully along."
"External things take their expression from the feelings with which they are looked at,"
     replied Sir Arthur, with sudden emotion. "That wide desert of sand seems to me this morning
     boundless as human wishes, and barren as their reality. I would not willingly throw a cloud
     over your happy face, Marion; but it must be! How strange, that even you, young and joyous as
     you are, must be doomed, like all the children of man, to sorrow! The delight of seeing you
     here, my very dear girl, had banished all care from my mind for a time; but it is on your
     account, far—far more than my own—that I feel anxious and melancholy."
Marion put her arm gently within that of Sir Arthur, and looked affectionately, but silently,
     in his face, while he continued, in accents of manly regret and indignation, while there was a
     mournful tenderness in the look he turned on his niece,
"You have not heard, Marion, that the little I ever had has been made less by a mean
     transaction of my nephew's. For my own part, this matters little, as it is not in the nature of
     things, that with all my accumulated infirmities, I should live as much as a couple of years.
     My sight has almost entirely failed, my general health is equally bad, and my long-faded
     spirits owe their best support to religion, and to the affection of yourself and Henry."
Marion silently and tearfully kissed her uncle's check, and pressed his hand more closely in
     her own, while he proceeded, in accents of increasing emotion,
"My boy here wishes, as he ought, to pursue a profession, and Henry will be an honor to any
     one he enters. He has never cost me an anxious thought, nor a single shilling. I trust his
     anonymous annuity will be always continued, and that on his account I need not lament my
     impoverished circumstances; but my chief earthly care is for you, Marion. Though Agnes, too,
     shows me little attention, and no kindness, I cannot forget whose child she is, nor think of
     her future life without anxiety. I had hoped to have the means of being useful to both of you
     while I lived—to have offered you a shelter here, in case, as I expect soon, there should be no
     other for you—and to have left you both at last above absolute penury, when I am at rest in the
     grave. It is for your sakes only that I would now cling to the tattered shreds of my worn-out
     existence; but this is a difficult world for unprotected, portionless girls, in which to buffet
     their way onwards. Remember, dear Marion, it is my misfortune, not my fault, if death now
     overtake me before I can do anything for my brother's children."
Marion clasped her arms round Sir Arthur's neck, and wept in silence. There was a weight of
     grief in all he had said, for which she was totally unprepared, and which she felt in every
     fibre of her heart. Sir Patrick's disgraceful conduct, and the impending departure of Henry, so
     long her companion and friend, were afflictions for which she was in some degree prepared; and
     they seemed as nothing, compared with what her venerable uncle said, for the first time, of
     himself. He was a strong-minded man, unwilling to obtrude his infirmities and feelings on the
     notice of any one, anxious always rather to borrow cheerfulness from those around, than to
     cause anxiety or grief; but a sense of its absolute necessity had induced him to show Marion,
     in some degree, her real position, and in doing so, had obliged him for once to speak of his
     own pecuniary losses and growing frailty. Long as the Admiral had been threatened with
     blindness, brought on by the pernicious climates in which he had served, the apprehension of
     actually losing him had hitherto been so far from Marion's thoughts, that she frequently
     pleased herself with anticipating the time when she might herself supply, by reading to him and
     walking with him, the place of that gloomy and spectral-looking Mr. Howard, one of the few
     people in the world whom Marion disliked, at the same time that she almost envied him for being
     so constantly in the society of Sir Arthur, and for being so indispensably useful to him.
Marion felt that all the world would be cold and bleak to her indeed, as if the sun had left
     the firmament, if she lost the warmth of affection and kindness to which, from infancy, she had
     been accustomed, in the house of her beloved uncle, the only parent she had ever known. If such
     a misfortune were to come, who would then advise her—who would then be interested in her
     feelings—who would believe in the sincerity of her affections—who would be happy when she
     appeared, and grieved when she departed? All this rushed upon Marion's young mind when she
     arose to depart, while bitter tears coursed each other down her cheeks, and large drops stood
     in the nearly blinded eyes of Sir Arthur, which he endeavored to hide, as he affectionately
     embraced her, saying, in a tone of dignified, but melancholy composure,
"Come back soon, my dear girl! Let me see that face often, while I can see at all! You are
     the ivy giving life and cheerfulness to a blasted tree."
"Let me remain with you always!" whispered Marion, in a tone of the deepest earnestness,
     "dear uncle Arthur! It is impossible to tell how happy I could be with you, but I have an
     abhorrence now, not to be expressed, of my present situation. It seems little short of
     swindling even for me, to live as I do, with all our debts unpaid. When I sit down at my
     brother's table, or wear the dresses he gives me, I cannot but feel myself an accomplice. It is
     degrading to my very heart, and I would not willingly do it. Take me home, dear uncle, to the
     best home I have ever known. Let me read to you, write for you, walk with you, and we shall be
     so happy—so very happy together."
"It may come to that too soon, dear Marion, and when it does, no parent ever received his own
     child with more pleasure than I shall welcome you. Even with all my shame and sorrow, then, for
     your brother, my very heart shall rejoice to see you, but not yet. Patrick is your guardian—a
     most unfit one certainly;—but while he is able and willing to receive you, which cannot
     probably be long,—it would ill become me to interfere. In remaining with him, you fulfil your
     father's will, who bequeathed you to his care,—a trust he has but little deserved. Remain with
     him, however, at present, and do not feel answerable for his actions or circumstances, over
     which you have no control."
