<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
CHAPTER I.
It was a bright day in the early spring of 1869. All Paris seemed to have turned out to
      enjoy itself. The Tuileries, the Champs Elysees, the Bois de Boulogne, swarmed with idlers. A
      stranger might have wondered where Toil was at work, and in what nook Poverty lurked
      concealed. A millionaire from the London Exchange, as he looked round on the magasins, the
      equipages, the dresses of the women; as he inquired the prices in the shops and the rent of
      apartments,—might have asked himself, in envious wonder, How on earth do those gay Parisians
      live? What is their fortune? Where does it come from?
As the day declined, many of the scattered loungers crowded into the Boulevards; the cafes
      and restaurants began to light up.
About this time a young man, who might be some five or six and twenty, was walking along the
      Boulevard des Italiens, heeding little the throng through which he glided his solitary way:
      there was that in his aspect and bearing which caught attention. He looked a somebody; but
      though unmistakably a Frenchman, not a Parisian. His dress was not in the prevailing mode: to
      a practised eye it betrayed the taste and the cut of a provincial tailor. His gait was not
      that of the Parisian,—less lounging, more stately; and, unlike the Parisian, he seemed
      indifferent to the gaze of others.
Nevertheless there was about him that air of dignity or distinction which those who are
      reared from their cradle in the pride of birth acquire so unconsciously that it seems
      hereditary and inborn. It must also be confessed that the young man himself was endowed with a
      considerable share of that nobility which Nature capriciously distributes among her favourites
      with little respect for their pedigree and blazon, the nobility of form and face. He was tall
      and well shaped, with graceful length of limb and fall of shoulders; his face was handsome, of
      the purest type of French masculine beauty,—the nose inclined to be aquiline, and delicately
      thin, with finely-cut open nostrils; the complexion clear,—the eyes large, of a light hazel,
      with dark lashes,—the hair of a chestnut brown, with no tint of auburn,—the beard and mustache
      a shade darker, clipped short, not disguising the outline of lips, which were now compressed,
      as if smiles had of late been unfamiliar to them; yet such compression did not seem in harmony
      with the physiognomical character of their formation, which was that assigned by Lavater to
      temperaments easily moved to gayety and pleasure.
Another man, about his own age, coming quickly out of one of the streets of the Chausee
      d’Antin, brushed close by the stately pedestrian above described, caught sight of his
      countenance, stopped short, and exclaimed, “Alain!” The person thus abruptly accosted turned
      his eye tranquilly on the eager face, of which all the lower part was enveloped in black
      beard; and slightly lifting his hat, with a gesture of the head that implied, “Sir, you are
      mistaken; I have not the honour to know you,” continued his slow indifferent way. The would-be
      acquaintance was not so easily rebuffed. “Peste,” he said, between his teeth, “I am certainly
      right. He is not much altered: of course I AM; ten years of Paris would improve an
      orang-outang.” Quickening his step, and regaining the side of the man he had called “Alain,”
      he said, with a well-bred mixture of boldness and courtesy in his tone and countenance,
“Ten thousand pardons if I am wrong. Put surely I accost Alain de Kerouec, son of the
      Marquis de Rochebriant.”
“True, sir; but—”
“But you do not remember me, your old college friend, Frederic Lemercier?”
“Is it possibly?” cried Alain, cordially, and with an animation which charged the whole
      character of his countenance. “My dear Frederic, my dear friend, this is indeed good fortune!
      So you, too, are at Paris?”
“Of course; and you? Just come, I perceive,” he added, somewhat satirically, as, linking his
      arm in his new-found friend’s, he glanced at the cut of that friend’s coat-collar.
“I have been here a fortnight,” replied Alain.
“Hem! I suppose you lodge in the old Hotel de Rochebriant. I passed it yesterday, admiring
      its vast facade, little thinking you were its inmate.”
“Neither am I; the hotel does not belong to me; it was sold some years ago by my
      father.”
“Indeed! I hope your father got a good price for it; those grand hotels have trebled their
      value within the last five years. And how is your father? Still the same polished grand
      seigneur? I never saw him but once, you know; and I shall never forget his smile, style grand
      monarque, when he patted me on the head and tipped me ten napoleons.”
“My father is no more,” said Alain, gravely; “he has been dead nearly three years.”
“Ciel! forgive me; I am greatly shocked. Hem! so you are now the Marquis de Rochebriant, a
      great historical name, worth a large sum in the market. Few such names left. Superb place your
      old chateau, is it not?”
“A superb place, no—a venerable ruin, yes!”
“Ah, a ruin! so much the better. All the bankers are mad after ruins: so charming an
      amusement to restore them. You will restore yours, without doubt. I will introduce you to such
      an architect! has the ‘moyen age’ at his fingers’ ends. Dear,—but a genius.”
The young Marquis smiled,—for since he had found a college friend, his face showed that it
      could smile,—smiled, but not cheerfully, and answered,
“I have no intention to restore Rochebriant. The walls are solid: they have weathered the
      storms of six centuries, they will last my time, and with me the race perishes.”
“Bah! the race perish, indeed! you will marry. ‘Parlez moi de ca’: you could not come to a
      better man. I have a list of all the heiresses at Paris, bound in russia leather. You may take
      your choice out of twenty. Ah, if I were but a Rochebriant! It is an infernal thing to come
      into the world a Lemercier. I am a democrat, of course. A Lemercier would be in a false
      position if he were not. But if any one would leave me twenty acres of land, with some antique
      right to the De and a title, faith, would not I be an aristocrat, and stand up for my order?
      But now we have met, pray let us dine together. Ah! no doubt you are engaged every day for a
      month. A Rochebriant just new to Paris must be ‘fete’ by all the Faubourg.”
“No,” answered Alain, simply, “I am not engaged; my range of acquaintance is more
      circumscribed than you suppose.”
“So much the better for me. I am luckily disengaged today, which is not often the case, for
      I am in some request in my own set, though it is not that of the Faubourg. Where shall we
      dine?—at the Trois Freres?”
“Wherever you please. I know no restaurant at Paris, except a very ignoble one, close by my
      lodging.”
“‘Apropos’, where do you lodge?”
“Rue de l’Universite, Numero —.”
“A fine street, but ‘triste’. If you have no longer your family hotel, you have no excuse to
      linger in that museum of mummies, the Faubourg St. Germain; you must go into one of the new
      quarters by the Champs Elysees. Leave it to me; I’ll find you a charming apartment. I know one
      to be had a bargain,—a bagatelle,—five hundred naps a-year. Cost you about two or three
      thousand more to furnish tolerably, not showily. Leave all to me. In three days you shall be
      settled. Apropos! horses! You must have English ones. How many?—three for the saddle, two for
      your ‘coupe’? I’ll find them for you. I will write to London to-morrow: Reese [Rice] is your
      man.”
“Spare yourself that trouble, my dear Frederic. I keep no horses and no coupe. I shall not
      change my apartment.” As he said this, Rochebriant drew himself up somewhat haughtily.
“Faith,” thought Lemercier, “is it possible that the Marquis is poor? No. I have always
      heard that the Rochebriants were among the greatest proprietors in Bretagne. Most likely, with
      all his innocence of the Faubourg St. Germain, he knows enough of it to be aware that I,
      Frederic Lemercier, am not the man to patronize one of its greatest nobles. ‘Sacre bleu!’ if I
      thought that; if he meant to give himself airs to me, his old college friend,—I would—I would
      call him out.”
Just as M. Lemercier had come to that bellicose resolution, the Marquis said, with a smile
      which, though frank, was not without a certain grave melancholy in its expression, “My dear
      Frederic, pardon me if I seem to receive your friendly offers ungraciously. But I believe that
      I have reasons you will approve for leading at Paris a life which you certainly will not
      envy;” then, evidently desirous to change the subject, he said in a livelier tone, “But what a
      marvellous city this Paris of ours is! Remember I had never seen it before: it burst on me
      like a city in the Arabian Nights two weeks ago. And that which strikes me most—I say it with
      regret and a pang of conscience—is certainly not the Paris of former times, but that Paris
      which M. Buonaparte—I beg pardon, which the Emperor—has called up around him, and identified
      forever with his reign. It is what is new in Paris that strikes and enthrals me. Here I see
      the life of France, and I belong to her tombs!”
“I don’t quite understand you,” said Lemercier. “If you think that because your father and
      grandfather were Legitimists, you have not the fair field of living ambition open to you under
      the Empire, you never were more mistaken. ‘Moyen age,’ and even rococo, are all the rage. You
      have no idea how valuable your name would be either at the Imperial Court or in a Commercial
      Company. But with your fortune you are independent of all but fashion and the Jockey Club.
“And ‘apropos’ of that, pardon me,—what villain made your coat?—let me know; I will denounce
      him to the police.” Half amused, half amazed, Alain Marquis de Rochebriant looked at Frederic
      Lemercier much as a good-tempered lion may look upon a lively poodle who takes a liberty with
      his mane, and after a pause he replied curtly, “The clothes I wear at Paris were made in
      Bretagne; and if the name of Rochebriant be of any value at all in Paris, which I doubt, let
      me trust that it will make me acknowledged as ‘gentilhomme,’ whatever my taste in a coat or
      whatever the doctrines of a club composed—of jockeys.”
“Ha, ha!” cried Lemercier, freeing himself from the arm of his friend, and laughing the more
      irresistibly as he encountered the grave look of the Marquis. “Pardon me,—I can’t help it,—the
      Jockey Club,—composed of jockeys!—it is too much!—the best joke. My dear, Alain, there is some
      of the best blood of Europe in the Jockey Club; they would exclude a plain bourgeois like me.
      But it is all the same: in one respect you are quite right. Walk in a blouse if you please:
      you are still Rochebriant; you would only be called eccentric. Alas! I am obliged to send to
      London for my pantaloons: that comes of being a Lemercier. But here we are in the Palais
      Royal.”
</div></body></text></TEI>