<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="121">
L’ENVOI.
The intelligent reader will perceive that the story I relate is virtually closed with the
      preceding chapter; though I rejoice to think that what may be called its plot does not find
      its denouement amidst the crimes and the frenzy of the Guerre des Communeaux. Fit subjects
      these, indeed, for the social annalist in times to come. When crimes that outrage humanity
      have their motive or their excuse in principles that demand the demolition of all upon which
      the civilisation of Europe has its basis-worship, property, and marriage—in order to
      reconstruct a new civilisation adapted to a new humanity, it is scarcely possible for the
      serenest contemporary to keep his mind in that state of abstract reasoning with which
      Philosophy deduces from some past evil some existent good. For my part, I believe that
      throughout the whole known history of mankind, even in epochs when reason is most misled and
      conscience most perverted, there runs visible, though fine and threadlike, the chain of
      destiny, which has its roots in the throne of an All-wise and an All-good; that in the wildest
      illusions by which muititudes are frenzied, there may be detected gleams of prophetic truths;
      that in the fiercest crimes which, like the disease of an epidemic, characterise a peculiar
      epoch under abnormal circumstances, there might be found instincts or aspirations towards some
      social virtues to be realised ages afterwards by happier generations, all tending to save man
      from despair of the future, were the whole society to unite for the joyless hour of his race
      in the abjuration of soul and the denial of God, because all irresistibly establishing that
      yearning towards an unseen future which is the leading attribute of soul, evincing the
      government of a divine Thought which evolves out of the discords of one age the harmonies of
      another, and, in the world within us as in the world without, enforces upon every unclouded
      reason the distinction between Providence and chance.
The account subjoined may suffice to say all that rests to be said of those individuals in
      whose fate, apart from the events or personages that belong to graver history, the reader of
      this work may have conceived an interest. It is translated from the letter of Frederic
      Lemercier to Graham Vane, dated June ——, a month after the defeat of the Communists.
“Dear and distinguished Englishman, whose name I honour but fail to pronounce, accept my
      cordial thanks for your interests in such remains of Frederic Lemercier as yet survive the
      ravages of Famine, Equality, Brotherhood, Petroleum, and the Rights of Labour. I did not
      desert my Paris when M. Thiers, ‘parmula non bene relicta,’ led his sagacious friends and his
      valiant troops to the groves of Versailles, and confided to us unarmed citizens the
      preservation of order and property from the insurgents whom he left in possession of our forts
      and cannon. I felt spellbound by the interest of the sinistoe melodrame, with its quick
      succession of scenic effects and the metropolis of the world for its stage. Taught by
      experience, I did not aspire to be an actor; and even as a spectator, I took care neither to
      hiss nor applaud. Imitating your happy England, I observed a strict neutrality; and, safe
      myself from danger, left my best friends to the care of the gods.
“As to political questions, I dare not commit myself to a conjecture. At this rouge et noir
      table, all I can say is, that whichever card turns up, it is either a red or a black one. One
      gamester gains for the moment by the loss of the other; the table eventually ruins both.
“No one believes that the present form of government can last; every one differs as to that
      which can. Raoul de Vandemar is immovably convinced of the restoration of the Bourbons.
      Savarin is meditating a new journal devoted to the cause of the Count of Paris. De Brew and
      the old Count de Passy, having in turn espoused and opposed every previous form of government,
      naturally go in for a perfectly novel experiment, and are for constitutional dictatorship
      under the Duc d’Aumale, which he is to hold at his own pleasure, and ultimately resign to his
      nephew the Count, under the mild title of a constitutional king;—that is, if it ever suits the
      pleasure of a dictator to depose himself. To me this seems the wildest of notions. If the
      Duc’s administration were successful, the French would insist on keeping it; and if the uncle
      were unsuccessful, the nephew would not have a chance. Duplessis retains his faith in the
      Imperial dynasty; and that Imperialist party is much stronger than it appears on the surface.
      So many of the bourgeoisie recall with a sigh eighteen years of prosperous trade; so many of
      the military officers, so many of the civil officials, identify their career with the
      Napoleonic favour; and so many of the Priesthood, abhorring the Republic, always liable to
      pass into the hands of those who assail religion,—unwilling to admit the claim of the
      Orleanists, are at heart for the Empire.
“But I will tell you one secret. I and all the quiet folks like me (we are more numerous
      than any one violent faction) are willing to accept any form of government by which we have
      the best chance of keeping our coats on our backs. Liberte, Egalite, Fraternity, are gone
      quite out of fashion; and Mademoiselle—has abandoned her great chant of the Marseillaise, and
      is drawing tears from enlightened audiences by her pathetic delivery of ‘O Richard! O mon
      roi!’”
“Now about the other friends of whom you ask for news.
“Wonders will never cease. Louvier and Duplessis are no longer deadly rivals. They have
      become sworn friends, and are meditating a great speculation in common, to commence as soon as
      the Prussian debt is paid off. Victor de Mauleon brought about this reconciliation in a single
      interview during the brief interregnum between the Peace and the Guerre des Communeaux. You
      know how sternly Louvier was bent upon seizing Alain de Rochebriant’s estates. Can you
      conceive the true cause? Can you imagine it possible that a hardened money-maker like Louvier
      should ever allow himself to be actuated, one way or the other, by the romance of a
      sentimental wrong? Yet so it was. It seems that many years ago he was desperately in love with
      a girl who disappeared from his life, and whom he believed to have been seduced by the late
      Marquis de Rochebriant. It was in revenge for this supposed crime that he had made himself the
      principal mortgagee of the late Marquis; and, visiting the sins of the father on the son, had,
      under the infernal disguise of friendly interest, made himself sole mortgagee to Alain, upon
      terms apparently the most generous. The demon soon showed his griffe, and was about to
      foreclose, when Duplessis came to Alain’s relief; and Rochebriant was to be Valerie’s dot on
      her marriage with Alain. The Prussian war, of course, suspended all such plans, pecuniary and
      matrimonial. Duplessis, whose resources were terribly crippled by the war, attempted
      operations in London with a view of raising the sum necessary to pay off the mortgage;—found
      himself strangely frustrated and baffled. Louvier was in London, and defeated his rival’s
      agent in every speculation. It became impossible for Duplessis to redeem the mortgage. The two
      men came to Paris with the peace. Louvier determined both to seize the Breton lands and to
      complete the ruin of Duplessis, when he learned from De Mauleon that he had spent half his
      life in a baseless illusion; that Alain’s father was innocent of the crime for which his son
      was to suffer;—and Victor, with that strange power over men’s minds which was so peculiar to
      him, talked Louvier into mercy if not into repentance. In short, the mortgage is to be paid
      off by instalments at the convenience of Duplessis. Alain’s marriage with Valerie is to take
      place in a few weeks. The fournisseurs are already gone to fit up the old chateau for the
      bride, and Louvier is invited to the wedding.
“I have all this story from Alain, and from Duplessis himself. I tell the tale as ‘twas told
      to me, with all the gloss of sentiment upon its woof. But between ourselves, I am too Parisian
      not to be sceptical as to the unalloyed amiability of sudden conversions. And I suspect that
      Louvier was no longer in a condition to indulge in the unprofitable whim of turning rural
      seigneur. He had sunk large sums and incurred great liabilities in the new street to be called
      after his name; and that street has been twice ravaged, first by the Prussian siege, and next
      by the Guerre des Communeaux; and I can detect many reasons why Louvier should deem it prudent
      not only to withdraw from the Rochebriant seizure, and make sure of peacefully recovering the
      capital lent on it, but establishing joint interest and quasi partnership with a financier so
      brilliant and successful as Armand Duplessis has hitherto been.
“Alain himself is not quite recovered from his wound, and is now at Rochebriant, nursed by
      his aunt and Valerie. I have promised to visit him next week. Raoul de Vandemar is still at
      Paris with his mother, saying, there is no place where one Christian man can be of such
      service. The old Count declines to come back, saying there is no place where a philosopher can
      be in such danger.
“I reserve as my last communication, in reply to your questions, that which is the gravest.
      You say that you saw in the public journals brief notice of the assassination of Victor de
      Mauleon; and you ask for such authentic particulars as I can give of that event, and of the
      motives of the assassin.
“I need not, of course, tell you how bravely the poor Vicomte behaved throughout the siege;
      but he made many enemies among the worst members of the National Guard by the severity of his
      discipline; and had he been caught by the mob the same day as Clement Thomas, who committed
      the same offence, would have certainly shared the fate of that general. Though elected a
      depute, he remained at Paris a few days after Thiers & Co. left it, in the hope of
      persuading the party of Order, including then no small portion of the National Guards, to take
      prompt and vigorous measures to defend the city against the Communists. Indignant at their
      pusillanimity, he then escaped to Versailles. There he more than confirmed the high reputation
      he had acquired during the siege, and impressed the ablest public men with the belief that he
      was destined to take a very leading part in the strife of party. When the Versailles troops
      entered Paris, he was, of course, among them in command of a battalion.
“He escaped safe through that horrible war of barricades, though no man more courted danger.
      He inspired his men with his own courage. It was not till the revolt was quenched on the
      evening of the 28th May that he met his death. The Versailles soldiers, naturally exasperated,
      were very prompt in seizing and shooting at once every passenger who looked like a foe. Some
      men under De Mauleon had seized upon one of these victims, and were hurrying him into the next
      street for execution, when, catching sight of the Vicomte, he screamed out, ‘Lebeau, save
      me!’
“At that cry De Mauleon rushed forward, arrested his soldiers, cried, ‘This man is
      innocent—a harmless physician. I answer for him.’ As he thus spoke, a wounded Communist, lying
      in the gutter amidst a heap of the slain, dragged himself up, reeled towards De Mauleon,
      plunged a knife between his shoulders, and dropped down dead.
“The Vicomte was carried into a neighbouring house, from all the windows of which the
      tricolour was suspended; and the Medecin whom he had just saved from summary execution
      examined and dressed his wound. The Vicomte lingered for more than an hour, but expired in the
      effort to utter some words, the sense of which those about him endeavoured in vain to
      seize.
“It was from the Medecin that the name of the assassin and the motive for the crime were
      ascertained. The miscreant was a Red Republican and Socialist named Armand Monnier. He had
      been a very skilful workman, and earning, as such, high wages. But he thought fit to become an
      active revolutionary politician, first led into schemes for upsetting the world by the
      existing laws of marriage, which had inflicted on him one woman who ran away from him, but
      being still legally his wife, forbade him to marry another woman with whom he lived, and to
      whom he seems to have been passionately attached.
“These schemes, however, he did not put into any positive practice till he fell in with a
      certain Jean Lebeau, who exercised great influence over him, and by whom he was admitted into
      one of the secret revolutionary societies which had for their object the overthrow of the
      Empire. After that time his head became turned. The fall of the Empire put an end to the
      society he had joined: Lebeau dissolved it. During the siege Monnier was a sort of leader
      among the ouvriers; but as it advanced and famine commenced, he contracted the habit of
      intoxication. His children died of cold and hunger. The woman he lived with followed them to
      the grave. Then he seems to have become a ferocious madman, and to have been implicated in the
      worst crimes of the Communists. He cherished a wild desire of revenge against this Jean
      Lebeau, to whom he attributed all his calamities, and by whom, he said, his brother had been
      shot in the sortie of December.
“Here comes the strange part of the story. This Jean Lebeau is alleged to have been one and
      the same person with Victor de Mauleon. The Medecin I have named, and who is well known in
      Belleville and Montmartre as the Medecin des Pauvres, confesses that he belonged to the secret
      society organised by Lebeau; that the disguise the Vicomte assumed was so complete, that he
      should not have recognised his identity with the conspirator but for an accident. During the
      latter time of the bombardment, he, the Medecin des Pauvres, was on the eastern
      ramparts, and his attention was suddenly called to a man mortally wounded by the splinter of a
      shell. While examining the nature of the wound; De Mauleon, who was also on the ramparts, came
      to the spot. The dying man said, ‘M. le Vicomte, you owe me a service. My name is Marc le
      Roux. I was on the police before the war. When M. de. Mauleon reassumed his station, and was
      making himself obnoxious to the Emperor, I might have denounced him as Jean Lebeau the
      conspirator. I did not. The siege has reduced me to want. I have a child at home—a pet. Don’t
      let her starve.’ ‘I will see to her,’ said the Vicomte. Before we could get the man into the
      ambulance cart he expired.
“The Medecin who told this story I had the curiosity to see myself, and cross-question. I
      own I believe his statement. Whether De Mauleon did or did not conspire against a fallen
      dynasty, to which he owed no allegiance, can little, if at all, injure the reputation he has
      left behind of a very remarkable man—of great courage and great ability—who might have had a
      splendid career if he had survived. But, as Savarin says truly, the first bodies which the car
      of revolution crushes down are those which first harness themselves to it.
“Among De Mauleon’s papers is the programme of a constitution fitted for France. How it got
      into Savarin’s hands I know not. De Mauleon left no will, and no relations came forward to
      claim his papers. I asked Savarin to give me the heads of the plan, which he did. They are as
      follows:
“The American republic is the sole one worth studying, for it has lasted. The causes of its
      duration are in the checks to democratic fickleness and disorder. 1st. No law affecting the
      Constitution can be altered without the consent of two-thirds of Congress. 2nd. To counteract
      the impulses natural to a popular Assembly chosen by universal suffrage, the greater
      legislative powers, especially in foreign affairs, are vested in the Senate, which has even
      executive as well as legislative functions. 3rd. The Chief of the State, having elected his
      government, can maintain it independent of hostile majorities in either Assembly.
“‘These three principles of safety to form the basis of any new constitution for France.
“‘For France it is essential that the chief magistrate, under whatever title he assume,
      should be as irresponsible as an English sovereign. Therefore he should not preside at his
      councils; he should not lead his armies. The day for personal government is gone, even in
      Prussia. The safety for order in a State is that, when things go wrong, the Ministry changes,
      the State remains the same. In Europe, Republican institutions are safer where the chief
      magistrate is hereditary than where elective.’
“Savarin says these axioms are carried out at length, and argued with great ability.
“I am very grateful for your proffered hospitalities in England. Some day I shall accept
      them-viz., whenever I decide on domestic life, and the calm of the conjugal foyer. I have a
      penchant for an English Mees, and am not exacting as to the dot. Thirty thousand livres
      sterling would satisfy me—a trifle, I believe, to you rich islanders.
“Meanwhile I am naturally compelled to make up for the miseries of that horrible siege.
      Certain moralising journals tell us that, sobered by misfortunes, the Parisians are going to
      turn over a new leaf, become studious and reflective, despise pleasure and luxury, and live
      like German professors. Don’t believe a word of it. My conviction is that, whatever may be
      said as to our frivolity, extravagance, etc., under the Empire, we shall be just the same
      under any form of government—the bravest, the most timid, the most ferocious, the
      kindest-hearted, the most irrational, the most intelligent, the most contradictory, the most
      consistent people whom Jove, taking counsel of Venus and the Graces, Mars and the Furies, ever
      created for the delight and terror of the world;—in a word, the Parisians.—Votre tout dévoué,
      ‘FREDERIC LEMERCIER.’”
It is a lovely noon on the bay of Sorrento, towards the close of the autumn of 1871. Upon
      the part of the craggy shore, to the left of the town, on which her first perusal of the
      loveliest poem in which the romance of Christian heroism has ever combined elevation of
      thought with silvery delicacies of speech, had charmed her childhood, reclined the young bride
      of Graham Vane. They were in the first month of their marriage. Isaura had not yet recovered
      from the effects of all that had preyed upon her life, from the hour in which she had deemed
      that in her pursuit of fame she had lost the love that had coloured her genius and inspired
      her dreams, to that in which....
The physicians consulted agreed in insisting on her passing the winter in a southern
      climate; and after their wedding, which took place in Florence, they thus came to
      Sorrento.
As Isaura is seated on the small smoothed rock, Graham reclines at her feet, his face
      upturned to hers with an inexpressible wistful anxiety in his impassioned tenderness. “You are
      sure you feel better and stronger since we have been here?”
THE END.
</div></body></text></TEI>