<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="41">
CHAPTER VI.
The room was in complete darkness, save where a ray from a gas-lamp at the mouth of the
      court came aslant through the window, when citizen Le Roux re-entered, closed the window,
      lighted two of the sconces, and drew forth from a drawer in the table implements of writing,
      which he placed thereon noiselessly, as if he feared to disturb M. Lebeau, whose head, buried
      in his hands, rested on the table. He seemed in a profound sleep. At last the porter gently
      touched the arm of the slumberer, and whispered in his ear, “It is on the stroke of ten,
      citizen; they will be here in a minute or so.” Lebeau lifted his head drowsily.
“Eh,” said he—“what?”
“You have been asleep.”
“I suppose so, for I have been dreaming. Ha! I hear the door-bell. I am wide awake now.”
The porter left him, and in a few minutes conducted into the salon two men wrapped in
      cloaks, despite the warmth of the summer night. Lebeau shook hands with them silently, and not
      less silently they laid aside their cloaks and seated themselves. Both these men appeared to
      belong to the upper section of the middle class. One, strongly built, with a keen expression
      of countenance, was a surgeon considered able in his profession, but with limited practice,
      owing to a current suspicion against his honour in connection with a forged will. The other,
      tall, meagre, with long grizzled hair and a wild unsettled look about the eyes, was a man of
      science; had written works well esteemed upon mathematics and electricity, also against the
      existence of any other creative power than that which he called “nebulosity,” and defined to
      be the combination of heat and moisture. The surgeon was about the age of forty, the atheist a
      few years older. In another minute or so, a knock was heard against the wall. One of the men
      rose and touched a spring in the panel, which then flew back, and showed an opening upon a
      narrow stair, by which, one after the other, entered three other members of the society.
      Evidently there was more than one mode of ingress and exit.
The three new-comers were not Frenchmen,—one might see that at a glance; probably they had
      reasons for greater precaution than those who entered by the front door. One, a tall,
      powerfully-built man, with fair hair and beard, dressed with a certain pretension to
      elegance,—faded threadbare elegance,—exhibiting no appearance of linen, was a Pole. One, a
      slight bald man, very dark and sallow, was an Italian. The third, who seemed like an ouvrier
      in his holiday clothes, was a Belgian.
Lebeau greeted them all with an equal courtesy, and each with an equal silence took his seat
      at the table.
Lebeau glanced at the clock. “Confreres,” he said, “our number as fixed for this seance
      still needs two to be complete, and doubtless they will arrive in a few minutes. Till they
      come, we can but talk upon trifles. Permit me to offer you my cigar-case.” And so saying, he
      who professed to be no smoker handed his next neighbour, who was the Pole, a large cigar-case
      amply furnished; and the Pole, helping himself to two cigars, handed the case to the man next
      him,—two only declining the luxury, the Italian and the Belgian. But the Pole was the only man
      who took two cigars.
Steps were now heard on the stairs, the door opened, and citizen Le Toux ushered in, one
      after the other, two men, this time unmistakably French,—to an experienced eye unmistakably
      Parisians: the one, a young beardless man, who seemed almost boyish, with a beautiful face,
      and a stinted, meagre frame; the other, a stalwart man of about eight-and twenty, dressed
      partly as an ouvrier, not in his Sunday clothes, rather affecting the blouse,—not that he wore
      that antique garment, but that he was in rough costume unbrushed and stained, with thick shoes
      and coarse stockings, and a workman’s cap. But of all who gathered round the table at which M.
      Lebeau presided, he had the most distinguished exterior,—a virile honest exterior, a massive
      open forehead, intelligent eyes, a handsome clear-cut incisive profile, and solid jaw. The
      expression of the face was stern, but not mean,—an expression which might have become an
      ancient baron as well as a modern workman; in it plenty of haughtiness and of will, and still
      more of self-esteem.
“Confreres,” said Lebeau, rising, and every eye turned to him, “our number for the present
      seance is complete. To business. Since we last met, our cause has advanced with rapid and not
      with noiseless stride. I need not tell you that Louis Bonaparte has virtually abnegated Les
      idees Napoleoniennes,—a fatal mistake for him, a glorious advance for us. The liberty of the
      press must very shortly be achieved, and with it personal government must end. When the
      autocrat once is compelled to go by the advice of his ministers, look for sudden changes. His
      ministers will be but weathercocks, turned hither and thither according as the wind chops at
      Paris; and Paris is the temple of the winds. The new revolution is almost at hand. [Murmurs of
      applause.] It would move the laughter of the Tuileries and its ministers, of the Bourse and of
      its gamblers, of every dainty salon of this silken city of would-be philosophers and wits, if
      they were told that here within this mouldering baraque, eight men, so little blessed by
      fortune, so little known to fame as ourselves, met to concert the fall of an empire. The
      Government would not deem us important enough to notice our existence.”
“I know not that,” interrupted the Pole.
“Ah, pardon,” resumed the orator; “I should have confined my remark to the five of us who
      are French. I did injustice to the illustrious antecedents of our foreign allies. I know that
      you, Thaddeus Loubisky, that you, Leonardo Raselli, have been too eminent for hands hostile to
      tyrants not to be marked with a black cross in the books of the police; I know that you, Jan
      Vanderstegen, if hitherto unscarred by those wounds in defence of freedom which despots and
      cowards would fain miscall the brands of the felon, still owe it to your special fraternity to
      keep your movements rigidly concealed. The tyrant would suppress the International Society,
      and forbids it the liberty of congress. To you three is granted the secret entrance to our
      council-hall. But we Frenchmen are as yet safe in our supposed insignificance. Confreres,
      permit me to impress on you the causes why, insignificant as we seem, we are really
      formidable. In the first place, we are few: the great mistake in most secret associations has
      been to admit many councillors; and disunion enters wherever many tongues can wrangle. In the
      next place, though so few in council, we are legion when the time comes for action; because we
      are representative men, each of his own section, and each section is capable of an indefinite
      expansion.
“You, valiant Pole, you, politic Italian, enjoy the confidence of thousands now latent in
      unwatched homes and harmless callings, but who, when you lift a finger, will, like the buried
      dragon’s teeth, spring up into armed men. You, Jan Vanderstegen, the trusted delegate from
      Verviers, that swarming camp of wronged labour in its revolt from the iniquities of
      capital,—you, when the hour arrives, can touch the wire that flashes the telegram ‘Arise’
      through all the lands in which workmen combine against their oppressors.
“Of us five Frenchmen, let me speak more modestly. You, sage and scholar, Felix Ruvigny,
      honoured alike for the profundity of your science and the probity of your manners, induced to
      join us by your abhorrence of priestcraft and superstition,—you made a wide connection among
      all the enlightened reasoners who would emancipate the mind of man from the trammels of
      Church-born fable, and when the hour arrives in which it is safe to say, ‘Delenda est Roma,’
      you know where to find the pens that are more victorious than swords against a Church and a
      Creed. You” (turning to the surgeon)—“you, Gaspard le Noy, whom a vile calumny has robbed of
      the throne in your profession so justly due to your skill, you, nobly scorning the rich and
      great, have devoted yourself to tend and heal the humble and the penniless, so that you have
      won the popular title of the ‘Medecin des Pauvres,’ when the time comes wherein soldiers shall
      fly before the sansculottes, and the mob shall begin the work which they who move mobs will
      complete, the clients of Gaspard le Noy will be the avengers of his wrongs.
“You, Armand Monnier, simple ouvrier, but of illustrious parentage, for your grandsire was
      the beloved friend of the virtuous Robespierre, your father perished a hero and a martyr in
      the massacre of the coup d’etat; you, cultured in the eloquence of Robespierre himself, and in
      the persuasive philosophy of Robespierre’s teacher, Rousseau; you, the idolized orator of the
      Red Republicans,—you will be indeed a chief of dauntless bands when the trumpet sounds for
      battle. Young publicist and poet, Gustave Rameau,—I care not which you are at present, I know
      what you will be soon, you need nothing for the development of your powers over the many but
      an organ for their manifestation. Of that anon. I now descend into the bathos of egotism. I am
      compelled lastly to speak of myself. It was at Marseilles and Lyons, as you already know, that
      I first conceived the plan of this representative association. For years before I had been in
      familiar intercourse with the friends of freedom,—that is, with the foes of the Empire. They
      are not all poor; some few are rich and generous. I do not say these rich and few concur in
      the ultimate objects of the poor and many; ‘but they concur in the first object, the
      demolition of that which exists,—the Empire. In the course of my special calling of negotiator
      or agent in the towns of the Midi, I formed friendships with some of these prosperous
      malcontents; and out of these friendships I conceived the idea which is embodied in this
      council.
“According to that conception, while the council may communicate as it will with all
      societies, secret or open, having revolution for their object, the council refuses to merge
      itself in any other confederation; it stands aloof and independent; it declines to admit into
      its code any special articles of faith in a future beyond the bounds to which it limits its
      design and its force. That design unites us; to go beyond would divide. We all agree to
      destroy the Napoleonic dynasty; none of us might agree as to what we should place in its
      stead. All of us here present might say, ‘A republic.’ Ay, but of what kind? Vanderstegen
      would have it socialistic; Monnier goes further, and would have it communistic, on the
      principles of Fourier; Le Noy adheres to the policy of Danton, and would commence the republic
      by a reign of terror; our Italian ally abhors the notion of general massacre, and advocates
      individual assassination. Ruvigny would annihilate the worship of a Deity; Monnier holds with
      Voltaire and Robespierre, that, ‘if there were no Deity, it would be necessary to man to
      create one.’ Bref, we could not agree upon any plan for the new edifice, and therefore we
      refuse to discuss one till the ploughshare has gone over the ruins of the old. But I have
      another and more practical reason for keeping our council distinct from all societies with
      professed objects beyond that of demolition. We need a certain command of money. It is I who
      bring to you that, and—how? Not from my own resources,—they but suffice to support myself; not
      by contributions from ouvriers who, as you well know, will subscribe only for their own ends
      in the victory of workmen over masters. I bring money to you from the coffers of the rich
      malcontents. Their politics are not those of most present; their politics are what they term
      moderate. Some are indeed for a republic, but for a republic strong in defence of order, in
      support of property; others—and they are more numerous and the more rich—for a constitutional
      monarchy, and, if possible, for the abridgment of universal suffrage, which in their eyes
      tends only to anarchy in the towns and arbitrary rule under priestly influence in the rural
      districts. They would not subscribe a sou if they thought it went to further the designs
      whether of Ruvigny the atheist, or of Monnier, who would enlist the Deity of Rousseau on the
      side of the drapeau rouge; not a sou if they knew I had the honour to boast such confreres as
      I see around me. They subscribe, as we concert, for the fall of Bonaparte. The policy I adopt
      I borrow from the policy of the English Liberals. In England, potent millionnaires, high-born
      dukes, devoted Churchmen, belonging to the Liberal party, accept the services of men who look
      forward to measures which would ruin capital, eradicate aristocracy, and destroy the Church,
      provided these men combine with them in some immediate step onward against the Tories. They
      have a proverb which I thus adapt to French localities: if a train passes Fontainebleau on its
      way to Marseilles, why should I not take it to Fontainebleau because other passengers are
      going on to Marseilles?
“Confreres, it seems to me the moment has come when we may venture some of the fund placed
      at my disposal to other purposes than those to which it has been hitherto devoted. I propose,
      therefore, to set up a journal under the auspices of Gustave Rameau as editor-in-chief,—a
      journal which, if he listen to my advice, will create no small sensation. It will begin with a
      tone of impartiality; it will refrain from all violence of invective; it will have wit, it
      will have sentiment, and eloquence; it will win its way into the salons and cafes of educated
      men; and then, and then, when it does change from polished satire into fierce denunciation and
      sides with the blouses, its effect will be startling and terrific. Of this I will say more to
      citizen Rameau in private. To you I need not enlarge upon the fact that, at Paris, a
      combination of men, though immeasurably superior to us in status or influence, without a
      journal at command is nowhere; with such a journal, written not to alarm but to seduce
      fluctuating opinions, a combination of men immeasurably inferior to us may be anywhere.
“Confreres, this affair settled, I proceed to distribute amongst you sums of which each who
      receives will render me an account, except our valued confrere the Pole. All that we can
      subscribe to the cause of humanity a representative of Poland requires for himself.” (A
      suppressed laugh among all but the Pole, who looked round with a grave, imposing air, as much
      as to say, “What is there to laugh at?—a simple truth.”)
M. Lebeau then presented to each of his confreres a sealed envelope, containing no doubt a
      bank-note, and perhaps also private instructions as to its disposal. It was one of his rules
      to make the amount of any sum granted to an individual member of the society from the fund at
      his disposal a confidential secret between himself and the recipient. Thus jealousy was
      avoided if the sums were unequal; and unequal they generally were. In the present instance the
      two largest sums were given to the “Medecin des Pauvres” and to the delegate from Verviers.
      Both were no doubt to be distributed among “the poor,” at the discretion of the trustee
      appointed.
Whatever rules with regard to the distribution of money M. Lebeau laid down were acquiesced
      in without demur, for the money was found exclusively by himself, and furnished without the
      pale of the Secret Council, of which he had made himself founder and dictator. Some other
      business was then discussed, sealed reports from each member were handed to the president, who
      placed them unopened in his pocket, and resumed, “Confreres, our seance is now concluded. The
      period for our next meeting must remain indefinite, for I myself shall leave Paris as soon as
      I have set on foot the journal, on the details of which I will confer with citizen Rameau. I
      am not satisfied with the progress made by the two travelling missionaries who complete our
      Council of Ten; and though I do not question their zeal, I think my experience may guide it if
      I take a journey to the towns of Bordeaux and Marseilles, where they now are. But should
      circumstances demanding concert or action arise, you may be sure that I will either summon a
      meeting or transmit instructions to such of our members as may be most usefully employed. For
      the present, confreres, you are relieved. Remain only you, dear young author.”
</div></body></text></TEI>