<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="85">
CHAPTER V.
Graham had left a note with Rochebriant’s concierge requesting an interview on the Marquis’s
      return to Paris, and on the evening after the day just commemorated he received a line, saying
      that Alain had come back, and would be at home at nine o’clock. Graham found himself in the
      Breton’s apartment punctually at the hour indicated.
Alain was in high spirits: he burst at once into enthusiastic exclamations on the virtual
      announcement of war.
“Congratulate me, mon cher!” he cried—“the news was a joyous surprise to me. Only so
      recently as yesterday morning I was under the gloomy apprehension that the Imperial Cabinet
      would continue to back Ollivier’s craven declaration ‘that France had not been affronted!’ The
      Duchesse de Tarascon, at whose campagne I was a guest, is (as you doubtless know) very much in
      the confidence of the Tuileries. On the first signs of war, I wrote to her, saying that
      whatever the objections of my pride to enter the army as a private in time of peace, such
      objections ceased on the moment when all distinctions of France must vanish in the eyes of
      sons eager to defend her banners. The Duchesse in reply begged me to come to her campagne and
      talk over the matter. I went; she then said that if war should break out it was the intention
      to organise the Mobiles and officer them with men of birth and education, irrespective of
      previous military service, and in that case I might count on my epaulets. But only two nights
      ago she received a letter—I know not of course from whom—evidently from some high
      authority—that induced her to think the moderation of the Council would avert the war, and
      leave the swords of the Mobiles in their sheaths. I suspect the decision of yesterday must
      have been a very sudden one. Ce cher Gramont! See what it is to have a well-born man in a
      sovereign’s councils.”
“If war must come, I at least wish all renown to yourself. But—”
“Oh! spare me your ‘buts’; the English are always too full of them where her own interests
      do not appeal to her. She had no ‘buts’ for war in India or a march into Abyssinia.”
Alain spoke petulantly; at that moment the French were very much irritated by the monitory
      tone of the English journals. Graham prudently avoided the chance of rousing the wrath of a
      young hero yearning for his epaulets.
“I am English enough,” said he, with good-humoured courtesy, “to care for English interests;
      and England has no interest abroad dearer to her than the welfare and dignity of France. And
      now let me tell you why I presumed on an acquaintance less intimate than I could desire, to
      solicit this interview on a matter which concerns myself, and in which you could perhaps
      render me a considerable service.”
“If I can, count it rendered; move to this sofa—join me in a cigar, and let us talk at ease
      comme de vieux amis, whose fathers or brothers might have fought side by side in the Crimea.”
      Graham removed to the sofa beside Rochebriant, and after one or two whiffs laid aside the
      cigar and began:
“Among the correspondence which Monsieur your father has left, are there any letters of no
      distant date signed Marigny—Madame Marigny? Pardon me, I should state my motive in putting
      this question. I am intrusted with a charge, the fulfilment of which may prove to the benefit
      of this lady or her child; such fulfilment is a task imposed upon my honour. But all the
      researches to discover this lady which I have instituted stop at a certain date, with this
      information,—viz., that she corresponded occasionally with the late Marquis de Rochebriant;
      that he habitually preserved the letters of his correspondents; and that these letters were
      severally transmitted to you at his decease.”
Alain’s face had taken a very grave expression while Graham spoke, and he now replied with a
      mixture of haughtiness and embarrassment:
“The boxes containing the letters my father received and preserved were sent to me as you
      say—the larger portion of them were from ladies—sorted and labelled, so that in glancing at
      any letter in each packet I could judge of the general tenor of these in the same packet
      without the necessity of reading them. All packets of that kind, Monsieur Vane, I burned. I do
      not remember any letters signed ‘Marigny!”
“I perfectly understand, my dear Marquis, that you would destroy all letters which your
      father himself would have destroyed if his last illness had been sufficiently prolonged. But I
      do not think the letters I mean would have come under that classification; probably they were
      short, and on matters of business relating to some third person—some person, for instance, of
      the name of Louise, or of Duval!”
“Stop! let me think. I have a vague remembrance of one or two letters which rather perplexed
      me, they were labelled, ‘Louise D—. Mem.: to make further inquiries as to the fate of her
      uncle.’”
“Marquis, these are the letters I seek. Thank heaven, you have not destroyed them?”
“No; there was no reason why I should destroy, though I really cannot state precisely any
      reason why I kept them. I have a very vague recollection of their existence.”
“I entreat you to allow me at least a glance at the handwriting, and compare it with that of
      a letter I have about me; and if the several handwritings correspond, I would ask you to let
      me have the address, which, according to your father’s memorandum, will be found in the
      letters you have preserved.”
“To compliance with such a request I not only cannot demur, but perhaps it may free me from
      some responsibility which I might have thought the letters devolved upon my executorship. I am
      sure they did not concern the honour of any woman of any family, for in that case I must have
      burned them.”
“Ah, Marquis, shake hands there! In such concord between man and man, there is more entente
      cordiale between England and France than there was at Sebastopol. Now let me compare the
      handwritings.”
“The box that contained the letters is not here—I left it at Rochebriant; I will telegraph
      to my aunt to send it; the day after to-morrow it will no doubt arrive. Breakfast with me that
      day—say at one o’clock, and after breakfast the Box!”
“How can I thank you?”
“Thank me! but you said your honour was concerned in your request—requests affecting honour
      between men comma il faut is a ceremony of course, like a bow between them. One bows, the
      other returns the bow—no thanks on either side. Now that we have done with that matter, let me
      say that I thought your wish for our interview originated in a very different cause.”
“What could that be?”
“Nay, do you not recollect that last talk between us, when with such loyalty you spoke to me
      about Mademoiselle Cicogna, and supposing that there might be rivalship between us, retracted
      all that you might have before said to warn me against fostering the sentiment with which she
      had inspired me; even at the first slight glance of a face which cannot be lightly forgotten
      by those who have once seen it.”
“I recollect perfectly every word of that talk, Marquis,” answered Graham, calmly, but with
      his hand concealed within his vest and pressed tightly to his heart. The warning of Mrs.
      Morley flashed upon him. “Was this the man to seize the prize he had put aside—this man,
      younger than himself—handsomer than himself—higher in rank?”
“I recollect that talk, Marquis! Well, what then?”
“In my self-conceit I supposed that you might have heard how much I admired Mademoiselle
      Cicogna—how, having not long since met her at the house of Duplessis (who by the way writes me
      word that I shall meet you chez lui tomorrow), I have since sought her society wherever there
      was a chance to find it. You may have heard, at our club, or elsewhere, how I adore her
      genius—how, I say, that nothing so Breton—that is, so pure and so lofty—has appeared and won
      readers since the days of Chateaubriand,—and—you, knowing that les absents ont toujours tort,
      come to me and ask Monsieur de Rochebriant, Are we rivals? I expected a challenge—you relieve
      my mind—you abandon the field to me?”
At the first I warned the reader how improved from his old mauvaise honte a year or so of
      Paris life would make our beau Marquis. How a year or two of London life with its horsey slang
      and its fast girls of the period would have vulgarised an English Rochebriant! Graham gnawed
      his lips and replied quietly, “I do not challenge! Am I to congratulate you?”
“No, that brilliant victory is not for me. I thought that was made clear in the conversation
      I have referred to. But if you have done me the honour to be jealous I am exceedingly
      flattered. Speaking, seriously, if I admired Mademoiselle Cicogna when you and I last met, the
      admiration is increased by the respect with which I regard a character so simply noble. How
      many women older than she would have been spoiled by the adulation that has followed her
      literary success!—how few women so young, placed in a position so critical, having the courage
      to lead a life so independent, would have maintained the dignity of their character free from
      a single indiscretion! I speak not from my own knowledge, but from the report of all, who
      would be pleased enough to censure if they could find a cause. Good society is the paradise of
      mauvaises langues.”
Graham caught Alain’s hand and pressed it, but made no answer.
The young Marquis continued:
“You will pardon me for speaking thus freely in the way that I would wish any friend to
      speak of the demoiselle who might become my wife. I owe you much, not only for the loyalty
      with which you address me in reference to this young lady, but for words affecting my own
      position in France, which sank deep into my mind—saved me from deeming myself a proscrit in my
      own land—filled me with a manly ambition, not stifled amidst the thick of many effeminate
      follies—and, in fact, led me to the career which is about to open before me, and in which my
      ancestors have left me no undistinguished examples. Let us speak, then, a coeur ouvert, as one
      friend to another. Has there been any misunderstanding between you and Mademoiselle Cicogna
      which has delayed your return to Paris? If so, is it over now?”
“There has been no such misunderstanding.”
“Do you doubt whether the sentiments you expressed in regard to her when we met last year,
      are returned?”
“I have no right to conjecture her sentiments. You mistake altogether.”
“I do not believe that I am dunce enough to mistake your feelings towards Mademoiselle—they
      may be read in your face at this moment. Of course I do not presume to hazard a conjecture as
      to those of Mademoiselle towards yourself. But when I met her not long since at the house of
      Duplessis, with whose daughter she is intimate, I chanced to speak to her of you; and if I may
      judge, by looks and manner, I chose no displeasing theme. You turn away—I offend you?”
“Offend!—no, indeed; but on this subject I am not prepared to converse. I came to Paris on
      matters of business much complicated and which ought to absorb my attention. I cannot longer
      trespass on your evening. The day after to-morrow, then, I will be with you at one
      o’clock.”
“Yes, I hope then to have the letters you wish to consult; and, meanwhile, we meet to-morrow
      at the Hotel Duplessis.”
</div></body></text></TEI>