<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
CHAPTER VII.
A LITTLE later Graham found himself alone amongst the crowd. Attracted by the sound of
      music, he had strayed into one of the rooms whence it came, and in which, though his range of
      acquaintance at Paris was for an Englishman large and somewhat miscellaneous, he recognized no
      familiar countenance. A lady was playing the pianoforte—playing remarkably well—with accurate
      science, with that equal lightness and strength of finger which produces brilliancy of
      execution; but to appreciate her music one should be musical one’s self. It wanted the charm
      that fascinates the uninitiated. The guests in the room were musical connoisseurs,—a class
      with whom Graham Vane had nothing in common. Even if he had been more capable of enjoying the
      excellence of the player’s performance, the glance he directed towards her would have sufficed
      to chill him into indifference. She was not young, and with prominent features and puckered
      skin, was twisting her face into strange sentimental grimaces, as if terribly overcome by the
      beauty and pathos of her own melodies. To add to Vane’s displeasure, she was dressed in a
      costume wholly antagonistic to his views of the becoming,—in a Greek jacket of gold and
      scarlet, contrasted by a Turkish turban.
Muttering “What she-mountebank have we here?” he sank into a chair behind the door, and fell
      into an absorbed revery. From this he was aroused by the cessation of the music and the hum of
      subdued approbation by which it was followed. Above the hum swelled the imposing voice of M.
      Louvier as he rose from a seat on the other side of the piano, by which his bulky form had
      been partially concealed.
“Bravo! perfectly played! excellent! Can we not persuade your charming young countrywoman to
      gratify us even by a single song?” Then turning aside and addressing some one else invisible
      to Graham he said, “Does that tyrannical doctor still compel you to silence,
      Mademoiselle?”
A voice so sweetly modulated that if there were any sarcasm in the words it was lost in the
      softness of pathos, answered, “Nay, Monsieur Louvier, he rather overtasks the words at my
      command in thankfulness to those who like yourself, so kindly regard me as something else than
      a singer.”
It was not the she-mountebank who thus spoke. Graham rose and looked round with instinctive
      curiosity. He met the face that he said had haunted him. She too had risen, standing near the
      piano, with one hand tenderly resting on the she-mountebank’s scarlet and gilded shoulder,—the
      face that haunted him, and yet with a difference. There was a faint blush on the clear pale
      cheek, a soft yet playful light in the grave dark-blue eyes, which had not been visible in the
      countenance of the young lady in the pearl-coloured robe. Graham did not hear Louvier’s reply,
      though no doubt it was loud enough for him to hear. He sank again into revery. Other guests
      now came into the room, among them Frank Morley, styled Colonel,—eminent military titles in
      the United States do not always denote eminent military services,—a wealthy American, and his
      sprightly and beautiful wife. The Colonel was a clever man, rather stiff in his deportment,
      and grave in speech, but by no means without a vein of dry humour. By the French he was
      esteemed a high-bred specimen of the kind of grand seigneur which democratic republics
      engender. He spoke French like a Parisian, had an imposing presence, and spent a great deal of
      money with the elegance of a man of taste and the generosity of a man of heart. His high
      breeding was not quite so well understood by the English, because the English are apt to judge
      breeding by little conventional rules not observed by the American Colonel. He had a slight
      nasal twang, and introduced “sir” with redundant ceremony in addressing Englishmen, however
      intimate he might be with them, and had the habit (perhaps with a sly intention to startle or
      puzzle them) of adorning his style of conversation with quaint Americanisms.
Nevertheless, the genial amiability and the inherent dignity of his character made him
      acknowledged as a thorough gentleman by every Englishman, however conventional in tastes, who
      became admitted into his intimate acquaintance.
Mrs. Morley, ten or twelve years younger than her husband, had no nasal twang, and employed
      no Americanisms in her talk, which was frank, lively, and at times eloquent. She had a great
      ambition to be esteemed of a masculine understanding; Nature unkindly frustrated that ambition
      in rendering her a model of feminine grace. Graham was intimately acquainted with Colonel
      Morley; and with Mrs. Morley had contracted one of those cordial friendships, which, perfectly
      free alike from polite flirtation and Platonic attachment, do sometimes spring up between
      persons of opposite sexes without the slightest danger of changing their honest character into
      morbid sentimentality or unlawful passion. The Morleys stopped to accost Graham, but the lady
      had scarcely said three words to him, before, catching sight of the haunting face, she darted
      towards it. Her husband, less emotional, bowed at the distance, and said, “To my taste, sir,
      the Signorina Cicogna is the loveliest girl in the present bee,* and full of mind, sir.”

 [*Bee, a common expression in “the West” for a meeting or gathering ]of people.
      
“Singing mind,” said Graham, sarcastically, and in the ill-natured impulse of a man striving
      to check his inclination to admire.
“I have not heard her sing,” replied the American, dryly; “and the words ‘singing mind’ are
      doubtless accurately English, since you employ them; but at Boston the collocation would be
      deemed barbarous. You fly off the handle. The epithet, sir, is not in concord with the
      substantive.”
“Boston would be in the right, my dear Colonel. I stand rebuked; mind has little to do with
      singing.”
“I take leave to deny that, sir. You fire into the wrong flock, and would not hazard the
      remark if you had conversed as I have with Signorina Cicogna.”
Before Graham could answer, Signorina Cicogna stood before him, leaning lightly on Mrs.
      Morley’s arm.
“Frank, you must take us into the refreshment-room,” said Mrs. Morley to her husband; and
      then, turning to Graham, added, “Will you help to make way for us?”
Graham bowed, and offered his arm to the fair speaker. “No,” said she, taking her husband’s.
      “Of course you know the Signorina, or, as we usually call her, Mademoiselle Cicogna. No? Allow
      me to present you. Mr. Graham Vane, Mademoiselle Cicogna. Mademoiselle speaks English like a
      native.”
And thus abruptly Graham was introduced to the owner of the haunting face. He had lived too
      much in the great world all his life to retain the innate shyness of an Englishman; but he
      certainly was confused and embarrassed when his eyes met Isaura’s, and he felt her hand on his
      arm. Before quitting the room she paused and looked back. Graham’s look followed her own, and
      saw behind them the lady with the scarlet jacket escorted by some portly and decorated
      connoisseur. Isaura’s face brightened to another kind of brightness,—a pleased and tender
      light.
“Poor dear Madre,” she murmured to herself in Italian. “Madre!” echoed Graham, also in
      Italian. “I have been misinformed, then; that lady is your mother.”
Isaura laughed a pretty, low, silvery laugh, and replied in English, “She is not my mother;
      but I call her Madre, for I know no name more loving.”
Graham was touched, and said gently, “Your own mother was evidently very dear to you.”
Isaura’s lip quivered, and she made a slight movement as if she would have withdrawn her
      hand from his arm. He saw that he had offended or wounded her, and with the straightforward
      frankness natural to him, resumed quickly, “My remark was impertinent in a stranger; forgive
      it.”
“There is nothing to forgive, Monsieur.”
The two now threaded their way through the crowd, both silent. At last Isaura, thinking she
      ought to speak first in order to show that Graham had not offended her, said,
“How lovely Mrs. Morley is!”
“Yes; and I like the spirit and ease of her American manner. Have you known her long,
      Mademoiselle?”
“No; we met her for the first time some weeks ago at M. Savarin’s.”
“Was she very eloquent on the rights of women?”
“What! you have heard her on that subject?”
“I have rarely heard her on any other, though she is the best and perhaps the cleverest
      friend I have at Paris; but that may be my fault, for I like to start it. It is a relief to
      the languid small-talk of society to listen to any one thoroughly in earnest upon turning the
      world topsy-turvy.”
“Do you suppose poor Mrs. Morley would seek to do that if she had her rights?” asked Isaura,
      with her musical laugh.
“Not a doubt of it; but perhaps you share her opinions.”
“I scarcely know what her opinions are, but—”
“Yes?—but—”
“There is a—what shall I call it?—a persuasion, a sentiment, out of which the opinions
      probably spring, that I do share.”
“Indeed? a persuasion, a sentiment, for instance, that a woman should have votes in the
      choice of legislators, and, I presume, in the task of legislation?”
“No, that is not what I mean. Still, that is an opinion, right or wrong, which grows out of
      the sentiment I speak of.”
“Pray explain the sentiment.”
“It is always so difficult to define a sentiment; but does it not strike you that in
      proportion as the tendency of modern civilization has been to raise women more and more to an
      intellectual equality with men, in proportion as they read and study and think, an uneasy
      sentiment, perhaps querulous, perhaps unreasonable, grows up within their minds that the
      conventions of the world are against the complete development of the faculties thus aroused
      and the ambition thus animated; that they cannot but rebel, though it may be silently, against
      the notions of the former age, when women were not thus educated, notions that the aim of the
      sex should be to steal through life unremarked; that it is a reproach to be talked of; that
      women are plants to be kept in a hothouse and forbidden the frank liberty of growth in the
      natural air and sunshine of heaven? This, at least, is a sentiment which has sprung up within
      myself; and I imagine that it is the sentiment which has given birth to many of the opinions
      or doctrines that seem absurd, and very likely are so, to the general public. I don’t pretend
      even to have considered those doctrines; I don’t pretend to say what may be the remedies for
      the restlessness and uneasiness I feel. I doubt if on this earth there be any remedies; all I
      know is, that I feel restless and uneasy.”
Graham gazed on her countenance as she spoke with an astonishment not unmingled with
      tenderness and compassion, astonishment at the contrast between a vein of reflection so hardy,
      expressed in a style of language that seemed to him so masculine, and the soft velvet dreamy
      eyes, the gentle tones, and delicate purity of hues rendered younger still by the blush that
      deepened their bloom.
At this moment they had entered the refreshment-room; but a dense group being round the
      table, and both perhaps forgetting the object for which Mrs. Morley had introduced them to
      each other, they had mechancially seated themselves on an ottoman in a recess while Isaura was
      yet speaking. It must seem as strange to the reader as it did to Graham that such a speech
      should have been spoken by so young a girl to an acquaintance so new; but in truth Isaura was
      very little conscious of Graham’s presence. She had got on a subject that perplexed and
      tormented her solitary thoughts; she was but thinking aloud.
“I believe,” said Graham, after a pause, “that I comprehend your sentiment much better than
      I do Mrs. Morley’s opinions; but permit me one observation. You say truly that the course of
      modern civilization has more or less affected the relative position of woman cultivated beyond
      that level on which she was formerly contented to stand,—the nearer perhaps to the heart of
      man because not lifting her head to his height,—and hence a sense of restlessness, uneasiness;
      but do you suppose that, in this whirl and dance of the atoms which compose the rolling ball
      of the civilized world, it is only women that are made restless and uneasy? Do you not see
      amid the masses congregated in the wealthiest cities of the world, writhings and struggles
      against the received order of things? In this sentiment of discontent there is a certain
      truthfulness, because it is an element of human nature, and how best to deal with it is a
      problem yet unsolved; but in the opinions and doctrines to which, among the masses, the
      sentiment gives birth, the wisdom of the wisest detects only the certainty of a common ruin,
      offering for reconstruction the same building-materials as the former edifice,—materials not
      likely to be improved because they may be defaced. Ascend from the working classes to all
      others in which civilized culture prevails, and you will find that same restless feeling,—the
      fluttering of untried wings against the bars between wider space and their longings. Could you
      poll all the educated ambitious young men in England,—perhaps in Europe,—at least half of
      them, divided between a reverence for the past and a curiosity as to the future, would sigh,
      ‘I am born a century too late or a century too soon!’”
Isaura listened to this answer with a profound and absorbing interest. It was the first time
      that a clever young man talked thus sympathetically to her, a clever young girl.
Then, rising, he said, “I see your Madre and our American friends are darting angry looks at
      me. They have made room for us at the table, and are wondering why I should keep you thus from
      the good things of this little life. One word more ere we join them,—consult your own mind,
      and consider whether your uneasiness and unrest are caused solely by conventional shackles on
      your sex. Are they not equally common to the youth of ours,—common to all who seek in art, in
      letters, nay, in the stormier field of active life, to clasp as a reality some image yet seen
      but as a dream?”
</div></body></text></TEI>