<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER VI.
There is generally a brisk exhilaration of spirits in the return to any special amusement or
      light accomplishment associated with the pleasant memories of earlier youth; and remarkably
      so, I believe, when the amusement or accomplishment has been that of the amateur stage-player.
      Certainly I have known persons of very grave pursuits, of very dignified character and
      position, who seem to regain the vivacity of boyhood when disguising look and voice for a part
      in some drawing-room comedy or charade. I might name statesmen of solemn repute rejoicing to
      raise and to join in a laugh at their expense in such travesty of their habitual selves.
The reader must not therefore be surprised, nor, I trust, deem it inconsistent with the more
      serious attributes of Graham’s character, if the Englishman felt the sort of joyful excitement
      I describe, as, in his way to the cafe Jean Jacques, he meditated the role he had undertaken;
      and the joyousness was heightened beyond the mere holiday sense of humouristic pleasantry by
      the sanguine hope that much to effect his lasting happiness might result from the success of
      the object for which his disguise was assumed.
It was just twenty minutes past nine when he arrived at the cafe Jean Jacques. He dismissed
      the fiacre and entered.
The apartment devoted to customers comprised two large rooms. The first was the cafe
      properly speaking; the second, opening on it, was the billiard-room. Conjecturing that he
      should probably find the person of whom he was in quest employed at the billiard-table, Graham
      passed thither at once. A tall man, who might be seven-and-forty, with a long black beard,
      slightly grizzled, was at play with a young man of perhaps twenty-eight, who gave him odds,—as
      better players of twenty-eight ought to give odds to a player, though originally of equal
      force, whose eye is not so quick, whose hand is not so steady, as they were twenty years ago.
      Said Graham to himself, “The bearded man is my Vicomte.” He called for a cup of coffee, and
      seated himself on a bench at the end of the room.
The bearded man was far behind in the game. It was his turn to play; the balls were placed
      in the most awkward position for him. Graham himself was a fair billiard-player, both in the
      English and the French game. He said to himself, “No man who can make a cannon there should
      accept odds.” The bearded man made a cannon; the bearded man continued to make cannons; the
      bearded man did not stop till he had won the game. The gallery of spectators was enthusiastic.
      Taking care to speak in very bad, very English-French, Graham expressed to one of the
      enthusiasts seated beside him his admiration of the bearded man’s playing, and ventured to ask
      if the bearded man were a professional or an amateur player.
“Monsieur,” replied the enthusiast, taking a short cutty-pipe from his mouth, “it is an
      amateur, who has been a great player in his day, and is so proud that he always takes less
      odds than he ought of a younger man. It is not once in a month that he comes out as he has
      done to-night; but to-night he has steadied his hand. He has had six petits verres.”
“Ah, indeed! Do you know his name?”
“I should think so: he buried my father, my two aunts, and my wife.”
“Buried?” said Graham, more and more British in his accent; “I don’t understand.”
“Monsieur, you are English.”
“I confess it.”
“And a stranger to the Faubourg Montmartre.”
“True.”
“Or you would have heard of M. Giraud, the liveliest member of the State Company for
      conducting funerals. They are going to play La Poule.”
Much disconcerted, Graham retreated into the cafe, and seated himself haphazard at one of
      the small tables. Glancing round the room, he saw no one in whom he could conjecture the once
      brilliant Vicomte.
The company appeared to him sufficiently decent, and especially what may be called local.
      There were some blouses drinking wine, no doubt of the cheapest and thinnest; some in rough,
      coarse dresses, drinking beer. These were evidently English, Belgian, or German artisans. At
      one table, four young men, who looked like small journeymen, were playing cards. At three
      other tables, men older, better dressed, probably shop-keepers, were playing dominos. Graham
      scrutinized these last, but among them all could detect no one corresponding to his ideal of
      the Vicomte de Mauleon. “Probably,” thought he, “I am too late, or perhaps he will not be here
      this evening. At all events, I will wait a quarter of an hour.” Then, the garcon approaching
      his table, he deemed it necessary to call for something, and, still in strong English accent,
      asked for lemonade and an evening journal. The garcon nodded and went his way. A monsieur at
      the round table next his own politely handed to him the “Galignani,” saying in very good
      English, though unmistakably the good English of a Frenchman, “The English journal, at your
      service.”
Graham bowed his head, accepted the “Galignani,” and inspected his courteous neighbour. A
      more respectable-looking man no Englishman could see in an English country town. He wore an
      unpretending flaxen wig, with limp whiskers that met at the chin, and might originally have
      been the same colour as the wig, but were now of a pale gray,—no beard, no mustache. He was
      dressed with the scrupulous cleanliness of a sober citizen,—a high white neckcloth, with a
      large old-fashioned pin, containing a little knot of hair covered with glass or crystal, and
      bordered with a black framework, in which were inscribed letters,—evidently a mourning pin,
      hallowed to the memory of lost spouse or child,—a man who, in England, might be the mayor of a
      cathedral town, at least the town-clerk. He seemed suffering from some infirmity of vision,
      for he wore green spectacles. The expression of his face was very mild and gentle; apparently
      he was about sixty years old,—somewhat more.
Graham took kindly to his neighbour, insomuch that, in return for the “Galignani,” he
      offered him a cigar, lighting one himself.
His neighbour refused politely.
“Merci! I never smoke, never; mon medecin forbids it. If I could be tempted, it would be by,
      an English cigar. Ah, how you English beat us in all things,—your ships, your iron, your
      tabac,—which you do not grow!”
This speech rendered literally as we now render it may give the idea of a somewhat vulgar
      speaker. But there was something in the man’s manner, in his smile, in his courtesy, which did
      not strike Graham as vulgar; on the contrary, he thought within himself, “How instinctive to
      all Frenchmen good breeding is!”
Before, however, Graham had time to explain to his amiable neighbour the politico-economical
      principle according to which England, growing no tobacco, had tobacco much better than France,
      which did grow it, a rosy middle-aged monsieur made his appearance, saying hurriedly to
      Graham’s neighbour, “I’m afraid I’m late, but there is still a good half-hour before us if you
      will give me my revenge.”
“Willingly, Monsieur Georges. Garcon, the dominos.”
“Have you been playing at billiards?” asked M. Georges.
“Yes, two games.”
“With success?”
“I won the first, and lost the second through the defect of my eyesight; the game depended
      on a stroke which would have been easy to an infant,—I missed it.”
Here the dominos arrived, and M. Georges began shuffling them; the other turned to Graham
      and asked politely if he understood the game.
“A little, but not enough to comprehend why it is said to require so much skill.”
“It is chiefly an affair of memory with me; but M. Georges, my opponent, has the talent of
      combination, which I have not.”
“Nevertheless,” replied M. Georges, gruffly, “you are not easily beaten; it is for you to
      play first, Monsieur Lebeau.” Graham almost started. Was it possible! This mild,
      limp-whiskered, flaxen-wigged man Victor de Mauleon, the Don Juan of his time; the last person
      in the room he should have guessed. Yet, now examining his neighbour with more attentive eye,
      he wondered at his stupidity in not having recognized at once the ci-devant gentilhomme and
      beau garcon. It happens frequently that our imagination plays us this trick; we form to
      ourselves an idea of some one eminent for good or for evil,—a poet, a statesman, a general, a
      murderer, a swindler, a thief. The man is before us, and our ideas have gone into so different
      a groove that he does not excite a suspicion; we are told who he is, and immediately detect a
      thousand things that ought to have proved his identity.
Looking thus again with rectified vision at the false Lebeau, Graham observed an elegance
      and delicacy of feature which might, in youth, have made the countenance very handsome, and
      rendered it still good-looking, nay, prepossessing. He now noticed, too, the slight Norman
      accent, its native harshness of breadth subdued into the modulated tones which bespoke the
      habits of polished society. Above all, as M. Lebeau moved his dominos with one hand, not
      shielding his pieces with the other (as M. Georges warily did), but allowing it to rest
      carelessly on the table, he detected the hands of the French aristocrat,—hands that had never
      done work; never (like those of the English noble of equal birth) been embrowned or freckled,
      or roughened or enlarged by early practice in athletic sports; but hands seldom seen save in
      the higher circles of Parisian life,—partly perhaps of hereditary formation, partly owing
      their texture to great care begun in early youth, and continued mechanically in after
      life,—with long taper fingers and polished nails; white and delicate as those of a woman, but
      not slight, not feeble; nervous and sinewy as those of a practised swordsman.
Graham watched the play, and Lebeau good-naturedly explained to him its complications as it
      proceeded; though the explanation, diligently attended to by M. Georges, lost Lebeau the
      game.
The dominos were again shuffled, and during that operation M. Georges said, “By the way,
      Monsieur Lebeau, you promised to find me a locataire for my second floor; have you
      succeeded?”
“Not yet. Perhaps you had better advertise in ‘Les Petites Affiches.’ You ask too much for
      the habitues of this neighbourhood,—one hundred francs a month.”
“But the lodging is furnished, and well too, and has four rooms. One hundred francs are not
      much.”
A thought flashed upon Graham. “Pardon, Monsieur,” he said, “have you an appartement de
      garcon to let furnished?”
“Yes, Monsieur, a charming one. Are you in search of an apartment?”
“I have some idea of taking one, but only by the month. I am but just arrived at Paris, and
      I have business which may keep me here a few weeks. I do but require a bedroom and a small
      cabinet, and the rent must be modest. I am not a milord.”
“I am sure we could arrange, Monsieur,” said M. Georges, “though I could not well divide my
      logement. But one hundred francs a month is not much!”
“I fear it is more than I can afford; however, if you will give me your address, I will call
      and see the rooms,—say the day after to-morrow. Between this and then, I expect letters which
      may more clearly decide my movements.”
“If the apartments suit you,” said M. Lebeau, “you will at least be in the house of a very
      honest man, which is more than can be said of every one who lets furnished apartments. The
      house, too, has a concierge, with a handy wife who will arrange your rooms and provide you
      with coffee—or tea, which you English prefer—if you breakfast at home.” Here M. Georges handed
      a card to Graham, and asked what hour he would call.
“About twelve, if that hour is convenient,” said Graham, rising. “I presume there is a
      restaurant in the neighbourhood where I could dine reasonably.”
“Je crois bien, half-a-dozen. I can recommend to you one where you can dine en prince for
      thirty sous. And if you are at Paris on business, and want any letters written in private, I
      can also recommend to you my friend here, M. Lebeau. Ay, and on affairs his advice is as good
      as a lawyer’s, and his fee a bagatelle.”
“Don’t believe all that Monsieur Georges so flatteringly says of me,” put in M. Lebeau, with
      a modest half-smile, and in English. “I should tell you that I, like yourself, am recently
      arrived at Paris, having bought the business and goodwill of my predecessor in the apartment I
      occupy; and it is only to the respect due to his antecedents, and on the score of a few
      letters of recommendation which I bring from Lyons, that I can attribute the confidence shown
      to me, a stranger in this neighbourhood. Still I have some knowledge of the world, and I am
      always glad if I can be of service to the English. I love the English”—he said this with a
      sort of melancholy earnestness which seemed sincere; and then added in a more careless
      tone,—“I have met with much kindness from them in the course of a chequered life.”
“You seem a very good fellow,—in fact, a regular trump, Monsieur Lebeau,” replied Graham, in
      the same language. “Give me your address. To say truth, I am a very poor French scholar, as
      you must have seen, and am awfully bother-headed how to manage some correspondence on matters
      with which I am entrusted by my employer, so that it is a lucky chance which has brought me
      acquainted with you.”
M. Lebeau inclined his head gracefully, and drew from a very neat morocco case a card, which
      Graham took and pocketed. Then he paid for his coffee and lemonade, and returned home well
      satisfied with the evening’s adventure.
</div></body></text></TEI>