<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III.
Alain reached the house in which he lodged. Externally a fine house, it had been the hotel
      of a great family in the old regime. On the first floor were still superb apartments, with
      ceilings painted by Le Brun, with walls on which the thick silks still seemed fresh. These
      rooms were occupied by a rich ‘agent de change;’ but, like all such ancient palaces, the upper
      stories were wretchedly defective even in the comforts which poor men demand nowadays: a back
      staircase, narrow, dirty, never lighted, dark as Erebus, led to the room occupied by the
      Marquis, which might be naturally occupied by a needy student or a virtuous ‘grisette.’ But
      there was to him a charm in that old hotel, and the richest ‘locataire’ therein was not
      treated with a respect so ceremonious as that which at tended the lodger on the fourth story.
      The porter and his wife were Bretons; they came from the village of Rochebriant; they had
      known Alain’s parents in their young days; it was their kinsman who had recommended him to the
      hotel which they served: so, when he paused at the lodge for his key, which he had left there,
      the porter’s wife was in waiting for his return, and insisted on lighting him upstairs and
      seeing to his fire, for after a warm day the night had turned to that sharp biting cold which
      is more trying in Paris than even in London.
The old woman, running up the stairs before him, opened the door of his room, and busied
      herself at the fire. “Gently, my good Marthe,” said he, “that log suffices. I have been
      extravagant to-day, and must pinch for it.”
“M. le Marquis jests,” said the old woman, laughing.
“No, Marthe; I am serious. I have sinned, but I shall reform. ‘Entre nous,’ my dear friend,
      Paris is very dear when one sets one’s foot out of doors: I must soon go back to
      Rochebriant.”
“When M. le Marquis goes back to Rochebriant he must take with him a Madame la
      Marquise,—some pretty angel with a suitable dot.”
“A dot suitable to the ruins of Rochebriant would not suffice to repair them, Marthe: give
      me my dressing-gown, and good-night.”
“‘Bon repos, M. le Marquis! beaux reves, et bel avenir.’”
“‘Bel avenir!’” murmured the young man, bitterly, leaning his cheek on his hand; “what
      fortune fairer than the present can be mine? yet inaction in youth is more keenly felt than in
      age. How lightly I should endure poverty if it brought poverty’s ennobling companion,
      Labour,—denied to me! Well, well; I must go back to the old rock: on this ocean there is no
      sail, not even an oar, for me.”
Alain de Rochebriant had not been reared to the expectation of poverty. The only son of a
      father whose estates were large beyond those of most nobles in modern France, his destined
      heritage seemed not unsuitable to his illustrious birth. Educated at a provincial academy, he
      had been removed at the age of sixteen to Rochebriant, and lived there simply and lonelily
      enough, but still in a sort of feudal state, with an aunt, an elder and unmarried sister to
      his father.
His father he never saw but twice after leaving college. That brilliant seigneur visited
      France but rarely, for very brief intervals, residing wholly abroad. To him went all the
      revenues of Rochebriant save what sufficed for the manage of his son and his sister. It was
      the cherished belief of these two loyal natures that the Marquis secretly devoted his fortune
      to the cause of the Bourbons; how, they knew not, though they often amused themselves by
      conjecturing: and, the young man, as he grew up, nursed the hope that he should soon hear that
      the descendant of Henri Quatre had crossed the frontier on a white charger and hoisted the old
      gonfalon with its ‘fleur-de-lis.’ Then, indeed, his own career would be opened, and the sword
      of the Kerouecs drawn from its sheath. Day after day he expected to hear of revolts, of which
      his noble father was doubtless the soul. But the Marquis, though a sincere Legitimist, was by
      no means an enthusiastic fanatic. He was simply a very proud, a very polished, a very
      luxurious, and, though not without the kindliness and generosity which were common attributes
      of the old French noblesse, a very selfish grand seigneur.
Losing his wife (who died the first year of marriage in giving birth to Alain) while he was
      yet very young, he had lived a frank libertine life until he fell submissive under the
      despotic yoke of a Russian Princess, who, for some mysterious reason, never visited her own
      country and obstinately refused to reside in France. She was fond of travel, and moved yearly
      from London to Naples, Naples to Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Seville, Carlsbad,
      Baden-Baden,—anywhere for caprice or change, except Paris. This fair wanderer succeeded in
      chaining to herself the heart and the steps of the Marquis de Rochebriant.
She was very rich; she lived semi-royally. Hers was just the house in which it suited the
      Marquis to be the ‘enfant qate.’ I suspect that, cat-like, his attachment was rather to the
      house than to the person of his mistress. Not that he was domiciled with the Princess; that
      would have been somewhat too much against the proprieties, greatly too much against the
      Marquis’s notions of his own dignity. He had his own carriage, his own apartments, his own
      suite, as became so grand a seigneur and the lover of so grand a dame. His estates, mortgaged
      before he came to them, yielded no income sufficient for his wants; he mortgaged deeper and
      deeper, year after year, till he could mortgage them no more. He sold his hotel at Paris; he
      accepted without scruple his sister’s fortune; he borrowed with equal ‘sang froid’ the two
      hundred thousand francs which his son on coming of age inherited from his mother. Alain
      yielded that fortune to him without a murmur,—nay, with pride; he thought it destined to go
      towards raising a regiment for the fleur-de-lis.
To do the Marquis justice, he was fully persuaded that he should shortly restore to his
      sister and son what he so recklessly took from them. He was engaged to be married to his
      Princess so soon as her own husband died. She had been separated from the Prince for many
      years, and every year it was said he could not last a year longer. But he completed the
      measure of his conjugal iniquities by continuing to live; and one day, by mistake, Death
      robbed the lady of the Marquis instead of the Prince.
This was an accident which the Marquis had never counted upon. He was still young enough to
      consider himself young; in fact, one principal reason for keeping Alain secluded in Bretagne
      was his reluctance to introduce into the world a son “as old as myself” he would say
      pathetically. The news of his death, which happened at Baden after a short attack of
      bronchitis caught in a supper ‘al fresco’ at the old castle, was duly transmitted to
      Rochebriant by the Princess; and the shock to Alain and his aunt was the greater because they
      had seen so little of the departed that they regarded him as a heroic myth, an impersonation
      of ancient chivalry, condemning himself to voluntary exile rather than do homage to usurpers.
      But from their grief they were soon roused by the terrible doubt whether Rochebriant could
      still be retained in the family. Besides the mortgagees, creditors from half the capitals in
      Europe sent in their claims; and all the movable effects transmitted to Alain by his father’s
      confidential Italian valet, except sundry carriages and horses which were sold at Baden for
      what they would fetch, were a magnificent dressing-case, in the secret drawer of which were
      some bank-notes amounting to thirty thousand francs, and three large boxes containing the
      Marquis’s correspondence, a few miniature female portraits, and a great many locks of
      hair.
Wholly unprepared for the ruin that stared him in the face, the young Marquis evinced the
      natural strength of his character by the calmness with which he met the danger, and the
      intelligence with which he calculated and reduced it.
By the help of the family notary in the neighbouring town, he made himself master of his
      liabilities and his means; and he found that, after paying all debts and providing for the
      interest of the mortgages, a property which ought to have realized a rental of L10,000 a year
      yielded not more than L400. Nor was even this margin safe, nor the property out of peril; for
      the principal mortgagee, who was a capitalist in Paris named Louvier, having had during the
      life of the late Marquis more than once to wait for his half-yearly interest longer than
      suited his patience,—and his patience was not enduring,—plainly declared that if the same
      delay recurred he should put his right of seizure in force; and in France still more than in
      England, bad seasons seriously affect the security of rents. To pay away L9,600 a year
      regularly out of L10,000, with the penalty of forfeiting the whole if not paid,—whether crops
      may fail, farmers procrastinate, and timber fall in price,—is to live with the sword of
      Damocles over one’s head.
For two years and more, however, Alain met his difficulties with prudence and vigour; he
      retrenched the establishment hitherto kept at the chateau, resigned such rural pleasures as he
      had been accustomed to indulge, and lived like one of his petty farmers. But the risks of the
      future remained undiminished.
“There is but one way, Monsieur le Marquis,” said the family notary, M. Hebert, “by which
      you can put your estate in comparative safety. Your father raised his mortgages from time to
      time, as he wanted money, and often at interest above the average market interest. You may add
      considerably to your income by consolidating all these mortgages into one at a lower
      percentage, and in so doing pay off this formidable mortgagee, M. Louvier, who, I shrewdly
      suspect, is bent upon becoming the proprietor of Rochebriant. Unfortunately those few portions
      of your land which were but lightly charged, and, lying contiguous to small proprietors, were
      coveted by them, and could be advantageously sold, are already gone to pay the debts of
      Monsieur the late Marquis. There are, however, two small farms which, bordering close on the
      town of S______, I think I could dispose of for building purposes at high rates; but these
      lands are covered by M. Louvier’s general mortgage, and he has refused to release them, unless
      the whole debt be paid. Were that debt therefore transferred to another mortgagee, we might
      stipulate for their exception, and in so doing secure a sum of more than 100,000 francs, which
      you could keep in reserve for a pressing or unforeseen occasion, and make the nucleus of a
      capital devoted to the gradual liquidation of the charges on the estate. For with a little
      capital, Monsieur le Marquis, your rent-roll might be very greatly increased, the forests and
      orchards improved, those meadows round S_____ drained and irrigated. Agriculture is beginning
      to be understood in Bretagne, and your estate would soon double its value in the hands of a
      spirited capitalist. My advice to you, therefore, is to go to Paris, employ a good ‘avoue,’
      practised in such branch of his profession, to negotiate the consolidation of your mortgages
      upon terms that will enable you to sell outlying portions, and so pay off the charge by
      instalments agreed upon; to see if some safe company or rich individual can be found to
      undertake for a term of years the management of your forests, the draining of the S_____
      meadows, the superintendence of your fisheries, etc. They, it is true, will monopolize the
      profits for many years,—perhaps twenty; but you are a young man: at the end of that time you
      will reenter on your estate with a rental so improved that the mortgages, now so awful, will
      seem to you comparatively trivial.”
In pursuance of this advice, the young Marquis had come to Paris fortified with a letter
      from M. Hebert to an ‘avoue’ of eminence, and with many letters from his aunt to the nobles of
      the Faubourg connected with his house. Now one reason why M. Hebert had urged his client to
      undertake this important business in person, rather than volunteer his own services in Paris,
      was somewhat extra-professional. He had a sincere and profound affection for Alain; he felt
      compassion for that young life so barrenly wasted in seclusion and severe privations; he
      respected, but was too practical a man of business to share, those chivalrous sentiments of
      loyalty to an exiled dynasty which disqualified the man for the age he lived in, and, if not
      greatly modified, would cut him off from the hopes and aspirations of his eager generation. He
      thought plausibly enough that the air of the grand metropolis was necessary to the mental
      health, enfeebled and withering amidst the feudal mists of Bretagne; that once in Paris, Alain
      would imbibe the ideas of Paris, adapt himself to some career leading to honour and to
      fortune, for which he took facilities from his high birth, an historical name too national for
      any dynasty not to welcome among its adherents, and an intellect not yet sharpened by contact
      and competition with others, but in itself vigorous, habituated to thought, and vivified by
      the noble aspirations which belong to imaginative natures.
At the least, Alain would be at Paris in the social position which would afford him the
      opportunities of a marriage, in which his birth and rank would be readily accepted as an
      equivalent to some ample fortune that would serve to redeem the endangered seigneuries. He
      therefore warned Alain that the affair for which he went to Paris might be tedious, that
      lawyers were always slow, and advised him to calculate on remaining several months, perhaps a
      year; delicately suggesting that his rearing hitherto had been too secluded for his age and
      rank, and that a year at Paris, even if he failed in the object which took him there, would
      not be thrown away in the knowledge of men and things that would fit him better to grapple
      with his difficulties on his return.
Alain divided his spare income between his aunt and himself, and had come to Paris
      resolutely determined to live within the L200 a year which remained to his share. He felt the
      revolution in his whole being that commenced when out of sight of the petty principality in
      which he was the object of that feudal reverence, still surviving in the more unfrequented
      parts of Bretagne, for the representatives of illustrious names connected with the immemorial
      legends of the province.
The very bustle of a railway, with its crowd and quickness and unceremonious democracy of
      travel, served to pain and confound and humiliate that sense of individual dignity in which he
      had been nurtured. He felt that, once away from Rochebriant, he was but a cipher in the sum of
      human beings. Arrived at Paris, and reaching the gloomy hotel to which he had been
      recommended, he greeted even the desolation of that solitude which is usually so oppressive to
      a stranger in the metropolis of his native land. Loneliness was better than the loss of self
      in the reek and pressure of an unfamiliar throng. For the first few days he had wandered over
      Paris without calling even on the ‘avoue’ to whom M. Hebert had directed him. He felt with the
      instinctive acuteness of a mind which, under sounder training, would have achieved no mean
      distinction, that it was a safe precaution to imbue himself with the atmosphere of the place,
      and seize on those general ideas which in great capitals are so contagious that they are often
      more accurately caught by the first impressions than by subsequent habit, before he brought
      his mind into collision with those of the individuals he had practically to deal with.
At last he repaired to the ‘avoue,’ M. Gandrin, Rue St. Florentin. He had mechanically
      formed his idea of the abode and person of an ‘avoue’ from his association with M. Hebert. He
      expected to find a dull house in a dull street near the centre of business, remote from the
      haunts of idlers, and a grave man of unpretending exterior and matured years.
He arrived at a hotel newly fronted, richly decorated, in the fashionable quartier close by
      the Tuileries. He entered a wide ‘porte cochere,’ and was directed by the concierge to mount
      ‘au premier.’ There, first detained in an office faultlessly neat, with spruce young men at
      smart desks, he was at length admitted into a noble salon, and into the presence of a
      gentleman lounging in an easy-chair before a magnificent bureau of ‘marqueterie, genre Louis
      Seize,’ engaged in patting a white curly lapdog, with a pointed nose and a shrill bark.
The gentleman rose politely on his entrance, and released the dog, who, after sniffing the
      Marquis, condescended not to bite.
“Monsieur le Marquis,” said M. Gandrin, glancing at the card and the introductory note from
      M. Hebert, which Alain had sent in, and which lay on the ‘secretaire’ beside heaps of letters
      nicely arranged and labelled, “charmed to make the honour of your acquaintance; just arrived
      at Paris? So M. Hebert—a very worthy person whom I have never seen, but with whom I have had
      correspondence—tells me you wish for my advice; in fact, he wrote to me some days ago,
      mentioning the business in question,—consolidation of mortgages. A very large sum wanted,
      Monsieur le Marquis, and not to be had easily.”
“Nevertheless,” said Alain, quietly, “I should imagine that there must be many capitalists
      in Paris willing to invest in good securities at fair interest.”
“You are mistaken, Marquis; very few such capitalists. Men worth money nowadays like quick
      returns and large profits, thanks to the magnificent system of ‘Credit Mobilier,’ in which, as
      you are aware, a man may place his money in any trade or speculation without liabilities
      beyond his share. Capitalists are nearly all traders or speculators.”
“Then,” said the Marquis, half rising, “I am to presume, sir, that you are not likely to
      assist me.”
“No, I don’t say that, Marquis. I will look with care into the matter. Doubtless you have
      with you an abstract of the necessary documents, the conditions of the present mortgages, the
      rental of the estate, its probable prospects, and so forth.”
“Sir, I have such an abstract with me at Paris; and having gone into it myself with M.
      Hebert, I can pledge you my word that it is strictly faithful to the facts.”
The Marquis said this with naive simplicity, as if his word were quite sufficient to set
      that part of the question at rest. M. Gandrin smiled politely and said, “‘Eh bien,’ M. le
      Marquis: favour me with the abstract; in a week’s time you shall have my opinion. You enjoy
      Paris? Greatly improved under the Emperor. ‘Apropos,’ Madame Gandrin receives tomorrow
      evening; allow me that opportunity to present you to her.” Unprepared for the proffered
      hospitality, the Marquis had no option but to murmur his gratification and assent.
In a minute more he was in the streets. The next evening he went to Madame Gandrin’s,—a
      brilliant reception,—a whole moving flower-bed of “decorations” there. Having gone through the
      ceremony of presentation to Madame Gandrin,—a handsome woman dressed to perfection, and
      conversing with the secretary to an embassy,—the young noble ensconced himself in an obscure
      and quiet corner, observing all and imagining that he escaped observation. And as the young
      men of his own years glided by him, or as their talk reached his ears, he became aware that
      from top to toe, within and without, he was old-fashioned, obsolete, not of his race, not of
      his day. His rank itself seemed to him a waste-paper title-deed to a heritage long lapsed. Not
      thus the princely seigneurs of Rochebriant made their ‘debut’ at the capital of their nation.
      They had had the ‘entree’ to the cabinets of their kings; they had glittered in the halls of
      Versailles; they had held high posts of distinction in court and camp; the great Order of St.
      Louis had seemed their hereditary appanage. His father, though a voluntary exile in manhood,
      had been in childhood a king’s page, and throughout life remained the associate of princes;
      and here, in an ‘avoue’s soiree,’ unknown, unregarded, an expectant on an ‘avoue’s’ patronage,
      stood the last lord of Rochebriant.
It is easy to conceive that Alain did not stay long. But he stayed long enough to convince
      him that on L200 a year the polite society of Paris, even as seen at M. Gandrin’s, was not for
      him. Nevertheless, a day or two after, he resolved to call upon the nearest of his kinsmen to
      whom his aunt had given him letters. With the Count de Vandemar, one of his fellow-nobles of
      the sacred Faubourg, he should be no less Rochebriant, whether in a garret or a palace. The
      Vandemars, in fact, though for many generations before the First Revolution a puissant and
      brilliant family, had always recognized the Rochebriants as the head of their house,—the trunk
      from which they had been slipped in the fifteenth century, when a younger son of the
      Rochebriants married a wealthy heiress and took the title with the lands of Vandemar.
Since then the two families had often intermarried. The present count had a reputation for
      ability, was himself a large proprietor, and might furnish advice to guide Alain in his
      negotiations with M. Gandrin. The Hotel do Vandemar stood facing the old Hotel de Rochebriant;
      it was less spacious, but not less venerable, gloomy, and prison-like.
As he turned his eyes from the armorial scutcheon which still rested, though chipped and
      mouldering, over the portals of his lost ancestral house, and was about to cross the street,
      two young men, who seemed two or three years older than himself, emerged on horseback from the
      Hotel de Vandemar.
Handsome young men, with the lofty look of the old race, dressed with the punctilious care
      of person which is not foppery in men of birth, but seems part of the self-respect that
      appertains to the old chivalric point of honour. The horse of one of these cavaliers made a
      caracole which brought it nearly upon Alain as he was about to cross. The rider, checking his
      steed, lifted his hat to Alain and uttered a word of apology in the courtesy of ancient
      high-breeding, but still with condescension as to an inferior. This little incident, and the
      slighting kind of notice received from coevals of his own birth, and doubtless his own
      blood,—for he divined truly that they were the sons of the Count de Vandemar,—disconcerted
      Alain to a degree which perhaps a Frenchman alone can comprehend. He had even half a mind to
      give up his visit and turn back. However, his native manhood prevailed over that morbid
      sensitiveness which, born out of the union of pride and poverty, has all the effects of
      vanity, and yet is not vanity itself.
The Count was at home, a thin spare man with a narrow but high forehead, and an expression
      of countenance keen, severe, and ‘un peu moqueuse.’
He received the Marquis, however, at first with great cordiality, kissed him on both sides
      of his cheek, called him “cousin,” expressed immeasurable regret that the Countess was gone
      out on one of the missions of charity in which the great ladies of the Faubourg religiously
      interest themselves, and that his sons had just ridden forth to the Bois.
As Alain, however, proceeded, simply and without false shame, to communicate the object of
      his visit at Paris, the extent of his liabilities, and the penury of his means, the smile
      vanished from the Count’s face. He somewhat drew back his fauteuil in the movement common to
      men who wish to estrange themselves from some other man’s difficulties; and when Alain came to
      a close, the Count remained some moments seized with a slight cough; and, gazing intently on
      the carpet, at length he said, “My dear young friend, your father behaved extremely ill to
      you,—dishonourably, fraudulently.”
“Hold!” said the Marquis, colouring high. “Those are words no man can apply to my father in
      my presence.”
The Count stared, shrugged his shoulders, and replied with ‘sang froid,’ “Marquis, if you
      are contented with your father’s conduct, of course it is no business of mine: he never
      injured me. I presume, however, that, considering my years and my character, you come to me
      for advice: is it so?”
Alain bowed his head in assent.
“There are four courses for one in your position to take,” said the Count, placing the index
      of the right hand successively on the thumb and three fingers of the left,—“four courses, and
      no more.
“First. To do as your notary recommended: consolidate your mortgages, patch up your income
      as you best can, return to Rochebriant, and devote the rest of your existence to the
      preservation of your property. By that course your life will be one of permanent privation,
      severe struggle; and the probability is that you will not succeed: there will come one or two
      bad seasons, the farmers will fail to pay, the mortgagee will foreclose, and you may find
      yourself, after twenty years of anxiety and torment, prematurely old and without a sou.
“Course the second. Rochebriant, though so heavily encumbered as to yield you some such
      income as your father gave to his chef de cuisine, is still one of those superb ‘terres’ which
      bankers and Jews and stock-jobbers court and hunt after, for which they will give enormous
      sums. If you place it in good hands, I do not doubt that you could dispose of the property
      within three months, on terms that would leave you a considerable surplus, which, invested
      with judgment, would afford you whereon you could live at Paris in a way suitable to your rank
      and age. Need we go further?—does this course smile to you?”
“Pass on, Count; I will defend to the last what I take from my ancestors, and cannot
      voluntarily sell their roof-tree and their tombs.”
“Your name would still remain, and you would be just as well received in Paris, and your
      ‘noblesse’ just as implicitly conceded, if all Judaea encamped upon Rochebriant. Consider how
      few of us ‘gentilshommes’ of the old regime have any domains left to us. Our names alone
      survive: no revolution can efface them.”
“It may be so, but pardon me; there are subjects on which we cannot reason,—we can but feel.
      Rochebriant may be torn from me, but I cannot yield it.”
“I proceed to the third course. Keep the chateau and give up its traditions; remain ‘de
      facto’ Marquis of Rochebriant, but accept the new order of things. Make yourself known to the
      people in power. They will be charmed to welcome you a convert from the old noblesse is a
      guarantee of stability to the new system. You will be placed in diplomacy; effloresce into an
      ambassador, a minister,—and ministers nowadays have opportunities to become enormously
      rich.”
“That course is not less impossible than the last. Till Henry V. formally resign his right
      to the throne of Saint Louis, I can be servant to no other man seated on that throne.”
“Such, too, is my creed,” said the Count, “and I cling to it; but my estate is not
      mortgaged, and I have neither the tastes nor the age for public employments. The last course
      is perhaps better than the rest; at all events it is the easiest. A wealthy marriage; even if
      it must be a ‘mesalliance.’ I think at your age, with your appearance, that your name is worth
      at least two million francs in the eyes of a rich ‘roturier’ with an ambitious daughter.”
“Alas!” said the young man, rising, “I see I shall have to go back to Rochebriant. I cannot
      sell my castle, I cannot sell my creed, and I cannot sell my name and myself.”
“The last all of us did in the old ‘regime,’ Marquis. Though I still retain the title of
      Vandemar, my property comes from the Farmer-General’s daughter, whom my great-grandfather,
      happily for us, married in the days of Louis Quinze. Marriages with people of sense and rank
      have always been ‘marriages de convenance’ in France. It is only in ‘le petit monde’ that men
      having nothing marry girls having nothing, and I don’t believe they are a bit the happier for
      it. On the contrary, the ‘quarrels de menage’ leading to frightful crimes appear by the
      ‘Gazette des Tribunaux’ to be chiefly found among those who do not sell themselves at the
      altar.”
The old Count said this with a grim ‘persiflage.’ He was a Voltairian.
Voltairianism, deserted by the modern Liberals of France, has its chief cultivation nowadays
      among the wits of the old ‘regime.’ They pick up its light weapons on the battle-field on
      which their fathers perished, and re-feather against the ‘canaille’ the shafts which had been
      pointed against the ‘noblesse.’
“Adieu, Count,” said Alain, rising; “I do not thank you less for your advice because I have
      not the wit to profit by it.”
“‘Au revoir,’ my cousin; you will think better of it when you have been a month or two at
      Paris. By the way, my wife receives every Wednesday; consider our house yours.”
“Count, can I enter into the world which Madame la Comtesse receives, in the way that
      becomes my birth, on the income I take from my fortune?”
The Count hesitated. “No,” said he at last, frankly; “not because you will be less welcome
      or less respected, but because I see that you have all the pride and sensitiveness of a
      ‘seigneur de province.’ Society would therefore give you pain, not pleasure. More than this, I
      know, by the remembrance of my own youth and the sad experience of my own sons, that you would
      be irresistibly led into debt, and debt in your circumstances would be the loss of
      Rochebriant. No; I invite you to visit us. I offer you the most select but not the most
      brilliant circles of Paris, because my wife is religious, and frightens away the birds of gay
      plumage with the scarecrows of priests and bishops. But if you accept my invitation and my
      offer, I am bound, as an old man of the world to a young kinsman, to say that the chances are
      that you will be ruined.”
“I thank you, Count, for your candour; and I now acknowledge that I have found a relation
      and a guide,” answered the Marquis, with nobility of mien that was not without a pathos which
      touched the hard heart of the old man.
“Come at least whenever you want a sincere if a rude friend;” and though he did not kiss his
      cousin’s cheek this time, he gave him, with more sincerity, a parting shake of the hand.
And these made the principal events in Alain’s Paris life till he met Frederic Lemercier.
      Hitherto he had received no definite answer from M. Gandrin, who had postponed an interview,
      not having had leisure to make himself master of all the details in the abstract sent to
      him.
</div></body></text></TEI>