<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV.
The next day, towards the afternoon, Frederic Lemercier, somewhat breathless from the
      rapidity at which he had ascended to so high an eminence, burst into Alain’s chamber.
“‘Br-r! mon cher;’ what superb exercise for the health—how it must strengthen the muscles
      and expand the chest! After this who should shrink from scaling Mont Blanc? Well, well. I have
      been meditating on your business ever since we parted. But I would fain know more of its
      details. You shall confide them to me as we drive through the Bois. My coupe is below, and the
      day is beautiful; come.”
To the young Marquis, the gayety, the heartiness of his college friend were a cordial. How
      different from the dry counsels of the Count de Vandemar! Hope, though vaguely, entered into
      his heart. Willingly he accepted Frederic’s invitation, and the young men were soon rapidly
      borne along the Champs Elysees. As briefly as he could Alain described the state of his
      affairs, the nature of his mortgages, and the result of his interview with M. Gandrin.
Frederic listened attentively. “Then Gandrin has given you as yet no answer?”
“None; but I have a note from him this morning asking me to call to-morrow.”
“After you have seen him, decide on nothing,—if he makes you any offer. Get back your
      abstract, or a copy of it, and confide it to me. Gandrin ought to help you; he transacts
      affairs in a large way. ‘Belle clientele’ among the millionnaires. But his clients expect
      fabulous profits, and so does he. As for your principal mortgagee, Louvier, you know, of
      course, who he is.”
“No, except that M. Hebert told me that he was very rich.”
“‘Rich’ I should think so; one of the Kings of Finance, Ah! observe those young men on
      horseback.”
Alain looked forth and recognized the two cavaliers whom he had conjectured to be the sons
      of the Count de Vandemar.
“Those ‘beaux garcons’ are fair specimens of your Faubourg,” said Frederic; “they would
      decline my acquaintance because my grandfather kept a shop, and they keep a shop between
      them.”
“A shop! I am mistaken, then. Who are they?”
“Raoul and Enguerrand, sons of that mocker of man, the Count de Vandemar.”
“And they keep a shop! You are jesting.”
“A shop at which you may buy gloves and perfumes, Rue de la Chaussee d’Antin. Of course they
      don’t serve at the counter; they only invest their pocket-money in the speculation; and, in so
      doing, treble at least their pocket-money, buy their horses, and keep their grooms.”
“Is it possible! nobles of such birth! How shocked the Count would be if he knew it!”
“Yes, very much shocked if he was supposed to know it. But he is too wise a father not to
      give his sons limited allowances and unlimited liberty, especially the liberty to add to the
      allowances as they please. Look again at them; no better riders and more affectionate brothers
      since the date of Castor and Pollux. Their tastes indeed differ—Raoul is religious and moral,
      melancholy and dignified; Enguerrand is a lion of the first water,—elegant to the tips of his
      nails. These demigods nevertheless are very mild to mortals. Though Enguerrand is the best
      pistol-shot in Paris, and Raoul the best fencer, the first is so good-tempered that you would
      be a brute to quarrel with him, the last so true a Catholic, that if you quarrelled with him
      you need not fear his sword. He would not die in the committal of what the Church holds a
      mortal sin.”
“Are you speaking ironically? Do you mean to imply that men of the name of Vandemar are not
      brave?”
“On the contrary, I believe that, though masters of their weapons, they are too brave to
      abuse their skill; and I must add that, though they are sleeping partners in a shop, they
      would not cheat you of a farthing. Benign stars on earth, as Castor and Pollux were in
      heaven.”
“But partners in a shop!”
“Bah! when a minister himself, like the late M. de M______, kept a shop, and added the
      profits of ‘bons bons’ to his revenue, you may form some idea of the spirit of the age. If
      young nobles are not generally sleeping partners in shops, still they are more or less
      adventurers in commerce. The Bourse is the profession of those who have no other profession.
      You have visited the Bourse?”
“No.”
“No! this is just the hour. We have time yet for the Bois. Coachman, drive to the
      Bourse.”
“The fact is,” resumed Frederic, “that gambling is one of the wants of civilized men. The
      ‘rouge-et-noir’ and ‘roulette’ tables are forbidden; the hells closed: but the passion for
      making money without working for it must have its vent, and that vent is the Bourse. As
      instead of a hundred wax-lights you now have one jet of gas, so instead of a hundred hells you
      have now one Bourse, and—it is exceedingly convenient; always at hand; no discredit being seen
      there as it was to be seen at Frascati’s; on the contrary, at once respectable, and yet the
      mode.”
The coupe stops at the Bourse, our friends mount the steps, glide through the pillars,
      deposit their canes at a place destined to guard them, and the Marquis follows Frederic up a
      flight of stairs till he gains the open gallery round a vast hall below. Such a din! such a
      clamour! disputations, wrangling, wrathful.
Here Lemercier distinguished some friends, whom he joined for a few minutes.
Alain left alone, looked down into the hall. He thought himself in some stormy scene of the
      First Revolution. An English contested election in the market-place of a borough when the
      candidates are running close on each other—the result doubtful, passions excited, the whole
      borough in civil war—is peaceful compared to the scene at the Bourse.
Bulls and bears screaming, bawling, gesticulating, as if one were about to strangle the
      other; the whole, to an uninitiated eye, a confusion, a Babel, which it seems absolutely
      impossible to reconcile to the notion of quiet mercantile transactions, the purchase and sale
      of shares and stocks. As Alain gazed bewildered, he felt himself gently touched, and, looking
      round, saw the Englishman.
“A lively scene!” whispered Mr. Vane. “This is the heart of Paris: it beats very
      loudly.”
“Is your Bourse in London like this?”
“I cannot tell you: at our Exchange the general public are not admitted: the privileged
      priests of that temple sacrifice their victims in closed penetralia, beyond which the sounds
      made in the operation do not travel to ears profane. But had we an Exchange like this open to
      all the world, and placed, not in a region of our metropolis unknown to fashion, but in some
      elegant square in St. James’s or at Hyde Park Corner, I suspect that our national character
      would soon undergo a great change, and that all our idlers and sporting-men would make their
      books there every day, instead of waiting long months in ‘ennui’ for the Doncaster and the
      Derby. At present we have but few men on the turf; we should then have few men not on
      Exchange, especially if we adopt your law, and can contrive to be traders without risk of
      becoming bankrupts. Napoleon I. called us a shopkeeping nation. Napoleon III. has taught
      France to excel us in everything, and certainly he has made Paris a shopkeeping city.”
Alain thought of Raoul and Enguerrand, and blushed to find that what he considered a blot on
      his countrymen was so familiarly perceptible to a foreigner’s eye.
“And the Emperor has done wisely, at least for the time,” continued the Englishman, with a
      more thoughtful accent. “He has found vent thus for that very dangerous class in Paris society
      to which the subdivision of property gave birth; namely the crowd of well-born, daring young
      men without fortune and without profession. He has opened the ‘Bourse’ and said, ‘There, I
      give you employment, resource, an ‘avenir.‘’ He has cleared the byways into commerce and
      trade, and opened new avenues of wealth to the noblesse, whom the great Revolution so unwisely
      beggared. What other way to rebuild a ‘noblesse’ in France, and give it a chance of power be
      side an access to fortune? But to how many sides of your national character has the Bourse of
      Paris magnetic attraction! You Frenchmen are so brave that you could not be happy without
      facing danger, so covetous of distinction that you would pine yourselves away without a dash,
      coute quo coute, at celebrity and a red ribbon. Danger! look below at that arena: there it is;
      danger daily, hourly. But there also is celebrity; win at the Bourse, as of old in a
      tournament, and paladins smile on you, and ladies give you their scarves, or, what is much the
      same, they allow you to buy their cachemires. Win at the Bourse,—what follows? the Chamber,
      the Senate, the Cross, the Minister’s ‘portefeuille.’ I might rejoice in all this for the sake
      of Europe,—could it last, and did it not bring the consequences that follow the demoralization
      which attends it. The Bourse and the Credit Mobilier keep Paris quiet, at least as quiet as it
      can be. These are the secrets of this reign of splendour; these the two lions couchants on
      which rests the throne of the Imperial reconstructor.”
Alain listened surprised and struck. He had not given the Englishman credit for the cast of
      mind which such reflections evinced.
Here Lemercier rejoined them, and shook hands with Graham Vane, who, taking him aside, said,
      “But you promised to go to the Bois, and indulge my insane curiosity about the lady in the
      pearl-coloured robe?”
“I have not forgotten; it is not half-past two yet; you said three. ‘Soyez tranquille;’ I
      drive thither from the Bourse with Rochebriant.”
“Is it necessary to take with you that very good-looking Marquis?”
“I thought you said you were not jealous, because not yet in love. However, if Rochebriant
      occasions you the pang which your humble servant failed to inflict, I will take care that he
      do not see the lady.”
“No,” said the Englishman; “on consideration, I should be very much obliged to any one with
      whom she would fall in love. That would disenchant me. Take the Marquis by all means.”
Meanwhile Alain, again looking down, saw just under him, close by one of the pillars, Lucien
      Duplessis. He was standing apart from the throng, a small space cleared round himself, and two
      men who had the air of gentlemen of the ‘beau monde,’ with whom he was conferring. Duplessis,
      thus seen, was not like the Duplessis at the restaurant. It would be difficult to explain what
      the change was, but it forcibly struck Alain: the air was more dignified, the expression
      keener; there was a look of conscious power and command about the man even at that distance;
      the intense, concentrated intelligence of his eye, his firm lip, his marked features, his
      projecting, massive brow, would have impressed a very ordinary observer. In fact, the man was
      here in his native element; in the field in which his intellect gloried, commanded, and had
      signalized itself by successive triumphs. Just thus may be the change in the great orator whom
      you deemed insignificant in a drawing-room, when you see his crest rise above a reverential
      audience; or the great soldier, who was not distinguishable from the subaltern in a peaceful
      club, could you see him issuing the order to his aids-de-camp amidst the smoke and roar of the
      battle-field.
“Ah, Marquis!” said Graham Vane, “are you gazing at Duplessis? He is the modern genius of
      Paris. He is at once the Cousin, the Guizot, and the Victor Hugo of speculation. Philosophy,
      Eloquence, audacious Romance,—all Literature now is swallowed up in the sublime epic of
      ‘Agiotage,’ and Duplessis is the poet of the Empire.”
“Well said, M. Grarm Varn,” cried Frederic, forgetting his recent lesson in English names.
      “Alain underrates that great man. How could an Englishman appreciate him so well?”
“‘Ma foi!’” returned Graham, quietly. “I am studying to think at Paris, in order some day or
      other to know how to act in London. Time for the Bois. Lemercier, we meet at
      seven,—Philippe’s.”
</div></body></text></TEI>