<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="72">
CHAPTER VII.
A few days after the date of the last chapter, Colonel Morley returned to Paris. He had
      dined with Graham at Greenwich, had met him afterwards in society, and paid him a farewell
      visit on the day before the Colonel’s departure; but the name of Isaura Cicogna had not again
      been uttered by either. Morley was surprised that his wife did not question him minutely as to
      the mode in which he had executed her delicate commission, and the manner as well as words
      with which Graham had replied to his “ventilations.” But his Lizzy cut him short when he began
      his recital:
“I don’t want to hear anything more about the man. He has thrown away a prize richer than
      his ambition will ever gain, even if it gained him a throne.”
“That it can’t gain him in the old country. The people are loyal to the present dynasty,
      whatever you may be told to the contrary.”
“Don’t be so horribly literal, Frank; that subject is done with. How was the Duchess of ———
      dressed?”
But when the Colonel had retired to what the French call the cabinet de traivail—and which
      he more accurately termed his “smoke den”—and there indulged in the cigar which, despite his
      American citizenship, was forbidden in the drawing-room of the tyrant who ruled his life, Mrs.
      Morley took from her desk a letter received three days before, and brooded over it intently,
      studying every word. When she had thus reperused it, her tears fell upon the page. “Poor
      Isaura!” she muttered—“poor Isaura! I know she loves him—and how deeply a nature like hers can
      love! But I must break it to her. If I did not, she would remain nursing a vain dream, and
      refuse every chance of real happiness for the sake of nursing it.” Then she mechanically
      folded up the letter—I need not say it was from Graham Vane—restored it to the desk, and
      remained musing till the Colonel looked in at the door and said peremptorily, “Very late—come
      to bed.”
The next day Madame Savarin called on Isaura.
“Chere enfant,” said she, “I have bad news for you. Poor Gustave is very ill—an attack of
      the lungs and fever; you know how delicate he is.”
“I am sincerely grieved,” said Isaura, in earnest tender tones; “it must be a very sudden
      attack: he was here last Thursday.”
“The malady only declared itself yesterday morning, but surely you must have observed how
      ill he has been looking for several days past? It pained me to see him.”
“I did not notice any change in him,” said Isaura, somewhat conscience-stricken. Wrapt in
      her own happy thoughts, she would not have noticed change in faces yet more familiar to her
      than that of her young admirer.
“Isaura,” said Madame Savarin, “I suspect there are moral causes for our friend’s failing
      health. Why should I disguise my meaning? You know well how madly he is in love with you, and
      have you denied him hope?”
“I like M. Rameau as a friend; I admire him—at times I pity him.”
“Pity is akin to love.”
“I doubt the truth of that saying, at all events as you apply it now. I could not love M.
      Rameau; I never gave him cause to think I could.”
“I wish for both your sakes that you could make me a different answer; for his sake,
      because, knowing his faults and failings, I am persuaded that they would vanish in a
      companionship so pure, so elevating as yours: you could make him not only so much happier but
      so much better a man. Hush! let me go on, let me come to yourself,—I say for your sake I wish
      it. Your pursuits, your ambition, are akin to his; you should not marry one who could not
      sympathise with you in these. If you did, he might either restrict the exercise of your genius
      or be chafed at its display. The only authoress I ever knew whose married lot was serenely
      happy to the last, was the greatest of English poetesses married to a great English poet. You
      cannot, you ought not, to devote yourself to the splendid career to which your genius
      irresistibly impels you, without that counsel, that support, that protection, which a husband
      alone can give. My dear child, as the wife myself of a man of letters, and familiarised to all
      the gossip, all the scandal, to which they who give their names to the public are exposed, I
      declare that if I had a daughter who inherited Savarin’s talents, and was ambitious of
      attaining to his renown, I would rather shut her up in a convent than let her publish a book
      that was in every one’s hands until she had sheltered her name under that of a husband; and if
      I say this of my child, with a father so wise in the world’s ways, and so popularly respected
      as my bon homme, what must I feel to be essential to your safety, poor stranger in our land!
      poor solitary orphan! with no other advice or guardian than the singing mistress whom you
      touchingly call ‘Madre!’ I see how I distress and pain you—I cannot help it. Listen! The other
      evening Savarin came back from his favourite cafe in a state of excitement that made me think
      he came to announce a revolution. It was about you; he stormed, he wept—actually wept—my
      philosophical laughing Savarin. He had just heard of that atrocious wager made by a Russian
      barbarian. Every one praised you for the contempt with which you had treated the savage’s
      insolence. But that you should have been submitted to such an insult without one male friend
      who had the right to resent and chastise it,—you cannot think how Savarin was chafed and
      galled. You know how he admires, but you cannot guess how he reveres you; and since then he
      says to me every day: ‘That girl must not remain single. Better marry any man who has a heart
      to defend a wife’s honour and the nerve to fire a pistol: every Frenchman has those
      qualifications!’”
Here Isaura could no longer restrain her emotions; she burst into sobs so vehement, so
      convulsive, that Madame Savarin became alarmed; but when she attempted to embrace and soothe
      her, Isaura recoiled with a visible shudder, and gasping out, “Cruel, cruel!” turned to the
      door, and rushed to her own room.
A few minutes afterwards a maid entered the salon with a message to Madame Savarin that
      Mademoiselle was so unwell that she must beg Madame to excuse her return to the salon.
Later in the day Mrs. Morley called, but Isaura would not see her.
Meanwhile poor Rameau was stretched on his sick-bed, and in sharp struggle between life and
      death. It is difficult to disentangle, one by one, all the threads in a nature so complex as
      Rameau’s; but if we may hazard a conjecture, the grief of disappointed love was not the
      immediate cause of his illness, and yet it had much to do with it. The goad of Isaura’s
      refusal had driven him into seeking distraction in excesses which a stronger frame could not
      have courted with impunity. The man was thoroughly Parisian in many things, but especially in
      impatience of any trouble. Did love trouble him—love could be drowned in absinthe; and too
      much absinthe may be a more immediate cause of congested lungs than the love which the
      absinthe had lulled to sleep.
His bedside was not watched by hirelings. When first taken thus ill—too ill to attend to his
      editorial duties—information was conveyed to the publisher of the Sens Commun, and in
      consequence of that information, Victor de Mauleon came to see the sick man. By his bed he
      found Savarin, who had called, as it were by chance, and seen the doctor, who had said, “It is
      grave. He must be well nursed.” Savarin whispered to De Mauleon, “Shall we call in a
      professional nurse, or a soeur de charite?”
De Mauleon replied, also in a whisper, “Somebody told me that the man had a mother.”
It was true—Savarin had forgotten it. Rameau never mentioned his parents—he was not proud of
      them.
They belonged to a lower class of the bourgeoisie, retired shopkeepers, and a Red Republican
      is sworn to hate of the bourgeoisie, high or low; while a beautiful young author pushing his
      way into the Chaussee d’Antin does not proclaim to the world that his parents had sold hosiery
      in the Rue St. Denis.
Nevertheless Savarin knew that Rameau had such parents still living, and took the hint. Two
      hours afterwards Rameau was leaning his burning forehead on his mother’s breast.
The next morning the doctor said to the mother, “You are worth ten of me. If you can stay
      here we shall pull him through.”
“Stay here!—my own boy!” cried indignantly the poor mother.
</div></body></text></TEI>