<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="97">
CHAPTER X.
No man perhaps had more earnestly sought and more passionately striven for the fall of the
      Empire than Victor de Mauleon; and perhaps no man was more dissatisfied and disappointed by
      the immediate consequences of that fall, In first conspiring against the Empire, he had
      naturally enough, in common with all the more intelligent enemies of the dynasty, presumed
      that its fate would be worked out by the normal effect of civil causes—the alienation of the
      educated classes, the discontent of the artisans, the eloquence of the press and of popular
      meetings, strengthened in proportion as the Emperor had been compelled to relax the former
      checks upon the license of either. And De Mauleon had no less naturally concluded that there
      would be time given for the preparation of a legitimate and rational form of government to
      succeed that which was destroyed. For, as has been hinted or implied, this remarkable man was
      not merely an instigator of revolution through the Secret Council, and the turbulent agencies
      set in movement through the lower strata of society;—he was also in confidential communication
      with men eminent for wealth, station, and political repute, from whom he obtained the funds
      necessary for the darker purposes of conspiracy, into the elaboration of which they did not
      inquire; and these men, though belonging like himself to the Liberal party, were no
      hot-blooded democrats. Most of them were in favour of constitutional monarchy; all of them for
      forms of government very different from any republic in which socialists or communists could
      find themselves uppermost. Among these politicians were persons ambitious and able, who, in
      scheming for the fall of the Empire, had been prepared to undertake the task of conducting to
      ends compatible with modern civilisation the revolution they were willing to allow a mob at
      Paris to commence. The opening of the war necessarily suspended their designs. How completely
      the events of the 4th September mocked the calculations of their ablest minds, and paralysed
      the action of their most energetic spirits, will appear in the conversation I am about to
      record. It takes place between Victor de Mauleon and the personage to whom he had addressed
      the letter written on the night before the interview with Louvier, in which Victor had
      announced his intention of reappearing in Paris in his proper name and rank. I shall designate
      this correspondent as vaguely as possible; let me call him the Incognito. He may yet play so
      considerable a part in the history of France as a potent representative of the political
      philosophy of De Tocqueville—that is, of Liberal principles incompatible with the absolute
      power either of a sovereign or a populace, and resolutely opposed to experiments on the
      foundations of civilised society—that it would be unfair to himself and his partisans if, in a
      work like this, a word were said that could lead malignant conjecture to his identity with any
      special chief of the opinions of which I here present him only as a type.
The Incognito, entering Victor’s apartment:
“My dear friend, even if I had not received your telegram, I should have hastened hither on
      the news of this astounding revolution. It is only in Paris that such a tragedy could be
      followed by such a farce. You were on the spot—a spectator. Explain it if you can.”
DE MAULEON.—“I was more than a spectator; I was an actor. Hiss me—I deserve it. When the
      terrible news from Sedan reached Paris, in the midst of the general stun and bewilderment I
      noticed a hesitating timidity among all those who had wares in their shops and a good coat on
      their backs. They feared that to proclaim the Empire defunct would be to install the Red
      Republic with all its paroxysm of impulsive rage and all its theories of wholesale
      confiscation. But since it was impossible for the object we had in view to let slip the
      occasion of deposing the dynasty which stood in its way, it was necessary to lose no time in
      using the revolutionary part of the populace for that purpose. I assisted in doing so; my
      excuse is this—that in a time of crisis a man of action must go straight to his immediate
      object, and in so doing employ the instruments at his command. I made, however, one error in
      judgment which admits no excuse: I relied on all I had heard, and all I had observed, of the
      character of Trochu, and I was deceived, in common, I believe, with all his admirers, and
      three parts of the educated classes of Paris.”
INCOGNITO.—“I should have been equally deceived! Trochu’s conduct is a riddle that I doubt
      if he himself can ever solve. He was master of the position; he had the military force in his
      hands if he combined with Palikao, which, whatever the jealousies between the two, it was his
      absolute duty to do. He had a great prestige—”
DE MAULEON.—“And for the moment a still greater popularity. His ipse dixit could have
      determined the wavering and confused spirits of the population. I was prepared for his
      abandonment of the Emperor—even of the Empress and the Regency. But how could I imagine that
      he, the man of moderate politics, of Orleanistic leanings, the clever writer, the fine talker,
      the chivalrous soldier, the religious Breton, could abandon everything that was legal,
      everything that could save France against the enemy, and Paris against civil discord; that he
      would connive at the annihilation of the Senate, of the popular Assembly, of every form of
      Government that could be recognised as legitimate at home or abroad, accept service under men
      whose doctrines were opposed to all his antecedents, all his professed opinions, and
      inaugurate a chaos under the name of a Republic!”
INCOGNITO.—“How, indeed? How suppose that the National Assembly, just elected by a majority
      of seven millions and a half, could be hurried into a conjuring-bog, and reappear as the
      travesty of a Venetian oligarchy, composed of half-a-dozen of its most unpopular members! The
      sole excuse for Trochu is, that he deemed all other considerations insignificant compared with
      the defence of Paris, and the united action of the nation against the invaders. But if that
      were his honest desire in siding with this monstrous usurpation of power, he did everything by
      which the desire could be frustrated. Had there been any provisional body composed of men
      known and esteemed, elected by the Chambers, supported by Trochu and the troops at his back,
      there would have been a rallying-point for the patriotism of the provinces; and in the wise
      suspense of any constitution to succeed that Government until the enemy were chased from the
      field, all partisans—Imperialists, Legitimists, Orleanists, Republicans—would have equally
      adjourned their differences. But a democratic Republic, proclaimed by a Parisian mob for a
      nation in which sincere democratic Republicans are a handful, in contempt of an Assembly
      chosen by the country at large; headed by men in whom the provinces have no trust, and for
      whom their own representatives are violently cashiered;—can you conceive such a combination of
      wet blankets supplied by the irony of Fate for the extinction of every spark of ardour in the
      population from which armies are to be gathered in haste, at the beck of usupers they distrust
      and despise? Paris has excelled itself in folly. Hungering for peace, it proclaims a
      Government which has no legal power to treat for it. Shrieking out for allies among the
      monarchies, it annihilates the hope of obtaining them; its sole chance of escape from siege,
      famine, and bombardment, is in the immediate and impassioned sympathy of the provinces; and it
      revives all the grudges which the provinces have long sullenly felt against the domineering
      pretensions of the capital, and invokes the rural populations, which comprise the pith and
      sinew of armies, in the name of men whom I verily believe they detest still more than they do
      the Prussians. Victor, it is enough to make one despair of his country! All beyond the hour
      seems anarchy and ruin.”
“Not so!” exclaimed De Mauleon. “Everything comes to him who knows how to wait. The Empire
      is destroyed; the usurpation that follows it has no roots. It will but serve to expedite the
      establishment of such a condition as we have meditated and planned—a constitution adapted to
      our age and our people, not based wholly on untried experiments, taking the best from nations
      that do not allow Freedom and Order to be the sport of any popular breeze. From the American
      Republic we must borrow the only safeguards against the fickleness of the universal suffrage
      which, though it was madness to concede in any ancient community, once conceded cannot be
      safely abolished,—viz., the salutary law that no article of the Constitution, once settled,
      can be altered without the consent of two-thirds of the legislative body. By this law we
      insure permanence, and that concomitant love for institutions which is engendered by time and
      custom. Secondly, the formation of a senate on such principles as may secure to it in all
      times of danger a confidence and respect which counteract in public opinion the rashness and
      heat of the popular assembly. On what principles that senate should be formed, with what
      functions invested, what share of the executive—especially in foreign affairs, declarations of
      war, or treaties of peace—should be accorded to it, will no doubt need the most deliberate
      care of the ablest minds. But a senate I thus sketch has alone rescued America from the
      rashness of counsel incident to a democratic Chamber; and it is still more essential to
      France, with still more favourable elements for its creation. From England we must borrow the
      great principle that has alone saved her from revolution—that the head of the State can do no
      wrong. He leads no armies, he presides over no Cabinet. All responsibility rests with his
      advisers; and where we upset a dynasty, England changes an administration. Whether the head of
      the State should have the title of sovereign or president, whether he be hereditary or
      elected, is a question of minor importance impossible now to determine, but on which I
      heartily concur with you that hereditary monarchy is infinitely better adapted to the habits
      of Frenchmen, to their love of show and of honours—and infinitely more preservative from all
      the dangers which result from constant elections to such a dignity, with parties so heated,
      and pretenders to the rank so numerous—than any principle by which a popular demagogue or a
      successful general is enabled to destroy the institutions he is elected to guard. On these
      fundamental doctrines for the regeneration of France I think we are agreed. And I believe when
      the moment arrives to promulgate them, through an expounder of weight like yourself, they will
      rapidly commend themselves to the intellect of France. For they belong to common sense; and in
      the ultimate prevalence of common-sense I have a faith which I refuse to medievalists who
      would restore the right divine; and still more to fanatical quacks, who imagine that the
      worship of the Deity, the ties of family, and the rights of property are errors at variance
      with the progress of society. Qui vivera, verra.”
INCOGNITO.—“In the outlines of the policy you so ably enunciate I heartily concur. But if
      France is, I will not say to be regenerated, but to have fair play among the nations of
      Europe, I add one or two items to the programme. France must be saved from Paris, not by
      subterranean barracks and trains, the impotence of which we see to-day with a general in
      command of the military force, but by conceding to France its proportionate share of the power
      now monopolised by Paris. All this system of centralisation, equally tyrannical and corrupt,
      must be eradicated. Talk of examples from America, of which I know little—from England, of
      which I know much,—what can we more advantageously borrow from England than that diffusion of
      all her moral and social power which forbids the congestion of blood in one vital part?
      Decentralise! decentralise! decentralise! will be my incessant cry, if ever the time comes
      when my cry will be heard. France can never be a genuine France until Paris has no more
      influence over the destinies of France than London has over those of England. But on this
      theme I could go on till midnight. Now to the immediate point: what do you advise me to do in
      this crisis, and what do you propose to do yourself?”
De Mauleon put his hand to his brow, and remained a few moments silent and thoughtful. At
      last he looked up with that decided expression of face which was not the least among his many
      attributes for influence over those with whom he came into contact.
“For you, on whom so much of the future depends, my advice is brief—have nothing to do with
      the present. All who join this present mockery of a Government will share the fall that
      attends it—a fall from which one or two of their body may possibly recover by casting blame on
      their confreres,—you never could. But it is not for you to oppose that Government with an
      enemy on its march to Paris. You are not a soldier; military command is not in your rode. The
      issue of events is uncertain; but whatever it be, the men in power cannot conduct a prosperous
      war nor obtain an honourable peace. Hereafter you may be the Deus ex machina. No personage of
      that rank and with that mission appears till the end of the play: we are only in the first
      act. Leave Paris at once, and abstain from all action.”
INCOGNITO (dejectedly).—“I cannot deny the soundness of your advice, though in accepting it
      I feel unutterably saddened. Still you, the calmest and shrewdest observer among my friends,
      think there is cause for hope, not despair. Victor, I have more than most men to make life
      pleasant, but I would lay down life at this moment with you. You know me well enough to be
      sure that I utter no melodramatic fiction when I say that I love my country as a young man
      loves the ideal of his dreams—with my whole mind and heart and soul! and the thought that I
      cannot now aid her in the hour of her mortal trial is—is—”
The man’s voice broke down, and he turned aside, veiling his face with a hand that
      trembled.
DE MAULEON—“Courage—patience! All Frenchmen have the first; set them an example they much
      need in the second. I, too, love my country, though I owe to it little enough, heaven knows. I
      suppose love of country is inherent in all who are not Internationalists. They profess only to
      love humanity, by which, if they mean anything practical, they mean a rise in wages.”
INCOGNITO (rousing himself, and with a half smile). “Always cynical, Victor—always belying
      yourself. But now that you have advised my course, what will be your own? Accompany me, and
      wait for better times.”
“No, noble friend; our positions are different. Yours is made—mine yet to make. But for this
      war I think I could have secured a seat in the Chamber. As I wrote you, I found that my
      kinsfolk were of much influence in their department, and that my restitution to my social
      grade, and the repute I had made as an Orleanist, inclined them to forget my youthful errors
      and to assist my career. But the Chamber ceases to exist. My journal I shall drop. I cannot
      support the Government; it is not a moment to oppose it. My prudent course is silence.”
INCOGNITO.—“But is not your journal essential to your support?”
DE MAULEON.—“Fortunately not. Its profits enabled me to lay by for the rainy day that has
      come; and having reimbursed you and all friends the sums necessary to start it, I stand clear
      of all debt, and, for my slender wants, a rich man. If I continued the journal I should be
      beggared; for there would be no readers to Common Sense in this interval of lunacy.
      Nevertheless, during this interval, I trust to other ways for winning a name that will open my
      rightful path of ambition whenever we again have a legislature in which Common Sense can be
      heard.”
INCOGNITO.—“But how win that name, silenced as a writer?”
DE MAULEON.—“You forget that I have fought in Algeria. In a few days Paris will be in a
      state of siege; and then—and then,” he added, and very quietly dilated on the renown of a
      patriot or the grave of a soldier.
“I envy you the chance of either,” said the Incognito; and after a few more brief words he
      departed, his hat drawn over his brows, and entering a hired carriage which he had left at the
      corner of the quiet street, was consigned to the station du ————, just in time for the next
      train.
</div></body></text></TEI>