<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="96">
CHAPTER, IX.
The conspirators, when left by their president, dispersed in deep, not noisy resentment.
      They were indeed too stunned for loud demonstration; and belonging to different grades of
      life, and entertaining different opinions, their confidence in each other seemed lost now that
      the chief who had brought and kept them together was withdrawn from their union. The Italian
      and the Atheist slunk away, whispering to each other. Grimm reproached Ferrier for deserting
      Dombinsky and obeying Lebeau. Ferrier accused Grimm of his German origin, and hinted at
      denouncing him as a Prussian spy. Gaspard le Noy linked his arm in Monnier’s, and when they
      had gained the dark street without, leading into a labyrinth of desolate lanes, the Medicin
      des Pauvres said to the mechanic: “You are a brave fellow, Monnier. Lebeau owes you a good
      turn. But for your cry, ‘We are not assassins,’ the Pole might not have been left without
      support. No atmosphere is so infectious as that in which we breathe the same air of revenge:
      when the violence of one man puts into action the anger or suspicion of others, they become
      like a pack of hounds, which follow the spring of the first hound, whether on the wild boar or
      their own master. Even I, who am by no means hot-headed, had my hand on my case-knife when the
      word ‘assassin’ rebuked and disarmed me.”
“Nevertheless,” said Monnier, gloomily, “I half repent the impulse which made me interfere
      to save that man. Better he should die than live to betray the cause we allowed him to
      lead.”
“Nay, mon ami, speaking candidly, we must confess that he never from the first pretended to
      advocate the cause for which you conspired. On the contrary, he always said that with the fall
      of the Empire our union would cease, and each become free to choose his own way towards his
      own after-objects.”
“Yes,” answered Armand, reluctantly; “he said that to me privately, with still greater
      plainness than he said it to the Council. But I answered as plainly.”
“How?”
“I told him that the man who takes the first step in a revolution, and persuades others to
      go along with him, cannot in safety stand still or retreat when the next step is to be taken.
      It is ‘en avant’ or ‘a la lanterne.’ So it shall be with him. Shall a fellow-being avail
      himself of the power over my mind which he derives from superior education or
      experience,—break into wild fragments my life, heretofore tranquil, orderly, happy,—make use
      of my opinions, which were then but harmless desires, to serve his own purpose, which was
      hostile to the opinions he roused into action,—say to me, ‘Give yourself up to destroy the
      first obstacle in the way of securing a form of society which your inclinations prefer,’ and
      then, that first obstacle destroyed, cry, ‘Halt! I go with you no further; I will not help you
      to piece together the life I have induced you to shatter; I will not aid you to substitute for
      the society that pained you the society that would please; I leave you, struggling,
      bewildered, maddened, in the midst of chaos within and without you’? Shall a fellow-being do
      this, and vanish with a mocking cry: ‘Tool! I have had enough of thee; I cast thee aside as
      worthless lumber’? Ah! let him beware! The tool is of iron, and can be shaped to edge and
      point.” The passion with which this rough eloquence was uttered, and the fierce sinister
      expression that had come over a countenance habitually open and manly, even when grave and
      stern, alarmed and startled Le Noy. “Pooh, my friend!” he said, rather falteringly, “you are
      too excited now to think justly. Go home and kiss your children. Never do anything that may
      make them shrink from their father. And as to Lebeau, try and forget him. He says he shall
      disappear from Paris. I believe him. It is clear to me that the man is not what he seemed to
      us. No man of sixty could by so easy a sleight of hand have brought that giant Pole to his
      knee. If Lebeau reappear it will be in some other form. Did you notice that in the momentary
      struggle his flaxen wig got disturbed, and beneath it I saw a dark curl. I suspect that the
      man is not only younger than he seemed, but of higher rank—a conspirator against one throne,
      perhaps, in order to be minister under another. There are such men.”
Before Monnier, who seemed struck by these conjectures, collected his thoughts to answer, a
      tall man in the dress of a sous lieutenant stopped under a dim gas-lamp, and, catching sight
      of the artisan’s face, seized him by the hand, exclaiming, “Armand, mon frere! well met;
      strange times, eh? Come and discuss them at the cafe de Lyon yonder over a bowl of punch. I’ll
      stand treat.”
“Agreed, dear Charles.”
“And if this monsieur is a friend of yours, perhaps he will join us.”
“You are too obliging, Monsieur,” answered Le Noy, not ill-pleased to get rid of his excited
      companion; “but it has been a busy day with me, and I am only fit for bed. Be abstinent of the
      punch, Armand. You are feverish already. Good-night, Messieurs.”
The cafe de Lyon, in vogue among the National Guard of the quartier, was but a few yards
      off, and the brothers turned towards it arm in arm. “Who is the friend?” asked Charles; “I
      don’t remember to have seen him with thee before.”
“He belongs to the medical craft—a good patriot and a kind man—attends the poor
      gratuitously. Yes, Charles, these are strange times; what dost thou think will come of
      them?”
They had now entered the cafe; and Charles had ordered the punch, and seated himself at a
      vacant table before he replied. “What will come of these times? I will tell thee. National
      deliverance and regeneration through the ascendency of the National Guard.”
“Eh? I don’t take,” said Armand, bewildered.
“Probably not,” answered Charles, with an air of compassionate conceit; “thou art a dreamer,
      but I am a politician.” He tapped his forehead significantly. “At this custom-house, ideas are
      examined before they are passed.”
Armand gazed at his brother wistfully, and with a defence he rarely manifested towards any
      one who disputed his own claims to superior intelligence. Charles was a few years older than
      Monnier; he was of large build; he had shaggy lowering eyebrows, a long obstinate upper lip,
      the face of a man who was accustomed to lay down the law. Inordinate self-esteem often gives
      that character to a physiognomy otherwise commonplace. Charles passed for a deep thinker in
      his own set, which was a very different set from Armand’s—not among workmen but small
      shopkeepers. He had risen in life to a grade beyond Armand’s; he had always looked to the main
      chance, married the widow of a hosier and glover much older than himself, and in her right was
      a very respectable tradesman, comfortably well off; a Liberal, of course, but a Liberal
      bourgeois, equally against those above him and those below. Needless to add that he had no
      sympathy with his brother’s socialistic opinions. Still he loved that brother as well as he
      could love any one except himself. And Armand, who was very affectionate, and with whom family
      ties were very strong, returned that love with ample interest; and though so fiercely at war
      with the class to which Charles belonged, was secretly proud of having a brother who was of
      that class. So in England I have known the most violent antagonist of the landed
      aristocracy—himself a cobbler—who interrupts a discourse on the crimes of the aristocracy by
      saying, “Though I myself descend from a county family.”
In an evil day Charles Monnier, enrolled in the National Guard, had received promotion in
      that patriotic corps. From that date he began to neglect his shop, to criticise military
      matters, and to think that if merit had fair play he should be a Cincinnatus or a Washington,
      he had not decided which.
“Yes,” resumed Charles, ladling out the punch, “thou hast wit enough to perceive that our
      generals are imbeciles or traitors; that gredin Bonaparte has sold the army for ten millions
      of francs to Bismarck, and I have no doubt that Wimpffen has his share of the bargain. McMahon
      was wounded conveniently, and has his own terms for it. The regular army is nowhere. Thou wilt
      see—thou wilt see—they will not stop the march of the Prussians. Trochu will be obliged to
      come to the National Guard. Then we shall say, ‘General, give us our terms, and go to
      sleep.’
“I shall be summoned to the council of war. I have my plan. I explain it—‘tis accepted—it
      succeeds. I am placed in supreme command—the Prussians are chased back to their sour-krout.
      And I—well—I don’t like to boast, but thou’lt see—thou’lt see—what will happen.”
“And thy plan, Charles—thou hast formed it already?”
“Ay, ay,—the really military genius is prompt, mon petit Armand—a flash of the brain. Hark
      ye! Let the Vandals come to Paris and invest it. Whatever their numbers on paper, I don’t care
      a button; they can only have a few thousands at any given point in the vast circumference of
      the capital. Any fool must grant that—thou must grant it eh?”
“It seems just.”
“Of course. Well, then, we proceed by sorties of 200,000 men repeated every other day, and
      in twelve days the Prussians are in full flight. The country rises on their flight—they are
      cut to pieces. I depose Trochu—the National Guard elects the Saviour of France. I have a place
      in my eye for thee. Thou art superb as a decorator—thou shalt be Minister des Beaux Arts. But
      keep clear of the canaille. No more strikes then—thou wilt be an employer—respect thy future
      order.”

 [Charles Monnier seems to have indiscreetly blabbed out his “idea,” for it was plagiarised
      afterwards at a meeting of the National Guards in the Salle de la Bourse by Citizen Rochebrune
      (slain 19th January, 1871, in the affair of Montretout). The plan, which he developed nearly
      in the same words as Charles Monnier, was received with lively applause; and at the close of
      his speech it was proposed to name at once Citizen Rochebrune General of the National Guard,
      an honour which, unhappily for his country, the citizen had the modesty to decline.]
      
Armand smiled mournfully. Though of intellect which, had it been disciplined, was far
      superior to his brother’s, it was so estranged from practical opinions, so warped, so heated,
      so flawed and cracked in parts, that he did not see the ridicule of Charles’s braggadocio.
      Charles had succeeded in life, Armand had failed; and Armand believed in the worldly wisdom of
      the elder born. But he was far too sincere for any bribe to tempt him to forsake his creed and
      betray his opinions. And he knew that it must be a very different revolution from that which
      his brother contemplated, that could allow him to marry another man’s wife, and his “order” to
      confiscate other people’s property.
“Don’t talk of strikes, Charles. What is done is done. I was led into heading a strike, not
      on my own account, for I was well paid and well off, but for the sake of my fellow-workmen. I
      may regret now what I did, for the sake of Marie and the little ones. But it is an affair of
      honour, and I cannot withdraw from the cause till my order, as thou namest my class, has its
      rights.”
“Bah! thou wilt think better of it when thou art an employer. Thou hast suffered enough
      already. Remember that I warned thee against that old fellow in spectacles whom I met once at
      thy house. I told thee he would lead thee into mischief, and then leave thee to get out of it.
      I saw through him. I have a head! Va!”
“Thou wert a true prophet—he has duped me. But in moving me he has set others in movement;
      and I suspect he will find he has duped himself. Time will show.”
Here the brothers were joined by some loungers belonging to the National Guard. The talk
      became general, the potations large. Towards daybreak Armand reeled home, drunk for the first
      time in his life. He was one of those whom drink makes violent. Marie had been sitting up for
      him, alarmed at his lengthened absence. But when she would have thrown herself on his breast,
      her pale face and her passionate sobs enraged him. He flung her aside roughly. From that night
      the man’s nature was changed. If, as a physiognomist has said, each man has in him a portion
      of the wild beast, which is suppressed by mild civilising circumstances, and comes uppermost
      when self-control is lost, the nature of many an honest workman, humane and tender-hearted as
      the best of us, commenced a change into the wild beast that raged through the civil war of the
      Communists, on the day when half-a-dozen Incapables, with no more claim to represent the
      people of Paris than half-a-dozen monkeys would have, were allowed to elect themselves to
      supreme power, and in the very fact of that election released all the elements of passion, and
      destroyed all the bulwarks of order.
</div></body></text></TEI>