<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">
CHAPTER IX.
The bal champetre was gay and brilliant, as such festal scenes are at Paris. A lovely night
      in the midst of May, lamps below and stars above; the society mixed, of course. Evidently,
      when Graham has singled out Frederic Lemercier from all his acquaintances at Paris to conjoin
      with the official aid of M. Renard in search of the mysterious lady, he had conjectured the
      probability that she might be found in the Bohemian world so familiar to Frederic; if not as
      an inhabitant, at least as an explorer. Bohemia was largely represented at the bal champetre,
      but not without a fair sprinkling of what we call the “respectable classes,” especially
      English and Americans, who brought their wives there to take care of them. Frenchmen, not
      needing such care, prudently left their wives at home. Among the Frenchmen of station were the
      Comte de Passy and the Vicomte de Breze.
On first entering the gardens, Graham’s eye was attracted and dazzled by a brilliant form.
      It was standing under a festoon of flowers extended from tree to tree, and a gas jet opposite
      shone full upon the face,—the face of a girl in all the freshness of youth. If the freshness
      owed anything to art, the art was so well disguised that it seemed nature. The beauty of the
      countenance was Hebe-like, joyous, and radiant; and yet one could not look at the girl without
      a sentiment of deep mournfulness. She was surrounded by a group of young men, and the ring of
      her laugh jarred upon Graham’s ear. He pressed Frederic’s arm, and directing his attention to
      the girl, asked who she was.
“Who? Don’t you know? That is Julie Caumartin. A little while ago her equipage was the most
      admired in the Bois, and great ladies condescended to copy her dress or her coiffure; but she
      has lost her splendour, and dismissed the rich admirer who supplied the fuel for its blaze,
      since she fell in love with Gustave Rameau. Doubtless she is expecting him to-night. You ought
      to know her; shall I present you?”
“No,” answered Graham, with a compassionate expression in his manly face. “So young;
      seemingly so gay. How I pity her!”
“What! for throwing herself away on Rameau? True. There is a great deal of good in that
      girl’s nature, if she had been properly trained. Rameau wrote a pretty poem on her which
      turned her head and won her heart, in which she is styled the ‘Ondine of Paris,’—a nymph-like
      type of Paris itself.”
“Vanishing type, like her namesake; born of the spray, and vanishing soon into the deep,”
      said Graham. “Pray go and look for the Duval; you will find me seated yonder.”
Graham passed into a retired alley, and threw himself on a solitary bench, while Lemercier
      went in search of Madame Duval. In a few minutes the Frenchman reappeared. By his side was a
      lady well dressed, and as she passed under the lamps Graham perceived that, though of a
      certain age, she was undeniably handsome. His heart beat more quickly. Surely this was the
      Louise Duval he sought.
He rose from his seat, and was presented in due form to the lady, with whom Frederic then
      discreetly left him. “M. Lemercier tells me that you think that we were once acquainted with
      each other.”
“Nay, Madame; I should not fail to recognize you were that the case. A friend of mine had
      the honour of knowing a lady of your name; and should I be fortunate enough to meet that lady,
      I am charged with a commission that may not be unwelcome to her. M. Lemercier tells me your
      nom de bapteme is Louise.”
“Louise Corinne, Monsieur.”
“And I presume that Duval is the name you take from your parents?”
“No; my father’s name was Bernard. I married, when I was a mere child, M. Duval, in the wine
      trade at Bordeaux.”
“Ah, indeed!” said Graham, much disappointed, but looking at her with a keen, searching eye,
      which she met with a decided frankness. Evidently, in his judgment, she was speaking the
      truth.
“You know English, I think, Madame,” he resumed, addressing her in that language.
“A leetle; speak un peu.”
“Only a little?”
Madame Duval looked puzzled, and replied in French, with a laugh, “Is it that you were told
      that I spoke English by your countryman, Milord Sare Boulby? Petit scelerat, I hope he is
      well. He sends you a commission for me,—so he ought; he behaved to me like a monster.”
“Alas! I know nothing of Milord Sir Boulby. Were you never in England yourself?”
“Never,” with a coquettish side-glance; “I should like so much to go. I have a foible for
      the English in spite of that vilain petit Boulby. Who is it gave you the commission for me?
      Ha! I guess, le Capitaine Nelton.”
“No. What year, Madame, if not impertinent, were you at Aix-la-Chapelle?”
“You mean Baden? I was there seven years ago, when I met le Capitaine Nelton, bel homme aux
      cheveux rouges.”
“But you have been at Aix?”
“Never.”
“I have, then, been mistaken, Madame, and have only to offer my most humble apologies.”
“But perhaps you will favour me with a visit, and we may on further conversation find that
      you are not mistaken. I can’t stay now, for I am engaged to dance with the Belgian of whom, no
      doubt, M. Lemercier has told you.”
“No, Madame, he has not.”
“Well, then, he will tell you. The Belgian is very jealous; but I am always at home between
      three and four; this is my card.”
Graham eagerly took the card, and exclaimed, “Is this you’re your own handwriting,
      Madame?”
“Yes, indeed.”
“Tres belle ecriture,” said Graham, and receded with a ceremonious bow. “Anything so unlike
      her handwriting! Another disappointment,” muttered the Englishman as the lady went back to the
      ball.
A few minutes later Graham joined Lemercier, who was talking with De Passy and De Breze.
“Well,” said Lemercier, when his eye rested on Graham, “I hit the right nail on the head
      this time, eh?”
Graham shook his head.
“What! is she not the right Louise Duval?”
“Certainly not.”
The Count de Passy overheard the name, and turned. “Louise Duval,” he said; “does Monsieur
      Vane know a Louise Duval?”
“No; but a friend asked me to inquire after a lady of that name whom he had met many years
      ago at Paris.” The Count mused a moment, and said, “Is it possible that your friend knew the
      family De Mauleon?”
“I really can’t say. What then?”
“The old Vicomte de Mauleon was one of my most intimate associates. In fact, our houses are
      connected. And he was extremely grieved, poor man, when his daughter Louise married her
      drawing-master, Auguste Duval.”
“Her drawing-master, Auguste Duval? Pray say on. I think the Louise Duval my friend knew
      must have been her daughter. She was the only child of a drawing-master or artist named
      Auguste Duval, and probably enough her Christian name would have been derived from her mother.
      A Mademoiselle de Mauleon, then, married M. Auguste Duval?”
“Yes; the old Vicomte had espoused en premieres noces Mademoiselle Camille de Chavigny, a
      lady of birth equal to his own; had by her one daughter, Louise. I recollect her well,—a plain
      girl, with a high nose and a sour expression. She was just of age when the first Vicomtesse
      died, and by the marriage settlement she succeeded at once to her mother’s fortune, which was
      not large. The Vicomte was, however, so poor that the loss of that income was no trifle to
      him. Though much past fifty, he was still very handsome. Men of that generation did not age
      soon, Monsieur,” said the Count, expanding his fine chest and laughing exultingly.
“He married, en secondes noces, a lady of still higher birth than the first, and with a much
      larger dot. Louise was indignant at this, hated her stepmother; and when a son was born by the
      second marriage she left the paternal roof, went to reside with an old female relative near
      the Luxembourg, and there married this drawing-master. Her father and the family did all they
      could to prevent it; but in these democratic days a woman who has attained her majority can,
      if she persist in her determination, marry to please herself and disgrace her ancestors. After
      that mesalliance her father never would see her again. I tried in vain to soften him. All his
      parental affections settled on his handsome Victor.
“Ah! you are too young to have known Victor de Mauleon during his short reign at Paris, as
      roi des viveurs.”
“Yes, he was before my time; but I have heard of him as a young man of great fashion; said
      to be very clever, a duellist, and a sort of Don Juan.”
“Exactly.”
“And then I remember vaguely to have heard that he committed, or was said to have committed,
      some villanous action connected with a great lady’s jewels, and to have left Paris in
      consequence.”
“Ah, yes; a sad scrape. At that time there was a political crisis; we were under a Republic;
      anything against a noble was believed. But I am sure Victor de Mauleon was not the man to
      commit a larceny. However, it is quite true that he left Paris, and I don’t know what has
      become of him since.” Here he touched De Breze, who, though still near, had not been listening
      to this conversation, but interchanging jest and laughter with Lemercier on the motley scene
      of the dance.
“De Breze, have you ever heard what became of poor dear Victor de Mauleon?—you knew
      him.”
“Knew him? I should think so. Who could be in the great world and not know le beau Victor?
      No; after he vanished I never heard more of him; doubtless long since dead. A good-hearted
      fellow in spite of all his sins.”
“My dear Monsieur de Breze, did you know his half-sister?” asked Graham,—“a Madame
      Duval?”
“No. I never heard he had a half-sister. Halt there; I recollect that I met Victor once, in
      the garden at Versailles, walking arm-in-arm with the most beautiful girl I ever saw; and when
      I complimented him afterwards at the Jockey Club on his new conquest, he replied very gravely
      that the young lady was his niece. ‘Niece!’ said I; ‘why, there can’t be more than five or six
      years between you.’ ‘About that, I suppose,’ said he; ‘my half-sister, her mother, was more
      than twenty years older than I at the time of my birth.’ I doubted the truth of his story at
      the time; but since you say he really had a sister, my doubt wronged him.”
“Have you never seen that same young lady since?”
“Never.”
“How many years ago was this?”
“Let me see, about twenty or twenty-one years ago. How time flies!”
Graham still continued to question, but could learn no further particulars. He turned to
      quit the gardens just as the band was striking up for a fresh dance, a wild German waltz air;
      and mingled with that German music his ear caught the sprightly sounds of the French laugh,
      one laugh distinguished from the rest by a more genuine ring of light-hearted joy, the laugh
      that he had heard on entering the gardens, and the sound of which had then saddened him.
      Looking towards the quarter from which it came, he again saw the “Ondine of Paris.” She was
      not now the centre of a group. She had just found Gustave Rameau, and was clinging to his arm
      with a look of happiness in her face, frank and innocent as a child’s; and so they passed amid
      the dancers down a solitary lamplit alley, till lost to the Englishman’s lingering gaze.
</div></body></text></TEI>