<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Project Gutenberg's The Parisians, Complete, by Edward
     Bulwer-Lytton</title><author>Lytton, Edward Bulwer (1803-1873)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1874</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">
CHAPTER II.
The Marquis de Rochebriant is no longer domiciled in an attic in the gloomy Faubourg. See
      him now in a charming appartement de garcon an premier in the Rue du Helder, close by the
      promenades and haunts of the mode. It had been furnished and inhabited by a brilliant young
      provincial from Bordeaux, who, coming into an inheritance of one hundred thousand francs, had
      rushed up to Paris to enjoy himself, and make his million at the Bourse. He had enjoyed
      himself thoroughly,—he had been a darling of the demi monde; he had been a successful and an
      inconstant gallant. Zelie had listened to his vows of eternal love, and his offers of
      unlimited cachemires; Desiree, succeeding Zelie, had assigned to him her whole heart—or all
      that was left of it—in gratitude for the ardour of his passion, and the diamonds and coupe
      which accompanied and attested the ardour; the superb Hortense, supplanting Desiree, received
      his visits in the charming apartment he furnished for her, and entertained him and his friends
      at the most delicate little suppers, for the moderate sum of four thousand francs a month.
      Yes, he had enjoyed himself thoroughly, but he had not made a million at the Bourse. Before
      the year was out, the one hundred thousand francs were gone. Compelled to return to his
      province, and by his hard-hearted relations ordained, on penalty of starvation, to marry the
      daughter of an avoue, for the sake of her dot and a share in the hated drudgery of the avoue’s
      business,—his apartment was to be had for a tenth part of the original cost of its furniture.
      A certain Chevalier de Finisterre, to whom Louvier had introduced the Marquis as a useful
      fellow who knew Paris, and would save him from being cheated, had secured this bijou of an
      apartment for Alain, and concluded the bargain for the bagatelle of L500. The Chevalier took
      the same advantageous occasion to purchase the English well-bred hack and the neat coupe and
      horses which the Bordelais was also necessitated to dispose of. These purchases made, the
      Marquis had some five thousand francs (L200) left out of Louvier’s premium of L1,000. The
      Marquis, however, did not seem alarmed or dejected by the sudden diminution of capital so
      expeditiously effected. The easy life thus commenced seemed to him too natural to be fraught
      with danger; and easy though it was, it was a very simple and modest sort of life compared
      with that of many other men of his age to whom Enguerrand had introduced him, though most of
      them had an income less than his, and few, indeed, of them were his equals in dignity of
      birth. Could a Marquis de Rochebriant, if he lived at Paris at all, give less than three
      thousand francs a year for his apartment, or mount a more humble establishment than that
      confined to a valet and a tiger, two horses for his coupe and one for the saddle?
      “Impossible,” said the Chevalier de Finisterre, decidedly; and the Marquis bowed to so high an
      authority. He thought within himself, “If I find in a few months that I am exceeding my means,
      I can but dispose of my rooms and my horses, and return to Rochebriant a richer man by far
      than I left it.”
To say truth, the brilliant seductions of Paris had already produced their effect, not only
      on the habits, but on the character and cast of thought, which the young noble had brought
      with him from the feudal and melancholy Bretagne.
Warmed by the kindness with which, once introduced by his popular kinsmen, he was everywhere
      received, the reserve or shyness which is the compromise between the haughtiness of
      self-esteem and the painful doubt of appreciation by others rapidly melted away. He caught
      insensibly the polished tone, at once so light and so cordial, of his new-made friends. With
      all the efforts of the democrats to establish equality and fraternity, it is among the
      aristocrats that equality and fraternity are most to be found. All gentilshommes in the best
      society are equals; and whether they embrace or fight each other, they embrace or fight as
      brothers of the same family. But with the tone of manners Alain de Rochebriant imbibed still
      more insensibly the lore of that philosophy which young idlers in pursuit of pleasure teach to
      each other. Probably in all civilized and luxurious capitals that philosophy is very much the
      same among the same class of idlers at the same age; probably it flourishes in Pekin not less
      than at Paris. If Paris has the credit, or discredit, of it more than any other capital, it is
      because in Paris more than in any other capital it charms the eye by grace and amuses the ear
      by wit. A philosophy which takes the things of this life very easily; which has a smile and a
      shrug of the shoulders for any pretender to the Heroic; which subdivides the wealth of passion
      into the pocket-money of caprices, is always in or out of love ankle-deep, never venturing a
      plunge; which, light of heart as of tongue, turns “the solemn plausibilities” of earth into
      subjects for epigrams and bons mots,—jests at loyalty to kings and turns up its nose at
      enthusiasm for commonwealths, abjures all grave studies and shuns all profound emotions. We
      have crowds of such philosophers in London; but there they are less noticed, because the
      agreeable attributes of the sect are there dimmed and obfuscated. It is not a philosophy that
      flowers richly in the reek of fogs and in the teeth of east winds; it wants for full
      development the light atmosphere of Paris. Now this philosophy began rapidly to exercise its
      charms upon Alain de Rochebriant. Even in the society of professed Legitimists, he felt that
      faith had deserted the Legitimist creed or taken refuge only as a companion of religion in the
      hearts of high-born women and a small minority of priests. His chivalrous loyalty still
      struggled to keep its ground, but its roots were very much loosened. He saw—for his natural
      intellect was keen—that the cause of the Bourbon was hopeless, at least for the present,
      because it had ceased, at least for the present, to be a cause. His political creed thus
      shaken, with it was shaken also that adherence to the past which had stifled his ambition of a
      future. That ambition began to breathe and to stir, though he owned it not to others, though,
      as yet, he scarce distinguished its whispers, much less directed its movements towards any
      definite object. Meanwhile, all that he knew of his ambition was the new-born desire for
      social success.
We see him, then, under the quick operation of this change in sentiments and habits,
      reclined on the fauteuil before his fireside, and listening to his college friend, of whom we
      have so long lost sight, Frederic Lemercier. Frederic had breakfasted with Alain,—a breakfast
      such as might have contented the author of the “Almanach des Gourmands,” and provided from the
      cafe Anglais. Frederic has just thrown aside his regalia.
“Pardieu! my dear Alain. If Louvier has no sinister object in the generosity of his dealings
      with you, he will have raised himself prodigiously in my estimation. I shall forsake, in his
      favour, my allegiance to Duplessis, though that clever fellow has just made a wondrous coup in
      the Egyptians, and I gain forty thousand francs by having followed his advice. But if
      Duplessis has a head as long as Louvier’s, he certainly has not an equal greatness of soul.
      Still, my dear friend, will you pardon me if I speak frankly, and in the way of a warning
      homily?”
“Speak; you cannot oblige me more.”
“Well, then, I know that you can no more live at Paris in the way you are doing, or mean to
      do, without some fresh addition to your income, than a lion could live in the Jardin des
      Plantes upon an allowance of two mice a week.”
“I don’t see that. Deducting what I pay to my aunt,—and I cannot get her to take more than
      six thousand francs a year,—I have seven hundred napoleons left, net and clear. My rooms and
      stables are equipped, and I have twenty-five hundred francs in hand. On seven hundred
      napoleons a year, I calculate that I can very easily live as I do; and if I fail—well, I must
      return to Pochebriant. Seven hundred napoleons a year will be a magnificent rental there.”
Frederic shook his head. “You do not know how one expense leads to another. Above all, you
      do not calculate the chief part of one’s expenditure,—the unforeseen. You will play at the
      Jockey Club, and lose half your income in a night.”
“I shall never touch a card.”
“So you say now, innocent as a lamb of the force of example. At all events, beau seigneur, I
      presume you are not going to resuscitate the part of the Ermite de la Chaussee d’Antin; and
      the fair Parisiennes are demons of extravagance.”
“Demons whom I shall not court.”
“Did I say you would? They will court you. Before another month has flown you will be
      inundated with billets-doux.”
“It is not a shower that will devastate my humble harvest. But, mon cher, we are falling
      upon very gloomy topics. Laissez-moi tranquille in my illusions, if illusions they be. Ah, you
      cannot conceive what a new life opens to the man who, like myself, has passed the dawn of his
      youth in privation and fear, when he suddenly acquires competence and hope. If it lasts only a
      year, it will be something to say ‘Vixi.’”
“Alain,” said Frederic; very earnestly, “believe me, I should not have assumed the
      ungracious and inappropriate task of Mentor, if it were only a year’s experience at stake, or
      if you were in the position of men like myself,—free from the encumbrance of a great name and
      heavily mortgaged lands. Should you fail to pay regularly the interest due to Louvier, he has
      the power to put up at public auction, and there to buy in for himself, your chateau and
      domain.”
“I am aware that in strict law he would have such power, though I doubt if he would use it.
      Louvier is certainly a much better and more generous fellow than I could have expected; and if
      I believe De Finisterre, he has taken a sincere liking to me on account of affection to my
      poor father. But why should not the interest be paid regularly? The revenues from Rochebriant
      are not likely to decrease, and the charge on them is lightened by the contract with Louvier.
      And I will confide to you a hope I entertain of a very large addition to my rental.”
“How?”
“A chief part of my rental is derived from forests, and De Finisterre has heard of a
      capitalist who is disposed to make a contract for their sale at the fall this year, and may
      probably extend it to future years, at a price far exceeding that which I have hitherto
      obtained.”
“Pray be cautious. De Finisterre is not a man I should implicitly trust in such
      matters.”
“Why? Do you know anything against him? He is in the best society,—perfect gentilhomme,—and,
      as his name may tell you, a fellow-Breton. You yourself allow, and so does Enguerrand, that
      the purchases he made for me—in this apartment, my horses, etc.—are singularly
      advantageous.”
“Quite true; the Chevalier is reputed sharp and clever, is said to be very amusing, and a
      first-rate piquet-player. I don’t know him personally,—I am not in his set. I have no valid
      reason to disparage his character, nor do I conjecture any motive he could have to injure or
      mislead you. Still, I say, be cautious how far you trust to his advice or recommendation.”
“Again I ask why?”
“He is unlucky to his friends. He attaches himself much to men younger than himself; and
      somehow or other I have observed that most of them have come to grief. Besides, a person in
      whose sagacity I have great confidence warned me against making the Chevalier’s acquaintance,
      and said to me, in his blunt way, ‘De Finisterre came to Paris with nothing; he has succeeded
      to nothing; he belongs to no ostensible profession by which anything can be made. But
      evidently now he has picked up a good deal; and in proportion as any young associate of his
      becomes poorer, De Finisterre seems mysteriously to become richer. Shun that sort of
      acquaintance.’”
“Who is your sagacious adviser!”
“Duplessis.”
“Ah, I thought so. That bird of prey fancies every other bird looking out for pigeons. I
      fancy that Duplessis is, like all those money-getters, a seeker after fashion, and De
      Finisterre has not returned his bow.”
“My dear Alain, I am to blame; nothing is so irritating as a dispute about the worth of the
      men we like. I began it, now let it be dropped; only make me one promise,—that if you should
      be in arrear, or if need presses, you will come at once to me. It was very well to be absurdly
      proud in an attic, but that pride will be out of place in your appartement au premier.”
“You are the best fellow in the world, Frederic, and I make you the promise you ask,” said
      Alain, cheerfully, but yet with a secret emotion of tenderness and gratitude. “And now, mon
      cher, what day will you dine with me to meet Raoul and Enguerrand, and some others whom you
      would like to know?”
“Thanks, and hearty ones, but we move now in different spheres, and I shall not trespass on
      yours. Je suis trop bourgeois to incur the ridicule of le bourgeois gentilhomme.”
“Frederic, how dare you speak thus? My dear fellow, my friends shall honour you as I
      do.”
“But that will be on your account, not mine. No; honestly that kind of society neither
      tempts nor suits me. I am a sort of king in my own walk; and I prefer my Bohemian royalty to
      vassalage in higher regions. Say no more of it. It will flatter my vanity enough if you will
      now and then descend to my coteries, and allow me to parade a Rochebriant as my familiar
      crony, slap him on the shoulder, and call him Alain.”
“Fie! you who stopped me and the English aristocrat in the Champs Elysees, to humble us with
      your boast of having fascinated une grande dame,—I think you said a duchesse.”
“Oh,” said Lemercier, conceitedly, and passing his hand through his scented locks, “women
      are different; love levels all ranks. I don’t blame Ruy Blas for accepting the love of a
      queen, but I do blame him for passing himself off as a noble,—a plagiarism, by the by, from an
      English play. I do not love the English enough to copy them. A propos, what has become of ce
      beau Grarm Varn? I have not seen him of late.”
“Neither have I.”
“Nor the belle Italienne?”
“Nor her,” said Alain, slightly blushing.
At this moment Enguerrand lounged into the room. Alain stopped Lemercier to introduce him to
      his kinsman. “Enguerrand, I present to you M. Lemercier, my earliest and one of my dearest
      friends.”
The young noble held out his hand with the bright and joyous grace which accompanied all his
      movements, and expressed in cordial words his delight to make M. Lemercier’s acquaintance.
      Bold and assured as Frederic was in his own circles, he was more discomposed than set at ease
      by the gracious accost of a lion, whom he felt at once to be of a breed superior to his own.
      He muttered some confused phrases, in which ravi and flatte were alone audible, and
      evanished.
“I know M. Lemercier by sight very well,” said Enguerrand, seating himself. “One sees him
      very often in the Bois; and I have met him in the Coulisses and the Bal Mabille. I think, too,
      that he plays at the Bourse, and is lie with M. Duplessis, who bids fair to rival Louvier one
      of these days. Is Duplessis also one of your dearest friends?”
“No, indeed. I once met him, and was not prepossessed in his favour.”
“Nevertheless, he is a man much to be admired and respected.”
“Why so?”
“Because he understands so well the art of making what we all covet,—money. I will introduce
      you to him.”
“I have been already introduced.”
“Then I will re-introduce you. He is much courted in a society which I have recently been
      permitted by my father to frequent,—the society, of the Imperial Court.”
“You frequent that society, and the Count permits it?”
“Yes; better the Imperialists than the Republicans; and my father begins to own that truth,
      though he is too old or too indolent to act on it.”
“And Raoul?”
“Oh, Raoul, the melancholy and philosophical Raoul, has no ambition of any kind, so long
      as—thanks somewhat to me—his purse is always replenished for the wants of his stately
      existence, among the foremost of which wants are the means to supply the wants of others. That
      is the true reason why he consents to our glove-shop. Raoul belongs, with some other young men
      of the Faubourg, to a society enrolled under the name of Saint Francois de Sales, for the
      relief of the poor. He visits their houses, and is at home by their sickbeds as at their
      stinted boards. Nor does he confine his visitations to the limits of our Faubourg; he extends
      his travels to Montmartre and Belleville. As to our upper world, he does not concern himself
      much with its changes. He says that we have destroyed too much ever to rebuild solidly; and
      that whatever we do build could be upset any day by a Paris mob, which he declares to be the
      only institution we have left. A wonderful fellow is Raoul,—full of mind, though he does
      little with it; full of heart, which he devotes to suffering humanity, and to a poetic,
      knightly reverence (not to be confounded with earthly love, and not to be degraded into that
      sickly sentiment called Platonic affection) for the Comtesse di Rimini, who is six years older
      than himself, and who is very faithfully attached to her husband, Raoul’s intimate friend,
      whose honour he would guard as his own. It is an episode in the drama of Parisian life, and
      one not so uncommon as the malignant may suppose. Di Rimini knows and approves of his
      veneration; my mother, the best of women, sanctions it, and deems truly that it preserves
      Raoul safe from all the temptations to which ignobler youth is exposed. I mention this lest
      you should imagine there was anything in Raoul’s worship of his star less pure than it is. For
      the rest, Raoul, to the grief and amazement of that disciple of Voltaire, my respected father,
      is one of the very few men I know in our circles who is sincerely religious,—an orthodox
      Catholic,—and the only man I know who practises the religion he professes; charitable, chaste,
      benevolent; and no bigot, no intolerant ascetic. His only weakness is his entire submission to
      the worldly common-sense of his good-for-nothing, covetous, ambitious brother Enguerrand. I
      cannot say how I love him for that. If he had not such a weakness, his excellence would gall
      me, and I believe I should hate him.”
Alain bowed his head at this eulogium. Such had been the character that a few months ago he
      would have sought as example and model. He seemed to gaze upon a flattered portrait of himself
      as he had been.
“But,” said Enguerrand, “I have not come here to indulge in the overflow of brotherly
      affection. I come to take you to your relation, the Duchesse of Tarascon. I have pledged
      myself to her to bring you, and she is at home on purpose to receive you.”
“In that case I cannot be such a churl as to refuse. And, indeed, I no longer feel quite the
      same prejudices against her and the Imperialists as I brought from Bretagne. Shall I order my
      carriage?”
“No; mine is at the door. Yours can meet you where you will, later. Allons.”
</div></body></text></TEI>