
CHAPTER XXVIII
Alterations
`SO the day has come at length, Susan,´ said Florence to the excellent Nipper, `when we are
     going back to our quiet home!´ 
Susan drew in her breath with an amount of expression not easily described, and further
     relieving her feelings with a smart cough, answered, `Very quiet indeed, Miss Floy, no doubt.
     Excessive so.´ 
`When I was a child,´ said Florence, thoughtfully, and after musing for some moments, `did
     you ever see that gentleman who has taken the trouble to ride down here to speak to me, now
     three times—three times, I think, Susan?´ 
`Three times, Miss,´ returned the Nipper. `Once when you was out a walking with them Sket—´ 
Florence gently looked at her, and Miss Nipper checked herself. 
`With Sir Barnet and his lady, I mean to say, Miss, and the young gentleman. And two evenings
     since then.´ 
`When I was a child, and when company used to come to visit papa, did you ever see that
     gentleman at home, Susan?´ asked Florence. 
`Well, Miss,´ returned her maid, after considering, `I really couldn't say I ever did. When
     your poor dear ma died, Miss Floy, I was very new in the family, you see, and my
     element:´ the Nipper bridled, as opining that her merits had been always designedly
     extinguished by Mr. Dombey: `was the floor below the attics.´ 
`To be sure,´ said Florence, still thoughtfully; `you are not likely to have known who came
     to the house. I quite forgot.´ 
`Not, Miss, but what we talked about the family and visitors,´ said Susan, `and but what I
     heard much said, although the nurse before Mrs. Richards did make unpleasant remarks
     when I was in company, and hint at little Pitchers, but that could only be attributed, poor
     thing,´ observed Susan, with composed forbearance, `to habits of intoxication, for which she
     was required to leave, and did.´ 
Florence, who was seated at her chamber window, with her face resting on her hand, sat
     looking out, and hardly seemed to hear what Susan said, she was so lost in thought. 
`At all events, Miss,´ said Susan, `I remember very well that this same gentleman, Mr.
     Carker, was almost, if not quite, as great a gentleman with your Papa then, as he is now. It
     used to be said in the house then, Miss, that he was at the head of all your Pa's affairs in
     the City, and managed the whole, and that your Pa minded him more than anybody, which, begging
     your pardon, Miss Floy, he might easy do, for he never minded anybody else. I knew that,
     Pitcher as I might have been.´ 
Susan Nipper, with an injured remembrance of the nurse before Mrs. Richards, emphasised
     `Pitcher´ strongly. 
`And that Mr. Carker has not fallen off, Miss,´ she pursued, `but has stood his ground, and
     kept his credit with your Pa, I know from what is always said among our people by that Perch,
     whenever he comes to the house; and though he's the weakest weed in the world, Miss Floy, and
     no one can have a moment's patience with the man, he knows what goes on in the City tolerable
     well, and says that your Pa does nothing without Mr. Carker, and leaves all to Mr. Carker, and
     acts according to Mr. Carker, and has Mr. Carker always at his elbow, and I do believe that he
     believes (that washiest of Perches!) that after your Pa, the Emperor of India is the child
     unborn to Mr. Carker.´ 
Not a word of this was lost on Florence, who, with an awakened interest in Susan's speech, no
     longer gazed abstractedly on the prospect without, but looked at her, and listened with
     attention. 
`Yes, Susan,´ she said, when that young lady had concluded. `He is in Papa's confidence, and
     is his friend, I am sure.´ 
Florence's mind ran high on this theme, and had done for some days. Mr. Carker, in the two
     visits with which he had followed up his first one, had assumed a confidence between himself
     and her—a right on his part to be mysterious and stealthy, in telling her that the ship was
     still unheard of—a kind of mildly restrained power and authority over her—that made her wonder,
     and caused her great uneasiness. She had no means of repelling it, or of freeing herself from
     the web he was gradually winding about her; for that would have required some art and knowledge
     of the world, opposed to such address is his; and Florence had none. True, he had said no more
     to her than that there was no news of the ship, and that he feared the worst; but how he came
     to know that she was interested in the ship, and why he had the right to signify his knowledge
     to her, so insidiously and darkly, troubled Florence very much. 
This conduct on the part of Mr. Carker, and her habit of often considering it with wonder and
     uneasiness, began to invest him with an uncomfortable fascination in Florence's thoughts. A
     more distinct remembrance of his features, voice, and manner: which she sometimes courted, as a
     means of reducing him to the level of a real personage, capable of exerting no greater charm
     over her than another: did not remove the vague impression. And yet he never frowned, or looked
     upon her with an air of dislike or animosity, but was always smiling and serene. 
Again, Florence, in pursuit of her strong purpose with reference to her father, and her
     steady resolution to believe that she was herself unwittingly to blame for their so cold and
     distant relations, would recall to mind that this gentleman was his confidential friend, and
     would think, with an anxious heart, could her struggling tendency to dislike and fear him be a
     part of that misfortune in her, which had turned her father's love adrift, and left her so
     alone? She dreaded that it might be; sometimes believed it was: then she resolved that she
     would try to conquer this wrong feeling; persuaded herself that she was honoured and encouraged
     by the notice of her father's friend; and hoped that patient observation of him and trust in
     him would lead her bleeding feet along that stony road which ended in her father's heart. 
Thus, with no one to advise her—for she could advise with no one without seeming to complain
     against him—gentle Florence tossed on an uneasy sea of doubt and hope; and Mr. Carker, like a
     scaly monster of the deep, swam down below, and kept his shining eye upon her. 
Florence had a new reason in all this for wishing to be at home again. Her lonely life was
     better suited to her course of timid hope and doubt; and she feared sometimes, that in her
     absence she might miss some hopeful chance of testifying her affection for her father. Heaven
     knows, she might have set her mind at rest, poor child! on this last point; but her slighted
     love was fluttering within her, and, even in her sleep, it flew away in dreams, and nestled,
     like a wandering bird come home, upon her father's neck. 
Of Walter she thought often. Ah! how often, when the night was gloomy, and the wind was
     blowing round the house!But hope was strong in her breast. It is so difficult for the young and
     ardent, even with such experience as hers, to imagine youth and ardour quenched like a weak
     flame, and the bright day of life merging into night, at noon, that hope was strong yet. Her
     tears fell frequently for Walter's sufferings; but rarely for his supposed death, and never
     long. 
She had written to the old Instrument-maker, but had received no answer to her note: which
     indeed required none. Thus matters stood with Florence on the morning when she was going home,
     gladly, to her old secluded life. 
Doctor and Mrs. Blimber, accompanied (much against his will) by their valued charge, Master
     Barnet, were already gone back to Brighton, where that young gentleman and his fellow-pilgrims
     to Parnassus were then, no doubt, in the continual resumption of their studies. The holiday
     time was past and over; most of the juvenile guests at the villa had taken their departure: and
     Florence's long visit was come to an end. 
There was one guest, however, albeit not resident within the house, who had been very
     constant in his attention to the family, and who still remained devoted to them. This was Mr.
     Toots, who after renewing, some weeks ago, the acquaintance he had had the happiness of forming
     with Skettles Junior, on the night when he burst the Blimberian bonds and soared into freedom
     with his ring on, called regularly every other day, and left a perfect pack of cards at the
     hall-door; so many indeed, that the ceremony was quite a deal on the part of Mr. Toots, and a
     hand at whist on the part of the servant. 
Mr. Toots, likewise, with the bold and happy idea of preventing the family from forgetting
     him (but there is reason to suppose that this expedient originated in the teeming brain of the
     Chicken), had established a six-oared cutter, manned by aquatic friends of the Chicken's and
     steered by that illustrious character in person, who wore a bright red fireman's coat for the
     purpose, and concealed the perpetual black eye with which he was afflicted, beneath a green
     shade. Previous to the institution of this equipage, Mr. Toots sounded the Chicken on a
     hypothetical case, as, supposing the Chicken to be enamoured of a young lady named Mary, and to
     have conceived the intention of starting a boat of his own, what would he call that boat? The
     Chicken replied, with divers strong asseverations, that he would either christen it Poll or The
     Chicken's Delight. Improving on this idea, Mr. Toots, after deep study and the exercise of much
     invention, resolved to call his boat The Toots's Joy, as a delicate compliment to Florence, of
     which no man knowing the parties, could possibly miss the appreciation. 
Stretched on a crimson cushion in his gallant bark, with his shoes in the air, Mr. Toots, in
     the exercise of his project, had come up the river, day after day, and week after week, and had
     flitted to and fro, near Sir Barnet's garden, and had caused his crew to cut across and across
     the river at sharp angles, for his better exhibition to any lookers-out from Sir Barnet's
     windows, and had had such evolutions performed by the Toots's Joy as had filled all the
     neighbouring part of the water-side with astonishment. But whenever he saw any one in Sir
     Barnet's garden on the brink of the river, Mr. Toots always feigned to be passing there, by a
     combination of coincidences of the most singular and unlikely description. 
`How are you, Toots?´ Sir Barnet would say, waving his hand from the lawn, while the artful
     Chicken steered close in shore. 
`How de do, Sir Barnet?´ Mr. Toots would answer, `What a surprising thing that I should see
      you here!´ 
Mr. Toots, in his sagacity, always said this, as if, instead of that being Sir Barnet's
     house, it were some deserted edifice on the banks of the Nile, or Ganges. 
`I never was so surprised!´ Mr. Toots would exclaim.—`Is Miss Dombey there?´ 
Whereupon Florence would appear, perhaps. 
`Oh, Diogenes is quite well, Miss Dombey,´ Mr. Toots would cry. `I called to ask this
     morning.´ 
`Thank you very much!´ the pleasant voice of Florence would reply. 
`Won't you come ashore, Toots?´ Sir Barnet would say then. `Come! you're in no hurry. Come
     and see us.´ 
`Oh, it's of no consequence, thank you!´ Mr. Toots would blushingly rejoin. `I thought Miss
     Dombey might like to know, that's all. Good-bye!´ And poor Mr. Toots, who was dying to accept
     the invitation, but hadn't the courage to do it, signed to the Chicken, with an aching heart,
     and away went the Joy, cleaving the water like an arrow. 
The Joy was lying in a state of extraordinary splendour, at the garden steps, on the morning
     of Florence's departure. When she went down stairs to take leave, after her talk with Susan,
     she found Mr. Toots awaiting her in the drawing-room. 
`Oh, how de do, Miss Dombey?´ said the stricken Toots, always dreadfully disconcerted when
     the desire of his heart was gained, and he was speaking to her; `thank you, I'm very well
     indeed, I hope you're the same, so was Diogenes yesterday.´ 
`You are very kind,´ said Florence. 
`Thank you, it's of no consequence,´ retorted Mr. Toots. `I thought perhaps you wouldn't
     mind, in this fine weather, coming home by water, Miss Dombey. There's plenty of room in the
     boat for your maid.´ 
`I am very much obliged to you,´ said Florence, hesitating. `I really am—but I would rather
     not.´ 
`Oh, it's of no consequence,´ retorted Mr. Toots. `Good morning!´ 
`Won't you wait and see Lady Skettles?´ asked Florence, kindly. 
`Oh no, thank you,´ returned Mr. Toots, `it's of no consequence at all.´ 
So shy was Mr. Toots on such occasions, and so flurried!But Lady Skettles entering at the
     moment, Mr. Toots was suddenly seized with a passion for asking her how she did, and hoping she
     was very well; nor could Mr. Toots by any possibility leave off shaking hands with her, until
     Sir Barnet appeared: to whom he immediately clung with the tenacity of desperation. 
`We are losing, to-day, Toots,´ said Sir Barnet, turning towards Florence, `the light of our
     house, I assure you.´ 
`Oh, it's of no conseq——I mean yes, to be sure,´ faltered the embarrassed Toots. `good morning!´ 
Notwithstanding the emphatic nature of this farewell, Mr. Toots, instead of going away, stood
     leering about him, vacantly. Florence, to relieve him, bade adieu, with many thanks, to Lady
     Skettles, and gave her arm to Sir Barnet. 
`May I beg of you, my dear Miss Dombey,´ said her host, as he conducted her to the carriage,
     `to present my best compliments to your dear Papa?´ 
It was distressing to Florence to receive the commission, for she felt as if she were
     imposing on Sir Barnet by allowing him to believe that a kindness rendered to her, was rendered
     to her father. As she could not explain, however, she bowed her head and thanked him; and again
     she thought that the dull home, free from such embarrassments, and such reminders of her
     sorrow, was her natural and best retreat. 
Such of her late friends and companions as were yet remaining at the villa, came running from
     within, and from the garden, to say good-bye. They were all attached to her, and very earnest
     in taking leave of her. Even the household were sorry for her going, and the servants came
     nodding and curtseying round the carriage door. As Florence looked round on the kind faces, and
     saw among them those of Sir Barnet and his lady, and of Mr. Toots, who was chuckling and
     staring at her from a distance, she was reminded of the night when Paul and she had come from
     Doctor Blimber's: and when the carriage drove away, her face was wet with tears. 
Sorrowful tears, but tears of consolation, too; for all the softer memories connected with
     the dull old house to which she was returning made it dear to her, as they rose up. How long it
     seemed since she had wandered through the silent rooms: since she had last crept, softly and
     afraid, into those her father occupied: since she had felt the solemn but yet soothing
     influence of the beloved dead in every action of her daily life! This new farewell reminded
     her, besides, of her parting with poor Walter: of his looks and words that night: and of the
     gracious blending she had noticed in him, of tenderness for those he left behind, with courage
     and high spirit. His little history was associated with the old house too, and gave it a new
     claim and hold upon her heart. 
Even Susan Nipper softened towards the home of so many years, as they were on their way
     towards it. Gloomy as it was, and rigid justice as she rendered to its gloom, she forgave it a
     great deal. `I shall be glad to see it again, I don't deny, Miss,´ said the Nipper. `There
     ain't much in it to boast of, but I wouldn't have it burnt or pulled down, neither!´ 
`You'll be glad to go through the old rooms, won't you, Susan?´ said Florence, smiling. 
`Well, Miss,´ returned the Nipper, softening more and more towards the house, as they
     approached it nearer, `I won't deny but what I shall, though I shall hate 'em again, to-morrow,
     very likely.´ 
Florence felt that, for her, there was greater peace within it than elsewhere. It was better
     and easier to keep her secret shut up there, among the tall dark walls, than to carry it abroad
     into the light, and try to hide it from a crowd of happy eyes. It was better to pursue the
     study of her loving heart, alone, and find no new discouragements in loving hearts about her.
     It was easier to hope, and pray, and love on, all uncared for, yet with constancy and patience,
     in the tranquil sanctuary of such remembrances: although it mouldered, rusted, and decayed
     about her: than in a new scene, let its gaiety be what it would. She welcomed back her old
     enchanted dream of life, and longed for the old dark door to close upon her, once again. 
Full of such thoughts, they turned into the long and sombre street. Florence was not on that
     side of the carriage which was nearest to her home, and as the distance lessened between them
     and it, she looked out of her window for the children over the way. 
She was thus engaged, when an exclamation from Susan caused her to turn quickly round. 
`Why, Gracious me!´ cried Susan, breathless, `where's our house!´ 
`Our house!´ said Florence. 
Susan, drawing in her head from the window, thrust it out again, drew it in again as the
     carriage stopped, and stared at her mistress in amazement. 
There was a labyrinth of scaffolding raised all round the house from the basement to the
     roof. Loads of bricks and stones, and heaps of mortar, and piles of wood, blocked up half the
     width and length of the broad street at the side. Ladders were raised against the walls:
     labourers were climbing up and down; men were at work upon the steps of the scaffolding:
     painters and decorators were busy inside; great rolls of ornamental paper were being delivered
     from a cart at the door; an upholsterer's waggon also stopped the way; no furniture was to be
     seen through the gaping and broken windows in any of the rooms; nothing but workmen, and the
     implements of their several trades swarming from the kitchens to the garrets. Inside and
     outside alike: bricklayers, painters, carpenters, masons: hammer, hod, brush, pickaxe, saw, and
     trowel: all at work together, in full chorus. 
Florence descended from the coach, half doubting if it were, or could be the right house,
     until she recognized Towlinson, with a sun-burnt face, standing at the door to receive her. 
`There is nothing the matter?´ inquired Florence. 
`Oh no, Miss.´ 
`There are great alterations going on.´ 
`Yes, Miss, great alterations,´ said Towlinson. 
Florence passed him as if she were in a dream, and hurried up stairs. The garish light was in
     the long-darkened drawing-room, and there were steps and platforms, and men in paper caps, in
     the high places. Her mother's picture was gone with the rest of the moveables, and on the mark
     where it had been, was scrawled in chalk, `this room in-panel. Green and gold.´ The staircase
     was a labyrinth of posts and planks like the out-side of the house, and a whole Olympus of
     plumbers and glaziers was reclining in various attitudes, on the skylight. Her own room was not
     yet touched within, but there were beams and boards raised against it without, baulking the
     daylight. She went up swiftly to that other bedroom, where the little bed was; and a dark giant
     of a man with a pipe in his mouth, and his head tied up in a pocket-handkerchief, was staring
     in at the window. 
It was here that Susan Nipper, who had been in quest of Florence, found her, and said, would
     she go down stairs to her Papa, who wished to speak to her. 
`At home! and wishing to speak to me!´ cried Florence, trembling. 
Susan, who was infinitely more distraught than Florence herself, repeated her errand; and
     Florence, pale and agitated, hurried down again, without a moment's hesitation. She thought
     upon the way down, would she dare to kiss him? The longing of her heart resolved her, and she
     thought she would. 
Her father might have heard that heart beat, when it came into his presence. One instant, and
     it would have beat against his breast— 
But he was not alone. There were two ladies there; and Florence stopped. Striving so hard
     with her emotion, that if her brute friend Di had not burst in and overwhelmed her with his
     caresses as a welcome home—at which one of the ladies gave a little scream, and that diverted
     her attention from herself—she would have swooned upon the floor. 
`Florence,´ said her father, putting out his hand: so stiffly that it held her off: `how do
     you do?´ 
Florence took the hand between her own, and putting it timidly to her lips, yielded to its
     withdrawal. It touched the door in shutting it, with quite as much endearment as it had touched
     her. 
`What dog is that?´ said Mr. Dombey, displeased. 
`It is a dog, Papa—from Brighton.´ 
`Well!´ said Mr. Dombey; and a cloud passed over his face, for he understood her. 
`He is very good-tempered,´ said Florence, addressing herself with her natural grace and
     sweetness to the two lady strangers. `He is only glad to see me. Pray forgive him.´ 
She saw in the glance they interchanged, that the lady who had screamed, and who was seated,
     was old; and that the other lady, who stood near her Papa, was very beautiful, and of an
     elegant figure. 
`Mrs. Skewton,´ said her father, turning to the first, and holding out his hand, `this is my
     daughter Florence.´ 
`Charming, I am sure,´ observed the lady, putting up her glass. `So natural! My darling
     Florence, you must kiss me, if you please.´ 
Florence having done so, turned towards the other lady, by whom her father stood waiting. 
`Edith,´ said Mr. Dombey, `this is my daughter Florence. Florence, this lady will soon be
     your Mama.´ 
Florence started, and looked up at the beautiful face in a conflict of emotions, among which
     the tears that name awakened, struggled for a moment with surprise, interest, admiration, and
     an indefinable sort of fear. Then she cried out, `Oh, Papa, may you be happy! may you be very,
     very happy all your life!´ and then fell weeping on the lady's bosom. 
There was a short silence. The beautiful lady, who at first had seemed to hesitate whether or
     no she should advance to Florence, held her to her breast, and pressed the hand with which she
     clasped her, close about her waist, as if to reassure her and comfort her. Not one word passed
     the lady's lips. She bent her head down over Florence, and she kissed her on the cheek, but she
     said no word. 
`Shall we go on through the rooms,´ said Mr. Dombey, `and see how our workmen are doing? Pray
     allow me, my dear madam.´ 
He said this in offering his arm to Mrs. Skewton, who had been looking at Florence through
     her glass, as though picturing to herself what she might be made, by the fashion—from her own
     copious storehouse, no doubt—of a little more Heart and Nature. Florence was still sobbing on
     the lady's breast, and holding to her, when Mr. Dombey was heard to say from the Conservatory: 
`Let us ask Edith. Dear me, where is she?´ 
`Edith, my dear!´ cried Mrs. Skewton, `where are you? Looking for Mr. Dombey somewhere, I
     know. We are here, my love.´ 
The beautiful lady released her hold of Florence, and pressing her lips once more upon her
     face, withdrew hurriedly, and joined them. Florence remained standing in the same place: happy,
     sorry, joyful, and in tears, she knew not how, or how long, but all at once: when her new Mama
     came back, and took her in her arms again. 
`Florence,´ said the lady, hurriedly, and looking into her face with great earnestness. `You
     will not begin by hating me?´ 
`By hating you, Mama?´ cried Florence, winding her arm round her neck, and returning the
     look. 
`Hush! Begin by thinking well of me,´ said the beautiful lady. `Begin by believing that I
     will try to make you happy, and that I am prepared to love you, Florence. Good-bye. We shall
     meet again soon. Good-bye! Don't stay here, now.´ 
Again she pressed her to her breast—she had spoken in a rapid manner, but firmly—and Florence
     saw her rejoin them in the other room. 
And now Florence began to hope that she would learn from her new and beautiful Mama, how to
     gain her father's love; and in her sleep that night, in her lost old home, her own Mama smiled
     radiantly upon the hope, and blessed it. Dreaming Florence! 
