
CHAPTER I
Dombey and Son
DOMBEY sat in the corner of the darkened room in the great arm-chair by the bedside, and Son
     lay tucked up warm in a little basket bedstead, carefully disposed on a low settee immediately
     in front of the fire and close to it, as if his constitution were analogous to that of a
     muffin, and it was essential to toast him brown while he was very new. 
Dombey was about eight-and-forty years of age. Son about eight-and-forty minutes. Dombey was
     rather bald, rather red, and though a handsome well-made man, too stern and pompous in
     appearance, to be prepossessing. Son was very bald, and very red, and though (of course) an
     undeniably fine infant, somewhat crushed and spotty in his general effect, as yet. On the brow
     of Dombey, Time and his brother Care had set some marks, as on a tree that was to come down in
     good time—remorseless twins they are for striding through their human forests, notching as they
     go—while the countenance of Son was crossed and recrossed with a thousand little creases, which
     the same deceitful Time would take delight in smoothing out and wearing away with the flat part
     of his scythe, as a preparation of the surface for his deeper operations. 
Dombey, exulting in the long-looked-for event, jingled and jingled the heavy gold watch-chain
     that depended from below his trim blue coat, whereof the buttons sparkled phosphorescently in
     the feeble rays of the distant fire. Son, with his little fists curled up and clenched, seemed,
     in his feeble way, to be squaring at existence for having come upon him so unexpectedly. 
`The house will once again, Mrs. Dombey,´ said Mr. Dombey, `be not only in name but in fact
     Dombey and Son; Dom-bey and Son!´ 
The words had such a softening influence, that he appended a term of endearment to Mrs.
     Dombey's name (though not without some hesitation, as being a man but little used to that form
     of address): and said, `Mrs. Dombey, my—my dear.´ 
A transient flush of faint surprise overspread the sick lady's face as she raised her eyes
     towards him. 
`He will be christened Paul, my—Mrs. Dombey—of course.´ 
She feebly echoed, `Of course,´ or rather expressed it by the motion of her lips, and closed
     her eyes again. 
`His father's name, Mrs. Dombey, and his grandfather's! I wish his grandfather were alive
     this day!´ And again he said `Dom-bey and Son,´ in exactly the same tone as before. 
Those three words conveyed the one idea of Mr. Dombey's life. The earth was made for Dombey
     and Son to trade in, and the sun and moon were made to give them light. Rivers and seas were
     formed to float their ships; rainbows gave them promise of fair weather; winds blew for or
     against their enterprises; stars and planets circled in their orbits, to preserve inviolate a
     system of which they were the centre. Common abbreviations took new meanings in his eyes, and
     had sole reference to them: A.D. had no concern with anno Domini, but stood for anno Dombei—and
     Son. 
He had risen, as his father had before him, in the course of life and death, from Son to
     Dombey, and for nearly twenty years had been the sole representative of the firm. Of those
     years he had been married, ten—married, as some said, to a lady with no heart to give him;
     whose happiness was in the past, and who was content to bind her broken spirit to the dutiful
     and meek endurance of the present. Such idle talk was little likely to reach the ears of Mr.
     Dombey, whom it nearly concerned; and probably no one in the world would have received it with
     such utter incredulity as he, if it had reached him. Dombey and Son had often dealt in hides,
     but never in hearts. They left that fancy ware to boys and girls, and boarding-schools and
     books. Mr. Dombey would have reasoned: That a matrimonial alliance with himself must,
     in the nature of things, be gratifying and honourable to any woman of common sense. That the
     hope of giving birth to a new partner in such a house, could not fail to awaken a glorious and
     stirring ambition in the breast of the least ambitious of her sex. That Mrs. Dombey had entered
     on that social contract of matrimony: almost necessarily part of a genteel and wealthy station,
     even without reference to the perpetuation of family firms: with her eyes fully open to these
     advantages. That Mrs. Dombey had had daily practical knowledge of his position in society. That
     Mrs. Dombey had always sat at the head of his table, and done the honours of his house in a
     remarkably lady-like and becoming manner. That Mrs. Dombey must have been happy. That she
     couldn't help it. 
Or, at all events, with one drawback. Yes. That he would have allowed. With only one; but
     that one certainly involving much. They had been married ten years, and until this present day
     on which Mr. Dombey sat jingling and jingling his heavy gold watch-chain in the great arm-chair
     by the side of the bed, had had no issue. 
—To speak of; none worth mentioning. There had been a girl some six years before, and the
     child, who had stolen into the chamber unobserved, was now crouching timidly, in a corner
     whence she could see her mother's face. But what was a girl to Dombey and Son! In the capital
     of the House's name and dignity, such a child was merely a piece of base coin that couldn't be
     invested—a bad Boy—nothing more. 
Mr. Dombey's cup of satisfaction was so full at this moment, however, that he felt he could
     afford a drop or two of its contents, even to sprinkle on the dust in the by-path of his little
     daughter. 
So he said, `Florence, you may go and look at your pretty brother, if you like, I dare say.
     Don't touch him!´ 
The child glanced keenly at the blue coat and stiff white cravat, which, with a pair of
     creaking boots and a very loud ticking watch, embodied her idea of a father; but her eyes
     returned to her mother's face immediately, and she neither moved nor answered. 
Next moment, the lady had opened her eyes and seen the child; and the child had run towards
     her; and, standing on tip-toe, the better to hide her face in her embrace, had clung about her
     with a desperate affection very much at variance with her years. 
`Oh Lord bless me!´ said Mr. Dombey, rising testily. `A very ill-advised and feverish
     proceeding this, I am sure. I had better ask Doctor Peps if he'll have the goodness to step up
     stairs again perhaps. I'll go down. I'll go down. I needn't beg you,´ he added, pausing for a
     moment at the settee before the fire, `to take particular care of this young gentleman, Mrs.—-´ 
`Blockitt, Sir?´ suggested the nurse, a simpering piece of faded gentility, who did not
     presume to state her name as a fact, but merely offered it as a mild suggestion. 
`Of this young gentleman, Mrs. Blockitt.´ 
`No, Sir, indeed. I remember when Miss Florence was born—´ 
`Ay, ay, ay,´ said Mr. Dombey, bending over the basket bedstead, and slightly bending his
     brows at the same time. `Miss Florence was all very well, but this is another matter. This
     young gentleman has to accomplish a destiny. A destiny, little fellow!´ As he thus
     apostrophised the infant he raised one of his hands to his lips, and kissed it; then, seeming
     to fear that the action involved some compromise of his dignity, went, awkwardly enough, away. 
Doctor Parker Peps, one of the Court Physicians, and a man of immense reputation for
     assisting at the increase of great families, was walking up and down the drawing-room with his
     hands behind him, to the unspeakable admiration of the family Surgeon, who had regularly puffed
     the case for the last six weeks, among all his patients, friends, and acquaintances, as one to
     which he was in hourly expectation day and night of being summoned, in conjunction with Doctor
     Parker Peps. 
`Well, Sir,´ said Doctor Parker Peps in a round, deep, sonorous voice, muffled for the
     occasion, like the knocker; `do you find that your dear lady is at all roused by your visit?´ 
`Stimulated as it were?´ said the family practitioner faintly: bowing at the same time to the
     Doctor, as much as to say, `Excuse my putting in a word, but this is a valuable connexion.´ 
Mr. Dombey was quite discomfited by the question. He had thought so little of the patient,
     that he was not in a condition to answer it. He said that it would be a satisfaction to him, if
     Doctor Parker Peps would walk up stairs again. 
`Good! We must not disguise from you, Sir,´ said Doctor Parker Peps, `that there is a want of
     power in Her Grace the Duchess—I beg your pardon; I confound names; I should say, in your
     amiable lady. That there is a certain degree of languor, and a general absence of elasticity,
     which we would rather—not—´ 
`See,´ interposed the family practitioner with another inclination of the head. 
`Quite so,´ said Doctor Parker Peps, `which we would rather not see. It would appear that the
     system of Lady Cankaby—excuse me: I should say of Mrs. Dombey: I confuse the names of cases—´ 
`So very numerous,´ murmured the family practitioner—`can't be expected I'm sure—quite
     wonderful if otherwise—Doctor Parker Peps's West-End practice—´ 
`Thank you,´ said the Doctor, `quite so. It would appear, I was observing, that the system of
     our patient has sustained a shock, from which it can only hope to rally by a great and strong—´ 
`And vigorous,´ murmured the family practitioner. 
`Quite so,´ assented the Doctor—`and vigorous effort. Mr. Pilkins here, who from his position
     of medical adviser in this family—no one better qualified to fill that position, I am sure.´ 
`Oh!´ murmured the family practitioner. `&rdquo;Praise from Sir Hubert Stanley!”´ 
`You are good enough,´ returned Doctor Parker Peps, `to say so. Mr. Pilkins who, from his
     position, is best acquainted with the patient's constitution in its normal state (an
     acquaintance very valuable to us in forming our opinions on these occasions), is of opinion,
     with me, that Nature must be called upon to make a vigorous effort in this instance; and that
     if our interesting friend the Countess of Dombey—I beg your pardon; Mrs. Dombey—should
     not be—´ 
`Able,´ said the family practitioner. 
`To make that effort successfully,´ said Doctor Parker Peps, `then a crisis might arise,
     which we should both sincerely deplore.´ 
With that, they stood for a few seconds looking at the ground. Then, on the motion—made in
     dumb show—of Doctor Parker Peps, they went up stairs; the family practitioner opening the room
     door for that distinguished professional, and following him out, with most obsequious
     politeness. 
To record of Mr. Dombey that he was not in his way affected by this intelligence, would be to
     do him an injustice. He was not a man of whom it could properly be said that he was ever
     startled or shocked; but he certainly had a sense within him, that if his wife should sicken
     and decay, he would be very sorry, and that he would find a something gone from among his plate
     and furniture, and other household possessions, which was well worth the having, and could not
     be lost without sincere regret. Though it would be a cool, business-like, gentlemanly,
     self-possessed regret, no doubt. 
His meditations on the subject were soon interrupted, first by the rustling of garments on
     the staircase, and then by the sudden whisking into the room of a lady rather past the middle
     age than otherwise, but dressed in a very juvenile manner, particularly as to the tightness of
     her bodice, who, running up to him with a kind of screw in her face and carriage, expressive of
     suppressed emotion, flung her arms round his neck, and said in a choking voice, 
`My dear Paul! He's quite a Dombey!´ 
`Well, well!´ returned her brother—for Mr. Dombey was her brother—`I think he is
     like the family. Don't agitate yourself, Louisa.´ 
`It's very foolish of me,´ said Louisa, sitting down, and taking out her pocket-handkerchief,
     `but he's—he's such a perfect Dombey! I never saw anything like it in my life!´ 
`But what is this about Fanny, herself?´ said Mr. Dombey. `How is Fanny?´ 
`My dear Paul,´ returned Louisa, `it's nothing whatever. Take my word, it's nothing whatever.
     There is exhaustion, certainly, but nothing like what I underwent myself, either with George or
     Frederick. An effort is necessary. That's all. If dear Fanny were a Dombey!—But I dare say
     she'll make it; I have no doubt she'll make it. Knowing it to be required of her, as a duty, of
     course she'll make it. My dear Paul, it's very weak and silly of me, I know, to be so trembly
     and shaky from head to foot; but I am so very queer that I must ask you for a glass of wine and
     a morsel of that cake. I thought I should have fallen out of the staircase window as I came
     down from seeing dear Fanny, and that tiddy ickle sing.´ These last words originated in a
     sudden vivid reminiscence of the baby. 
They were succeeded by a gentle tap at the door. 
`Mrs. Chick,´ said a very bland female voice outside, `how are you now, my dear friend?´ 
`My dear Paul,´ said Louisa in a low voice, as she rose from her seat, `it's Miss Tox. The
     kindest creature! I never could have got here without her! Miss Tox, my brother Mr. Dombey.
     Paul, my dear, my very particular friend Miss Tox.´ 
The lady thus specially presented, was a long lean figure, wearing such a faded air that she
     seemed not to have been made in what linen-drapers call `fast colours´ originally, and to have,
     by little and little, washed out. But for this she might have been described as the very pink
     of general propitiation and politeness. From a long habit of listening admirably to everything
     that was said in her presence, and looking at the speakers as if she were mentally engaged in
     taking off impressions of their images upon her soul, never to part with the same but with
     life, her head had quite settled on one side. Her hands had contracted a spasmodic habit of
     raising themselves of their own accord as in involuntary admiration. Her eyes were liable to a
     similar affection. She had the softest voice that ever was heard; and her nose, stupendously
     aquiline, had a little knob in the very centre or key-stone of the bridge, whence it tended
     downwards towards her face, as in an invincible determination never to turn up at anything. 
Miss Tox's dress, though perfectly genteel and good, had a certain character of angularity
     and scantiness. She was accustomed to wear odd weedy little flowers in her bonnets and caps.
     Strange grasses were sometimes perceived in her hair; and it was observed by the curious, of
     all her collars, frills, tuckers, wristbands, and other gossamer articles—indeed of everything
     she wore which had two ends to it intended to unite—that the two ends were never on good terms,
     and wouldn't quite meet without a struggle. She had furry articles for winter wear, as tippets,
     boas, and muffs, which stood up on end in a rampant manner, and were not at all sleek. She was
     much given to the carrying about of small bags with snaps to them, that went off like little
     pistols when they were shut up; and when full-dressed, she wore round her neck the barrenest of
     lockets, representing a fishy old eye, with no approach to speculation in it. These and other
     appearances of a similar nature, had served to propagate the opinion, that Miss Tox was a lady
     of what is called a limited independence, which she turned to the best account. Possibly her
     mincing gait encouraged the belief, and suggested that her clipping a step of ordinary compass
     into two or three, originated in her habit of making the most of everything. 
`I am sure,´ said Miss Tox, with a prodigious curtsey, `that to have the honour of being
     presented to Mr. Dombey is a distinction which I have long sought, but very little expected at
     the present moment. My dear Mrs. Chick—may I say Louisa!´ 
Mrs. Chick took Miss Tox's hand in hers, rested the foot of her wine-glass upon it, repressed
     a tear, and said in a low voice `Bless you!´ 
`My dear Louisa then,´ said Miss Tox, `my sweet friend, how are you now?´ 
`Better,´ Mrs. Chick returned. `Take some wine. You have been almost as anxious as I have
     been, and must want it, I am sure.´ 
Mr. Dombey of course officiated. 
`Miss Tox, Paul,´ pursued Mrs. Chick, still retaining her hand, `knowing how much I have been
     interested in the anticipation of the event of to-day, has been working at a little gift for
     Fanny, which I promised to present. It is only a pin-cushion for the toilette table, Paul, but
     I do say, and will say, and must say, that Miss Tox has very prettily adapted the sentiment to
     the occasion. I call `Welcome little Dombey´ Poetry, myself!´ 
`Is that the device?´ inquired her brother. 
`That is the device,´ returned Louisa. 
`But do me the justice to remember, my dear Louisa,´ said Miss Tox in a tone of low and
     earnest entreaty, `that nothing but the—I have some difficulty in expressing myself—the
     dubiousness of the result would have induced me to take so great a liberty: “Welcome, Master
     Dombey,” would have been much more congenial to my feelings, as I am sure you know. But the
     uncertainty attendant on angelic strangers, will, I hope, excuse what must otherwise appear an
     unwarrantable familiarity.´ Miss Tox made a graceful bend as she spoke, in favour of Mr.
     Dombey, which that gentleman graciously acknowledged. Even the sort of recognition of Dombey
     and Son, conveyed in the foregoing conversation, was so palatable to him, that his sister, Mrs.
     Chick—though he affected to consider her a weak good-natured person—had perhaps more influence
     over him than anybody else. 
`Well´ said Mrs. Chick, with a sweet smile, `after this, I forgive Fanny everything!´ 
It was a declaration in a Christian spirit, and Mrs. Chick felt that it did her good. Not
     that she had anything particular to forgive in her sister-in-law, nor indeed anything at all,
     except her having married her brother—in itself a species of audacity—and her having, in the
     course of events, given birth to a girl instead of a boy: which, as Mrs. Chick had frequently
     observed, was not quite what she had expected of her, and was not a pleasant return for all the
     attention and distinction she had met with. 
Mr. Dombey being hastily summoned out of the room at this moment, the two ladies were left
     alone together. Miss Tox immediately became spasmodic. 
`I knew you would admire my brother. I told you so before-hand, my dear,´ said Louisa. 
Miss Tox's hands and eyes expressed how much. 
`And as to his property, my dear!´ 
`Ah!´ said Miss Tox, with deep feeling. 
`Im—mense!´ 
`But his deportment, my dear Louisa!´ said Miss Tox. `His presence! His dignity! No portrait
     that I have ever seen of any one has been half so replete with those qualities. Something so
     stately, you know: so uncompromising: so very wide across the chest: so upright! A pecuniary
     Duke of York, my love, and nothing short of it!´ said Miss Tox. `That's what I should
     designate him.´ 
`Why, my dear Paul!´ exclaimed his sister, as he returned, `you look quite pale! There's
     nothing the matter?´ 
`I am sorry to say, Louisa, that they tell me that Fanny—´ 
`Now, my dear Paul,´ returned his sister rising, `don't believe it. If you have any reliance
     on my experience, Paul, you may rest assured that there is nothing wanting but an effort on
     Fanny's part. And that effort,´ she continued, taking off her bonnet, and adjusting her cap and
     gloves, in a business-like manner, `she must be encouraged, and really, if necessary, urged to
     make. Now, my dear Paul, come up stairs with me.´ 
Mr. Dombey, who, besides being generally influenced by his sister for the reason already
     mentioned, had really faith in her as an experienced and bustling matron, acquiesced: and
     followed her, at once, to the sick chamber. 
The lady lay upon her bed as he had left her, clasping her little daughter to her breast. The
     child clung close about her, with the same intensity as before, and never raised her head, or
     moved her soft cheek from her mother's face, or looked on those who stood around, or spoke, or
     moved, or shed a tear. 
`Restless without the little girl,´ the Doctor whispered Mr. Dombey. `We found it best to
     have her in again.´ 
There was such a solemn stillness round the bed; and the two medical attendants seemed to
     look on the impassive form with so much compassion and so little hope, that Mrs. Chick was for
     the moment diverted from her purpose. But presently summoning courage, and what she called
     presence of mind, she sat down by the bedside, and said in the low precise tone of one who
     endeavours to awaken a sleeper: 
`Fanny! Fanny!´ 
There was no sound in answer but the loud ticking of Mr. Dombey's watch and Doctor Parker
     Peps's watch, which seemed in the silence to be running a race. 
`Fanny, my dear,´ said Mrs. Chick, with assumed lightness, `here's Mr. Dombey come to see
     you. Won't you speak to him? They want to lay your little boy—the baby, Fanny, you know; you
     have hardly seen him yet, I think—in bed; but they can't till you rouse yourself a little.
     Don't you think it's time you roused yourself a little? Eh?´ 
She bent her ear to the bed, and listened: at the same time looking round at the bystanders,
     and holding up her finger. 
`Eh?´ she repeated, `what was it you said, Fanny? I didn't hear you.´ 
No word or sound in answer. Mr. Dombey's watch and Dr. Parker Peps's watch seemed to be
     racing faster. 
`Now, really, Fanny my dear,´ said the sister-in-law, altering her position, and speaking
     less confidently, and more earnestly, in spite of herself, `I shall have to be quite cross with
     you, if you don't rouse yourself. It's necessary for you to make an effort, and perhaps a very
     great and painful effort which you are not disposed to make; but this is a world of effort you
     know, Fanny, and we must never yield, when so much depends upon us. Come! Try! I must really
     scold you if you don't!´ 
The race in the ensuing pause was fierce and furious. The watches seemed to jostle, and to
     trip each other up. 
`Fanny!´ said Louisa, glancing round, with a gathering alarm. `Only look at me. Only open
     your eyes to show me that you hear and understand me; will you? Good Heaven, gentlemen, what is
     to be done!´ 
The two medical attendants exchanged a look across the bed; and the Physician, stooping down,
     whispered in the child's ear. Not having understood the purport of his whisper, the little
     creature turned her perfectly colourless face, and deep dark eyes towards him; but without
     loosening her hold in the least. 
The whisper was repeated. 
`Mama!´ said the child. 
The little voice, familiar and dearly loved, awakened some show of consciousness, even at
     that ebb. For a moment, the closed eye-lids trembled, and the nostril quivered, and the
     faintest shadow of a smile was seen. 
`Mama!´ cried the child sobbing aloud. `Oh dear Mama! oh dear Mama!´ 
The Doctor gently brushed the scattered ringlets of the child, aside from the face and mouth
     of the mother. Alas how calm they lay there; how little breath there was to stir them! 
Thus, clinging fast to that slight spar within her arms, the mother drifted out upon the dark
     and unknown sea that rolls round all the world. 
