
CHAPTER XI
Paul's Introduction to a New Scene
MRS. PIPCHIN'S constitution was made of such hard metal, in spite of its liability to the
     fleshly weaknesses of standing in need of repose after chops, and of requiring to be coaxed to
     sleep by the soporific agency of sweet-breads, that it utterly set at naught the predictions of
     Mrs. Wickam, and showed no symptoms of decline. Yet, as Paul's rapt interest inthe old lady
     continued unabated, Mrs. Wickam would not budge an inch from the position she had taken up.
     Fortifying and entrenching herself on the strong ground of her uncle's Betsey Jane, she advised
     Miss Berry, as a friend, to prepare herself for the worst; and forewarned her that her aunt
     might, at any time, be expected to go off suddenly, like a powder-mill. 
Poor Berry took it all in good part, and drudged and slaved away as usual; perfectly
     convinced that Mrs. Pipchin was one of the most meritorious persons in the world, and making
     every day innumerable sacrifices of herself upon the altar of that noble old woman. But all
     these immolations of Berry were somehow carried to the credit of Mrs. Pipchin by Mrs. Pipchin's
     friends and admirers; and were made to harmonise with, and carry out, that melancholy fact of
     the deceased Mr. Pipchin having broken his heart in the Peruvian mines. 
For example, there was an honest grocer and general dealer in the retail line of business,
     between whom and Mrs. Pipchin there was a small memorandum book, with a greasy red cover,
     perpetually in question, and concerning which divers secret councils and conferences were
     continually being held between the parties to the register, on the mat in the passage, and with
     closed doors in the parlour. Nor were there wanting dark hints from Master Bitherstone (whose
     temper had been made re-vengeful by the solar heats of India acting on his blood), of balances
     unsettled, and of a failure, on one occasion with his memory, in the supply of moist sugar at
     tea-time. This grocer being a bachelor, and not a man who looked upon the surface for beauty,
     had once made honourable offers for the hand of Berry, which Mrs. Pipchin had, with contumely
     and scorn, rejected. Everybody said how laudable this was in Mrs. Pipchin, relict of a man who
     had died of the Peruvian mines; and what a staunch, high, independent spirit the old lady had.
     But nobody said anything about poor Berry, who cried for six weeks (being soundly rated by her
     good aunt all the time), and lapsed into a state of hopeless spinsterhood. 
`Berry's very fond of you, ain't she?´ Paul once asked Mrs. Pipchin when they were sitting by
     the fire with the cat. 
`Yes,´ said Mrs. Pipchin. 
`Why?´ asked Paul. 
`Why!´ returned the disconcerted old lady. `How can you ask such things, Sir! why are you
     fond of your sister Florence?´ 
`Because she's very good,´ said Paul. `There's nobody like Florence.´ 
`Well!´ retorted Mrs. Pipchin, shortly, `and there's nobody like me, I suppose.´ 
`Ain't there really though?´ asked Paul, leaning forward in his chair, and looking at her
     very hard. 
`No,´ said the old lady. 
`I am glad of that,´ observed Paul, rubbing his hands thoughtfully. `That's a very good
     thing.´ 
Mrs. Pipchin didn't dare to ask him why, lest she should receive some perfectly annihilating
     answer. But as a compensation to her wounded feelings, she harassed Master Bitherstone to that
     extent until bed-time, that he began that very night to make arrangements for an overland
     return to India, by Secreting from his supper a quarter of a round of bread and a fragment of
     moist Dutch cheese, as the beginning of a stock of provision to support him on the voyage. 
Mrs. Pipchin had kept watch and ward over little Paul and his sister for nearly twelve
     months. They had been home twice, but only for a few days; and had been constant in their
     weekly visits to Mr. Dombey at the hotel. By little and little Paul had grown stronger, and had
     become able to dispense with his carriage; though he still looked thin and delicate; and still
     remained the same old, quiet, dreamy child that he had been when first consigned to Mrs.
     Pipchin's care. One Saturday afternoon, at dusk, great consternation was occasioned in the
     castle by the unlooked-for announcement of Mr. Dombey as a visitor to Mrs. Pipchin. The
     population of the parlour wasimmediately swept up stairs as on the wings of a whirlwind, and
     after much slamming of bedroom doors, and trampling overhead, and some knocking about of Master
     Bitherstone by Mrs. Pipchin, as a relief to the perturbation of her spirits, the black
     bombazeen garments of the worthy old lady darkened the audience-chamber where Mr. Dombey was
     contemplating the vacant arm-chair of his son and heir. 
`Mrs. Pipchin,´ said Mr. Dombey, `How do you do?´ 
`Thank you, Sir,´ said Mrs. Pipchin, `I am pretty well, considering.´ 
Mrs. Pipchin always used that form of words. It meant, considering her virtues, sacrifices,
     and so forth. 
`I can't expect, Sir, to be very well,´ said Mrs. Pipchin, taking a chair and fetching her
     breath; `but such health as I have, I am grateful for.´ 
Mr. Dombey inclined his head with the satisfied air of a patron, who felt that this was the
     sort of thing for which he paid so much a quarter. After a moment's silence he went on to say: 
`Mrs. Pipchin, I have taken the liberty of calling, to consult you in reference to my son. I
     have had it in my mind to do so for some time past; but have deferred it from time to time, in
     order that his health might be thoroughly re-established. You have no misgivings on that
     subject, Mrs. Pipchin?´ 
`Brighton has proved very beneficial, Sir,´ returned Mrs. Pipchin. `Very beneficial, indeed.´ 
`I purpose,´ said Mr. Dombey, `his remaining at Brighton.´ 
 Mrs. Pipchin rubbed her hands, and bent her grey eyes on the fire. 
`But,´ pursued Mr. Dombey, stretching out his forefinger, `but possibly that he should now
     make a change, and lead different kind of life here. In short, Mrs. Pipchin, that is the object
     of my visit. My son is getting on, Mrs. Pipchin. Really he is getting on.´ 
There was something melancholy in the triumphant air with which Mr. Dombey said this. It
     showed how long Paul's childish life had been to him, and how his hopes were set upon a later
     stage of his existence. Pity may appear a strange word to connect with any one so haughty and
     so cold, and yet he seemed a worthy subject for it at that moment. 
`Six years old!´ said Mr. Dombey, settling his neckcloth—perhaps to hide an irrepressible
     smile that rather seemed to strike upon the surface of his face and glance away, as finding no
     resting-place, than to play there for an instant. `Dear me, six will be changed to sixteen,
     before we have time to look about us.´ 
`Ten years,´ croaked the unsympathetic Pipchin, with a frosty glistening of her hard grey
     eye, and a dreary shaking of her bent head, `is a long time.´ 
`It depends on circumstances,´ returned Mr. Dombey; `at all events, Mrs. Pipchin, my son is
     six years old, and there is no doubt, I fear, that in his studies he is behind many children of
     his age—or his youth,´ said Mr. Dombey, quickly answering what he mistrusted was a shrewd
     twinkle of the frosty eye, `his youth is a more appropriate expression. Now, Mrs. Pipchin,
     instead of being behind his peers, my son ought to be before them; far before them. There is an
     eminence ready for him to mount upon. There is nothing of chance or doubt in the course before
     my son. His way in life was clear and prepared, and marked out before he existed. The education
     of such a young gentleman must not be delayed. It must not be left imperfect. It must be very
     steadily and seriously undertaken, Mrs. Pipchin.´ `Well, Sir,´ said Mrs. Pipchin, `I can say
     nothing to the contrary.´ 
`I was quite sure, Mrs. Pipchin,´ returned Mr. Dombey, approvingly, `that a person of your
     good sense could not, and would not.´ 
`There is a great deal of nonsense—and worse—talked about young people not being pressed too
     hard at first, and being tempted on, and all the rest of it, Sir,' said Mrs. Pipchin,
     impatiently rubbing her hooked nose. `It never was thought of in my time, and it has no
     business to be thought of now. My opinion is “keep'em at it.”´ 
`My good madam,´ returned Mr. Dombey, `you have not acquired your reputation undeservedly;
     and I beg you to believe, Mrs. Pipchin, that I am more than satisfied with your excellent
     system of management, and shall have the greatest pleasure in commending it whenever my poor
     commendation'—Mr. Dombey's loftiness when he affected to disparage his own importance, passed
     all bounds—`can be of any service. I have been thinking of Doctor Blimber's, Mrs. Pipchin.´ 
`My neighbour, Sir?´ said Mrs. Pipchin. `I believe the Doctor's is an excellent
     establishment. I've heard that it's very strictly conducted, and there is nothing but learning
     going on from morning to night.´ 
`And it's very expensive,´ added Mr. Dombey. 
`And it's very expensive, Sir,'returned Mrs. Pipchin, catching at the fact, as if in omitting
     that, she had omitted one of its leading merits. 
`I have had some communication with the Doctor, Mrs. Pipchin,´ said Mr. Dombey, hitching his
     chair anxiously a little nearer to the fire, `and he does not consider Paul at all too young
     for his purpose. He mentioned several instances of boys in Greek at about the same age. If I
     have any little uneasiness in my own mind, Mrs. Pipchin, on the subject of this change, it is
     not on that head. My son not having known a mother has gradually concentrated much—too much—of
     his childish affection on his sister. Whether their separation—´ Mr. Dombey said no more, but
     sat silent. 
`Hoity-toity!´ exclaimed Mrs. Pipchin, shaking out her black bombazeen skirts, and plucking
     up all the ogress within her. `If she don't like it, Mr. Dombey, she must be taught to lump
     it.´ The good lady apologised immediately afterwards for using so common a figure of speech,
     but said (and truly) that that was the way she reasoned with 'em. 
Mr. Dombey waited until Mrs. Pipchin had done bridling and shaking her head, and frowning
     down a legion of Bitherstones and Pankeys; and then said quietly, but correctively, `He, my
     good madam, he.´ 
Mrs. Pipchin's system would have applied very much the same mode of cure to any uneasiness on
     the part of Paul, too; but as the hard grey eye was sharp enough to see that the recipe,
     however Mr. Dombey might admit its efficacy in the case of the daughter, was not a sovereign
     remedy for the son, she argued the point; and contended that change, and new society, and the
     different form of life he would lead at Doctor Blimber's, and the studies he would have to
     master, would very soon prove sufficient alienations. As this chimed in with Mr. Dombey's own
     hope and belief, it gave that gentleman a still higher opinion of Mrs. Pipchin's understanding:
     and as Mrs. Pipchin, at the same time, bewailed the loss of her dear little friend (which was
     not an overwhelming shock to her, as she had long expected it, and had not looked, in the
     beginning, for his remaining with her longer than three months), he formed an equally good
     opinion of Mrs. Pipchin's disinterestedness. It was plain that he had given the subject anxious
     consideration, for he had formed a plan, which he announced to the ogress, of sending Paul to
     the Doctor's as a weekly boarder for the first half year, during which time Florence would
     remain at the castle, that she might receive her brother there, on Saturdays. This would wean
     him by degrees, Mr. Dombey said; probably with a recollection of his not having been weaned by
     degrees on a former occasion. 
Mr. Dombey finished the interview by expressing his hope that Mrs. Pipchin would still remain
     in office as general superintendent and overseer of his son, pending his studies at Brighton;
     and having kissed Paul, and shaken hands with Florence, and beheld Master Bitherstone in his
     collar of state, and made Miss Pankey cry by patting her on the head (in which region she was
     uncommonly tender, on account of a habit Mrs. Pipchin had of sounding it with her knuckles,
     like a cask), he withdrew to his hotel and dinner: resolved that Paul, now that he was getting
     so old and well, should begin a vigorous course of education forthwith, to qualify him for the
     position in which he was to shine; and that Doctor Blimber should take him in hand immediately. 
Whenever a young gentleman was taken in hand by Doctor Blimber, he might consider himself
     sure of a pretty tight squeeze. The doctor only undertook the charge of ten young gentlemen,
     but he had, always ready, a supply of learning for a hundred, on the lowest estimate; and it
     was at once the business and delight of his life to gorge the unhappy ten with it. 
In fact, Doctor Blimber's establishment was a great hot-house, in which there was a forcing
     apparatus incessantly at work. All the boys blew before their time. Mental green-peas were
     produced at Christmas, and intellectual asparagus all the year round. Mathematical gooseberries
     (very sour ones too) were common at untimely seasons, and from mere sprouts of bushes, under
     Doctor Blimber's cultivation. Every description of Greek and Latin vegetable was got off the
     driest twigs of boys, under the frostiest circumstances. Nature was of no consequence at all.
     No matter what a young gentleman was intended to bear, Doctor Blimber made him bear to pattern,
     somehow or other. 
This was all very pleasant and ingenious, but the system of forcing was attended with its
     usual disadvantages. There was not the right taste about the premature productions, and they
     didn't keep well. Moreover, one young gentleman, with a swollen nose and an excessively large
     head (the oldest of the ten who had `gone through´ everything), suddenly left off blowing one
     day, and remained in the establishment a mere stalk. And people did say that the Doctor had
     rather overdone it with young Toots, and that when he began to have whiskers he left off having
     brains. 
There young Toots was, at any rate; possessed of the gruffest of voices and the shrillest of
     minds; sticking ornamental pins into his shirt, and keeping a ring in his waistcoat pocket to
     put on his little finger by stealth, when the pupils went out walking; constantly falling in
     love by sight with nurserymaids, who had no idea of his existence; and looking at the
     gas-lighted world over the little iron bars in the left-hand corner window of the front three
     pairs of stairs, after bed-time, like a greatly overgrown cherub who had sat up aloft much too
     long. 
The Doctor was a portly gentleman in a suit of black, with strings at his knees, and
     stockings below them. He had a bald head, highly polished; a deep voice; and a chin so very
     double, that it was a wonder how he ever managed to shave into the creases. He had likewise a
     pair of little eyes that were always half shut up, and a mouth that was always half expanded
     into a grin, as if he had, that moment, posed a boy, and were waiting to convict him from his
     own lips. Insomuch, that when the Doctor put his right hand into the breast of his coat, and
     with his other hand behind him, and a scarcely perceptible wag of his head, made the commonest
     observation to a nervous stranger, it was like a sentiment from the sphynx, and settled his
     business. 
The Doctor's was a mighty fine house, fronting the sea. Not a joyful style of house within,
     but quite the contrary. Sad-coloured curtains, whose proportions were spare and lean, hid
     themselves despondently behind the windows. The tables and chairs were put away in rows, like
     figures in a sum: fires were so rarely lighted in the rooms of ceremony, that they felt like
     wells, and a visitor represented the bucket; the dining-room seemed the last place in the world
     where any eating or drinking was likely to occur; there was no sound through all the house but
     the ticking of a great clock in the hall, which made itself audible in the very garrets: and
     sometimes a dull crying of young gentlemen at their lessons, like the murmurings of an
     assemblage of melancholy pigeons. 
Miss Blimber, too, although a slim and graceful maid, did no soft violence to the gravity of
     the house. There was no light nonsense about Miss Blimber. She kept her hair short and crisp,
     and wore spectacles. She was dry and sandy with working in the graves of deceased languages.
     None of your live languages for Miss Blimber. They must be dead—stone dead—and then Miss
     Blimber dug them up like a Ghoul. 
Mrs. Blimber, her mama, was not learned herself, but she pretended to be, and that did quite
     as well. She said at evening parties, that if she could have known Cicero, she thought she
     could have died contented. It was the steady joy of her life to see the Doctor's young
     gentlemen go out walking, unlike all other young gentlemen, in the largest possible
     shirt-collars, and the stiffest possible cravats. It was so classical, she said. 
As to Mr. Feeder, B.A., Doctor Blimber's assistant, he was a kind of human barrel-organ, with
     a little list of tunes at which he was continually working, over and over again, without any
     variation. He might have been fitted up with a change of barrels, perhaps, in early life, if
     his destiny had been favourable; but it had not been; and he had only one, with which, in a
     monotonous round, it was his occupation to bewilder the young ideas of Doctor Blimber's young
     gentlemen. The young gentlemen were prematurely full of carking anxieties. They knew no rest
     from the pursuit of stony-hearted verbs, savage noun-substantives, inflexible syntactic
     passages, and ghosts of exercises that appeared to them in their dreams. Under the forcing
     system, a young gentleman usually took leave of his spirits in three weeks. He had all the
     cares of the world on his head in three months. He conceived bitter sentiments against his
     parents or guardians in four; he was an old misanthrope, in five; envied Curtius that blessed
     refuge in the earth, in six; and at the end of the first twelvemonth had arrived at the
     conclusion, from which he never afterwards departed, that all the fancies of the poets, and
     lessons of the sages, were a mere collection of words and grammar, and had no other meaning in
     the world. 
But he went on blow, blow, blowing, in the Doctor's hot-house, all the time; and the Doctor's
     glory and reputation were great, when he took his wintry growth home to his relations and
     friends. 
Upon the Doctor's door-steps one day, Paul stood with a fluttering heart, and with his small
     right hand in his father's. His other hand was locked in that of Florence. How tight the tiny
     pressure of that one; and how loose and cold the other! 
Mrs. Pinchin hovered behind the victim, with her sable plumage and her hooked beak, like a
     bird of ill-omen. She was out of breath—for Mr. Dombey, full of great thoughts, had walked
     fast—and she croaked hoarsely as she waited for the opening of the door. 
`Now, Paul,´ said Mr. Dombey, exultingly. `This is the way indeed to be Dombey and Son, and
     have money. You are almost a man already.´ 
`Almost,´ returned the child. 
Even his childish agitation could not master the sly and quaint yet touching look, with which
     he accompanied the reply. 
It brought a vague expression of dissatisfaction into Mr. Dombey's face; but the door being
     opened, it was quickly gone. 
`Doctor Blimber is at home, I believe?´ said Mr. Dombey. 
The man said yes; and as they passed in, looked at Paul as if he were a little mouse, and the
     house were a trap. He was a weak-eyed young man, with the first faint streaks or early dawn of
     a grin on his countenance. It was mere imbecility; but Mrs. Pipchin took it into her head that
     it was impudence, and made a snap at him directly. 
`How dare you laugh behind the gentleman's back?´ said Mrs. Pipchin. `And what do you take me
     for?´ 
`I ain't a laughing at nobody, and I'm sure I don't take you for nothing, Ma'am,' returned
     the young man, in consternation. 
`A pack of idle dogs!´ said Mrs. Pipchin, `only fit to be turnspits. Go and tell your master
     that Mr. Dombey's here, or it'll be worse for you!´ 
The weak-eyed young man went, very meekly, to discharge himself of this commission; and soon
     came back to invite them to the Doctor's study. 
`You're laughing again, Sir,'said Mrs. Pipchin, when it came to her turn, bringing up the
     rear, to pass him in the hall. 
`I ain't, returned the young man, grievously oppressed. `I never see such a thing as
     this!´ 
`What is the matter, Mrs. Pipchin?´ said Mr. Dombey, looking round. `Softly! Pray!´ 
Mrs. Pipchin, in her deference, merely muttered at the young man as she passed on, and said,
     `Oh! he was a precious fellow'—leaving the young man, who was all meekness and incapacity,
     affected even to tears by the incident. But Mrs. Pipchin had a way of falling foul of all meek
     people; and her friends said who could wonder at it, after the Peruvian mines! 
The Doctor was sitting in his portentous study, with a globe at each knee, books all round
     him, Homer over the door, and Minerva on the mantel-shelf. `And how do you do, Sir?´ he said to
     Mr. Dombey; `and how is my little friend?´ Grave as an organ was the Doctor's speech; and when
     he ceased, the great clock in the hall seemed (to Paul at least) to take him up, and to go on
     saying, `how, is, my, lit, tle, friend? how, is, my, lit, tle, friend?´ over and over and over
     again. 
The little friend being something too small to be seen at all from where the Doctor sat, over
     the books on his table, the Doctor made several futile attempts to get a view of him round the
     legs; which Mr. Dombey perceiving, relieved the Doctor from his embarrassment by taking Paul up
     in his arms, and sitting him on another little table, over against the Doctor, in the middle of
     the room. 
`Ha!´ said the Doctor, leaning back in his chair with his hand in his breast. `Now I see my
     little friend. How do you do, my little friend?´ 
The clock in the hall wouldn't subscribe to this alteration in the form of words, but
     continued to repeat `how, is, my, lit, tle, friend? how, is, my, lit, tle, friend?´ 
`Very well, I thank you, Sir,´ returned Paul, answering the clock quite as much as the
     Doctor. 
`Ha!´ said Doctor Blimber. `Shall we make a man of him?´ 
`Do you hear, Paul?´ added Mr. Dombey; Paul being silent. 
`Shall we make a man of him?´ repeated the Doctor. 
`I had rather be a child,´ replied Paul. 
`Indeed!´ said the Doctor. `Why?´ 
The child sat on the table looking at him, with a curious expression of suppressed emotion in
     his face, and beating one hand proudly on his knee as if he had the rising tears beneath it,
     and crushed them. But his other hand strayed a little way the while, a little farther—farther
     from him yet—until it lighted on the neck of Florence. `This is why,´ it seemed to say, and
     then the steady look was broken up and gone; the working lip was loosened; and the tears came
     streaming forth. 
`Mrs. Pipchin,´ said his father, in a querulous manner, `I am really very sorry to see this.´ 
`Come away from him, do, Miss Dombey,´ quoth the matron. 
`Never mind,´ said the Doctor, blandly nodding his head, to keep Mrs. Pipchin back. `Ne-ver
     mind; we shall substitute new cares and new impressions, Mr. Dombey, very shortly. You would
     still wish my little friend to acquire——´ 
`Everything, if you please, Doctor,´ returned Mr. Dombey, firmly. 
`Yes,´ said the Doctor, who, with his half-shut eyes, and his usual smile, seemed to survey
     Paul with the sort of interest that might attach to some choice little animal he was going to
     stuff. `Yes, exactly. Ha! We shall impart a great variety of information to our little friend,
     and bring him quickly forward, I dare say. I dare say. Quite a virgin soil, I believe you said,
     Mr. Dombey?´ 
`Except some ordinary preparation at home, and from this lady,´ replied Mr. Dombey,
     introducing Mrs. Pipchin, who instantly communicated a rigidity to her whole muscular system,
     and snorted defiance beforehand, in case the Doctor should disparage her; `except so far, Paul
     has, as yet, applied himself to no studies at all.´ 
Doctor Blimber inclined his head, in gentle tolerance of such insignificant poaching as Mrs.
     Pipchin's, and said he was glad to hear it. It was much more satisfactory, he observed, rubbing
     his hands, to begin at the foundation. And again he leered at Paul, as if he would have liked
     to tackle him with the Greek alphabet on the spot. 
`That circumstance, indeed, Doctor Blimber,´ pursued Mr. Dombey, glancing at his little son,
     `and the interview I have already had the pleasure of holding with you, renders any further
     explanation, and consequently, and further intrusion on your valuable time, so unnecessary,
     that—´ 
`Now, Miss Dombey!´ said the acid Pipchin. 
`Permit me,´ said the Doctor, `one moment. Allow me to present Mrs. Blimber and my daughter,
     who will be associated with the domestic life of our young Pilgrim to Parnassus. Mrs. Blimber,´
     for the lady, who had perhaps been in waiting, opportunely entered, followed by her daughter,
     that fair Sexton in spectacles, `Mr. Dombey. My daughter Cornelia, Mr. Dombey. Mr. Dombey, my
     love,´ pursued the Doctor, turning to his wife, `is so confiding as to—do you see our little
     friend?´ 
Mrs. Blimber, in an excess of politeness, of which Mr. Dombey was the object, apparently did
     not, for she was backing against the little friend, and very much endangering his position on
     the table. But, on this hint, she turned to admire his classical and intellectual lineaments,
     and turning again to Mr. Dombey, said, with a sigh, that she envied his dear son. 
`Like a bee, Sir,´ said Mrs. Blimber, with uplifted eyes, `about to plunge into a garden of
     the choicest flowers, and sip the sweets for the first time. Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Terence,
     Plautus, Cicero. What a world of honey have we here. It may appear remarkable, Mr. Dombey, in
     one who is a wife—the wife of such a husband—´ 
`Hush, hush,´ said Doctor Blimber. `Fie for shame.´ 
`Mr. Dombey will forgive the partiality of a wife,´ said Mrs. Blimber, with an engaging
     smile. 
Mr. Dombey answered `Not at all:´ applying those words, it is to be presumed, to the
     partiality, and not to the forgiveness. 
`—And it may seem remarkable in one who is a mother also,´ resumed Mrs. Blimber. 
`And such a mother,´ observed Mr. Dombey, bowing with some confused idea of being
     complimentary to Cornelia. 
`But really,´ pursued Mrs. Blimber, `I think if I could have known Cicero, and been his
     friend, and talked with him in his retirement at Tusculum (beautiful Tusculum!), I could have
     died contented.´ 
A learned enthusiasm is so very contagious, that Mr. Dombey half believed this was exactly
     his case; and even Mrs. Pipchin, who was not, as we have seen, of an accommodating disposition
     generally, gave utterance to a little sound between a groan and a sigh, as if she would have
     said that nobody but Cicero could have proved a lasting consolation under that failure of the
     Peruvian Mines, but that he indeed would have been a very Davy-lamp of refuge. 
Cornelia looked at Mr. Dombey through her spectacles, as if she would have liked to crack a
     few quotations with him from the authority in question. But this design, if she entertained it,
     was frustrated by a knock at the room-door. 
`Who is that?´ said the Doctor. `Oh! Come in, Toots: come in. Mr. Dombey, Sir.' Toots bowed.
     `Quite a coincidence!´ said Doctor Blimber. `Here we have the beginning and the end. Alpha and
     Omega. Our head boy, Mr. Dombey.´ 
The Doctor might have called him their head and shoulders boy, for he was at least that much
     taller than any of the rest. He blushed very much at finding himself among strangers, and
     chuckled aloud. 
`An addition to our little Portico, Toots,´ said the Doctor; `Mr. Dombey's son.´ 
Young Toots blushed again: and finding, from a solemn silence which prevailed that he was
     expected to say something, said to Paul, `How are you?´ in a voice so deep, and a manner so
     sheepish, that if a lamb had roared it couldn't have been more surprising. 
`Ask Mr. Feeder, if you please, Toots,´ said the Doctor, `to prepare a few introductory
     volumes for Mr. Dombey's Son, and to allot him a convenient seat for study. My dear, I believe
     Mr. Dombey has not seen the dormitories.´ 
`If Mr. Dombey will walk up stairs,´ said Mrs. Blimber, `I shall be more than proud to show
     him the dominions of the drowsy god.´ 
With that, Mrs. Blimber, who was a lady of great suavity, and a wiry figure, and who wore a
     cap composed of sky-blue materials, proceeded up stairs with Mr. Dombey and Cornelia; Mrs.
     Pipchin following, and looking out sharp for her enemy the footman. 
While they were gone, Paul sat upon the table, holding Florence by the hand, and glancing
     timidly from the Doctor round and round the room, while the Doctor, leaning back in his chair,
     with his hand in his breast as usual, held a book from him at arm's length, and read. There was
     something very awful in this manner of reading. It was such a determined, unimpassioned,
     inflexible, coldblooded way of going to work. It left the Doctor's countenance exposed to view;
     and when the Doctor smiled auspiciously at his author, or knit his brows, or shook his head and
     made wry faces at him, as much as to say, `Don't tell me, Sir; I know better,´ it was terrific. 
Toots, too, had no business to be outside the door, ostentatiously examining the wheels in
     his watch, and counting his half-crowns. But that didn't last long; for Doctor Blimber,
     happening to change the position of his tight plump legs, as if he were going to get up, Toots
     swiftly vanished, and appeared no more. 
Mr. Dombey and his conductress were soon heard coming down stairs again, talking all the way;
     and presently they reentered the Doctor's study. 
`I hope, Mr. Dombey,´ said the Doctor, laying down his book, `that the arrangements meet your
     approval.´ 
`They are excellent, Sir,´ said Mr. Dombey. 
`Very fair, indeed,´ said Mrs. Pipchin, in a low voice; never disposed to give too much
     encouragement. 
`Mrs. Pipchin,´ said Mr. Dombey, wheeling round, `will, with your permission, Doctor and Mrs.
     Blimber, visit Paul now and then.´ 
`Whenever Mrs. Pipchin pleases,´ observed the Doctor. 
`Always happy to see her,´ said Mrs. Blimber. 
`I think,´ said Mr. Dombey, `I have given all the trouble I need, and may take my leave.
     Paul, my child,´ he went close to him, as he sat upon the table. `Good-bye.´ 
`Good-bye, Papa.´ 
The limp and careless little hand that Mr. Dombey took in his, was singularly out of keeping
     with the wistful face. But he had no part in its sorrowful expression. It was not addressed to
     him. No, no. To Florence—all to Florence. 
If Mr. Dombey in his insolence of wealth, had ever made an enemy, hard to appease and cruelly
     vindictive in his hate, even such an enemy might have received the pang that wrung his proud
     heart then, as compensation for his injury. 
He bent down over his boy, and kissed him. If his sight were dimmed as he did so, by
     something that for a moment blurred the little face, and made it indistinct to him, his mental
     vision may have been, for that short time, the clearer perhaps. 
`I shall see you soon, Paul. You are free on Saturdays and Sundays, you know.´ 
`Yes, papa,´ returned Paul: looking at his sister. `On Saturdays and Sundays.´ 
`And you'll try and learn a great deal here, and be a clever man,´ said Mr. Dombey; `won't
     you?´ 
`I'll try,´ returned the child wearily. 
`And you'll soon be grown up now!´ said Mr. Dombey. 
`Oh! very soon!´ replied the child. Once more the old, old look passed rapidly across his
     features like a strange light. It fell on Mrs. Pipchin, and extinguished itself in her black
     dress. That excellent ogress stepped forward to take leave and to bear off Florence, which she
     had long been thirsting to do. The move on her part roused Mr. Dombey, whose eyes were fixed on
     Paul. After patting him on the head, and pressing his small hand again, he took leave of Doctor
     Blimber, Mrs. Blimber, and Miss Blimber, with his usual polite frigidity, and walked out of the
     study. 
Despite his entreaty that they would not think of stirring, Doctor Blimber, Mrs. Blimber, and
     Miss Blimber all pressed forward to attend him to the hall; and thus Mrs. Pipchin got into a
     state of entanglement with Miss Blimber and the Doctor, and was crowded out of the study before
     she could clutch Florence. To which happy accident Paul stood afterwards indebted for the dear
     remembrance, that Florence ran back to throw her arms round his neck, and that hers was the
     last face in the doorway: turned towards him with a smile of encouragement, the brighter for
     the tears through which it beamed. 
It made his childish bosom heave and swell when it was gone; and sent the globes, the books,
     blind Homer and Minerva, swimming round the room. But they stopped, all of a sudden; and then
     he heard the loud clock in the hall still gravely inquiring `how, is, my, lit, tle, friend?
     how, is, my, lit, tle, friend?´ as it had done before. 
He sat, with folded hands, upon his pedestal, silently listening. But he might have answered
     `weary, weary! very lonely, very sad!´ And there, with an aching void in his young heart, and
     all outside so cold, and bare, and strange, Paul sat as if he had taken life unfurnished, and
     the upholsterer were never coming. 
