<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="22">
 CHAPTER XXI. 
MISS BROTHERTON EXERTS HER ELOQUENCE, AND NURSE TREMLETT IS BROUGHT TO REASON THEREBY
				— THE HEIRESS HARDENS HER HEART, AND SPEAKS HARSH TRUTHS TO MARTHA DOWLING, BUT ALL
				IN VAIN — SHE CONCEIVES A PROJECT, AND SETS ABOUT PUTTING IT IN EXECUTION WITH GREAT
				SPIRIT.
" Well , my dear Mary,!" said Mrs. Tremlett, on sitting down
					tête-à-tête with Miss Brotherton, after their return from Fairly,
				"don't you think that you will come at last to confess that I was right when I told
				you that you had better let things alone, and not attempt to make any fuss or stir
				about these factory goings on?"
Mary looked sick at heart, and only shook her head in reply.
 "Why, what have you gained, my dear child, by all your labour and 
				pains to get information, as you call it? You are looking as white as a sheet — your
				eyes are sunk in your head — when I look at you, instead of the smiles you used to
				give me, I get nothing but sighs, and all for what? Can you in honesty and truth say
				that you have gained any thing worth knowing by following your own opinion instead
				of mine? What good in the world can you do, dear, by listening to all the shocking
				stories that clergyman there told you? I dare say he is a very good man, and he
				looks like it, but upon my word I think he is doing nothing but just wasting his
				time, as well as yourself; for though I sat and said nothing, as of course it was my
				place to do, I listened to every word, and it is just because I believe every word
				was true, that common sense makes me see there's no good to talk about it. Indeed,
				and indeed, my darling, I would not make free to talk to you in this way, which
				looks for all the world as if I was taking advantage of your goodness to me, if I
				did not see that you was going the way to torment yourself for everlasting, without
				doing one bit of good to any one. For how, my dear, can you, or that good clergyman
				either, hope to put down all the wicked doings he told about? And to be sure he said
				as much himself — didn't he Miss Mary? Then do make up your mind to be quiet and
				happy, and let things that you can't mend, alone. Put as many children to school as
				you like, my dear, and you may give them a pretty neat uniform, you know, and that
				will be a pleasure for you to think about, and to look at; but for pity's sake my
				dear, dear, child! give up at once, and for ever, this bothering yourself for
				everlasting about the factories, which you can no more stop, Mary, than you can stop
				the sun from rising in the morning, and setting at night." 
Here the good woman ceased, and looked with some anxiety in the thoughtful eyes of
				her young mistress. She felt that she did not understand their expression, and no
				wonder, for Mary Brotherton herself sat silently doubting how she should answer her.
				A languid feeling, proceeding partly from fatigue and indisposition, and partly from
				the discouraging conviction that she had no very satisfactory arguments by which to
				rebut her old friend's charge of useless devotion to a hopless cause, made her for
				some minutes unwilling to speak at all. Then came a somewhat peevish wish to
				interdict for ever the discussion of the subject between them; but as she raised her
				eyes to utter it, she encountered a look of such humble love, deprecating her
				displeasure, yet fondly clinging to the freedom which risked the incuring it, that
				her purpose suddenly changed, and instead of the chilling command she was
				meditating, she threw her arms round the old woman's neck, exclaiming,
"Oh! my dear nurse! How much, how very much you must love me! since care for my
				already too-much-cared-for peace and quiet, can harden such a heart as yours towards
				all the sufferings we have this day heard recounted!"
 "Thank God! you are not angry," cried the affectionate old woman kissing her, and
				then arranging the neglected ringlets of her pretty charge, and looking cheerily in
				her face, she said, "Now then, Mary,  I won't teaze you any more about
				it. You are so sweet and so gentle to me, that I am quite sure you will not long
				think my heart is hard; and then by degrees you will find out that I am
				right; and then all will go well again, and I shall see my dear girl look like
				herself once more." 
"Nurse Tremlett! the time is already come when the impossibility of my efforts being
				of any avail to stem the torrent with which avarice and cruelty are overwhelming the
				land, is made evident to me. So much, dear nurse, I concede to you, and therefore on
				that point we will argue no more. But, my dear old woman, have patience with me if I
				tell you that there are some points on which my reading may have given me, young as
				I am, as much, or even more information than your experience has given you. You have
				heard of the slave trade, nurse Tremlett — you have heard more than one excellent
				charity sermon preached in aid of the funds that were to assist in freeing these
				poor helpless black people from the tyranny of their masters, and I suppose you know
				that it is now unlawful to buy and sell these poor creatures. And how do you think
				this happy change in their favour has been brought about?"
"By the king and the parliament, Miss Mary, making that most good and righteous law,"
				replied nurse Tremlett.
"And how were they persuaded to make that law, think you?" demanded Mary.
"I can't tell how that was brought about, my dear. I suppose it was because they saw
				that it was right and fit."
"It was brought about, nurse Tremlett, by the voices of the people of England, which
				were for years raised quietly, and with no breach of law or order, but with patient
				and unshrinking perseverance against this great sin, till the lengthened cry could
				be no longer resisted, and the law they perseveringly asked for, was granted to
				them. Do you think, nurse Tremlett, that if during these years of orderly, but
				steady remonstrance, every Englishman and woman had acted upon the principle you
				recommend, and had turned their thoughts and their conversation from the subject of
				negro slavery, because each one knew that he or she individually possessed no power
				to stop it. Do you think that if such had been the system acted upon, England would
				now have to boast of having abolished this most wicked traffic?"
"Perhaps not, my dear. I think I understand you now," replied the honest-hearted old
				woman, eagerly.
"Then now my dear old friend we shall, I think, never have any more disputes upon
				this subject. You — I — every servant in my house — every acquaintance I have in the
				world, may aid and assist in putting an end to this most atrocious factory system,
				WHICH OUGHT TO WEIGH HEAVIER UPON EVERY CHRISTIAN ENGLISH HEART THAN EVER THE
				SLAVE-TRADE DID. If the whole British empire, nurse, did but know what we are about
				here — if the facts we heard from Mr. Bell to-day were but impressed upon the minds
				of all my fellow-subjects as they are on mine, the horrors he detailed would cease
				before another year was come and gone."

"God forbid then, my sweet child, that I should ever more raise my sinful voice to
				drown your righteous one. I have been a vain self-sufficient old woman, my dear
				Mary, and clearly have been talking a great deal about that of which I know nothing.
				Only don't think I am cruel and hard-hearted; for though I do — as you truly say —
				though I do love you very very much indeed, I am not such a wretch as to hear all we
				were told to-day without wishing to mend it."
This was the last time Mary Brotherton had to do battle with her nurse on the subject
				of the factory system. Once awakened to a sense of its tyranny and injustice, and
				made to feel that the only hope of remedy lay in the possibility of universally
				raising British feeling against it, there was no danger that the right-hearted old
				woman would ever again turn with indifference, weariness, or displeasure, from the
				theme. Her young mistress felt that she had touched the right string, and that she
				should never again have to fear discord where it was so essential to her comfort to
				find harmony. This change was really a comfort, and she felt it to be so, removing
				as it did one irksome feature from her situation, and for a few minutes it cheered
				her, and she said so, cordially, but the next, a pang shot to her heart, as she
				rememebered that this assurance of accordant counsels with her venerable nurse,
				could avail her nothing in the most painful of all her difficulties, for it promised
				no help either in obtaining light upon the mystery of poor Michael's abode, or in
				the still more pressing embarrassment of confessing to his unhappy mother and
				brother the impossibility of obtaining it. Yet this painful task must be performed,
				and that without delay, for well she knew that every hour that passed without their
				seeing her, would be rendered dreadful, both by the agony of fear, and the sickening
				hot and cold fits of uncertainty. But never had she felt herself so very a coward as
				while meditating this visit of the morrow. She saw in imagination the eager
				questioning of Edward's speaking eyes, and the heavy glance of his mother,
				anticipating the worst she had to tell.
Sometimes she thought she would await the coming of the boy to take his place in the
				school, and let him report the failure of all her inquiries to the poor widow. But
				there was a selfish cowardice in this which instantly struck her, and she seemed to
				hate herself for the suggestion. For above an hour after she had laid her head upon
				her pillow these thoughts kept her painfully awake, and it was only after deciding
				that she would once more see Martha Dowling, and try the effect of repeating to her,
				but without quoting her authority, the dark hints she had listened to, respecting
				Sir Matthew's possible motives. It was only when her restless thoughts had fixed
				themselves on this, that she at length closed her aching eyes in sleep.
 Above an hour before the usual hour of rising, Mary Brotherton was already at her
				writing desk. The idea of going to Dowling-lodge, and encountering the knight and
				his family, was intolerable, and she had therefore recourse to her pen as the means
				of obtaining the interview  she wished for, without paying for it the
				penalty of such a visit. She wrote as follows: 
 "My dear Miss Martha,
"I trust you are too goodnatured to be angry with me, even if you should think that I
				am taking a great liberty with you. But the truth is, that I much wish for the
				pleasure of seeing you, and yet am too idle this morning to venture upon a drive.
				Will you then have the great kindness to pass the morning with me here? I send my
				carriage, lest Lady Dowling should not have one at leisure to send with you.

				"Believe me, my dear Miss Martha,
			
"Yours very sincerely, " Mary Brotherton ."
Having written, folded, and sealed this epistle, Mary recollected that it would be
				impossible to send it for at least four hours, and she smiled first, and then
				sighed, as she thought of the restless but useless activity which had caused her so
				needlessly to forestall her usual hour of rising. It would, in truth, have been
				better for her, poor girl, could she have slept through the time, for her waking
				thoughts had little that was pleasant to rest upon. Even the commencement of
				Edward's studies, to which she had before looked forward with great delight, now
				recurred to her only to bring the recollection that if she saw him, his thoughts
				would be neither of his new clothes nor his new books, but of Michael, and of her
				promise to get tidings of him. For his sake, and her own too, she determined at
				least to escape this interview, feeling that it would be better for all parties that
				no tidings should be delivered to both mother and son at once, which could be done
				after his school hours, by her driving to Hoxley-lane, after she had taken Martha
				home.
In pursuance of this resolution, she walked to the school-house, renewed her orders
				that the greatest attention should be paid to the new scholar, Edward Armstrong, and
				care taken that if he were found backward for his age, he should neither be laughed
				at nor chid. She then left a message for him, stating that she should be engaged all
				the morning, but would see him at his mother's house, after he left school.
At eleven o'clock Miss Brotherton's equipage set off for Dowlinglodge, bearing her
				letter to Martha, and the interval till its return was an anxious one. First she
				felt doubtful if her unusual invitation would be accepted; and if it were, she felt
				more doubtful still as to the nature of the scene which must follow. Nothing short
				of her earnest wish to redeem her promise to Mrs. Armstrong could have given Mary
				courage to do what she now meditated.
 She entertained not the slightest doubt of the intrinsic excellence of Martha
				Dowling. All she had ever seen of her, and still more, all she had heard from the
				Armstrongs, convinced her of this; and to pain her therefore, particularly in that
				most tender point, the exposure of  her father, the tremendous effect
				of which upon her, Mary had already witnessed, was one of the very last measures she
				could have been led to adopt. But a strong and stern feeling of justice, urged her
				not to shrink from this. It was evident from the statement of Mrs. Armstrong that
				Martha had been actively instrumental in sending Michael to his present destination,
				let it be where it might; and painful or not painful, it was unquestionably right to
				make her understand the doubts that existed as to the boy's well-being, in order
				that she might avail herself, as she was bound to do, of her access to the only
				person who could explain the transaction. 
Having screwed her courage, therefore, to the strictness of examination necessary to
				her most righteous purpose, Mary left her boudoir in the possession of Mrs.
				Tremlett, and repaired to the library to await her guest. Nor did she wait long.
				Almost before the time arrived at which she had calculated that the carriage might
				return, the great house-bell gave signal of a visiter, and the next moment Martha
				Dowling stood before her.
The two young girls shook hands, and each observed that the other looked paler than
				she was wont to do. The heart of Mary sank within her as she marked the expression
				of Martha's countenance. Not only was it pale, but most speakingly anxious, and in
				addition to her usual shy and reserved manner there was an appearance of uneasiness,
				and almost of fear, as she thought, which seemed to tell that her object was
				suspected. Nor was she wrong. In pursuance of a promise given to Michael, Martha had
				visited the widow Armstrong, and the intense anxiety under which she found her
				suffering respecting the destination of her boy, awakened for the first time in her
				own mind a shadowy suspicion that all might not be right concerning him. The pang
				this cost her was terrible. Good and kind-hearted as she was, there was no strength
				of fibre in Martha's character which might enable her to brave every thing rather
				than remain in doubt. She loved her father fondly, but she feared him more, and the
				stronger her suspicions grew (and unhappily the more she meditated the more they
				strengthened), the less power she felt either to refute or confirm them.
The note of Miss Brotherton was delivered to her at the family breakfast table, and
				the instant she read it, the truth suggested itself to her mind. Had she been a free
				agent, the wounded shrinking spirit of the poor girl would have certainly led her to
				invent some excuse for refusing an invitation so full of terror; but she was
				not.
"What's that about, Martha?" said Sir Matthew, holding out his hand for the note.
"It is from Miss Brotherton," muttered Martha, as she resigned it to him.
"Mercy on me!" exclaimed her eldest sister," what a wonderful fancy Miss Brotherton
				seems to have taken for Martha! I do think it is the very oddest thing I ever heard
				of."
"What a goose you are, my dear, not to understand it!" observed Miss Harriet, the
				second sister, giving at the same time a very significant glance towards her brother
				Augustus.

"But good gracious!" retorted Miss Arabella, why might not any other of us do as
				well? It would seem so much more natural in such an elegant and fashionable girl as
				she is."
"She is afraid of us, Bella," replied Miss Harriet, tittering.
Sir Matthew, who had not only read the note, but contrived to hear all that his two
				eldest daughters said concerning it, here burst into a laugh.
"Set a thief to catch a thief — hey! Harriet? Come Martha! start away! You have
				finished your breakfast long ago. I won't have the carriage kept waiting."
"Must I go, papa?" said poor Martha, turning very pale.
"Must you go? and with that die-away look too? Why, Martha! are you jealous, because
				some folks fancy that the young lady wants to make friends with you, for more
				reasons than one?"
"I would a great deal rather not go, papa!" replied Martha in a beseeching
				accent.
"Martha! I shall be in a downright passion with you in half a minute. Upon my honour
				I never heard any thing so cross-grained and unsisterly in my life. Go this moment,
				and get on your bonnet, and remember if you please, from first to last, to speak of
				your brother as a sister ought to speak. And if she hints any thing about his having
				flirted a little with Carry Thompson, be sure to say that he only did it to laugh at
				her."
As he spoke these words, Sir Matthew rose from the table, as if to accelerate the
				movement which was to send her off.
Martha listened to him with the habitual reverence which she ever bestowed on all he
				uttered; but shook her head, as it seemed, involuntarily, as he concluded.
"Why you don't mean to say he was in earnest, you good-for-nothing spiteful girl!"
				cried Lady Dowling, suddenly rousing herself from the dignified apathy in which she
				usually indulged.
"What a shame!" cried one sister.
"That's too bad!" cried the other.
"Just like her, though!" sneered Mr. Augustus.
"Hold your tongues, all of you," said Sir Matthew, "I know Martha better than any of
				ye, trust me for that, and what I bid her do, that she will do, and nothing else.
				Run away Martha. Don't mind any of 'em."
Thus urged, thus goaded to the interview she dreaded, Martha hastened to leave the
				room; but ere she passed the door, something at her heart told her that her best
				course would be to take her father apart, and tell him all. She turned back to look
				at him, but met a frown so strongly indicative of growing impatience at her delay,
				that yielding to the sort of slavish feeling in which she had been nurtured, she
				hurried forward to obey him. Had she possessed greater moral courage, many
				subsequent events would have been different.
 After the first salutation was over, Miss Brotherton, making a strong mental effort
				to subdue her agitation — of which she was infinitely more  capable
				than her companion — begged her to sit down; and then, placing herself where she
				could have, as a commentary on what she might induce her to say, the advantage of
				watching her countenance, she pronounced in a voice that she in vain laboured to
				render steady, "My dear Miss Martha, I have suffered a great deal of uneasiness
				since I last saw you respecting the little boy for whom — concerning whom — I mean
				Michael Armstrong, Martha! His mother is very wretched because she cannot discover
				to what place he has been sent; and I, nothing doubting that it would be perfectly
				easy to learn this from you, rashly promised that I would obtain this information.
				Can you, dear girl! tell me more upon this subject now, than you could when last we
				met?" 
"I cannot, Miss Brotherton!" replied Martha Dowling, in a voice so low and husky, as
				hardly to be audible, but with a complexion and features that spoke so plainly what
				was passing in her heart, that Mary felt ashamed of having placed herself where she
				could so distinctly read all she suffered, and leaving her chair to share the sofa
				on which the poor girl was seated, she took her hand and said,
"My poor dear Martha! It would be better for us both that I should speak sincerely. I
				have become acquainted with an individual, Martha, who knows more, much more, than
				either you or I can do, my dear girl, respecting the factories — those great
				magazines of human life and labour by which your father, and mine also, have grown
				from poverty to wealth. This person, Martha, on my questioning him respecting the
				probable destination of a child so circumstanced, did not scruple to reply, that if
				his master were displeased, and wished to be rid of him, there were places —
				factories, mills, dear Martha, where the business was so managed as to render labour
				very heavy, punishment, and where it was easy to keep children, ay, hundreds of
				them, unseen and unknown for years. Do not tremble thus, dear Martha! Do not draw
				your hand away from me! Most sure I am that your heart and my heart must beat in
				sympathy on such a subject as this. Let us be mutually sincere, and we may help each
				other to undo whatever wrong may have been done. We know, we both well know, that
				your father was displeased with this poor widow's son. We know, too, that
				he is a person of great power and influence. The boy is gone — he will not tell us
				where. What is the inference? Turn not from it, Martha Dowling, turn not from it, my
				poor friend, but boldly and honestly seek out the truth, and let me know enough of
				it to save this helpless child from further suffering."
"I have no means, Miss Brotherton," faltered poor Martha. "If all your dreadful
				thoughts were true, which you have no right to think they are — and still less have
				I — but if they were true, all true, I have no means to know it."
 "If we have ANY reason to believe them true," said Mary, solemnly, "means MUST be
				taken, Martha Dowling, to stop further wrong; and this can only be by learning where
				Michael Armstrong has been sent. I apply to you for this with great reluctance,
				because I know the subject  cannot be brought before you without
				causing you pain. But I feel it my duty not to shrink from this, and it is yours, my
				dear girl, to obtain the information I require." 
"But if I agreed with you in this, Miss Brotherton, what are my means of obtaining it
				beyond your own?" said Martha, rousing herself, and feeling renewed courage from
				remembering that there was no proof whatever of the boy's being otherwise than well
				and happy.
"Nay, Martha," returned the heiress gravely, "amongst those engaged in your father's
				service, you can hardly be at a loss to find some one who must have been employed in
				removing him."
"And would you have me," replied the poor girl, indignantly, "would you have me
				tamper with my father's servants, in order to obtain a knowledge of what it may be
				his will to keep secret? Miss Brotherton, I would rather die than do so."
"I honour your filial feelings, Martha, and grieve to think that you are placed in
				circumstances which must compel you to make them secondary," said Mary, gently.
"Nothing can make them secondary," retorted Martha, warmly, "I love my father, and I
				hold my duty to him the first and the highest I have to perform on earth."
"Save only what you owe to your own soul, Martha Dowling," replied Mary. "Had you
				been yourself for nothing in this matter, I might think as you do, that your duty as
				a child must prevent your interfering in it, though even that, I suspect, would be
				but doubtful morality. But, Martha! the case is otherwise. It was by your influence
				that this helpless widow was induced to send her child away. She did not
				trust your father, but she trusted you. Do you not know, Martha, that I speak the
				truth? And if I do, can you for an instant doubt that your first duty is to redeem
				the pledge you gave to this poor trusting creature, who hazarded all that was
				dearest to her in life, upon your assurance?"
A passionate burst of tears, that seemed rather to convulse than relieve the bosom on
				which they fell, was the only answer Mary received to her cogent reasonings, and so
				evident was the suffering of the innocent culprit who appeared writhing under the
				discipline she inflicted, that nothing less deeply impressed on her heart than was
				the remembrance of Edward and his mother, and the grief that threatened to destroy
				them both, could have given her courage to persevere.
"Martha! dear Martha! Be reasonable!" cried Mary, throwing her arms round her. "If
				you knew what I suffered in making you suffer, you would pity me! But I have no
				choice left me. I am not a free agent, Martha, any more than you are; we are both
				bound in honour, honesty, Christian faith, and Christian mercy, not to let any
				feeling stop us till we have restored Michael Armstrong to his mother."
"Restore him!" sobbed Martha. "Alas! Miss Brotherton, the poor woman herself has
				prevented the possibility of that! Do you not know that he is apprenticed?"
 "Let us but know where he is, Martha, and if the situation be one  that his mother can reasonably disapprove, there can be little doubt
				but means may be taken to release him. Teach us but where to find him, dearest
				Martha," cried Mary fervently, "and we will all pray for blessings on your head!" 
"I cannot do it," replied Martha, with a sigh that very nearly approached a
				groan.
"How know you that you cannot, Martha? Will you not try to learn this cruel, this
				nefarious secret?"
"No, I will not, Miss Brotherton," replied the unhappy girl with sudden firmness. "If
				any wrong has been done to this boy, I know that it must rest upon my head. So let
				it. The remembrance of it may bring me to the grave, and there I shall find mercy
				and forgiveness. But it shall not place me in rebellion to my father, nor force me
				to reveal any secrets which it may be his pleasure to keep. Now let me go, Miss
				Brotherton. I doubt not you have acted according to your sense of duty, and so have
				I. In this at least we are equal. Pray let me go; I am not well and greatly wish to
				be at home."
Mary looked at her with surprise, and almost with terror; she was as pale as death,
				and shook, as she stood up before her, as if she had been seized with an
				ague-fit.
"Alas, Martha!" she exclaimed, "I have made you very miserable, and very ill, yet
				have gained nothing by it! You shall go, my poor girl, you shall go instantly, but
				ere we part, let me implore you to examine in silence, and alone, the question of
				right and wrong in this case. Paint to yourself the misery of the wretched mother,
				and remember that yourself — I must say it, though I wring both our hearts as I do
				it — yourself, Martha Dowling, are the cause of it."
"You have said enough, Miss Brotherton, to destroy my peace for ever," replied the
				miserable girl, "but not enough to make me act as a spy upon my father. Farewell! Do
				not let us meet again! It is too painful."
Without waiting for an answer, Martha Dowling wrapped her shawl about her and hurried
				to the door.
"The carriage is not waiting, Miss Dowling," said the vexed and disappointed Mary,
				who had gained nothing from this painful interview, but the conviction that the
				well-intentioned, but erring Martha, was as much persuaded of the boy's having been
				unfairly dealt with, as herself. "Let me order the carriage for you."
"No, no, I cannot wait. I can walk. I know the way. Indeed I can stay no longer!"
				replied Martha, hurrying on, and closing the door of the room after her, and before
				Miss Brotherton could reopen it, she had already passed through the hall, and was
				almost running from the house.
 Mary lost not a moment in summoning a servant, and ordering the carriage to follow
				her with all speed, an order which was so well obeyed, that the unhappy Martha was
				overtaken ere she had walked a mile, and gladly did she then avail herself of it;
				for by that time every other painful feeling was merged in the terror of having to
				explain to her father the cause of her having so parted with Miss Brotherton,  as to return unattended and on foot. "Perfect love casteth out fear,"
				and perfect fear may perhaps petrify the heart into a sort of unstruggling
				desperation; but a union of the two reduces the mind to a state of slavery the most
				abject, leaving no strength whereby any healthful moral feeling can be sustained.
				Martha's whole care, on returning home, was to satisfy her father that
					nothing particular had passed in her interview with the heiress; and,
				unfortunately for all parties, she succeeded. 
Miss Brotherton, meanwhile, mounted a little pony phaeton with Mrs. Tremlett, and
				with a heavy heart proceeded to Hoxley-lane. But, painful as was her errand, her
				condition was a far happier one than that of Martha Dowling; for in her there was no
				mixture of motives to paralyze every word and act. Her kind heart sought and found
				counsel in her sound and upright judgment, and, sustained by it, she executed her
				task without shrinking. A little reflection on the subject convinced her that it was
				now become her duty to confess to her poor client, not only that her exertions to
				discover the abode of Michael had been unsuccessful, but that she began to fear that
				there must be some unpleasant reason for the difficulties thrown in the way of
				obtaining the information she had sought. It required some courage to utter this;
				but when it wasdone, Mary was surprised to perceive that its effect, both upon the
				mother and son was very trifling. Having candidly stated her fears, she remained
				silent, the eyes of both being fixed upon her with a sort of quiet hopelessness that
				was perhaps more painful to contemplate than more vehement demonstrations of
				grief.
"Our thanks are not the less due to you, ma'am," said the widow gently, "and don't
				vex your kind heart by thinking that we are disappointed. Edward and I guessed true
				from almost the first; that is, from when he was taken off without bidding us
				good-bye. Sir Matthew is known better by his mill people, ma'am, than by the great
				gentry that turns their eyes away from labour and sorrow, to revel and grow fat upon
				our graves. You would never be like to hear the truth from them, and I am told that
				even now, the country round rings with praises of Sir Matthew's goodness to Michael.
				'Tis bitter to hear it. But it is God's will our portion should be bitter here. He
				has power to make it up to us hereafter, and it is there we must fix our hope."
 "Most sure and most blessed is that hope!" replied Mary, fervently, "yet it should
				never check our efforts to put to profit the means of happiness he has granted to us
				here. I have now told you the very worst, Mrs. Armstrong, for I have told you not
				only all I know but all I fear — nor will I again pledge myself to do more than I am
				quite sure it is in my power to perform. I think you will believe, without my
				talking about it, that I shall not give up the search I have undertaken. But till
				some new light reaches us, we should but waste our time, and wear our spirits by
				speaking on the subject. Let us rather think and speak of the welfare of the dear
				boy that is left you; this will be no hindrance to our restoring his brother, if it
				be God's will that we  should have the power. Tell me, Edward, how did
				you get on at school to-day?" 
"Every body was kind to me," answered the boy.
"That's well, dear boy, and every body will be kind to you. He looks nicely in his
				new clothes, does he not, Mrs. Armstrong?"
"He does indeed, ma'am! and I could almost fancy that he looked better in health
				already, for having left the mill," replied the widow.
"And I feel better," said Edward, looking at his mother with his soft thoughtful
				eyes, "and I don't think that it would be impossible for me to grow well again."
"My boy! my boy!" cried the poor cripple, raising herself in her bed, and throwing
				her arms around him. "Should I dare to complain of any thing if that were possible!
				But oh! Teddy! wouldn't he have given one of his little hands to see it?"
This appeal, which in truth only echoed the thoughts of his own heart, overthrew all
				the courage of Edward, and his tears again flowed as fast as those of his poor
				mother; a renewal of weakness of which they might both have been still more ashamed
				than they were, had they not perceived that neither Miss Brotherton nor her old
				friend had dry eyes.
Mary, however, was too wise to let this last.
"This dear boy," said she, "has said that which ought to give us all courage. I can
				hardly tell you the delightful feeling which the hope of his restoration to health
				would give me. It would repay me a thousand fold for all the pain I have suffered.
				Let us fix our thoughts on this hope, and trust me it shall be realized, if medical
				skill and kind treatment can do it."
It was with this assurance she left them, and if any earthly promise could have
				healed the anguish of the mother's heart, it would have been this. But her two
				children were so twined and twisted together in her thoughts, that meditating upon
				her hopes for Edward inevitably brought her terrors for Michael before her, and it
				was but with a fitful sort of satisfaction that the boy dwelt upon his anticipations
				of being useful to her, or that she listened to him.
Two days after this, while Miss Brotherton and Mrs. Tremlett were pursuing their
				usual morning occupations in the boudoir, a servant announced that a lady and
				gentleman were in the drawing-room.
Had the announcement been of a gentleman alone, Mary's thoughts would have instantly
				suggested Mr. Bell, for they had been fixed upon him, and the hope of his coming,
				through both the preceding days. But the mention of the lady puzzled her.
				Nevertheless the gentleman was Mr. Bell, and no other, and the frank and simple
				kindness with which he said, as he led the lady forward to meet her, "Miss
				Brotherton! I wanted my wife to know you too," rendered the introduction as
				agreeable as it was unexpected.
 "If you and I, my dear young lady," said he, "take to consulting together concerning
				what we may hope, and what we may do in aid of the suffering people by whom we are
				surrounded, we shall do well to  take this good little woman into the
				committee, for she has probably more practical knowledge of the subject we were
				discussing when last we met, than any other lady you could meet with." 
Equally cordial and sincere was the welcome Mary gave to her new friends; and if
				sympathy of feeling, and a community of interest, on a subject of deep importance to
				them all, could have sufficed to make them happy, the long morning they passed
				together would have been one of great enjoyment; but they were all too much in
				earnest to be called happy while dwelling upon the frightful subject to which their
				thoughts were turned. The longer Mary listened to those whose lives were past in
				struggling to assuage the misery around them, and in battling with the horrid
				principles which produced it, the more deeply did she feel that she, too, was called
				upon to labour in the same thorny vineyard. Yet terrible as were the subjects they
				discussed, and sad as was the conviction that no power less mighty than that of the
				law could redress the evils they deplored, there was still something inexpressibly
				soothing to her feelings, in finding herself thus in intimate relation with persons
				who comprehended and shared in the sentiments which had become so essentially a part
				of herself. Though her conscience had told her, from the first moment her attention
				had been called to the subject, that it was her duty not to turn away from it, she
				had hitherto met little but opposition from those around her, and though steadfast
				and firm in purpose, she had often felt heavy in spirit from knowing herself to be
				alone, when she so much wanted assistance and support. This oppressive loneliness
				she could never suffer from again, as long as Mr. Bell and his excellent wife were
				within her reach, and fervently did she bless the courage which had led her to their
				dwelling. Tidings of poor Michael, however, there were none. Mr. Bell had sought
				information concerning him wherever he thought it possible to obtain them, but he
				had learnt nothing. Nevertheless he declared himself by no means satisfied that the
				boy might not be at some one of the Bastille-like establishments to which he had
				applied. "I know them, and they know me too well," he said, "for me to place
				implicit confidence in any answer they may be pleased to make, to any question I may
				venture to ask. If I knew where to find a trust-worthy stranger, who could not by
				possibility be recognised by any one as a friend of mine, I still think the chances
				would be greatly in favour of our finding the boy at some of the noted apprenticing
				establishments which I have named. But, in truth, I know not where to look for such
				a person."
"Am I not such a one?" cried Mary, eagerly. "Hardly a creature in the world, beyond
				the town of Ashleigh and its neighbourhood, knows me personally, and in all such
				places as those you have named, the Emperor of all the Russias would not be less
				likely to be recognised."
"But how, my dear young lady, could you represent yourself with any face of
				probability as interested in the inquiries you would have to make?" demanded Mr.
				Bell.
 "Methinks, Mr. Bell," replied Mary, colouring with her own enthusiasm, 
				— "methinks I could carry through an enterprise which had the recovery of little
				Michael for its object, with a degree of diplomatic skill that would surprise you.
				It should not be by downright and direct inquiry that I should proceed. Where such
				inquiry would be likely to excite suspicion, I would only contrive to insinuate
				myself and my eyes, and would ask no questions save what they should answer." 
"Many strangers, travelling, desire to see the factories, certainly," replied Mr.
				Bell, musingly. "But you are so young to undertake a wandering expedition. And then,
				how could you be accompanied? Your servants would unquestionably announce you every
				where."
"I am older, I think, than you suppose," replied Mary; "and if I undertake this, I
				will be accompanied by Mrs. Tremlett, with whom I have no reserves, and by no one
				else."
"You cannot travel without attendants, Miss Brotherton?" said the clergyman, looking
				at her kindly, but as if doubting that she was quite in earnest.
"Do not either of you judge me harshly," replied the heiress, with great earnestness;
				"do not set me down in your judgments as a hot-headed girl, indifferent to the
				opinions of society, and anxious only to follow the whim of the moment. Did I belong
				to any one, I think I should willingly yield to their guidance. But I am alone in
				the world; I have no responsibilities but to God and my own conscience, and the only
				way I know of, by which I can make this desolate sort of freedom endurable, is by
				fearlessly, and without respect to any prejudices or opinions whatever, employing my
				preposterous wealth in assisting the miserable race from whose labours it has been
				extracted. If you can aid me in doing this, you will do me good; but you will do me
				none, Mr. Bell, by pointing out to me the etiquettes by which the movements of other
				young ladies are regulated. I cannot think that I have any right to a place among
				them; and I therefore feel that to check any possible usefulness by a constant
				reference to the usages of persons with whom I have little or nothing in common,
				would be putting on very heavy harness, neither effective for use, nor for ornament.
				But 'something too much of this.' I must not talk of myself," she added, cheerfully.
				"Let us examine the possibility of my setting off with Mrs. Tremlett on a little
				home tour, without announcing the important event to the neighbourhood, or taking
				any servants with me to enact the part of Fame behind my chariot."
"By what conveyance would you propose to travel, Miss Brotherton?" inquired Mr. Bell,
				still looking, as an American would say, "as if he could not realize the
				scheme."
 Mary meditated for a moment, and then replied — "In the first instance, if you and
				Mrs. Bell will permit it, we shall go to your house in the same manner as before,
				only carrying with us a small travelling-trunk or so, such as would be necessary if
				we were going to pass a week with you. On the following morning we would set off by
				the — coach, in which you will secure places for us. At — we will order dinner and
				beds, like any other travellers, and inquire of  the waiter what will
				be the best way of getting a sight of the factories." 
"And he will tell you that such and such factories — naming precisely those in which
				there would not be the slightest chance of finding the boy — may be seen by
				application made to Mr. So-and-so," said Mr. Bell.
Mary coloured, and seemed about to answer him; but, either from consciousness that
				she had nothing very satisfactory to reply, or because she had some notion in her
				head not sufficiently digested to communicate, she changed her purpose, and instead
				of combating an objection which seemed almost fatal, drew from her pocket a set of
				little ivory tablets, on which she had written the names of all the establishments
				within a distance of twenty miles, notorious for taking apprentices, and of
				retaining them by means that converted the scene of their labour into a most strict
				and wretched prison-house. She read their names aloud. "These, I think, were all you
				mentioned to me?" said she. "I think they were," replied Mr. Bell. "But to these,
				believe me, you will get no admission as a visiter."
"Will you admit me as a visiter, if I come to you the day after tomorrow,
				Mrs. Bell?" said the heiress, playfully, and apparently wishing to wave any further
				discussion of her projects.
"Most joyfully!" was the kind and hospitable reply.
"Then, for the rest we must trust to chance. And now, if you will let me, I will show
				you my pretty garden," said Miss Brotherton, rising, and taking from a chair by the
				open window the ever-ready shawl and parasol, which made her lawns and shrubberies
				essentially a part of her dwelling-place. "Of all the fine things I possess, I
				believe I am only truly thankful for this," she continued, "I hardly know how I
				should pass my life if I had not a garden."
The garden was indeed one that spoke of its owner's love, by a multitude of enjoyable
				nooks that seemed all courting her approach, and by that perfection of elegant
				neatness which is never found in an equal degree where the mistress is indifferent
				respecting it. To her new friends' praises of all this she listened with pleasure,
				and sketched many pleasant plans for future meetings, when they should not, as they
				declared unavoidable now, remain only while their horse was resting. But Mary said
				not a word more on the subject of her purposed expedition till the very moment of
				their departure, and then it was only to remind them that they would see her come
				with her friend to claim their promised hospitality on the next day but one. This
				was received with renewed promises of a joyful welcome, and so they parted.
The next day was a busy one for Mary. In the first place she was closeted for at
				least two hours after breakfast with Mrs. Tremlett, and, whatever might be the
				subject of their conversation, it appeared to end satisfactorily, for when it was
				over Mary embraced her old friend very cordially, saying, "I feel more grateful,
				much more grateful, than I have words to express, nurse Tremlett, and never shall I
				forget your kindness to me!"
 After this they drove to the entrance of Hoxley-lane, and walked 
				thence to pay a farewell visit to Mrs. Armstrong; and here it was evident that,
				however wild the projects might be which the heiress had conceived, she knew how to
				be discreetly silent concerning them, for after bestowing upon the widow a gratuity
				sufficient to supply all her wants for a longer time than she purposed to be absent,
				she took leave of her, saying, "You will not see me again Mrs. Armstrong for a week
				or more, I am engaged to go from home for that time; but I shall take care that
				Edward shall receive as much attention at the school as if I were at home. Be sure
				also, that my absence will not make me the less mindful of Michael. Neither at home
				or abroad shall I cease to employ every means in my power to obtain intelligence
				concerning him." 
To Edward, whom she visited at the school, she gave the same assurance, adding an
				earnest injunction that he should keep in mind the necessity of exerting himself,
				both for the industrious prosecution of his studies, and the not less important
				regulation of his mind on the subject of his brother's absence, the welfare of his
				mother greatly depending upon both. Weakness of every kind seemed to vanish before
				the powerful stimulant thus offered, and she left her little protégé comforted and
				invigorated by the belief that he had a great duty to perform, and that his mother
				was the object of it.
The preparations for her own and her friends' convenience during the journey were
				very simple, but they puzzled her maid considerably. First, it was so very odd that
				she should be going out upon a visit and take absolutely no dinner dresses at all
				with her; and secondly, it was, if possible, odder still, that she should not take
				her. But Mary listened to all the hints and innuendoes to which these feelings gave
				rise with a sort of gentle indifference, which was doubtless very provoking, till at
				length she was induced to damp the curiosity, which she feared might prove
				inconveniently active during her absence, by saying, "I am going to visit the family
				of a clergyman, Morgan, and, as much dress will not be necessary, I shall not want
				you."
This was perfectly satisfactory. "A clergyman's family, where much dress would not be
				necessary, was where the lady's maid never did nor never could want to go."
Nothing could have been more judicious than these explanatory words. They accorded
				perfectly with the report of the servants who attended the carriage, and so
				completely satisfied the household, that, though it was the first absence of so long
				duration that she had made from her home since she became mistress of it, it
				fortunately led to no gossipings whatever.
We must not pause to describe the pleasant sociable evening passed by our travellers
				at the house of Mr. Bell, nor even relate all that was said in the course of it,
				concerning the expedition they were about to undertake. Every instruction, every
				hint which Mr. Bell believed might be useful, he gave clearly and succinctly, and
				not a word of it was lost upon Mary.

</div></body></text></TEI>