<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="1">
 CHAPTER I. 
DESCRIPTION OF DOWLING LODGE AND ITS APPURTENANCES — OF ITS MASTER — OF ITS MISTRESS
				— AND ALL THE MASTERS AND MISSES DOWLING — A LARGE DINNER-PARTY — A HOT
				DRAWING-ROOM, AND THE WAY TO ESCAPE FROM IT.
No traveller can ride or drive within sight of Dowling Lodge, without being tempted
				to inquire, "Whose house is that?"
It forms, indeed, a very striking object on the right of the London road, as the hill
				rises gradually, and overlooks the town of Ashleigh, one of the busiest in
				Lancashire, to the left; for although the trees about the mansion are not yet of
				sufficient growth to make it picturesque, its lofty portico, well-proportioned
				wings, and commanding site, render it an ornament to the neighbourhood for miles
				round.
 Those who are admitted to a nearer view of the house (and, for the convenience of
				the public, every Wednesday is set apart for its being shown), will find still more
				to admire, than such as see it only from a distance. It has its park and its pinery;
				conservatories, which cause the mercury in the thermometer, when paraded through
				them, to run up to the cocoa-ripening heat of the tropics, and ice-houses that would
				bring it down again to the temperature of Bhering's Straits. It has three
				drawing-rooms, two dining-rooms, a great library, all full of new books; as many
				bedrooms, dressing-rooms, and boudoirs, as a great man's house ought to have, and a
				study besides — Sir Matthew Dowling's own private study. This delightful little
				apartment is small, not more than twelve feet square; but nothing can be more
				agreeable and convenient. It opens by one door from the great hall of entrance, and
				by another communicates  ] through a long stone-passage with the offices
				of the mansion; enabling the knight to receive, without interruption, not only his
				overlookers (Sir Matthew being the proprietor of many cotton-mills), but his
				coachman, gardener, bailiff, and whomever else he might wish to transact business
				with. 
Of the fitting up of this princely mansion, it is only necessary to say, that it is
				done in a spirit of emulative imitation, which renders it fully equal, in this
				respect, to the most finished private dwellings in Europe. The furniture is
				uniformly rich throughout: the picture-frames in the best style of art; Saxony
				carpets in the drawing-rooms, Turkey ditto in the dining-rooms, Brussels in the
				bedrooms, and indeed not a single inch of Kidderminster any where, except in the
				garrets.
I will not attempt to state the amount of Sir Matthew Dowling's wealth; Cocker
				himself would have found it a laborious task to make the calculation; and it is
				sufficient for the gratification of all reasonable curiosity to say, that throughout
				the whole line of that Golconda country, which, being the busiest of the
				manufacturing districts, is probably the richest in the world, there was not any one
				who could vie in wealth with him. In a word, he shone amidst his rich neighbours
				like a golden sun, surrounded by silver moons.
But Sir Matthew was a superior man in all ways. He was six feet two inches in height,
				and stout in proportion, with hands and feet that might have sufficed a giant. His
				intellectual gifts were also of no ordinary character. He liked well enough,
				perhaps, to stand pre-eminent in the commercial estimation of his neighbours; but so
				enlightened was his spirit, that he liked better still to shine before their eyes as
				a man of taste, a literary and accomplished gentleman, a speaker of modern
				languages. a critical French scholar, a playful votary of the muses himself, and a
				universal Mecænas to all who wielded a pen in their service. But beyond all else,
				Sir Matthew valued himself upon his reputation for the lighter graces of wit and
				gallantry: he sought to make himself into something of a delightful mixture between
				Killigrew and the Count de Gramont; and there was no receptacle of wit from Joe
				Miller downwards, no gallant memoirs in an intelligible tongue, that he did not
				study with assiduity and perseverance of the highest order.
He was often heard to declare, that he loved nothing so well as the promotion of
				mirth and light-heartedness among his fellow-creatures; but tragedy and comedy often
				walk through the world hand in hand together, and their alliance may be traced
				without difficulty in the career of Sir Matthew Dowling.
The wife of this prosperous gentleman had also many admirable qualities. She was not
				one of the idle gossipers who delight in chattering about their own concerns to
				every one who will listen; she despised such weakness, and had never been heard to
				hint at her own parentage, or early history, to any one; rightly considering, that
				when such matters are unceasingly discussed, they may be exceedingly likely to
				prevent people's minding their own business, while devoting an undue share of
				attention to that of others.

Nevertheless, with nice and laudable discrimination, she took care that her
				neighbours should be well acquainted with all such facts respecting her as it
				concerned them to know. There was hardly an individual within ten miles who was not
				aware that Lady Dowling kept two carriages, six horses, one coachman, one postilion,
				five gardeners, two grooms, three footmen, one butler, and a page — not to mention
				two nurses, four nursery-maids, and more ladies'-maids, housemaids, cookmaids,
				kitchen-maids, laundry-maids, stillroom maids, dairy-maids, and the like, than any
				other lady in the county. Neither could any be ignorant that, except in the article
				of jewels, her wardrobe might vie with that of any duchess in the land, and all
				might see, moreover, that she was comely still, both in form and feature. She
				conversed with great ability on all subjects connected with fashionable life; and
				though some few carping critics thought that she was too apt to diversify the
				monotony of the English language, by indulging in some remarkable variations from
				its ordinary laws, nobody, or scarcely any body, attempted to deny that she was on
				the whole a very charming woman. Such was the testimony of her general acquaintance;
				those who knew her better were aware that her moral qualities outshone, as they
				always ought to do, all her external graces. She was a faithful and exceedingly fond
				wife, and doted upon all her children; no woman could more heartily detest every
				species of light flirting airs in females, and, being deeply sensible of the
				dangerous attractions of youth and beauty in her own sex, she studiously avoided
				bringing those of her family who might suffer thereby from coming in contact with
				any thing of the kind; so that the female portion of her establishment consisted of
				the ugliest set of neat and carefully dressed middle-aged women that ever were found
				assembled together.
The knight and his excellent lady were blessed with a very numerous progeny,
				certainly not less than eighteen or twenty; but, as they were rarely all at home
				together, it was at no time easy to count them.
Augustus, the eldest of the family, was a prodigiously fine young man, just returned
				from college. He had not indeed thought it necessary to take a degree, nor did Sir
				Matthew or her ladyship particularly wish it; both of them being of opinion that
				little distinction could be gained by the assumption of a title which was never used
				in society, and to which he conceived every Englishman to be eligible who could just
				read and write a little. But as, on all points that concerned the interest of his
				eldest son, Sir Matthew was too deeply interested to run any risk of blundering: he
				did not give his consent for the return of Augustus, without his having gone through
				this idle academic ceremony, till he had paid a visit to the rector of his parish,
				to elicit from him some information on the subject.
"May I ask, sir," said Sir Matthew abruptly, "what degree you took at the
				university?"
 Mr. Hetherington was a new incumbent, and might, perhaps, have been a little
				affronted at a question which, by the blunt manner of it, seemed almost to insinuate
				a doubt whether he had taken any  degree at all; but, though a good man,
				and an excellent clergyman to boot, he had a strong taste for humour, and had
				already discovered that his neighbour at the great house was rich in more ways than
				one. It was, therefore, with the utmost civility that he answered, "My degree, Sir
				Matthew, was that of Master of Arts." 
"And pray, sir, does it give you any title by which you can be distinguished as in
				any way a superior sort of person in society?"
"I am afraid not, Sir Matthew," was the reply.
"I thank you, sir, for your sincerity," rejoined the knight. "It was important that I
				should ascertain the truth on this point. — You are, then, never addressed in
				company as Mr. Master of Arts, or any thing of that kind?"
"I have never yet, Sir Matthew, met with any one of sufficient politeness to do me
				that honour," replied Mr. Hetherington gravely.
"And I suppose you have lived in respectable society?"
"Very decent society — very decent, Sir Matthew," replied Hetherington, whose mother
				was the daughter of a distinguished nobleman.
"Good morning, sir; I shall be happy to see you at Dowling Lodge — that is to say,
				sir, if your gown does not lead you to object to elegant amusements. I love science,
				Mr. Hetherington, and am indeed devoted to every thing intellectual; but,
				notwithstanding this, I am a worshipper at the shrine of grace and wit, and could
				not exist among people who did not relish the lighter embellishments of
				society."
"I shall be happy, Sir Matthew, to share in your gayer hours, provided I am fortunate
				enough to find that you have no objection to profit by my graver ones," replied the
				clergyman.
Sir Matthew returned from this visit very well pleased with the new rector. Mr.
				Augustus was immediately comforted by a letter, informing him that he might call in
				his accounts, and prepare to leave the university as soon as he pleased; and, within
				ten days after receiving it, the amiable young man was restored to the bosom of his
				family.
 Next to this primal hope of the Dowling race, came three young ladies, between the
				ages of seventeen and twenty-one; the two eldest of them being as like as two peas,
				and the third like nothing on earth but herself. Then followed several young
				gentlemen, who were placed at different fashionable schools; for Sir Matthew, who
				was a man of very enlarged mind, declared it to be his opinion and his principle,
				that the patronage of such a fortune as his should be extended as widely as
				possible. After these young gentlemen came, one after the other, with the interval
				of about eleven months between them, ever so many little girls, who, for the
				present, were all educated at home, having a particularly clever French governess.
				All the rest were nice little children of different degrees of babyhood; the dear
				little girls being remarkable for their long plaited hair, short frocks, and
				furbelowed trousers, and the dear little boys for the manly bustle with which they
				wore their Scotch bonnets and plaided tunics, which, considering that neither Sir
				Matthew nor his  lady had ever been in Scotland in their lives, showed
				great enlargement of national feeling. Altogether, it was considered to be the
				finest family ever seen. 
It happened upon a broiling day about the middle of July, during one of the hottest
				summers England had ever known, that Sir Matthew and Lady Dowling "entertained a
				party of distinguished fashionables" at dinner.
It may have been remarked by those who study such subjects, that there is a
				difference between a dinner-party given at such a grand mansion as that of Sir
				Matthew Dowling, and one at a dwelling of perhaps not a quarter the size, where the
				owners are of a different order of the aristocracy, having a longer pedigree, and a
				shorter purse. At both, probably, the banquet will be a costly one, yet the one
				entertainment will come off in a manner as unlike as possible to the other.
				There is something in the usual way of wearing stiff new-made grandeur, not far
				unlike that of wearing stiff new-made clothes. Neither the one nor the other sit
				easily.
At this splendid dinner at Dowling Lodge, the company consisted of a selection from
				the neighbouring families, made on the most legitimate principles of exclusiveness;
				no family being invited who did not drive four horses at the races. To this there
				were indeed two exceptions. The first was the Right Honourable Lady Clarissa
				Shrimpton; but this distinguished lady, though she drove only one pony instead of
				four horses, was considered by all the country round as the one thing needful to
				render a party completely elegant. She was, indeed, neither young, handsome, nor
				rich, but she was Lady Clarissa, and this was enough.
The other exception was to be found in the rotund person of Dr. Crockley, who having
				formerly been a celebrated quack, made a little fortune, and taken out a diploma,
				had lately married a beauty, and settled in the town of Ashleigh, where he was well
				pleased to pick up a few guinea fees, both as a public evidence of his being a real
				M.D., and as a private fund wherewith to indulge his still very tender passion, by
				buying finery for his pretty young wife.
This fat little gentleman was an especial favourite with Sir Matthew, chiefly on
				account of his jocund humour and ready laugh; and also, perhaps, because he had a
				pleasant way, peculiar to himself, of paying compliments in the bluntest and most
				unstudied manner possible.
 But, notwithstanding the presence of all these distinguished persons, the dinner
				moved on very slowly. Sir Matthew, indeed, was as brilliant as it was possible for
				any man to be under the circumstances, and Lady Clarissa, who did not scruple to
				declare that she was very partial to him, listened to all he said to her with as
				much attention at least as any lady could be expected to do, who was making one of
				sixteen at a dinner, where there were an equal number of dishes of hot meats reeking
				upon the table, and the thermometer standing at 87°. Dr. Crockley, too, laughed
				repeatedly; but his laugh was like a Lucifer match that fails, just kindling and  sputtering a little, but going out before it is able to communicate its
				light. 
The very sight of the servants as they panted round the table, was quite enough to
				smother and stifle all inclination for enjoyment — their shoes creaked — their faces
				shone — ice became water — the salad looked as if it were stewed — the cucumbers
				seemed to have fainted away — the prodigious turbot smelt fishy, and its attendant
				lobster-sauce glowed not with a deeper tint, than did my Lady Dowling's cheeks as
				her nose caught the unfragrant gale. In short, it was a great dinner in the
				dog-days, and no more need be said of it.
Great was the inward satisfaction of every guest, when at last Lady Dowling rose, and
				gave signal that the party was to be divided in half. The languid ladies welcomed
				the coolness of the marble hall as they passed through it, and the gentlemen gazed
				eagerly at the butler as he brought forward a fresh supply of claret, and a
				reinforcement of ice. But the enjoyment of neither party lasted long; for Lady
				Dowling was too grand and too solemn not to marshal all her company into her fine
				drawing-room, where they were all ceremoniously deposited on satin sofas, amidst
				swelling pillows that might have defied the frosts of January; while seven or eight
				hot-looking children were commanded to walk round the circle and kiss every
				body.
Nor did the gentlemen fare much better; for scarcely had the drawing-room door closed
				after the ladies, before the shining baldhead of Dr. Crockley stretched itself up
				nearly to a level with the long-backed Sir Matthew's breast-pin, whilst, with a very
				ominous sort of growl, making itself heard before his lips opened, he first
				preluded, and then uttered the following speech.
"I don't like it, Sir Matthew. — I don't like this business at the Weavers'
				Arms."
"What business, Doctor?" replied his friend sharply.
"Why this meeting, Sir Matthew. I can't get the notion of a strike out of my head."
				Every chair was drawn towards the little doctor: nobody had heard a word of it.
				"Well, gentleman, perhaps I am mistaken — perhaps there has been no meeting,"
				resumed the friendly doctor. "God knows, I don't wish to spoil the enjoyment of this
				delightful hour; but at any rate, my good friends, it is as well for you to be on
				the look-out." Then lowering his voice, he muttered, as near to the ear of Sir
				Matthew as he could reach, "I know that your people are meeting, in doors and out of
				doors. But you are such a good, generous, kind-hearted creature, that I dare say we
				shall hear, before long, of your having done some d — d goodnatured thing or other,
				and that perhaps will set all right; who knows?"
 Sir Matthew gave an almost imperceptible nod, and pushed on the claret-jug; but the
				gaiety of the party had been effectually checked, and it was not long before the
				second richest man in company (Sir Matthew of course being the first) said, "I do
				think and  believe, Sir Matthew, that my lady's coffee would do more to
				cool us than your wine." The opinion was not opposed, and, much earlier than usual,
				the gentlemen rose, and followed the ladies. 
But this movement did not appear greatly to increase the enjoyment of either party.
				It was near nine o'clock, but the heat continued to be most oppressive, and the
				company being for the most part massive in all ways, their union produced more
				additional caloric than gaiety. The whole process seemed to have the power of
				turning the hours into molten lead as they passed, a portion of which appeared to
				drop, and weigh heavily on each individual head. In vain Sir Matthew made the
				circuit of the company, pausing in front either of the richest or handsomest ladies,
				as duty or inclination preponderated; in vain he uttered his newest puns and
				freshest bon-mots — not one of them had strength to laugh, beyond a little feeble
				"he, he!" and even that was evidently a painful effort.
Things were in this state, when Lady Clarissa Shrimpton suddenly rose from the silken
				couch amidst whose pillows she was imbedded, and, without explaining her intentions
				to my Lady Dowling, or any one else, darted through the open French-window, and out
				upon the well-shaven lawn.
 Had it been possible that any one in the room could have been ignorant of the rank
				of Lady Clarissa, he must from that moment have felt an innate conviction that she
				was somebody; for nobody that was not somebody could have ventured upon so daring an
				escapade from such a solemn presence-chamber. The effect it produced was electric.
				Sir Matthew darted across the room with the eagerness of a man of gallantry and
				gaiety. He piqued himself upon being, of all the great men in the neighbourhood, the
				one upon whom Lady Clarissa bestowed the most attention. His estimate of the outward
				advantages of his extensive person was indeed not a low one; and, despite all his
				lady could do to crush such an odious idea, he was conscious that he was devoted to
				the fair sex, and flattered himself that the fair sex was not ungrateful. In fact,
				his general manner to ladies had a good deal of what in female slang is called
					swaining ; but to Lady Clarissa it was certainly something more. Had
				she been simply Miss Shrimpton, it is probable that, notwithstanding her great
				mental advantages, she would never have been exposed to the danger of this
				fascinating distinction, for she was nearly forty years old, had a sharp nose, and
				was deplorably thin. But Sir Matthew was not a man to be insensible to the charm of
				getting talked of in the neighbourhood about his devotion to Lady Clarissa any body,
				even had she been a skeleton with a Gorgon's head. There was, however, independently
				of her bewitching title, a charm in her conversation and character, to which the
				knight was peculiarly sensible. Her ladyship was celebrated for her devotion both to
				literature and art; and she permitted all the world to know, for indeed she never
				ceased to repeat it, that talent of every kind was to her an object of idolatry. Now
				Sir Matthew knew that he was full of talent — poetical  talent, pictorial
				talent, epigrammatic talent, every kind of talent, and it was certainly very
				delightful to be appreciated by such a superior creature as Lady Clarissa. So
				strongly indeed did this intellectual sympathy between them occasionally manifest
				itself, that not even the sharp elbows and red-tipped nose of the noble lady, who,
				to borrow the phrase of an inimitable describer, was in every sense "
					preter-blue perfect ," could render Lady Dowling quite easy respecting
				the nature of the friendship. Nor was it without something like a pang that she
				marked the sudden alacrity of movement with which Sir Matthew now strode across the
				floor to accompany Lady Clarissa in the extraordinary frolic which led her, in white
				satin shoes and a gauze dress, to exchange the drawing-room for the garden, at nine
				o'clock in the evening. 
But upon this occasion, as upon many others, Lady Dowling found consolation in the
				well-known fact, that Lady Clarissa rarely moved a step without being obsequiously
				attended by her humble companion, Miss Mogg. This young lady had been selected to
				fill her present enviable situation, principally from her appearance, though she was
				indeed by no means void of many other qualifications admirably suited to it. But in
				appearance she was a striking contrast to her tall and slender patroness; and,
				notwithstanding Lady Clarissa's mental superiority, she was not insensible to the
				advantage of having a foil that should set off the charms upon which she
				particularly prided herself. Lady Clarissa had a thin, narrow foot, and an ancle
				that resembled nothing so much as the leg of a Robin red-breast; the person of Miss
				Mogg was supported on shafts that told her Saxon origin, and feet that need not have
				shrunk from sustaining an ox. Lady Clarissa's slender waist might have been
				encircled by a ring of six inches diameter; a cestus of nearly double the span had
				often gone nigh to suffocate her plump companion. The throat of Lady Clarissa had
				not only all the flexile length of the swan's, but might even be said to resemble
				that of the stork in its proportions; while the head of Miss Mogg was separated from
				her shoulders by an interval so trifling, as hardly to be perceptible at all. The
				hair of her ladyship, though not very abundant, was as black as ink, and its
				straight nature enabled her to lay it in classic bands upon her forehead, furnishing
				a graceful foundation for the wreath of oak leaves with which, in judicious
				imitation of Domenichino's exquisite head of Sappho, she usually adorned herself
				when in full dress: while Miss Mogg, on the contrary, had a bushy abundance of
				flaxen curls, which gave a round fussy sort of contour to her face, that could not
				fail of setting off to advantage the severer outline of the noble lady; and, in a
				word, the contrast was altogether perfect.
 To the great satisfaction of Lady Dowling, this round little personage arose, as
				usual, when her principal rose, and waddled to the window after her. Many people are
				apt to overlook and forget companions, and the poor toady is as much used to be trod
				upon as the despised reptile whose name she bears. But if the world in 
				general be found guilty of this scorn towards what is too lowly to turn, and scorn
				again, more especially was our knight liable to the weakness. 
As he now hastened to offer his hand to Lady Clarissa in order to assist her in
				stepping over the window-sill, he very nearly overturned Miss Mogg as he passed her;
				but heeding neither the resistance her plump person offered to his passing elbow,
				nor yet the timid "oh!" which spoke her alarm, he hurried onward, and, manfully
				seizing the hand whose touch was honor, walked out side by side with the titled lady
				upon the lawn.
</div></body></text></TEI>