<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
 CHAPTER XIII. 
DISAGREEABLE MEDITATIONS — A CONFIDENTIAL INTERVIEW WITH A FAITHFUL SERVANT — ANOTHER
				INTERVIEW, NOT QUITE SO CONFIDENTIAL WITH A DAUGHTER — MARTHA AND MICHAEL TAKE A
				PLEASANT WALK TOGETHER TO VISIT THE WIDOW ARMSTRONG — A CONSULTATION.

				It will be easily believed that Sir Matthew rode back to Dowling
				Lodge not in the very sweetest humour in the world. "Bring up a child in the way he
				should go," is an admirable proverb, and certain it is that when that "way" is
				agreeable, he does very rarely "depart from the same." Thus it happens that the
				young gentlemen and ladies, sons and daughters of the millocrats, who pile thousands
				upon thousands, and acres upon acres, by the secret mysteries of their wonderful
				compound of human and divine machinery, do rarely or never take their way into the
				dwellings that shelter and that hide the sufferings of their operatives. Nothing is
				so distasteful to a truly elegant mill-owner as  any allusion, domestic
				or foreign, gossiping or professional, religious or political, to his factory, or
				his factory people; and the gay fatherly phrase, "Don't talk of that, for God's
				sake, my dear! — it smells of the shop," has turned away many innocent eyes from
				contemplating that, which had they looked upon it, could hardly have endured so
				long. 
To know therefore that the wilful, whimsical, rich, and independent Mary Brotherton
				(while still too young to understand any thing whatever of the real nature of trade,
				and our glorious manufactures), — to know that she was beginning to thrust herself
				behind the scenes, and do Heaven knows what mischief among his devilish people,
				instead of minding her own business, and falling in love with his adorable son, was
				altogether too much to be borne with patience; and had it not been that the weather
				was so hot as to make him long for a draught of hock and iced water, a natural
				instinct would have made him turn aside from his park-gates, and pursue the by path
				which led to his factory, where, as he knew by experience, the sort of temper he was
				then in could find great relief, without any body but the overlookers being in the
				secret.
As it was, however, Sir Matthew Dowling reached his home; and the first thing he
				heard from the man who threw wide its portals was, that Mr. Parsons was waiting for
				him in his study.
"Bring me a biscuit, a bottle of Stein, and some iced water," said the knight in the
				accent of one not born to "enter the venerable presence of hunger, thirst, and
				cold," nor into that of heat or vexation either.
"What's the matter now, Parsons?" said he, throwing himself into a delicious
				arm-chair, and perceiving by one glance at the sour visage before him, that
				something or other had gone wrong. "The mill's not burnt down I suppose, is it?"
"And I'm not sure that would be the worst thing that could happen Sir Matthew, if it
				was," replied the confidential servant. "It is well insured you know, sir, and would
				bring in a famous sum, as sure as the bank, and that's more, I take it, than we can
				say of all our debts."
 "Who the devil has been gossiping with you about the debts? What business is that of
				yours, I should like to know? Mind your billy-rollers Mr. Parsons, and take care
				your hands keep up with your machinery, that's your work; — and I can tell you, if
				you don't know it already, that the success of the concern depends more upon that,
				than upon any other thing whatever. The building is paid for, and the glorious
				machinery is paid for — mind that, sir, and where's the interest of it to come from
				if you let the hands go to sleep over it? I tell you what, Mr. Parsons, an
				overlooker is not worth his salt if he does not continually keep it in his head,
				that the more the machinery is improved the faster must the brats move to follow it.
				And you may rely upon it that where this is remembered early and late, day hours and
				night hours, the concern will answer, and every manager of it, master or
				man, will live well. But, by the Lord Harry! where it is not, they are as sure to go
				the wrong side of the post, as you are to go to bed to-night.  It
				stands to reason, Parsons. If one man knows how to drive, and another doesn't, the
				one man's team will pay, and the other's won't; and I will be much obliged to any
				man who will tell me how I am to help being undersold in the market, if I don't
				contrive to make my machinery go as fast, and as long too, as the best of 'em.
				That's the business you are to attend to, Mr. Parsons, and I won't trouble you about
				any other." 
"All true, Sir Matthew, every word of it. And I can't but say, though I scorn to be a
				boaster, — I can't but say, that I think I have given you reason to trust me. I am
				noted for being able to keep the children awake, and going longer than any other man
				in the mill. There isn't an overlooker in Ashleigh that can equal me with the strap
				or the billy-roller either, when I chooses to make 'em tell."
"I know all that, my good fellow, and I value your services accordingly. But I have
				been devilishly put out this morning, and that makes me snappish; besides, I am
				quite sure you have got something disagreeable to tell, by your face. So out with
				it, man, and make an end of it."
"Make an end of it, Sir Matthew?" replied Parsons, repeating the last words of the
				sentence with marked emphasis, "by the Lord, sir, that is exactly what I'm come to
				beg you to do. You must make an end of your charity job, Sir Matthew, for it don't
				answer in any way: we have lost one of the nimblest set of fingers we had, that
				wanted nothing but the strap to keep 'em going for sixteen hours out of the
				four-and-twenty, and I wish you could just hear what gratitude you have gained in
				return for it. There is not a single day comes round that the rickety little
				Armstrong don't blubber over his work like a church spout. And I overheard him, the
				young villain, when he didn't think I was so near — I overheard him when the
				scavenger-girl, as was cleaning under the mules, looked up and asked, why for he
				cried, when his brother had got such good fortune — I heard him answer. And what do
				you think he said, Sir Matthew?"
"How the devil should I know?" replied the chafed capitalist. "Don't stand mumming
				there, but out with it."
"Neither more nor less than this, Sir Matthew: 'Don't talk of his good fortune, Bet,'
				says he, 'he's the most unhappiest boy in all the world,' says he."
"Pestilent little vermin!" exclaimed Sir Matthew through his closed teeth. "Infernal
				fool that I was to listen to that idiot woman! — and Crockley too, who ought to know
				better, has been badgering me exactly with the same execrable nonsense. Never again
				as long as I live will I be persuaded to try any other scheme with the people than
				what we have always acted upon. Brutes and beasts they are, and like brutes and
				beasts they should be treated; — and so they shall by me, as long as my head's above
				ground."
 "Well, sir, I can't but say I am glad you are come back to your right mind, as one
				may call it. Such romantical goings on can never answer in a factory, Sir Matthew.
				It an't the way to do business, and business is what we have got to do. And so, sir,
				I hope you will send  that scamp Mike back to the mill to-morrow
				morning, for they can't say no worse of it, let us pay him off as we will, than that
				he's the most unhappiest boy in all the world. And that's what they says already." 
"It won't do, Parsons. That boy must be got rid of. — What do you stare for, you ass?
				Do you think I am going to get hanged for him?"
"Oh! dear no, Sir Matthew — you know the value of your own life better than that, any
				how, — God forbid you should not. Only I did not overwell understand what you meant
				by getting rid of him."
"I must contrive to send him out of the way, at least out of this neighbourhood; and
				moreover with his own consent and his mother's too. That is what I meant, Mr.
				Parsons."
"You must know best, Sir Matthew. But it seems to me you are taking a deal of trouble
				about him. If you'll just let me have him back in the mill, I think I'll venture to
				say that he shall never get within reach of plaguing you any more — and I'd get a
				pennyworth out of him into the bargain."
"For a tolerably sharp fellow, Parsons, you're devilish dull about this business.
				Can't you guess that I should not be taking all the trouble you talk of, about such
				a beggar's brat as that, unless I had reasons for it. There's that lord's daughter
				that got me into the scrape, won't she be ferreting and ferreting till she finds out
				that the sweet little master has not found himself comfortable here? And ten times
				worse than her, — ay, a hundred fold, is that obstinate headstrong girl of old
				Brotherton's. My Lady Clarissa might be troublesome from mere folly, and might
				perhaps be stopped short in any mischief she was doing, by a few words from me. But
				not the old one himself could stop Mary Brotherton if she got a whim in her head.
				You should have seen her just now, Mr. Parsons, raving at me with her colour up and
				her eyes flashing, for all the world as if she had just escaped out of Bedlam, only
				because I cautioned her against going into Joe Drake's pigsty, — a pretty place
				wasn't it for a girl of her fortune to go visiting? But in she went, by heaven! and
				you may rely upon it, if such a girl as that, who cares for nothing, and nobody,
				once gets it into her head to go about among the factory people, she'll kick up more
				dust than we shall find it easy to lay again. I've been told already by one who I
				suspect wanted to put me on my guard, that this Mary Brotherton wished to have a
				little talk with Michael Armstrong. I can put two and two together as well as Miss
				Mary. She was at our cursed play last night, and I'll bet my life to a rotten egg
				that she wants to ask him what he cried for."
"Likely enough, sir," replied the overlooker with a grim smile. "I heard of the
				crying, I won't say that I didn't. You may guess, Sir Matthew that it was a good
				deal talked about among the servants — and then t'other of 'em blubbering away at
				the mill, must give a pretty notion, mustn't it, sir, of your goodness to 'em?"
"Say no more about it, it makes me mad!" exclaimed the knight. "One or both of 'em
				shall be sent to Deep Valley mill, Parsons, if I die for it!"

"There's none but 'prentices taken in at the mill in the deep hollow, Sir Matthew, if
				you mean that."
"Yes, sir, I do mean that," replied Sir Matthew with a very ominous frown, "and there
				Master Michael Armstrong shall go. 'prentice or no 'prentice, or I'll give him up my
				place, and take his."
"That's all, then Sir Matthew," said the overlooker, preparing to depart. "I com'd to
				put you up to the boys ingratitude, and have nothing further to say at present."
"You need not trouble yourself any more about that, Mr. Parsons. I will take care of
				him," replied the knight. Whereupon Mr. Parsons made a bow, and departed.
Sir Matthew Dowling had already taken one tumbler of hock-and-water. He now took a
				second, and then throwing himself back in his arm-chair, indulged for several
				minutes in very deep meditation. At the end of that time it seemed as if the good
				Rhine wine had done its office, for suddenly the knight's countenance became
				animated; the heavy gloom which had rested upon it disappeared, and springing to his
				feet he rang the bell with a sort of lively jerk which showed he had some project in
				hand that he greatly relished.
It was the lively Peggy who answered the summons; but though she entered almost out
				of breath from the eagerness with which she had traversed the passage which led from
				the kitchen to the study, and though she brought into immediate activity all the
					agaceries of which she was capable, a smiling nod was all she got in
				return, so eager did Sir Matthew appear to say, "Go to Miss Martha, Peggy, as fast
				as you can, and tell her to come here to me this very minute. Go, my dear, and make
				haste, there's a good girl."
Peggy was disappointed and angry, for she had a great deal to tell Sir Matthew about
				Michael Armstrong's ungratefulness, and all that the servants thought and said about
				it; but the command she had received was too peremptory to be trifled with, and
				though she very nearly slammed the study door in shutting it, she failed not to
				deliver her message, which was instantly obeyed with the most dutiful alacrity by
				Martha.
"Did you send Peggy for me, papa?" said she in entering.
"Yes, Martha dear, I did. How are you to-day, my dear girl? I have not seen you
				before this morning. Sit down, love, sit down; I want to talk to you, Martha, I have
				got something upon my mind that vexes me, and I am going to open my heart to you
				about it."
"Oh, my dear, dear papa!" returned Martha, "I should be so glad if I could be of any
				use to you!"
"You can, Martha — you can be of great use and comfort to me. In the first place you
				must be my father confessor, and let me confess my faults to you, and I hope you
				will give me absolution if you can; for I really am very uncomfortable."
"What can you mean, papa?"
 "Why, my dear, I mean that I have been foolish enough to put myself in a great pet,
				when I ought not to have done any such thing. It is always wrong to let temper get
				the better of one; but in this case it  was particularly so. You know
				the fuss that has been made about this little fellow that I have taken out of the
				factory — I do assure you, my dear girl, that I really intended to be a very kind
				friend to him. But I got so provoked at his crying upon the stage last night in that
				beautiful speech that was written for him, that I cuffed him soundly for it when he
				came off — and I am sadly afraid that I frightened the poor little fellow so
				violently that he will never feel comfortable, and at his ease with me again. You
				cannot think how this vexes me." 
"Oh! my dear papa, he will never remember it any more if you will please to forgive
				him." And Martha's heart bounded with joy as she spoke, to think how completely Miss
				Brotherton's opinion would be changed could she but hear her father speak thus
				amiably of what had passed.
"No, Martha, no; I cannot bear to see his frightened look. And besides, my dear, I
				shall never be sure of myself — you know how hasty I am! — I should live in
				perpetual terror lest any thing should tempt me to give him a cuff. There are other
				reasons too, my dear Martha, which induce me to think that I should be doing the
				little fellow and his family infinitely more service if I apprenticed him to some
				good trade, than he could ever gain by running about Dowling Lodge."
The excellent good sense of this observation struck Martha as very valuable, and she
				uttered the most cordial approbation of the wisdom and goodness from whence it
				proceeded.
"I am exceedingly glad you agree with me, my dear child," proceeded Sir Matthew, "for
				I have an idea that you could be very useful in making the arrangement. Do you
				happen to know where the little boy's mother lives, my dear Martha?"
"No, papa — but Michael could show me."
"Then you should have no objection to pay her a visit on this business, my dear?"
"Oh! dear no! I should like it so much!"
"Very well, my love — then you shall set out immediately if you will. Or stay — it
				would perhaps be better to get you the paper first that they will have to sign. You
				must remember to tell them, Martha, that I shall undertake to pay all the fees. It
				certainly is an excellent thing for a poor family like Armstrong's, to have a boy
				'prenticed to a good trade. I trust the mother will not refuse her consent from any
				selfish notion, that she may lose the boy's help thereby, it would be really very
				wicked. You may tell her, my dear, that I shall continue to send her down nice and
				nourishing food, and that little Michael shall be taught to write, and well
				instructed every way; so she may be quite easy about him, and he will be sure to
				send her a letter every now and then." The knight concluded with a smile of
				kindness, that perfectly enchanted his daughter. "Oh! my dear, dear papa!" she said,
				"how few people there are who know you as well as I do! Let me go and look for
				Michael now, papa, shall I? I should like to go down to his mother with him at once,
				and tell her of your great goodness. The papers could be sent afterwards, you
				know."
 "Very well, dear, trot away then; — get your bonnet and parasol,  find
				your little squire, and then come back here to me to receive my last instructions." 
As soon as the happy-looking Martha had left the room the bell was again rung, and on
				this occasion answered by a footman, — the lively Peggy choosing to turn herself
				another way as soon as she heard it.
"Is Parsons gone?" demanded Sir Matthew of the servant.
"No, Sir Matthew, he is in the servants' hall," was the reply.
"Desire him to step here directly."
Though the overlooker was enjoying some very comfortable refreshment, he promptly
				obeyed the summons, and as soon as he had again entered the study, and shut the door
				behind him, his master said, "Do you know, Parsons, whether the woman Armstrong can
				read?"
"Yes, sir, I know she can — and that's one reason why she is so outdacious about the
				workhouse and every thing. There's nothing on earth does so much mischief among the
				mill people as making scholards of 'em," said the man.
"I know that well enough, who doesn't? But you may go now, I only wanted to ask you
				that one question," replied the master.
Once more alone, the knight again took to meditation. Profound as was the state of
				ignorance respecting all things beyond their own wretched dwellings in which the
				operatives at that time were kept, Sir Matthew had some misgivings as to the
				possibility that the name and fame of Deep Valley mill, might have reached even
				Hoxley-lane. If it had, the sending to a woman who could read, indentures by which
				her child should become bound to that establishment till the age of twenty-one, was
				running a risk of more opposition than he wished to encounter. But he had a ready
				wit, and seldom remained long at a loss how to manage any business on which his mind
				had fixed itself. When Martha returned, therefore, he was quite ready with his last
				instructions.
"Have you found the little boy, my dear?" said he mildly.
"Yes, papa, he is waiting for me in the hall. Foolish little fellow! I believe he
				fears that you are very angry with him, and he looked so much alarmed that I would
				not bring him in."
"Poor child! But you were quite right, my dear Martha. It is better not to harass him
				in any way. Now then, Martha, what you have got to do is this: Explain to the poor
				woman that it is my wish to keep my promise of providing for her boy; but that I am
				come to the persuasion that the apprenticing him to some respectable business will
				be better than letting him run about the place here learning nothing. You may talk
				to the little boy, you know; he is a sharp child, and I have no doubt will come to
				the same conclusion himself, if you state the thing to him properly."
"I have no doubt of it, papa," answered the innocent Martha; "I will do my very best
				to make him understand it. And what trade shall I tell Mrs. Armstrong you have
				chosen for him?"
"Stocking weaving, my dear, I really don't know a better; and we may be able to help
				him in that if he behaves well as he goes on."
"Well then, papa, now I may go?"

"Yes, my dear, now you may go — and you may just tell the woman, Martha, that if she
				approves the plan, I will call upon her myself some day with the papers. A pleasant
				walk to you! Good bye."

It was a very pleasant walk, for Martha was delighted with her companion. She opened
				to him kindly and clearly the plan for his being put apprentice to a respectable
				trade, and pointed out to his young but quick capacity the advantage this would give
				him in after life, and the power he might hope to possess, if he behaved well, of
				providing for his mother and brother.
"'Tis that what I should like best of all things," said Michael. "Because, please
				ma'am, I know I must help 'em, as they beant neither of 'em so strong as I be."
"You are a good boy, Michael, for thinking of them so much as you do. That is the
				reason I take notice of you, and love you."
The little fellow nestled closer to her side, as they walked on, and raising the hand
				that held his, he laid it upon his shoulder, and pressed his cheek upon it with very
				endearing fondness.
"What an affectionate little heart it is!" thought Martha, "and how very happy I
				shall be if I can help to get this business settled for him!"
Of course Miss Martha Dowling had never been in Hoxley-lane before; and
				notwithstanding her having so agreeable a companion, she speedily became aware that
				the region was as unpleasant as it was new.
"Is this the only road, my dear boy, by which we can get to your mother's house?"
				said she, almost mechanically enveloping her offended nose, in her
				pocket-handkerchief.
"It is here that we lives, please ma'am," said the child, pulling her onwards.
"How very foolish of me!" thought Martha, withdrawing her handkerchief, "of course
				poor people live in poor houses. But I cannot think why the place should smell
				so!"
No 12 was however soon reached, and the young lady carefully led by her little
				attendant through the largest gap in the hedge to the outer door of the back
				kitchen, in order that she might escape Mrs. Sykes's crowded front one.
"Go in first, Michael, and tell your mother that I am coming," said the considerate
				Martha. The child did so, but in this case there was no means for preparation, and
				having named the unexpected visitant and given his mother a hasty kiss, he returned
				before Martha had recovered the sort of shock which the dirty and desolate spot on
				which she stood had occasioned.
 In truth no person unaccustomed to approach the dwellings of the operatives in the
				towns of the manufacturing districts, can fail to be startled at the first near
				sight of them. In the very poorest agricultural village, the cottages which shelter
				its labourers have the pure untainted air of heaven to blow around their humble
				roofs; but where forests of tall bare chimneys, belching eternal clouds of smoke
				rear their unsightly shafts towards the sky, in lieu of verdant air-refreshing  trees, the black tint of the loathsome factory seems to rest upon
				every object near it. The walls are black, the fences are black, the window-panes
				(when there are any) are all veiled in black. No domestic animal that pertinaciously
				exists within their tainted purlieus, but wears the same dark hue; and perhaps there
				is no condition of human life so significantly surrounded by types of its own
				wretchedness as this. 
Martha Dowling shuddered as she looked around her; and when Michael returned to lead
				her in, she felt half afraid of crossing the gloomy threshold.
But the widow Armstrong was, as usual, less dirty in her abject misery than, perhaps,
				any other inhabitant of Hoxley-lane, or its immediate neighbourhood, and the mild
				countenance and gentle voice with which she replied to the young lady's salutation
				removed all her scruples, and she seated herself in the chair placed for her by
				Michael, with the best disposition in the world to improve the acquaintance.
"I hope you are getting better, Mrs. Armstrong?" said Martha, in that tone of genuine
				female softness which it is so impossible to mistake, "and that you don't miss
				little Michael as much as you did at first."
"You are very kind, ma'am, to take the trouble of coming to such a place as this,"
				replied the poor woman, in a voice that indicated something like surprise. Upon
				which Michael, who had stationed himself near enough to enable him to slip his
				little hand into hers, said, with a tolerably expressive emphasis — "This is Miss
				Martha, mother."
"I wish, ma'am, I had strength and power to thank you as I ought, for all your
				condescending kindness to my poor boy!" said the widow, earnestly. "I never see him,
				that he has not some fresh story to tell me of your goodness to him. He can read a
				chapter in the Bible now as well as any boy of his age need to do. And oh! Miss —
				This is all owing to you — for never could he have given his time to it in the
				factory."
"There is more praise due to him than to me, Mrs. Armstrong, I assure you. He is a
				very good boy at learning, and minds every word that is said to him. I suppose he
				has shown you his copy-book too, hasn't he? I never saw a child that had so good a
				notion of writing."
"He was always a quick boy, Miss — but never can he be thankful enough to you for
				teaching him how to put his quickness to profit. It will be the making of him."
 "I am very glad to hear you speak so earnestly about his learning, because that
				makes me think that you will be pleased at hearing the business I am come upon. My
				papa, who is very" — here poor Martha stopped short. She was going to add — "
					kind to little Michael ," but her honest heart would not let her
				pronounce the words; so she changed the phrase, and went on with "very desirous of
				being really useful to Michael, has commissioned me, Mrs. Armstrong, to ask you if
				you do not think it would be more profitable and advantageous to  him
				to be apprenticed to some good trade, the stocking-weaving for instance, than to run
				about our house any longer? Papa says, he fears it will give him habits of idleness
				which he may be the worse for all his life — and that would be quite contrary to his
				wishes, which have always been that he should benefit all his life long, by his good
				behaviour about the cow." 
Mrs. Armstrong's eyes which had been fixed on the countenance of Martha, every line
				of which spoke of truth and sincerity, fell upon the work she held in her hand as
				these words were uttered — and for a moment she made no answer. But feeling,
				perhaps, that this was both ungrateful and ungracious to her visiter, she looked up
				again and said, "I am sure, ma'am, we can never thank you enough for all your
				kindness."
There was the slightest emphasis in the world upon the word " you ," but it
				was enough to heighten the colour of Martha, and for a moment she both felt and
				looked displeased.
"My power, of myself, to befriend your boy, Mrs. Armstrong, is very little, I assure
				you," she said. "Of course it is natural that I should take more notice of him than
				a person like my father can, who has so many other things to attend to; but it is to
				his generosity and benevolence that you must look for any lasting advantage you may
				hope to gain for him."
"Indeed, ma'am, I would be happy to take your advice in the disposal of him any way;
				for I can't mistake your kindness, or your power to judge what is best, which of
				course must be greater than mine, notwithstanding your young age — and if Michael
				likes it, and you think it best, ma'am."
Martha saw that the mother's fear of having her boy parted from her, was combating
				the wiser hope for his future advantage; and fully conscious that the continuing his
				present mode of life could only be productive of mortification, she boldly answered
				this appeal, and in the confiding innocence of her heart ventured to say, "Perhaps,
				in this case, girl as I am, my judgment may be better than yours, Mrs.
				Armstrong. I do not think it would be good or pleasant for Michael in any way, to
				continue living at the Lodge as he does at present; and I do think, that if put to a
				respectable trade, he may not only provide for himself, but be a help and comfort to
				you and his brother likewise. This is my opinion, certainly, and now ask his. He is
				still younger than me, to be sure, poor little fellow, and yet I think you ought to
				listen to his opinion."
"Well, Mike dear," said the widow, turning her head towards the child, "you hear what
				the young lady says; speak up, my dear, and tell us what you think about it."
"I be ready to go, mother, if she bids me, and you like it," replied the boy.
 "You can judge, ma'am, that he knows his duty. That is just like him. From the time
				he was able to speak, dear creature, it was always the same — gentle, good, and
				reasonable. I won't say but what the parting with him will be a sore trial to me,
				but God forbid that I should set the wishes of my worn-out life against the hopes of
				his young one.  How far away is it Miss, do you happen to know where
				the master stocking-weaver bides, as he's to go to?" 
Martha confessed her ignorance on this point; but added, that though she should be
				sorry to hear it was too far off for him occasionally to come home and pay her a
				visit, she should be more sorry still, were he to be placed in the town of Ashleigh.
				"It would be only putting him for ever in the way of temptation, Mrs. Armstrong,"
				said she; "and I am sure you are too sensible a woman, to wish that he should be
				where the doing his duty was likely to be a pain to him."
"Indeed, and that I would," said the poor woman, earnestly. "'Tis the seeing their
				poor young faces for ever so sad and care-worn, that is the worst trial of all."
"How true is what my dear father says about the factory people," thought Martha —
				"how wonderfully they do all hate work!"
This conviction of their epidemic idleness, however, in no degree chilled the good
				girl's desire at once to perform her father's will, and benefit a very interesting,
				though not, as she believed, a very industrious mother and son. So deeming it best
				to enter into no further discussion, but to accept the consent uttered by both as
				final and conclusive, she rose, and smiling good-humouredly at Michael said,
"Now you have taught me the way here, I think I shall be able to get back again by
				myself; and I dare say Michael, that you and your mother will like to have a little
				conversation together about this new plan for you. But remember, dear, that you are
				home by five o'clock to read your lesson and show me your copy-book, we were
				interrupted this morning you know." Then leaving in the poor widow's hand a welcome
				token of her visit, and promising that she would either bring or send the papers
				necessary for her to sign, before long, the excellent Martha Dowling departed, after
				having most innocently, but most effectually, lent her aid to the perpetration of as
				hateful a crime, as the black heart of long-hardened depravity could devise.
Having waited till the figure of the young lady had passed across the little window,
				the widow Armstrong pulled her boy towards her, and gave him a mother's kiss.
"To be sure thee dost look all the better, my Mike, for good food, and fine clothing.
				But I shan't be satisfied, unless you tell me that you like all these new favours
				that they are going to confer upon you."
"I like to go, mother, very much," replied Michael, stoutly.
"Thank God! then, my darling — you are provided for," she rejoined with a deep sigh.
				"I have known a many stocking-weavers, Mike, exceeding well to do, and there was
				never one of them, I'll answer for it, that had a better will to work, and to do his
				duty, than you have — so I have no right to doubt but what you will do well, and I
				don't doubt it. But 'tis the parting with thee, my dear, dear child! — Oh! Mike, you
				have been a comfort to me ever since you was born — and how do I know, if — "
 "Mother!" cried the boy, interrupting her, "I'll be a comfort to you still. I'll
				tell you what I've got in my head to do, and just see  if it is not a
				good plan. I mean to be the very best boy that ever my master had, and when I've
				gone on working with him a bit, two or three months, perhaps, mother, — time enough
				for him really to find out that I am a good boy, — I will tell him all about you and
				Teddy, and make him understand that if he wants to keep me in good heart to work, he
				must let me trudge away home to pass a Sunday now and then with you two. I don't
				think he'll be able to say no, mother, when I tell him about Teddy's poor legs, and
				all you have done for us both, lying a-bed here." 
Mrs. Armstrong again kissed her boy, and after gazing at him with a look in which
				pride and pleasure were strangely blended with anguish, she said, "I do think you'll
				make your way, Michael — for you are a good boy, a very good boy. But I don't know
				how poor Edward will take it."
"That's the worst part of it, mother," replied the little fellow, beginning to cry.
				"Poor Teddy does look so very happy of a night when he sees me pop round the corner
				upon him, as he comes out of the factory! — But then I shall be able to help him,
				mother, all the better by and by. And when I come home of a Sunday, mother, I must
				teach him to write, and then think how beautiful to have a letter from one another!
				I know who'll give me a slate for Teddy, and me too, to learn with, and that's Miss
				Martha. And I shan't mind asking her, not the least, because she knows I am going
				away. And do you know, mother, I've got another notion, and that's no bad comfort
				neither. I should not a bit wonder, if Miss Martha was to turn out a right good
				friend to you and Teddy, when I am gone."
And so the little fellow ran on — each hopeful word he uttered begetting a new hope,
				till, by the time the hour of departure arrived, his poor mother had at least the
				comfort of believing that the prospect opening before him, was one that he looked
				upon with much less of pain than pleasure.
Meanwhile Martha found her way safely home, and gave her father such an account of
				the result of her mission, as induced him to give her a kiss, and declare that if
				she was not the handsomest of the family, she was out-and-out the most useful.
</div></body></text></TEI>