<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
 CHAPTER II. 
A DELIGHTFUL RAMBLE — FRIENDSHIP AND THE MUSE — AN ADVENTURE — DANGER AND ESCAPE —
				GRATITUDE AND BENEVOLENCE.
" Only see that! How very extraordinary!" exclaimed Lady Dowling,
				suddenly rising, and addressing herself to no one in particular.
"Oh! how delightful!" cried several ladies at once. "How clever Lady Clarissa is!
				Such a delicious refreshment!" "To be sure, it is the only thing in the world to do
				on such an evening as this," exclaimed Miss Brotherton; who, as being the richest
				young lady in company, very properly thought she ought to speak first. "I am sure I
				shall follow her example;" and so saying, she rose and walked towards the window.
				Three of the most dauntless ladies in the party started up to follow her; which,
				strange as the manoeuvre appeared to the full-dressed Lady Dowling, she did not
				oppose, greatly preferring that the garden party should be enlarged. But, though not
				by her, the adventurous fair ones were stopped before they accomplished their
				design, by a chorus of remonstrances from all the rest of the company, male and
				female.
"My dear Miss Brotherton, you will catch your death!" cried one.
"Oh! look at your satin shoes!" screamed another. "What would Mr. Tomkins say if he
				was here, Mrs. Tomkins?" demanded a third.
"And your neck and shoulders, Miss Williamson!" whispered a fourth.
 "And your blonde dress, Mrs. Simpkins!" vociferated a fifth; with a vast deal more
				in the same strain. So that before the sortie was accomplished, every lady,
				save Miss Brotherton, yielded before the storm of reasons that pelted them on all
				sides. The rich young  lady, however, stood firm: what young lady with
				two hundred thousand pounds would not? 
"Mr. Augustus Dowling," said she, still pursuing her way window-ward, but pausing ere
				she stepped out, "will you have the excessive kindness, — vraiment j'ai
					honte; ; but will you have the charity to look in the hall for my pink
				satin mantelet , trimmed with swansdown; without it I fear my poor little
				shoulders will be arrosées — 'too rudely, alas!' with the dews of
				night."
Now the young lady's shoulders were really very pretty little shoulders, and,
				moreover, Mr. Augustus Dowling, notwithstanding all his elegant nonchalance
				, perfectly well remembered that she had two hundred thousand pounds; so, before she
				had stamped with her little foot twice, in her impatience to join those who, from
				their gaiety, seemed to be so greatly enjoying the fresh air, he returned with the
					mantelet , and having, as usual, adjusted his glass in the corner of
				his eye to prevent his making any mistakes, placed it on her shoulders.
"Now, then!" she cried, "give me your arm. Is not this good fun?"
The young gentleman obeyed, declaring it was delightful, and in a moment they were
				beside Lady Clarissa and Sir Matthew; good Miss Mogg keeping a step or two
				behind.
"Nobody but your ladyship had wit enough to find out that there was more air to be
				got out of doors than in," said the heiress, venturing to pass her arm through that
				of her noble friend. But, upon this occasion, Lady Clarissa, though particularly
				intimate with Miss Brotherton, and seldom refusing to use her carriage and act as
				her chaperone to all the parties in the neighbourhood, seemed inclined to check her
				advances.
"My dear child," said she, "I am delighted to see you come out. I am sure you must
				have been half stifled, as well as myself. But you and Mr. Augustus must wander away
				by yourselves, and you may take Mogg with you, if you like it, for I have just got
				into a discussion with Sir Matthew, that I would not break off for the world. So
				away with you, my dear, as fast as you can."
Lady Clarissa's will was of course law, even to the heiress, but it was not without a
				little toss of the head that she turned off to another walk; nor was it without a
				considerable struggle between her inclination and a sense of propriety, which, all
				things considered, really did her honour, that she permitted poor Miss Mogg to obey
				the hint of her patroness, and follow after.
"And so you really have not seen this gifted young man yet, Sir Matthew?" resumed her
				ladyship, as soon as they were again alone. "You have never yet seen this Osmund
				Norval?"
"No, my lady, I have not," replied the knight; "and to say the truth," he added,
				venturing to press with his stout arm the slender one that rested on it, "to say the
				truth, though I have heard a monstrous deal about him, I was determined that I would
				have nothing to say to him, till I had heard your opinion, my lady."

"How kind! how flattering, Sir Matthew! But you will let me bring him to you
				now?"
"Will I?" (again pressing the lean arm.) "Fancy me saying no, when you tell me to say
				yes! Ah! my lady, you know better than that, or I am greatly mistaken."
"Oh! Sir Matthew, you are always so kind! What magnificent gardens you have! By the
				way, I think I never tasted such a pine as that we had to-day. I assure you, my
				brother, Lord Highlandloch, is celebrated for his pines — quite celebrated. They are
				the finest in all Scotland, but I give you my honour, I never saw one equal to it at
				his table."
"Oh! my lady, that is only your amiable condescension," replied Sir Matthew, greatly
				touched by this preference. "But if you really can be so polite as to think them
				good, I must entreat you just to let me knock at the head-gardener's door, who lives
				close outside this gate. I don't let him live inside, because of his children, Lady
				Clarissa. I know what birds peck the worst — ha! ha! ha! However, you must
				just let me pass through the gate to tell him to put up a brace for your ladyship.
				They shall be well taken care of now, my lady, trust me for that; I never valued
				them so much before, I promise you."
"You are too kind a thousand times!" said the lady, stretching out her own hand to
				open the gate. "I will go with you; there is nothing I doat upon like visiting a
				gardener. Could he not take us into the hot-houses, Sir Matthew? You have no idea
				how I should enjoy it."
By no means displeased to show off the high-born lady upon his arm, even to the eyes
				of his gardener, the knight joyfully assented to the proposal.
"Macnab!" he cried, knocking as he passed the cottage-window, "Macnab! come here
				directly, and bring a knife and a basket with you; you must come directly — this
				very moment, and unlock the hot-houses — her ladyship wishes to walk through them,
				and I must have one or two of the finest pines cut, and packed in a basket, to be
				put into Miss Brotherton's carriage: but mind, they are for Lady Clarissa Shrimpton;
				so you had better give them in charge to her ladyship's own man."
Mr. Alexander Macnab promptly left the seeds he was sorting, and prepared himself,
				basket in hand, to follow his master. The knight and the lady left the cottage,
				arm-and-arm together; but before they again entered the garden, a fancy seized her
				lively ladyship, that a short ramble in the green lane outside it would be the most
				agreeable thing in the world.
"Dear me! what a poetical idea!" exclaimed Sir Matthew with enthusiasm. "there's only
				one thing," he said, stopping short, "but that will spoil my pleasure altogether: I
				am so dreadfully afraid that your ladyship will take cold."
"Ask the gardener's wife to lend me one of her kerchiefs," said Lady Clarissa,
				laughing. "But it will only be to satisfy you, Sir Matthew, for there is no catching
				cold in such weather as this."

It was with something quite like tender anxiety that the knight stepped back, asked
				for and obtained a neat shawl, and himself wrapped it round the slender person of
				his amiable companion.
"Thank you! thank you a thousand times! But, dear Sir Matthew, I must not lose my
				pines by my frolic: will you give the gardener orders to get them without waiting
				for us? and perhaps you would let him put up a bunch of grapes, and a few peaches at
				the same time — it is no good to let him wait for us, Sir Matthew; — when you and I
				get into a chat together, we shall neither of us think of the pines again."
Quitting her highly-valued aristocratic arm for an instant, the flattered knight ran
				back and gave the necessary orders; and then, almost unconscious, in his full
				contentment, that his own gray head was as bare as that of the oak-crowned nymph by
				his side, he returned to his bewitching companion and led her gently onward over the
				mossy turf that bordered the road.
The gardener and his wife stood together for a moment looking after them. "Who would
				think now that she was one of the true old gentlefolks, and Scotch to boot, to see
				her pair off that way with our rogue of a spinner there? How, in God's name, can she
				choose to be so free and friendly with such as he?" said the gardener.
"Just for the same reason as yourself, Sawny," replied his wife; "to get all she can
				out of him."
"And that's true," replied Sawny, setting off upon his business. "I had like to
				forget the pines, and the grapes, and the peaches. She's not so far wrong after all;
				and yet 'tis a pity, too."

The evening was still oppressively sultry, and hardly a breath of air disturbed
				either the leaves on the oaks beside the road, or those that mimicked them so
				abominably on the lady's brow; but, nevertheless, there was a freshness in the smell
				of the hedges and the grass, which could not fail to be agreeable to any nerves that
				had endured the steaming dinner, and the irksome drawing-room of Dowling Lodge.
The shady lane in which the knight and the lady were thus recreating themselves,
				after skirting the extensive and lofty walls of the garden, turned at right angles
				both to the right and the left at the corner of it. The branch to the left followed
				the boundary of the garden, and led to the stable-yard and back entrance to the
				house; that to the right conducted to the factory, which was the source and
				head-spring of all the wealth that flowed over, and irrigated with its fructifying
				stream, meadows, parks, hot-beds and flower-gardens, till it made itself a
				prodigious cistern in the depths and heights of Dowling Lodge.
When the strangely-matched pair came to this point, Sir Matthew made a halt, till
				Lady Clarissa came to the end of a little poem, which the protegé whom she was so
				desirous of introducing to her rich and (to use her own words) "really very clever
				friend," had inscribed in her album.
 Nothing could be more agreeable to her ladyship than this pause.  In the
				first place it was the greatest possible relief to her lungs, for the lines she was
				reciting were much too full of deep feeling to be repeated without a painful effort,
				while walking; and in the second, the halt, accompanied as it was by a look of
				earnest attention from her apparently-delighted companion, furnished the most
				agreeable commentary in the world upon the poem itself, as well as on her manner of
				reciting it. 
It said so plainly, "Stay! — move not! — lest a word, an intonation, a cadence, be
				lost to me!"
Lady Clarissa was really touched by it; and let Sawny the gardener, and his wife
				Janet, say or think what they would, neither peaches nor pines had any thing to do
				with the gratification she at this moment experienced in the society of the great
				manufacturer.
His eyes were fixed on her face, and she bore the gaze, and returned it with that
				sort of courage and confidence, which genuine enthusiasm alone can give.
She had just finished a stanza when Sir Matthew ceased to move, and feeling that he
				did so under the influence of a spell, which she well knew would be more powerful
				still were it spoken when she were at rest — for Lady Clarissa was aware that she
				was exceedingly short-breathed — she repeated the last eight lines in a manner that
				showed she felt the pleasure she was producing — a pleasure, as she thought, like
				that occasionally caused by the repetition of some delicious phrase in a musical
				composition, reiterated as if to fill the soul with its sweetness. "And should
			the eye for which I write By sun-lit morn, or moon-lit night, Drop on this record of my
			soul, Which tells a part — ah! not the whole, Of hopes that trembling, faltering, timid,
			Now fire my cheek, now turn it livid, — Should that soft eye but drop one tear, I'd hug
			my chain, and call it dear!" The tear asked for, almost came as she ceased.
"You feel it, dear Sir Matthew!" she said, in a voice of considerable emotion.
"I'd hug my chain, and call it dear!" — she again murmured, hanging on his arm with
				such an evident degree of weakness, as showed the slender form to be less powerful
				than the ardent spirit it enshrined.
"Let us turn back," said Sir Matthew. "My dear friend," faintly ejaculated Lady
				Clarissa, "you are moved too strongly. — But — no, no! Sir Matthew! Believe me, it
				were far better for both of us that we should proceed. — Are we, either of us, my
				dear friend, in a state at this moment to meet the curious stare of idle eyes? —
				Come on, dear Sir Matthew!" — and she gently pulled him forward as she spoke — "this
				soft glade invites us."
 Though perfectly determined to find some excuse for not leading his fascinating
				companion within sight of his grim-looking factory, which another turn in the lane
				at no great distance would have made very unpicturesquely visible, it was impossible
				at that moment  not to yield to the gentle violence which carried him
				forward; and, in what Lady Clarissa felt to be very eloquent silence, he proceeded
				for a few steps farther. Considerably, however, before they had reached the dreaded
				turning, his good star shot a ray upon him in the shape of a very large cow, with a
				pair of enormous horns, that slowly turned the corner, and fronted them. 
"Good heaven!" he exclaimed in an accent of great alarm. — "There is that horrid
				spotted cow! she is the worst beast in the whole parish. Turn back, dearest Lady
				Clarissa! turn back instantly."
"How kindly considerate!" returned Lady Clarissa. "But you little know the strength
				of your friend's mind, Sir Matthew. Were I alone, indeed, I might tremble and turn
				as pale as the veriest child that ever hid its face on a nurse's lap; but with you!"
				— and here the lady turned a very flattering glance on the athletic form of her
				protector — 
"Heaven knows," replied Sir Matthew, once more pressing her lean arm, "Heaven knows
				that all which the strength of man could do to protect you, would not be left undone
				by me — but consider the dog!" he added, pointing to a little cur that always
				followed him; "its power of irritating an animal of this kind is quite
				extraordinary." And as he spoke, he whistled in a note which meant, as his dog Spite
				knew as well as he did, neither more nor less than — "At her, Spite!"
"If any thing can keep Spite quiet," resumed the knight, "it is whistling to
				him."
Obedient to the true meaning of the signal, however, the dog sprang forward, and of
				course there ensued the scene which always follows on such occasions. The dog
				yelped, and affected to spring at the nose of the cow, while she, somewhat
				accelerating her stately pace, threw up her tail, and bent down her head till her
				horns nearly touched the ground, offering so exact an image of "the cow with the
				crumpled horn," with whose portrait her ladyship's early studies had made her
				familiar, that her confidence in the prowess of Sir Matthew could sustain her no
				longer, and she rapidly uttered a succession of tremendous screams.
The purpose of the knight was accomplished, and he therefore indulged the fair lady
				by letting her scream on for at least a minute and a half, while he supported her
				with every appearance of the most pitying tenderness. Meanwhile, two little boys,
				who were making their way from the factory homewards, across a field by the side of
				the lane, ran with terrified curiosity, and all the strength they had, to a gate,
				through which they could see the interesting spectacle of a fine full-dressed lady,
				screaming with all her might from between the sheltering arms of the magnificent Sir
				Matthew Dowling, and a little dog worrying an old half-starved cow.
"Come here, you young scamps!" cried the knight, on perceiving the two little heads
				peeping over the gate: "Don't you see what's going on? Clamber over the gate, can't
				you, and drive back that devil of a beast."

The youngest, but by far the stoutest and tallest of the two boys, instantly obeyed
				this command, and placing himself midway between the tormented cow and the fair
				creature, whose nerves her menacing attitude had so cruelly shaken, he stood
				manfully astride in the middle of the lane, flourished his ragged hat on high, and
				with a few lusty "wough! woughs!" repeated at the top of his young voice, succeeded
				in turning the front of the enemy, which was presently seen to wheel round, and, by
				a sort of feeble, ambling little trot, speedily got out of sight round the
				corner.
"Now, then," said Sir Matthew, "let me lead you home, my dear lady!"
"Not till I have thanked my little deliverer," exclaimed Lady Clarissa, with very
				sentimental fervour. "Good heaven! what might have been my fate without him! I know
				— I feel, Sir Matthew, that you never could have borne to leave me, and what then
				could have stopped the fearful approach of that most vicious animal? — Death, or
				worse than death — dislocation of limb, disfigurement of feature! Oh, Sir Matthew,
				your heart, I know, will go side by side with mine. Tell me, what can I do — what
				can we both do, to reward the astonishing bravery of that noble little fellow?"
"Depend upon it, my lady, he will be delighted if you will give him sixpence."
"Sixpence!" cried her ladyship, turning extremely red, — but in a moment she
				recovered herself and said: "Oh! Sir Matthew! do I not know how dearly you love a
				jest? Men of wit and humour can rarely be grave for long together, even under
				circumstances that most keenly touch their feelings; did I not know you well, my
				friend, what should I not think of your proposal? But come, come — be serious for a
				moment longer: we have, it is true, escaped a tremendous danger, and it may well
				make us feel light at heart; but we will not laugh over it, till we have settled in
				what way that heroic child shall receive the meed he has earned. I shall not rest in
				peace, my friend, unless his destiny be as favourably influenced by me, as mine has
				probably been by him. Sir Matthew, you have great power, enormous wealth, a generous
				heart, a noble nature, and intellect, before which, if I mistake not, all
				difficulties will melt away like a mist before the sun. Of all this I am quite
				certain. There is but one IF in the business. IF you value me, Sir Matthew, as much
				as I think you do, that little boy now getting over the gate will be clothed,
				educated, fed, lodged by you. Do I deceive myself? or will the daily sight of him,
				by renewing the memory of this evening, rather cause you pleasure than pain?"
 Sir Matthew Dowling clearly saw, that sending "the little blackguard to the devil,"
				which was decidedly what his heart whispered to him, would, at this stage of the
				business, be inevitably sending her sentimental ladyship to at least an equal
				distance from himself; and this he had no inclination to do. She was the only Lady
				Somebody Something in the whole neighbourhood, and he was quite aware that he had
				already acquired more envy and hatred among his friends and neighbours, by the
				superior degree of intimacy he had  contrived to achieve with her, than
				by all his successful struggles to outspend them all. 
This pleasure was not to be given up for a trifle, especially at a moment when it
				seemed so very clear that it only depended on himself to make all the world perceive
				that they were dearer friends than ever; so, making a virtue of necessity, he looked
				in her face with one of his wittiest smiles, and cleverly taking the cue she had
				given, replied — "If you had not found out that I was jesting with you,
				Lady Clarissa, I never should have believed in your friendship more! Come here, my
				boy," he continued, raising his loud voice to a note that must have been heard as
				far as the factory, "come here, I say."
The little fellow, on hearing these imperative accents, which were not quite unknown
				to him, thought this was the first time he had been so greatly honoured as to have
				them addressed to himself, again let go the hand of his brother, by whose side he
				had begun to resume his progress homeward, and once more clambering over the gate,
				presented himself, cap in hand, before the illustrious pair.
"You are a happy little boy," said Lady Clarissa, "in having had the extraordinary
				good fortune of looking over yonder gate at the moment you did; and you are a brave
				little fellow into the bargain for not running away, as you certainly might have
				done, when you saw that dreadful beast. Oh! those tremendous horns, Sir Matthew!
				they haunt me still! I am quite sure it will be weeks before I lay my head on my
				pillow without dreaming of them. But you drove them away, my dear child, and as a
				reward for it, you shall be comfortably clothed and fed for the rest of your life.
				You will like that, won't you?"
"I should very much like never to go to work at the factory any more," replied the
				child; "but, please ma'am." he added the minute after, "I'd sooner you'd clothe and
				feed Teddy than me. He looked over the gate first, please ma'am."
"Did he, my dear? Then that is another reason why this good gentleman's favour should
				be shown to you; for if your brother saw my distress first, it was you who were the
				first to relieve it."
"That was only because Teddy is so lame, please ma'am," said the boy.
"Lame, is he?" repeated her ladyship, "Poor fellow! However, my little man, if I do
				not greatly mistake, you have this day made a friend by serving me, who will put you
				in a situation where, if you behave well, you will be able to assist all who belong
				to you."
The child opened a pair of remarkably large eyes, and fixing them on her face, said,
				"What! mother and all?"
"Yes, I should think so, my dear. He is a fine intelligent looking little fellow, is
				he not, Sir Matthew? But he does not look healthy. However, I dare say he will
				improve in that respect. Plenty of food generally cures all poor people's
				complaints, particularly when they are young. How old are you, my dear?"
"Nine last birthday," replied the boy.

"A tall little fellow for his age, though very thin, to be sure. And what is your
				name?"
"Michael Armstrong, ma'am."
"Michael Armstrong: I shall not forget it, I assure you; for truly do I believe that
				I should have been trampled in the dust by this time, if you had not been
				heart-strong as well as Armstrong. And what shall we do with him at first, Sir
				Matthew? Shall we take him home with us?"
"What! to your cottage, my dear lady? — Yes, certainly, if it will give you
				pleasure."
"My dearest Sir Matthew! there you are at your jestings again."
"Ha! ha! ha! Lady Clarissa, you begin to know me so well, that I shall never be able
				to cut my little dry jokes upon you," replied the knight laughing, as it seemed,
				most heartily, but inwardly cursing the audacious exaction of his fair friend, in
				attempting to make him pay the enormous price she hinted at, for permitting him to
				enjoy the honour and glory of flirting with her. The idea of being thus entrapped,
				and forced to adopt " a bag of rags out of his own factory " (for it was
				thus he inwardly designated little Michael), galled him for a moment so severely,
				that he was within an ace of exclaiming, " Confound you, and the beggar's brat
					together, you old fool! " But, most fortunately for all parties, he did no
				such thing; on the contrary, he happily remembered at that critical moment the
				important hints he had received from his excellent friend Dr. Crockley, and
				instantly decided "that this absurd whim of her ladyship's should be worked up into
				the d — d good-natured thing that was to set all right."
At the very same moment, as if to confirm his resolution, Lady Clarissa drew from her
				pocket a cambric pocket-handkerchief, something the worse for wear, perhaps, but
				most elaborately embroidered at each corner with the coronet of a countess. It was
				one of a dozen bequeathed to her a few years before by her thrifty and truly
				admirable mother, the late Countess of Highlandloch. This coincidence appeared to be
				the work of Providence.
"Give me your arm, my charming friend!" said the well-satisfied knight, with an air
				of tender gallantry, "and only remember, that all I shall do in this business, will
				proceed wholly from my devoted friendship to you. Follow us, little boy, and you
				shall learn what it is to have served Sir Matthew Dowling's most honoured
				friend."
Having said this, he began leading his fair companion back towards the house as
				rapidly as might be consistent with the delicate style in which she was shod.
"Please ma'am, may I go and tell Teddy?" said little Michael, walking after them.
 "Teddy? — who is Teddy, my little man?" inquired Lady Clarissa, graciously smiling
				upon him; for her ladyship, at no time an ill-natured woman, was at this moment in
				the best of all possible humours with herself, and every body else. There had been
				various passages in what had passed between herself and Sir  Matthew,
				during this most delightful walk, which convinced her that the knight,
				notwithstanding the homage he paid to her rank, could not wholly resist the
				fascinations of her person, talents, and manners; — and the conviction pleased her.
				But let not the character of this noble lady be for a moment misunderstood. Lucretia
				herself would hardly have shrunk with greater horror from an improper attachment.
				All she dreamed of in her intimacy with Sir Matthew Dowling, with the young poet,
				Osmund Norval, and with a few other gentlemen whom she was in the habit of meeting,
				was but that their admiring friendship should be animated by a lambent, innoxious
				flickering of the flame, which, after a peculiar theory of her own, she believed to
				pervade the universe, cheering the well-conducted by its mild platonic warmth, but
				scorching, burning, and destroying those who permitted it to exercise over them a
				too-sovereign sway and masterdom. That she had reached the age of forty, unsolicited
				in marriage by any suitor of any degree, she attributed, rightly enough perhaps, to
				the unfortunate disproportion between her fortune and her rank — but must she,
				therefore, live and die without the sweet consciousness of having been loved? Where
				was the law that enforced such cruelty? She knew it not; and accordingly had, for
				many years, and quite upon principle, made up her mind to permit as many gentlemen,
				of all ages, ranks, and conditions, to deserve "the soft impeachment," whether they
				owned it or not, as it was in her power to captivate. For most of these tender and
				really very innocent friendships, she was able to assign to herself some excellent
				cause — as poetical sympathy with one, botanical sympathy with another,
				philosophical religious sympathy with a third, and so on; but in the case of Sir
				Matthew Dowling, she sometimes felt a little puzzled herself. 
It was not, however, that she was weak enough in the least degree to blame herself
				for wishing to be admired by a vulgar man. She had long ago given such feelings to
				the winds. From the time she quitted, on the death of her mother, the floods and the
				fells of her native land, to inhabit a pretty little cottage (the timely gift of an
				English godmother), which happened to be situated in the midst of a manufacturing
				district, she had been schooling her spirit to endure the change from poor lairds of
				a hundred descents, to rich manufacturers, who would have been, for the most part,
				quite as pleased had they been unable to trace one. Just at first, her Scotch pride
				rebelled a little; but an hour or two of quiet meditation on the subject, led her to
				perceive so clearly all she might lose, and all she might gain, by being or not
				being on friendly terms with her neighbours, that she made up her mind on the matter
				at once, and thenceforward feasted upon delicate cates, and battened in the
				fructifying sunshine of universal popularity, in a neighbourhood that might be
				safely described as the richest in the world.
 But still this did not quite explain the terms she was upon with Sir Matthew
				Dowling, and she did feel sometimes conscious of taking more pains to please him
				than she quite knew why — unconscious that it arose from a latent wish to be
				distinguished by a man,  celebrated for the warmth of his devotion to
				the fair sex. But for this, she must not be out of measure blamed, inasmuch as those
				who have reached the age for looking on upon the drama of life, can many of them
				testify that in this she only yielded to a weakness very unaccountably common to the
				majority of the sex. 
But poor little Michael Armstrong has been left unmercifully long, looking up in her
				ladyship's smiling face, as she inquired who Teddy was.
"Teddy is my brother, please ma'am," was his answer.
"Is he still waiting for you at the gate, my dear?" said the lady. "I don't see
				him."
"He can't stand very well, ma'am, because he is lame," replied Michael. "I shouldn't
				wonder if he was set down, and gone to sleep."
"Gone to sleep! — why it is hardly bedtime yet, my dear, is it? However, I suppose he
				had better go to see, Sir Matthew? — Your brother," turning again to the child, "is
				younger than you are, I suppose, if he falls asleep on the grass like a baby. Is he
				old enough to go home by himself, and tell the great news that has happened to
				you?"
"Teddy is two years older than me — only he is always so tired," replied the boy.
"Well, then, just step back, and bid him run along home by himself, and tell all the
				family what a fine act you have done, and that Sir Matthew Dowling is going to take
				care of you all the rest of your life."
Michael now, for the first time, ventured to look steadily up into the face of the
				majestic Sir Matthew, and his little heart sank within him. It was quite evident
				from the child's speaking-countenance, that no pleasurable ideas were suggested, by
				the assurance that Sir Matthew would take care of him all the rest of his life. The
				knight saw this, and would for a moment have desired no better sport than wringing
				his neck round; nevertheless, he patted his head with astonishing condescension, and
				said, "It is quite true, my boy. For the sake of this charming lady, for whose
				happiness you must pray morning, noon, and night, I will undertake to provide for
				you. You may step back, if you will, and tell your brother so, who, if he be two
				years older than you, will be able to make your friends understand the good fortune
				that has happened to you."
"I have got no friends, please sir," said the boy.
"Where do you live then?"
"With mother, sir."
"Is not she your friend, my poor child?" demanded Lady Clarissa in an accent of great
				feeling.
"Please ma'am, she is my mother," answered Michael, while a slight flash mantled his
				pale cheek, and something like a tear twinkled in his eye.
"How very odd!" exclaimed Lady Clarissa. "Is she not kind to you, my boy?"
"Kind?" responded Michael, staring at her.

"Do you love her, my little fellow?"
"Love her?" again echoed Michael.
"Whatever she is, she has not taught you good manners, my lad, or you would not
				answer her ladyship this way," said the knight rather indignantly.
The little boy was certainly very foolish, for, large as his eyes were, they could
				not contain the salt rheum which, for no reason in the world that the lady or
				gentleman could guess, first filled them and then ran down in two great big drops
				upon his cheeks.
"I dare say he is hungry," exclaimed Lady Clarissa with sudden animation. "How
				delightful, dearest Sir Matthew, to have found a little creature so greatly in want!
				Are you hungry, my dear? Tell the truth — don't be afraid."
"Not very," said the child.
"Poor little fellow! — It is quite evident, Sir Matthew, that he is exceedingly shy.
				Let us go back, shall we? — just as far as the gate, and give the message ourselves
				to that lazy fellow that he says is asleep under the hedge — and two years older
				than this one. — Only conceive! — I am delighted that he is not to be the
				object of your bounty, for there is nothing so detestable as idleness."
Sir Matthew had turned in compliance with the word and action, which expressed her
				ladyship's desire that he should do so, and in another minute they reached the
				gate.
"Where is this brother of yours? — I don't see him," said Lady Clarissa, looking
				about.
"There he is, ma'am, if you please," replied Michael, once more climbing over the
				gate; and presently he was close under the flowery hedge, extending his two hands to
				raise a miserably sicklooking child, who was, in truth, soundly sleeping there. In
				consequence of a few words whispered to him by little Michael, the boy came forward
				with a shuffling gait, his knees sloping inwards, and his legs frightfully
				emaciated: but the moment he reached the gate, Lady Clarissa exclaimed, "Good
				gracious! how beautiful!"
It was indeed a lovely face that was then turned up to meet her eye; and when, as if
				somewhat daunted by her earnest gaze, he removed his own from her countenance to
				that of Sir Matthew, the bright flash that lighted it up for a moment made it appear
				more beautiful still.
"And what is your name, my pretty boy?" said the lady.
"Edward Armstrong," was the reply.
"But, my dear child, you don't look well, and you ought not to go to sleep so, quite
				late in the evening, upon the grass. What makes you so very sleepy, my dear? Have
				you been at play?"
"No, ma'am," replied the boy, furtively glancing at Sir Matthew, "I have been at
				work."
"At work! You can't have done much work, my poor little fellow, looking as you
				do."
"I have been at work since" — 
 "My dear Lady Clarissa, I really will not let you stay another moment," suddenly
				exclaimed Sir Matthew. "The heat is gone  off, and I am sure you will be
				quite chilled if you remain any longer out of doors." 
"I believe you are right, my dear friend," said Lady Clarissa, with a glance of
				affectionate gratitude for this earnest zeal. "Let us go. Never can I forget the
				kindness you have shown me during this eventful walk, and heartless indeed must I be
				were I to refuse to acknowledge that it has made a deep impression on me."
For a moment Lady Clarissa held her coroneted handkerchief to her eyes, and then
				resumed. "Go home, little Edward — tell your mother, who, by the by, I trust is not
				harsh to you, that your brother Michael is rewarded for an act of bravery that
				probably saved the life of an earl's daughter — has been most generously and nobly
				adopted by her friend Sir Matthew Dowling, and that henceforward she need have no
				anxiety whatever on his account. Now, then, Sir Matthew, I am ready."
"Are we never to see Michael again?" said the lame boy, while a sudden expression of
				anguish passed across his beautiful features.
"Why not, child?" replied her ladyship rather sharply. "Do you suppose that Sir
				Matthew and I are going to hide him?"
"It is all very well then," returned Edward, limping away. "But be sure to go and
				tell mother all about it yourself to-morrow, Mike."
"Come along, little one!" said Lady Clarissa, moving off. "Follow behind this
				generous gentleman, and see the palace of a home which your bravery has won."
So saying, she moved on; the obsequious knight at her side, and the wondering Michael
				Armstrong after her.
On reaching the gate beside the gardener's house, Sir Matthew paused. He had been
				meditating, while seemingly listening in rapt attention to the lady's talk, on the
				effect which would be produced on the party they were about to rejoin, by the
				appearance of the ragged little companion they had brought back with them.
Had he been a ragged sailor-boy, or a ragged plough-boy, or even a ragged
				chimney-sweeper, there might by possibility have been excited some feeling of
				curiosity and interest; but a ragged factory-boy was of all created beings the one
				least likely to give birth to such emotions, among his friends and neighbours, or
				indeed to any other emotion fit to be exhibited in good society. So, merely saying
				to his fair friend, "Excuse me, my lady, for one moment," he once more knocked at
				the cottage-window, and called aloud for "Macnab!"
The obedient North Briton appeared immediately, and was about to forestal the inquiry
				he anticipated by assurances that her ladyship's pines, peaches, and grapes, had all
				been consigned to the care of her ladyship's own serving-man, when he was very
				literally struck dumb by his master saying — 
 "Macnab, take this little boy into the servants' hall, and tell the servants to take
				care of him — do you hear? — and he is to have a bed made up for him, and — and
				supper, and breakfast — and all that; and to-morrow I will talk to Parsons about
				what must be done for him.  Observe, Macnab, and take care, if you
				please, that all the servants about the place know it, that this boy is to be the
				object of the greatest benevolence." 
"The greatest — what was you pleased to say, sir?" said the Scotch gardener, really
				and truly doubting his own ears.
" Benevolence , sir!" shouted the knight vehemently; "and woe to any
				one on my estate who dares to question or thwart my design!"
"How inspiring is this angelic goodness," exclaimed Lady Clarissa affectionately.
				"Ah, Sir Matthew! how few there are who know you as I know you!"
"Come along, my man," said the Scotchman, leading away Michael; and he said no more
				till he was quite sure that the knight and the lady had got far enough in their
				progress across the garden, to be out of hearing, and then he added: "And now, my
				little fellow, tell me in God's name what all this means? Why, you look for all the
				world like one of the little raggamuffins out of the factory."
"I am one of the raggamuffins out of the factory," replied Michael.
"You are? and our master's going to make a house-pet of ye? Why, now, you'll be made
				the talk of the whole country. I should not have been one-half so much surprised if
				he had taken one of our sucking pigs into the drawing-room."
"Nor I, sir," said Michael timidly, but with half a smile.
"So, then, you don't understand it much better than I do, it seems? But what did he
					say it was for? He didn't take the Earl of Highlandloch's daughter
				among the infernal whirligigs, did he, and pick you out as a specimen to be kept in
				a glass case?"
"I hope he won't put me in a glass case, sir," said Michael, taking courage from the
				gardener's good-humour; "but why he brought me here at all, I don't very well
				understand. The lady said it was because I held up my hat, and cried 'Wough!' to
				Dame Knight's old cow: but of course she was only making fun."
"At any rate, he was making no fun, for he roared like a bulldog, didn't he? So his
				bidding I'll do, let it mean what it will; and if it brings you food and lodging, I
				don't suppose you'll break your heart for being taken out of the factory — shall
				you?"
"Not if he'll take Edward out too," said the boy.
"Edward out too! Oh! Lord, oh! Lord, how many more? Did he cry 'Wough!' to the cow,
				too?"
"I wish he had!" said Michael, shaking his head very mysteriously.

Meanwhile Lady Clarissa and the gallant knight re-entered my Lady Dowling's
				drawing-room, amidst a perfect storm of questions, exclamations of admiration,
				wonder, fears for the lady's safety, and so forth.
 Miss Brotherton, who always took more liberties than any one else, laughed
				immoderately; Lady Dowling looked the picture of  conjugal woe; and good
				Miss Mogg bustled forward with her usual amiable attention, put a footstool under
				the lady's misused white satin shoes, took Mrs. Janet Macnab's shawl off her
				shoulders, and whispered in her ear, that she was dreadfully afraid she must have
				caught cold. 
But Lady Clarissa, with a lively action of both hands at once, not only drove Miss
				Mogg back, but every one else who attempted to crowd round her, saying, "Give me
				space! give me space, I entreat you! I must have 'ample room and verge enough' to
				breathe. Such a series of adventures! Lady Dowling, you have no idea! Good heaven! I
				can hardly believe it myself. I have been in the greatest possible danger of losing
				my life — a beast — a monster — the most terrific animal certainly that nature ever
				permitted on the earth! You know, Mogg, I fear nothing — I have the spirit of my
				race within me. Who ever heard of a Highlandloch being afraid? But I give you my
				honour — I pledge my noble word to you all, that such a monster as that which I have
				escaped from this night, might have made the black Douglas fear!"
"Or the Earl of Warwick either, perhaps," said Miss Brotherton, for she had heard Sir
				Matthew utter the word "cow," in answer to the importunate inquiries of his eldest
				son.
"But what shall I say of Sir Matthew Dowling?" resumed Lady Clarissa, with increased
				energy. "Such benevolence! such noble, disinterested conduct! — No, I cannot — I
				really have no strength left. Miss Brotherton, my dear, pray do order your carriage;
				my nerves are in disorder, so is my dress — in short, I long to get home, and
				meditate in solitude on my providential escape."
Here Lady Clarissa found it necessary to lie down upon a sofa, her faithful Mogg
				endeavouring in vain to pull her dress over her slender feet and ankles, for her
				ladyship was restless, feverish, and unable to remain in the same attitude for a
				minute together.
Ere long, however, the carriage of the heiress was announced, and the languid Lady
				Clarissa exerted herself to reach it, with the aid of Miss Mogg's substantial arm on
				one side, and that of Sir Matthew Dowling on the other.
"Farewell, my friend!" she uttered with some effort, after taking her seat: "ere long
				I shall call upon you, and shall hope to see our interesting protegé looking very
				differently from what he did when we parted from him. Farewell! I do assure you I am
				almost fainting! Do ask — will you, dear Sir Matthew? — if the fruit, the pines
				particularly, are put in. I really think they will do me good, and I am sure I want
				it. Thank you! thank you! Adieu!

</div></body></text></TEI>