<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
 CHAPTER III. 
INTRODUCTION OF MICHAEL ARMSTRONG INTO THE FAMILY OF SIR MATTHEW DOWLING —
				CONJECTURES CONCERNING HIS PARENTAGE — A CONFABULATION BETWEEN SIR MATTHEW AND MR.
				JOSEPH PARSONS.

				When Mr. Macnab and his little companion entered the kitchen, in
				their way to the servants' hall, to which place of honour the wondering Scotchman
				remembered he had been commanded to conduct his charge, the first person they
				encountered was Mr. Simkins, the butler, whom some accidental wish or want had led
				to enter a region but rarely honoured by the sunshine of his presence.
"Good morning, Macnab. What! empty-handed? I am afraid you have forgotten the little
				basket of peaches I desired to have; and upon my word, sir, if you leave it much
				longer, I shall not consider them worth presenting to the lady for whom I desired to
				have them. Be pleased to recollect, good Mr. Sawney, that when every garden-wall is
				hung with ripe fruit, a bottle of comfort will be rather too high a price for a
				dozen."
"Your discourse, Mr. Simkins, is neither civil nor discreet in any way," replied the
				offended North Briton: "my word, sir, is as good as the bank, either in England or
				Scotland; and it is beneath a gentleman, to say nothing of your rank as a butler,
				Mr. Simkins, to suspect that I should forget it."
"Well, well, the sooner the better, that's all. But who in God's name have you got
				here?"
"That is more than I am able to tell you, sir," replied Macnab. "All I know about him
				is a mystery. Sir Matthew, and a lady that was hardly born to be so free in his
				company, came to the garden-house about an hour ago, and Sir Matthew was as gay as a
				lark, and ambled and smirked; while the Highlandloch's daughter, old fool! looked as
				well pleased as if she had been gallanted by the Duke of Argyle. Well, sir, he
				ordered a basket of the choicest and best for her ladyship, and it went against me,
				Mr. Simkins, both ways — for first it ought to choke her, seeing who she is, and who
				he is, and next I thought upon my promise to you, sir. However, and nevertheless,
				Mr. Simkins, I will keep my word with you, if it cost me a ton of coals more in the
				forcing."
"But what's all this to do with your ragged companion there? The child looks as if he
				was ready to drop. I'll bet a bottle you caught him thieving in the
				fruit-garden."
 The boy's colour rose on hearing these words. He spoke not, however; but his large
				eyes were turned up to the face of his companion, and the fingers of his little hand
				pressed the hard palm that held them, almost convulsively. Sawney understood the
				appeal, and answered it: for though, like many other gentlemen, his code of  honour was at some points a little loosened and enlarged, to fit and
				suit his individual circumstances, he felt the value of character as much as any
				man; and promptly replied, in good Scotch, which must, however, for sundry weighty
				reasons, be here translated into English: "No, no, Mr. Butler! no such thing, I
				assure you; the lad's as honest as I am, for aught that I know to the contrary. But,
				to make a short story of a long one, my lady walked off up the lane, after borrowing
				a shawl from my wife, and your master with her, Mr. Simkins, who but he — Well, I
				had picked the fruit, packed it, and delivered it over to my lady's man, and was
				just set down again to my seed-picking, when I heard Sir Matthew's big voice again
				halloaing to me, and when I came out, there stood the ill-sorted pair, arm in arm
				together, as before, and this ragged chap beside them." 
"Well! and what then?" ejaculated the portly butler, impatiently. "What a long-winded
				man you are, Macnab."
"Hoot, man!" retorted Macnab, "if you want the story, you must just find patience to
				hear it. 'Take this boy to the servants' hall,' said Sir Matthew, quite upon the
				strut, 'and order supper and a bed for him.'"
"To the servants' hall?" repeated the indignant man of bottles, measuring the little
				fellow from head to foot with an eye, which, notwithstanding it was small and
				bloodshot, was eloquent of scorn. "To the servants' hall? Sir Matthew will inflict
				his own company upon us next, I suppose. Why, look at the cotton fluff mixed with
				his hair! He is neither more nor less than a factory-boy."
"To be sure he is," replied the gardener, shrugging his shoulders, "but it's no fault
				of mine, Mr. Simkins; to the servants' hall I must take him, right or wrong. Come
				along, boy."
"Stop one moment, if you please, Macnab. Let me step to Mrs. Thompson's room, and
				speak one word to her about it. Sit down, sit down, will you, for one moment." And
				away hurried Mr. Simkins, scattering dismay as he traversed the passages, by
				uttering as he passed along to footmen and housemaids, abigail and page, "Go to the
				kitchen, do, in God's name! go and see the company Sir Matthew has been ordering
				into the servants' hall!"
And away they flew, one after another, eager to see the wonder; so that by the time
				Mr. Simkins himself returned to the kitchen, marshalling the housekeeper before him,
				at least half-a-dozen servants had assembled there, all of whom were gazing at
				little Michael, very much as if he had been caught in a forest, and conveyed thither
				to gratify their desire of studying natural history.
"Who is that dirty little boy, Macnab?" said the magnificent Mrs. Thompson, advancing
				to the spot where the gardener was seated with his frightened charge standing beside
				him, and all the lookers-on making way for her as she passed.
"It is a factory-boy sent here by Sir Matthew, Mrs. Thompson," replied Macnab, while,
				forestalling, it may be, the storm likely to follow the intelligence, he seemed to
				settle himself in the arm-chair either to enjoy the fun, or abide the tempest.

But he was, as it should seem, mistaken as to Mrs. Thompson's feelings; for that
				lady, though usually considered by the subordinates as somewhat warm in temper,
				appeared on this occasion to be as mild as a lamb.
"A factory-boy, certainly," she replied with the dignity that was peculiar to her,
				"nobody is likely to doubt that , Mr. Macnab; one might know his calling at
				half a mile's distance. The vulgar factory itself, with its millions of windows, is
				not more easily known than the things that crawl out of it, with their millions of
				cotton specks — that is not the main point of the question, Mr. Macnab: it is not
				what the boy is, but who he is, and for what reason any one has dared to say that he
				was to sup in the servants' hall."
"Oh! dear me, ma'am," replied the gardener, endeavouring to look very grave, "that
				wasn't one half of it. To you, ma'am, it's my duty to repeat Sir Matthew's words
				exact, and this is what he said. 'Macnab,' or 'Mr. Macnab,' for he calls me both at
				times, 'take this little boy,' says he, 'into the servants' hall, and tell every
				body there to take care of him — every body to take care of him' — that was it, Mrs.
				Thompson, word for word. And then he went on: 'He is to have a bed,' says he, 'made
				up on purpose for him, and he is to be waited upon with supper and breakfast,' and a
				great deal more, that Mr. Parsons is to make known to-morrow. But you have not heard
				all yet, ma'am," continued Macnab, raising his voice, on perceiving that the stately
				housekeeper was putting herself in act to speak. "Sir Matthew went on, raising his
				arm like one of his own steam-engines, 'Observe, Mr. Macnab,' says he, 'and take
				care that all the servants, little and great, know it, that this boy is to be
					the object of the greatest benevolence .' That's something new for you,
				Mrs. Thompson, isn't it?"
"Sir Matthew may settle about his benevolence with himself, when he is in his own pew
				at church," replied Mrs. Thompson, with a very satirical sort of smile; "but most
				certainly it shall not be brought to dirty my premises; so let me hear no more about
				it, gardener, if you please." And with these words, she turned haughtily away.
"But, ma'am — Mrs. Thompson, you had better stop if you please, for go I must, if
				that's your answer, and tell Sir Matthew of it."
 If Mr. Macnab had been a blacksmith instead of a gardener, he might have been less
				surprised at the phenomena which followed these words; for he would have known that
				white heat is stronger than red heat, though it does not look so fierce. He had
				fancied the housekeeper particularly calm and placable upon this occasion, because,
				forsooth, she looked rather pale than red when she entered the kitchen; but no
				sooner had he uttered this threat of reporting her words to Sir Matthew, than the
				fact of her being in an exceedingly terrible rage became evident. Notwithstanding
				the usual dignified gentility of her manner, on which, indeed, when more
				self-possessed, she greatly prided herself, she clenched her fists, raised her arms
				on high, and from one of the most imposing housekeepers  in the British
				dominions, suddenly assumed the aspect of an inspired fury. 
"Tell! — You? — Sir Matthew? — Blackguard! scoundrel! — base-born spinning spider! —
				I, that have lived with the Duke of Clarington!"
"'Tis two, too bad, and that's the fact!" exclaimed my Lady Dowling's own footman,
				who always sided with the principal person in company, which gave him very much the
				air of being a superior person himself; "and if I was Mrs. Thompson, I'd throw my
				salary in the vulgar fellow's face, before I'd bear to have a factory-boy pushed
				into my company."
"And so I will, Mr. Jennings, you may depend upon it," replied the incensed prime
				ministeress, somewhat softened: "so now, Mr. Macnab, you may just take yourself off,
				and leave the brat in the kitchen, or take him away with you, as you like best."
"I have done my share of the benevolent job, so I will wish you good night,
				Mrs. Thompson; and whether this little fellow eats his supper and breakfast in the
				kitchen or the hall, it will be much the same to him, I fancy." So saying, the
				gardener rose, and giving a sort of general nod to the company, left the
				kitchen.
Considering that there had been nothing very affectionate in the nature of the
				intercourse which had taken place between them, it was rather singular that the
				little Michael should feel as sorry as he did at the departure of Mr. Macnab. But he
				did feel sorry, and when the door shut after him, he turned away, and hid his face
				with his uplifted arm.
Pride of place, and elevation of character, having been in a considerable degree
				satisfied by Mrs. Thompson's energetic expression of her feelings, something like
				curiosity awoke within her to learn what the circumstances had been which had
				induced Sir Matthew Dowling to declare an intention of acting benevolently. For a
				moment she struggled against it, and again seemed about to leave the room; but as
				she turned her eyes upon the child, she seemed to feel that before one so very
				abject, no loss of importance could be feared, even if she did question him. So,
				with the air of a judge walking up to the bench, she stalked onwards to the seat Mr.
				Macnab had left, and placing her austere person in it, made a signal with her hand,
				that the kitchen-maid who had ventured to approach the little boy should stand back,
				and leave her space to examine him.
 On one side of this space stood the lordly butler, with his arms folded, and a look
				of scorn upon his countenance that seemed to question the propriety of the measure
				Mrs. Thompson had thought proper to adopt. On the other was the courtly Jennings,
				with an arm resting upon her chair, as if to give evidence that he was near at hand
				to support her. An extremely fat and very professional-looking cook came next, while
				my lady's own maid, with all the elegant superiority of attire which marks the
				station, held a scent-bottle to her nose, that the curiosity which led her to be a
				witness  of this extraordinary scene, might be punished with as little
				suffering as possible. Two sprightly housemaids seemed to find something vastly
				amusing in the whole business, though their evident merriment was restrained by the
				solemnity of Mrs. Thompson's manner. 
"Look up in my face, little boy," said the housekeeper, as soon as she had seated
				herself and saw that those around her stood still, as if they had taken their
				places, and were prepared to listen.
Michael did not move; he was probably ashamed to show that he was weeping, before the
				face of a lady who spoke so very grandly.
The kitchen-maid gave him a nudge, but a gentle one, whispering at the same time — "
				Look up, my boy. What be you 'feard of? There's nobody as wants to hurt you
				here."
Thus encouraged, Michael let his arm drop by his side, and discovered a face that was
				indeed sallow, and by no means very plump, but with features and expression which,
				whatever Sir Matthew Dowling's men and maids might think of it, might have sufficed
				to make the fortune of an able painter.
"Whose child are you?" demanded the housekeeper. "Mother's," replied the boy.
"I suspected as much," rejoined the inquisitor, half aside to Mr. Jennings.
"And I beant no ways surprised to hear it, I promise you," he replied.
Mrs. Thompson sighed deeply. "It is dreadful!" said she. Then, after taking a moment
				to recover herself, she resumed, "And where does the unhappy person live?"
"Please, ma'am, who?" said the puzzled boy.
"The — your mother, child. — Shame upon you for forcing me to name her!"
Michael gave a little shake of the head, which seemed to the merciful kitchen-maid to
				say, that he did not know what the great lady meant; but he presently replied, as if
				discreetly determined to mind only what he did understand, "Mother lives in Hoxley
				Lane, ma'am."
"The most deplorable situation in the whole parish! inhabited only by the
					very lowest!" observed the housekeeper, with another indignant
				sigh.
"So much the worse for she," muttered the kitchen-maid; but not loud enough to be
				heard by her in whose hands rested the appointment of kitchen-maids as well as
				cooks.
"And why does such as you come here?" resumed the housekeeper.
"Because the squire ordered t'other man to bring me," answered Michael.
 "I suspect that the boy is a natural fool," observed Mrs. Thompson, addressing the
				butler. "It is a sure fact, and a great dispensation — bad parents have almost
				always children out of  shape, both mind and body. You may take my word
				for that, all of you," she added, looking round her; "and you will do well to teach
				it to your children after you." 
"I'll be burnt if I don't think it very likely that it was his own father sent him
				here, and no one else," said Mr. Jennings, chuckling.
"Fie! Jennings, fie!" returned Mrs. Thompson, with a frown. "God in heaven only knows
				what may have been the cause of it! — Not but what it does look strange, there's no
				denying that."
"Do you know any thing about your father, child?" said Mr. Simkins in a magisterial
				tone.
"Father's in heaven," replied the child.
"Mercy on me! do you hear him? Is not that like mocking the Lord's prayer?" exclaimed
				the lady's-maid.
"No, it is not!" said Michael, while a flash of youthful indignation rushed into his
				face. "My father is in heaven along with God."
"I dare say he means that his father is dead," observed the butler with an air of
				great sagacity; "and if what has been jealoused at is correct," he added, winking
				his eye at Mr. Jennings, "it is very natural that he should have been told to say
				so."
"That's very true," said the housekeeper, "and it may be, certainly, that the child
				knows nothing about it whatever, either one way or t'other — indeed I think it's a
				good deal the most likely that he does not; — but, any how, it's a very shocking
				business, and, as far as I am concerned, I'll neither make nor meddle in the matter.
				— Of course, the men-servants may do just as they like about taking notice of him —
				for here he is, and here he will bide, I dare say; but I recommend the maids to
				follow my example, and not to injure their characters, nor to corrupt their morals
				by having any thing to do with the offspring of — It is more decent not to finish
				what I was going to say for your goods, young women, — and lucky it is that there is
				no need. You must all understand me without it."
Mrs. Thompson then rose from her chair, and turning her eyes, and indeed her head,
				aside, to prevent herself from again seeing Michael, she walked with a degree of
				stateliness and majesty that few housekeepers ever attained, through the kitchen,
				along the passage, across the servants' hall, into the sacred shelter of her own
				parlour, where she gave way to emotions which rendered a glass of prime London
				Madeira absolutely necessary.
Meanwhile Michael remained in no very happy condition in the kitchen. He was very
				tired, very sleepy, very thirsty, very much longing to see his mother and brother,
				and very greatly puzzled as to himself.
But though accounted to be a brave little fellow for his age, he could not muster
				courage enough to ask any question of those around him, and if he had, it would have
				been of no avail; for the very moment Mrs. Thompson was out of sight, so many of the
				servants began talking together, that no sounds his voice could produce would have
				been heard.
 Jokes and gibes about Sir Matthew, mingled with ridiculous anecdotes, and very
				cordial abuse of him and all his race, furnished  the first subject, and
				filled the first chorus. Then followed some facetious observations from Mr. Jennings
				concerning Mrs. Thompson, and a few of her peculiarities; and it was in the midst of
				the giggling which these occasioned, that the kitchen-maid ventured to say — 
"Well, now, you are all so keen, and so clever about her, that I wonder it don't come
				into your heads to find out that she spoke just like an old fool and no better, when
				she invented all that rigmarole about the boy. Master might be just the devil you
				says he is, and ten times worser too, for any thing I know about him; but the worser
				he is, the father I'd be, if I was such a mighty good gentlewoman as she thinks
				herself, from giving such a bad father out of my own invention to any body — whether
				they comed out of the factory or not."
"I do think Molly's right," said one of the housemaids. — "What business has the old
				frump to find a father for him? Nobody asked her."
"That may be all very true, Rebecca," observed the lady's-maid, shaking her head very
				gravely. "I know well enough, that Mrs. Thompson does not always wait for right and
				reason before she speaks — but that makes no difference as to our having any
				familiarity with this dirty little boy; for it certainly does appear plain enough,
				that his mother is very little better than she ought to be."
"Lord bless us! and how much better be you than you ought to be, I should like to
				know?" said the fat cook, who had her own reasons for not being at all partial to
				Mrs. Wittington, her ladyship's waiting-maid.
"I! — You miserable lump of kitchen-stuff, that no man in his senses would ever deign
				to look upon twice! Do you dare to say that I'm no better than I ought to be?"
Now the cook was an Irishwoman; and though she had famous black eyes, and teeth like
				an elephant, her principal claim to the coveted attentions of the other sex (setting
				aside the attractions which it is but fair to presume her profession gave her),
				arose from the ready sauciness of her tongue, which, in a brogue as strong as that
				of the Scotch gardener, and equally dangerous for the untaught to meddle with, was
				wont to rattle about her, right and left, sometimes scolding, but oftener making
				sport of all who crossed her humour.
 Now this virtuous outbreak of Mrs. Wittington, was too fair an opportunity to be
				lost; and accordingly, putting on as demure a look as her wicked eyes would let her,
				she replied, "You be better than you ought to be, be you? Well now, that's a trouble
				for your conscious, isn't it? — Is there nobody as can help her out of it? — Think
				what it is, gentlemen, to be so burdened, and she, poor soul, unable to confess to a
				priest, seeing she's a heretic! — Oh! she's better than she ought to be! and you've
				her own word for it too, and that's the reason you see why she's obliged, whether
				she will or no, to turn her back on this poor little fellow, just because he's
				fatherless. Isn't that a sore strait for a young lady's conscious? — Praise  and glory to the Holy Virgin, and all the company of saints, now and
				for ever more, that I beant one bit better than I ought to be, and I hope you beant
				neither, Molly; and so just run to the larder, will you, girl, and bring out
				something for supper, fit for a hungry little boy, that havn't the misfortune to be
				so burdened in mind as pretty Mrs. Wittington. — Oh! the poor soul! she's better
				than she ought to be!" 
Molly, the kitchen-maid, did not wait for a second order; and if a capital dish of
				cold cutlets could have set little Michael's heart at rest, he might then have been
				a very happy fellow; but, in truth, he was longing for his own porridge, by his own
				mother's bedside; and except from the relief afforded by a copious draught of milk,
				he went to the bed prepared for him by his friend, the kitchen-maid, so little
				elated in spirit, and so little thankful for the extraordinary change which had
				befallen him, that, had his noble patroness been made aware of it, she would, beyond
				all doubt, have punished his ingratitude, by requesting Sir Matthew to turn him out
				of doors again; and, moreover, have for ever abandoned the generous idea of
				surrounding his young head, as she poetically expressed it, with a halo of
				immortality, by means of getting Mr. Osmund Norval to relate his adventure in
				verse.
Sir Matthew Dowling went to his bed also, hardly better pleased with what had
				occurred than little Michael. But there was this difference between them: little
				Michael said his prayers, which the great Sir Matthew did not; but, on the contrary,
				spent his last waking moment in cursing, with great fervour of spirit, the folly of
				the hideous old maid, who had entailed such a detestable burden upon him — the
				result of which, as a peace-offering to the whole body of operatives, was at any
				rate but problematical.
Nevertheless, when he awoke the next morning with his head quite cool, he felt
				disposed to think more of the hint given him by his friend and favourite Dr.
				Crockley, and less of the inconvenience of having a few pounds to pay out of
				hundreds of thousands for a job, which, if well managed, might help, perhaps, to
				avert a monstrous deal of mischief.
With these rational thoughts working strongly in his ever-active brain, he rang his
				bell, and ordered that Joseph Parsons, his principal overlooker, should be sent for
				instantly, and shown into his study.
A short half-hour brought the master and man to a tête-à-tête in the snug
				little apartment described in the first chapter.
"Good morning, Parsons," said Sir Matthew.
The overlooker bowed his head respectfully.
"Have you heard any thing of this meeting at the Weavers' Arms, Parsons?" inquired
				Sir Matthew.
"As much as a man was likely to hear, Sir Matthew, who, as you will easily believe,
				was not intended to hear any thing," replied the confidential servant.
"And how much was that, Parsons? Sit down, Parsons — sit down, and let us hear all
				about it."

"I was a coming, sir, if you hadn't a sent for me," rejoined the overlooker; "for to
				say truth, my mind misgives me, that there's mischief brewing."
"I have heard as much," said the master; "but it can hardly have gone very far yet,
				if such a sharp-sighted fellow as you only suspect."
"That's true, sir," said the man, with a grim smile, in acknowledgment of the
				compliment; "and I've not been idle, I promise you. But all I know for certain is,
				that the people, old and young our own people I mean, have, one and all, taken
				dudgeon about that girl Stephens, that died the week before last, just after leaving
				the mill. She had been at work all day in the spinning-mill, and who was to guess
				that she was that low?"
"It was a d — d stupid thing though, Parsons, to have a girl go on working, and not
				know whether she was dying or not."
"And how is one to know, sir? I'll defy any man to find out, what with their tricks,
				and what with their real faintings."
"You won't tell me, Parsons, that if you set your wits to work, you can't tell
				whether they are shamming or not?"
"That's not the question, Sir Matthew, asking your pardon. There's no great
				difficulty in finding out whether they are in a real faint, or only making the most
				of being a little sickish from standing, and want of air. That's not the difficulty.
				The thing is to know, when they really take to the downright faintings, whether they
				are likely to live through it or not."
"And where is the great difficulty of that? You know Dr. Crockley would come at a
				moment's warning at any time, and feel their pulses."
"And he does do it, sir. But, in the first place, I doubt if any man can justly tell
				whether girls are likely to go on fainting, and up again, as lots and lots of 'em do
				for years, or drop down and die, as Nancy Stephens did. That's one thing; and
				another is, that Dr. Crockley is so fond of a joke, that 'tis rarely one knows when
				he speaks earnest, and when he does not. He did see Nancy Stephens, about a
				month ago, and all he said was, 'she do look a little pale in the gills, to be sure,
				but a dance would cure her, I have no doubt.' A dance! says I, doctor. And please to
				tell me, says I, how the work is to get on, if the factory boys and girls sets off
				dancing?"
"'Maybe you haven't got a fiddle?'" said he.
"Maybe I haven't," said I.
"'Well, then,' says he, 'if it don't suit you to let them dance to the fiddle, I'll
				bet ten to one you'll be after making 'em dance to the strap .' And with
				that, if you'll believe me, sir, he set off capering, and making antics, just as if
				there had been somebody behind a-strapping him. To be sure, it was fit to make one
				die of laughing to see him; but that's not the way you know, sir, to do one any good
				as to finding out the real condition of the people."

Sir Mathew could not resist a hearty laugh at this characteristic trait of his
				friend, but he concluded by acknowledging that Parsons was quite right in saying
				that this way of doing business was more agreeable than useful.
"However, Parsons," he continued, "we must not talk about that now, for I have
				something else to say to you. It is quite plain that they are getting again to their
				grumblings; and Crockley, who you know is up to every thing, says that he'll bet his
				life they have got some new mischief into their cursed heads. Now this must be
				prevented, Parsons, some way or other; for any harm they can do the machinery, is
				not the worst of it. — 'Tis the rousing up people's attention again, Parsons,
				there's the danger. — Just see what they've done about the blackamoor slaves, by
				going on boring for everlasting, ding-dong, ding-dong, till they actually got the
				thing done at last. Now the Philadelphy people and the Boston people are just
				playing the very same game t'other side the water; and when they have got their way,
				where will their national wealth be I should like to know? — And where will our
				national wealth be, when these rascals have contrived to stop the mills instead of
				working them?"
"Lord have mercy upon us! Sir Matthew; — if you don't make me creep all over to hear
				you!" exclaimed Parsons. "'Tis a pity, sir, and often's the time I have said it,
				that you arn't in parliament yourself — you'd pretty soon show 'em what their
				meddling with factories would do for the country."
"'Tis likely I might, Parsons; but a man can't be in two places at once — and depend
				upon it, there's good to be done here, if we knew how to set about it. I shall make
				you stare, perhaps, Mr. Parsons, when I tell you what I am about now. It came into
				my head by accident at first; but if I don't greatly mistake, I'll make a capital
				thing of it before I have done."
"There's no doubt of that, Sir Matthew, if you sets your mind to it, let it be what
				it will," replied the confidential overlooker; "and if it isn't a secret, sir, I
				should like uncommon much to hear it."
"No, it's no secret, Parsons — any thing in the world but that," replied Sir Matthew,
				laughing. "What should you say now, Mr. Superintendent, to my taking a dirty little
				dog of a piecer out of the factory into my own house, and dressing him, and feeding
				him, and lodging him, all for the love of pure benevolence, and little boys?"
"I don't quite understand you, sir," replied Mr. Joseph Parsons, looking very
				grave.
"No, I dare say you don't. But I think I do, Parsons, and that's more to the purpose.
				Trust me, man, it will do good if it's only by giving the people something to talk
				of just now, besides this confounded girl's death. And now, my good fellow, tell me
				all you know of a boy called Michael Armstrong, for he you must understand, is the
				hero of my tale."
 "That's the boy, is it? — Then that's why the chap didn't come  to work
				this morning," replied Mr. Parsons; "I knows him well enough, Sir Matthew, in
				course; for he's going on for eight or nine, and he comed to the factory just about
				five." 
"And what sort of a boy is he, Parsons?"
"Nothing very particular, Sir Matthew, unless it is because of the unaccountable fuss
				he makes about his elder brother, who is but a poor rickety, shriveldy sort of a
				child. For some reason or other, his bones never seemed to come rightly straight,
				and this Mike makes as great a fuss about him, as if he was his grandmother."
"Are the parents living?" inquired Sir Matthew.
"The mother is. She is a bedridden woman, and ought to be in the workhouse; but she's
				upish, and can't abide it, and so she lies abed, doing plain work and that, and the
				two boys' wages maintains 'em. But I did hear t'other day, she had given in, and was
				a begging to go into the house, and take the eldest boy with her. These creturs
				never know what they would be at. I suspect, howsomever, that she has got hold of a
				notion, that because he's so cripply, he beant to work no more; but I shall take
				care to see Butchel, the parish-overseer, about it. It is altogether a trick that,
				what won't answer — his fingers is just as able to handle the reels, and piece the
				threads as ever they was; and in course, a little dwarf like him, with his legs like
				crooked drumsticks, can't look for any but the youngest wages; so after all, he's
				one of them as answers best."
"No! Parsons, no! ejaculated Sir Matthew with sudden energy. That woman must not go
				into the workhouse. The whole thing shall be got up, I tell you, in the best
				possible style. What d'ye say now to getting the woman arrested for debt? — or
				having all her things sold? — and we just stepping in at the very nick of time, to
				save her from destruction!"
There was something so truly comic in the expression of the knight's countenance, as
				he said this, that even the saturnine Mr. Parsons could not help laughing.
"If the born devils don't sing your praises through the country, sir," said he, as
				soon as he had recovered his gravity, "why we must find some other way to go to work
				with them."
"Now then be off, Parsons, and contrive some clever scheme or other to throw the
					unhappy family into a quandary."
"I understand, sir," said Parsons, nodding his head, and so parted the master and the
				man.

</div></body></text></TEI>