<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Life and Adventures of Michael Armstrong, the Factory Boy</title><author>Trollope, Frances Milton (1780-1863)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1840</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
 CHAPTER XXIX. 
MICHAEL CALLS HIS WISDOM TO COUNCIL, AND THE POINTS TO BE DISCUSSED PUZZLE THEM — AN
				EARLY WALK — AN OLD FRIEND WITH A CHANGED FACE.

				To describe Michael Armstrong's feeling as he took his solitary way
				along what seemed to him the most unfrequented fields he could find, would be both a
				difficult and an unnecessary task. That his heart swelled with thankfulness and joy
				cannot be doubted; yet there was a vagueness and uncertainty as to what he ought
				immediately to do, which made him anxious and sad, even in the midst of hope and
				joy. The small sum he had been able to save from his wages had been spent, or very
				nearly so, since he set out upon his eventful expedition. He had already accepted a
				loan from the friendly old coachman of Miss Brotherton, and he shrunk from the idea
				of contracting more debts, while unable to say with certainty when they should be
				paid. How then was he to reach his brother in his happy distant home? And where and
				how was he to pass the anxious interval that must of necessity intervene before he
				could even know to what point he should direct his pilgrim steps, even had he the
				means of setting forth?
 The path he had taken proved to be a short cut leading into the highroad from Fairly
				to Ashleigh, and on quitting the fields he found himself close to the door of a
				public-house which he was tempted to select for his shelter as long as he remained
				in the neighbourhood, both because it was lonely, and because it was humble. Having
				entered there, bespoken a bed, and made a very frugal repast, he 
				inquired the distance to Dowling Lodge, and finding it was greater than he could
				traverse on foot with any hope of returning in decent time to occupy his newly-taken
				lodging, he resolved to wait till the following morning, when, by setting off at
				daybreak, he might be able to make his visit to Martha, and perhaps report the
				result of it to Mr. Bell, before he slept. 
His mind had too much on which to employ itself for him to feel the afternoon a long
				one: an orchard close behind the little inn, afforded him shade and soft turf
				whereon to sit or lie, or to pace backwards and forwards, with unequal steps, as he
				meditated on the chances for and against his ever being one in the happy, thrice
				happy party described by Miss Brotherton. Nor had he wearied of these exciting, but
				most anxious thoughts, when the moon, and the stars, and the heavy dew warned him at
				length that the day was gone, and night come. And then he remembered that, in order
				to follow Mr. Bell's advice, he must prepare himself with a letter to Miss Martha,
				which it would be necessary to write before he went to bed. Fortunately his
					hotel was able to furnish the needful implements, and after a little
				reflection, he penned the following note:
"A poor lad, to whom Miss Martha Dowling once showed much charitable kindness, is now
				waiting at the park-gates, to know if he may pay his duty to her. He takes the
				freedom of asking for this favour, because he has been told that she would be
				pleased to hear he was alive and well." Having directed this to Miss Martha Dowling,
				and sealed it in the best manner he could, he retired to his little bed in a state
				of mind that hovered between inexpressible felicity, and anxiety that he was hardly
				able to bear.
He was afoot in time to hear the lark's first overture on the following morning: and
				his spirits, cheered by the bracing influence of the delicious hour, and by the
				sound sleep which had preceded it, enabled him to breakfast on a slice of brown
				bread, bespoken the night before, and laid ready for him, with a draught of icy-cold
				water from a neighbouring well, without any mixture of melancholy, though he thought
				the while of all the dangers and difficulties he might have to encounter ere he
				stood beside his Edward on the beautiful terrace to which his dreams had transported
				him so easily.
Michael was a stout walker, and had reached the well-remembered precincts of Dowling
				Lodge soon after the earliest servants were stirring. He had made up his mind to be
				the bearer of his own letter, and accordingly, having shown the address to the woman
				at the lodge as a reason for being permitted to enter, he approached the stately
				mansion by the road which led to the offices, and intrusting his epistle to the
				first female he encountered, requested her to deliver it to Miss Martha without
				delay.
"Why she bean't up yet," said the girl, looking at him, however, with the
				good-humoured smile with which light-hearted young damsels are wont to greet such
				very handsome lads as our Michael.
"But perhaps you will be so good as to let her have it as soon as she is awake?" he
				replied, returning the smile.
 "Well, poor thing, and that may be now, most likely," returned  the
				girl, "for her cough often wakes her before this time. Will you wait for an answer?" 
"I won't trouble the servants by staying here," replied Michael; "but if you please
				you may tell the young lady that I will walk up and down the road till she can let
				me have it. Does Miss Martha walk out early in the mornings, as she used to do?" he
				added.
"That's just what she likes best, poor thing," replied the girl. "But you needn't be
				afeard that she's gone out already; for if she had, I should have been sure to have
				seed her; for she never has the great door opened for her at this time of day, for
				fear of disturbing my lady, who always lies unaccountable late."
"And does Sir Matthew rise early now?" demanded Michael with some anxiety.
"He! — not he! He eats and sleeps like a pig, they say; but he is grumpier than ever
				he was, both to men and maids too, since he married the new lady. I wonder as I
				never happened to see you before, as you seem to know 'em all so well."
"It is several years since I was last here," returned Michael; "but run up stairs
				with it, there's a dear girl, will you? because I want to get my answer and be
				off."
"You had better stop here till I come down again," replied his good-natured
				messenger, "instead of walking up and down the road, without knowing whether there's
				an answer or no — sit down in the kitchen, and I'll be back in no time."
And into the kitchen he went — the selfsame kitchen which just eight years before had
				been the scene of his painful examination by Sir Matthew Dowling's servants.' He
				remembered the room perfectly; could have pointed out the exact spot where the awful
				housekeeper sat, and the place where he had himself stood, with no better champion
				to sustain his courage than the greasy kitchen-maid, whose pitying broad face, bent
				over him, he recollected as perfectly as if it had beamed upon him but the day
				before. He was still deeply revolving these interesting reminiscences, and the
				strange contrast they offered to his present hopes, when his envoy returned — "Miss
				Martha wants to know your name, young man," she said, "but she is getting up, and
				will be walking in the park as usual, she says, presently, so it is likely enough
				that she will give you the answer herself."
"Very well," replied Michael, perfectly satisfied — "good morning! — I am very much
				obliged to you."
"But you haven't told me your name, and Miss Martha says that she should like to know
				it."
"My name isn't one that would make any difference," he replied, "so I won't trouble
				you to go up again about that — good bye!" And without waiting for any further
				discussion, he walked off, exceedingly well pleased at having arranged the wished
				for tête-à-tête so satisfactorily. The noble dimensions of the park enabled
				Michael to select a space amply sufficient for his promenade which was neither
				within sight of the mansion nor the lodge, and ere he had made many turns upon it,
				he perceived the lady he wished to see, approaching him.
 He could not doubt that it was Martha, for at that hour of the  morning
				none other was at all likely to be there; but she was too much altered for him to
				recognise her in any degree. He thought she was taller than he had expected to see
				her, but at any rate she was greatly thinner, and so delicately pale, that her
				appearance was rather a contrast, than a resemblance to what he had expected to
				meet. She was already near him when he turned upon the path, and met her. He
				stopped, took off his hat, and bowed respectfully. 
"You are Miss Martha Dowling, ma'am?" he said interrogatively.
"Yes," replied Martha, "that is my name, but when did I see you before, young man? I
				do not know you."
"It is a great many years, Miss Martha — but I can never forget your kindness."
The pale cheek of Martha was tinted with a vivid blush, as she exclaimed, "If it were
				possible — if I did not know that he was dead — But this is nonsense," she added,
				recovering her composure. "I quite forget your person, young man," she continued,
				after a pause: "But if I have ever done you any service, I am glad of it. Perhaps if
				you tell me your name I may remember the circumstances to which you allude."
"Oh! Miss Martha!" replied Michael, "I am afraid my name will startle you, and
				therefore I do not like to speak it. But I think it came into your head just now,
				only you stopped short, and said it was impossible."
"Can it be Michael Armstrong that I see?" demanded Martha, in an agitated voice.
"It is indeed, Miss Martha!" he replied. "It is Michael Armstrong, come back to thank
				you for all your great kindness to him."
"My kindness to Michael Armstrong?" she exclaimed. — "Alas! it was I who occasioned
				all his sufferings, and, as I have thought for many years, his death. How is it you
				have been saved, Michael? How is it you have escaped from the horrid place to which
				I was the cause of your being sent?"
"My dear Miss Martha!" returned Michael, greatly affected by her look of ill-health,
				and by the agitation she displayed — for tears were trickling fast down her pale
				cheeks. "My dear Miss Martha," he said, " I know, if nobody else does, the
				kind motive that you had for every word you spoke — and was it not I myself that
				said I wanted to go, Miss Martha, when we walked together from here, down to poor
				mother's house? Never, never can I thank you enough for all your goodness then, as
				well as at all other times, from the very first moment that ever I saw you?"
"Thank God!" cried poor Martha, fervently clasping her hands, and raising her eyes to
				heaven, "you know not, Michael, what a load you have taken from my heart! I have for
				years lived under the dreadful weight of believing myself to be your murderer. The
				thought has haunted me by night, and rarely quitted me by day. And my poor father
				too! This crime at least he has not to answer for!"
 Michael could not help thinking — though for worlds he would not have lessened her
				pious satisfaction by uttering the thought — that  though he had
				escaped with life from the terrible sufferings to which he had been exposed, he owed
				Sir Matthew but little gratitude for it. Fortunately, however, for his veracity, he
				was not called upon to answer this observation, for Martha immediately added. 
"Does Miss Brotherton know that you are alive, Michael?"
"No, Miss Martha, she does not," he replied; "my brother Edward is living with her in
				some place abroad, and till yesterday I have existed in the dismal belief that
					he was dead, and that I had not a single relation in the whole
				world."
"And where are you living, Michael? What is your home now? And how did you escape
				from the dismal place to which you were sent as an apprentice?"
In answer to this, Michael related, as briefly as he could contrive to do it, all
				that had happened to him, confessing freely that he had run away, and that he
				supposed he was liable to be sent back again to work out his time, if Sir Matthew
				discovered that he was alive, and if it were his pleasure to do it.
"We will not talk of any thing of that kind, Michael," said Martha, a bright blush
				again visiting her cheek. "It would not be prudent, certainly, for you to make
				yourself known here — and I particularly desire that you will not do it. I am
				grateful, oh! most grateful, for your coming to tell me that the dismal news of your
				death was not true, but now that you have set my heart at rest on that score, do not
				come here again, Michael — Lady Clarissa is very particular about every body that
				comes to the house — and — in short — though I shall always have the greatest regard
				for you, Michael — I would a great deal rather that you did not come to Dowling
				Lodge again."
 Michael perfectly understood, though it was evident she would not avow it, that poor
				Martha had fears for his safety, should Sir Matthew discover him; and without giving
				her the slightest reason to suppose that he saw this, he assured her that he was
				going immediately from Ashleigh without any intention of returning to it. Martha
				then looked at her watch, and seeing that there was still above an hour to spare
				before the usual time at which the family came down stairs, ventured to seat herself
				on the trunk of a newly-felled tree, while she questioned the youth, for whom she
				still felt the strongest interest, as to what his projects were, and when, and how
				he thought of leaving England to join his brother. With frank and touching
				simplicity, Michael entered freely into all his harassing doubts and difficulties —
				confessed that he had not a shilling in the world that he could call his own, and,
				worse still, that he could not help feeling a strong repugnance to throwing himself
				wholly on the charity of Miss Brotherton, for no other reason in the world than
				because she had nobly provided for his brother. "To know that Edward is alive, and
				not endeavour to see him is impossible," he continued. "But I would fain earn money
				enough, if it were possible, to enable me to get to him without being chargeable to
				her, and once within reach of him — once near enough to his dwelling-place to know
				that we need never be many days asunder, I should not fear but that I might earn my
				living, without being indebted to charity  for it. I was always
				stronger than Edward, you know, Miss Martha, and there is no reason because he lives
				an idle life, dear fellow, that I should do so too." 
"Michael!" she replied, her whole countenance lighted up with the most animated
				expression of pleasure, "my dear Michael Armstrong! your coming here is certainly
				the greatest blessing that Heaven could have sent me. I cannot tell you, and you can
				never know, all I have suffered from believing you were dead, and from
					knowing that I had been the cause of great and terrible suffering to
				you. And that, too, wholly owing to the trust which you, and your poor mother
				reposed in me! May you never, my dear boy, know what it is to have a conscience
				burdened as mine has been. Be very sure that it is worse than any thing you could
				have suffered at the Deep Valley, Michael! When you see Mary Brotherton, tell her
				that I owned this to you — and perhaps she may think, at last, that she judged me
				rather more harshly than I deserved."
"If she judged you harshly at all, she was very wrong," replied Michael, warmly.
				"People should know, before they judge. Nobody who really knew you, could
				judge you harshly."
"I had rather that kind sentence came from your lips, Michael, than from those of any
				other human being. If you can say it, and mean it too, as I am sure you do,
				who is there living that can have a right to say the contrary? Yet this is not my
				only pleasure — I happen to have the power — and I bless my poor father for it — of
				making some little atonement for the years of suffering that I so unwittingly caused
				you. From the day we were each of us fifteen, we have received an allowance of sixty
				pounds a year for dress, and though I really never wanted one-half so much as my
				sisters, my father, who has ever been a kind father to me, has always insisted upon
				my having the same, and at the marriage of my two elder sisters, he gave me a
				hundred pounds each time, that I might be smart. But I have no taste for finery,
				Michael, it always made me melancholy; so I am very rich — I really do not know how
				rich, for I have always kept on laying the bank-notes that I did not want in a
				drawer, and I have never counted them. Think if it will not be a pleasure for me now
				to open that drawer, and give you all that is in it? Oh! with what different
				feelings shall I go to bed to-night from any I have felt for years past! I am sure
				there must be enough to take you to Italy, or wherever else Miss Brotherton may be
				gone, and to set you up in some little business into the bargain. Wait here only ten
				minutes, my dear Michael, and I will return with my treasure — a real treasure now,
				and for the first time that I ever thought it so!"
Martha had risen from her seat as she spoke, and literally before Michael could
				recover from his atonishment sufficiently to answer her, she was already at some
				distance from him. He had by no means settled to his satisfaction the question of
				whether he ought, or ought not, to strip the generous Martha of her little hoard
				when she again appeared. But she looked hurried and out of breath.
 "Make haste, Michael, dear Michael!" she said, with much agitation. 
				"For pity's sake let me not be again plunged in all the misery of self-reproach from
				which I have so recently escaped. Take this parcel, Michael! Nay, never stay to
				count them! My father has left his room — may have inquired for me — and even now be
				following me. Bless you, Michael! Bless you! Go, go, for goodness sake, and leave
				the country as quickly as possible." 
With these words she turned from him, and with a step too rapid for her state of
				health, and plainly showing her extreme anxiety, she hastily retreated towards the
				house.
Though after hearing Mr. Bell's decided opinion that no further danger was to be
				feared from Sir Matthew Dowling, Michael would himself have felt not the least
				desire to run away from him, yet it was impossible not to perceive that Martha was
				of a different mind, and that for some reason or other she was exceedingly anxious
				that he should not remain near Dowling Lodge, or, in other words, within her
				father's reach. Whether she were right, or wrong, in fancying that it was necessary
				for his safety that he should keep out of the way, he felt that it would be cruel to
				oppose her; and with the unexamined roll of bank-notes thrust into his coat-pocket,
				he gave but one farewell look at the retreating drapery of poor Martha, and then
				with rapid strides, and thoughts so full of the scene which had just passed, that he
				followed the right path rather mechanically than from judgment, he set off upon his
				return to the humble lodging he had secured for the night.
</div></body></text></TEI>