
CHAPTER IV.
OLD ALICE'S HISTORY.

To envy nought beneath the ample sky;
 To mourn no evil deed, no hour mis-spent;
 And, like a living violet, silently
 Return in sweets to Heaven what goodness lent,
Then bend beneath the chastening shower content.
Elliott.
Another year passed on. The waves of time seemed long since to have swept away all trace of
     poor Mary Barton. But her husband still thought of her, although with a calm and quiet grief,
     in the silent watches of the night: and Mary would start from her hard-earned sleep, and think
     in her half-dreamy, half-awakened state, she saw her mother stand by her bed-side, as she used
     to do "in the days of long-ago;" with a shaded candle and an expression of ineffable
     tenderness, while she looked on her sleeping child. But Mary rubbed her eyes and sank back on
     her pillow, awake, and knowing it was a dream; and still, in all her troubles and perplexities,
     her heart called on her mother for aid, and she thought, "If mother had but lived, she would
     have helped me." Forgetting that the woman's sorrows are far more difficult to mitigate than a
     child's, even by the mighty power of a mother's love; and unconscious of the fact, that she was
     far superior in sense and spirit to the mother she mourned. Aunt Esther was still mysteriously
     absent, and people had grown weary of wondering and began to forget. Barton still attended his
     club, and was an active member of a trades' union; indeed, more frequently than ever, since the
     time of Mary's return in the evening was so uncertain; and, as she occasionally, in very busy
     times, remained all night. His chiefest friend was still George Wilson, although he had no
     great sympathy on the questions that agitated Barton's mind. Still their hearts were bound by
     old ties to one another, and the remembrance of former times gave an unspoken charm to their
     meetings. Our old friend, the cub-like lad, Jem Wilson, had shot up into the powerful,
     well-made young man, with a sensible face enough; nay, a face that might have been handsome,
     had it not been here and there marked by the small-pox. He worked with one of the great firms
     of engineers, who send from out their towns of workshops engines and machinery to the dominions
     of the Czar and the Sultan. His father and mother were never weary of praising Jem, at all
     which commendation pretty Mary Barton would toss her head, seeing clearly enough that they
     wished her to understand what a good husband he would make, and to favour his love, about which
     he never dared to speak, whatever eyes and looks revealed.
One day, in the early winter time, when people were provided with warm substantial gowns, not
     likely soon to wear out, and when, accordingly, business was rather slack at Miss Simmonds',
     Mary met Alice Wilson, coming home from her half-day's work at some tradesman's house. Mary and
     Alice had always liked each other; indeed, Alice looked with particular interest on the
     motherless girl, the daughter of her whose forgiving kiss had so comforted her in many
     sleepless hours. So there was a warm greeting between the tidy old woman and the blooming young
     work-girl; and then Alice ventured to ask if she would come in and take her tea with her that
     very evening.
"You'll think it dull enough to come just to sit with an old woman like me, but there's a
     tidy young lass as lives in the floor above, who does plain work, and now and then a bit in
     your own line, Mary; she's grand-daughter to old Job Legh, a spinner, and a good girl she is.
     Do come, Mary! I've a terrible wish to make you known to each other. She's a genteel-looking
     lass, too."
At the beginning of this speech Mary had feared the intended visitor was to be no other than
     Alice's nephew; but Alice was too delicate-minded to plan a meeting, even for her dear Jem,
     when one would have been an unwilling party; and Mary, relieved from her apprehension by the
     conclusion, gladly agreed to come. How busy Alice felt! it was not often she had any one to
     tea; and now her sense of the duties of a hostess were almost too much for her. She made haste
     home, and lighted the unwilling fire, borrowing a pair of bellows to make it burn the faster.
     For herself she was always patient; she let the coals take their time. Then she put on her
     pattens, and went to fill her kettle at the pump in the next court, and on the way she borrowed
     a cup; of odd saucers she had plenty, serving as plates when occasion required. Half an ounce
     of tea and a quarter of a pound of butter went far to absorb her morning's wages; but this was
     an unusual occasion. In general, she used herb-tea for herself, when at home, unless some
     thoughtful mistress made her a present of tea-leaves from her more abundant household. The two
     chairs drawn out for visitors, and duly swept and dusted; an old board arranged with some skill
     upon two old candle-boxes set on end (rather ricketty to be sure, but she knew the seat of old,
     and when to sit lightly; indeed the whole affair was more for apparent dignity of position than
     for any real ease); a little, very little round table put just before the fire, which by this
     time was blazing merrily; her unlackered, ancient, third-hand tea-tray arranged with a black
     tea-pot, two cups with a red and white pattern, and one with the old friendly willow pattern,
     and saucers, not to match (on one of the extra supply, the lump of butter flourished away); all
     these preparations complete, Alice began to look about her with satisfaction, and a sort of
     wonder what more could be done to add to the comfort of the evening. She took one of the chairs
     away from its appropriate place by the table, and putting it close to the broad large hanging
     shelf I told you about when I first described her cellar-dwelling, and mounting on it, she
     pulled towards her an old deal box, and took thence a quantity of the oat bread of the north,
     the clap-bread of Cumberland and Westmoreland, and descending carefully with the thin cakes
     threatening to break to pieces in her hand, she placed them on the bare table, with the belief
     that her visitors would have an unusual treat in eating the bread of her childhood. She brought
     out a good piece of a four-pound loaf of common household bread as well, and then sat down to
     rest, really to rest, and not to pretend, on one of the rush-bottomed chairs. The candle was
     ready to be lighted, the kettle boiled, the tea was awaiting its doom in its paper parcel; all
     was ready.
A knock at the door! It was Margaret, the young workwoman who lived in the rooms above, who
     having heard the bustle, and the subsequent quiet, began to think it was time to pay her visit
     below. She was a sallow, unhealthy, sweet-looking young woman, with a careworn look; her dress
     was humble and very simple, consisting of some kind of dark stuff gown, her neck being covered
     by a drab shawl or large handkerchief, pinned down behind and at the sides in front. The old
     woman gave her a hearty greeting, and made her sit down on the chair she had just left, while
     she balanced herself on the board seat, in order that Margaret might think it was quite her
     free and independent choice to sit there.
"I cannot think what keeps Mary Barton. She's quite grand with her late hours," said Alice,
     as Mary still delayed.
The truth was, Mary was dressing herself; yes, to come to poor old Alice's—she thought it
     worth while to consider what gown she should put on. It was not for Alice, however, you may be
     pretty sure; no, they knew each other too well. But Mary liked making an impression, and in
     this it must be owned she was pretty often gratified—and there was this strange girl to
     consider just now. So she put on her pretty new blue merino, made tight to her throat, her
     little linen collar and linen cuffs, and sallied forth to impress poor gentle Margaret. She
     certainly succeeded. Alice, who never thought much about beauty, had never told Margaret how
     pretty Mary was; and, as she came in half-blushing at her own self-consciousness, Margaret
     could hardly take her eyes off her, and Mary put down her long black lashes with a sort of
     dislike of the very observation she had taken such pains to secure. Can you fancy the bustle of
     Alice to make the tea, to pour it out, and sweeten it to their liking, to help and help again
     to clap-bread and bread-and-butter? Can you fancy the delight with which she watched her
     piled-up clap-bread disappear before the hungry girls, and listened to the praises of her
     home-remembered dainty?
"My mother used to send me some clap-bread by any north-country person—bless her! She knew
     how good such things taste when far away from home. Not but what every one likes it. When I was
     in service my fellow-servants were always glad to share with me. Eh, it's a long time ago,
     yon."
"Do tell us about it, Alice," said Margaret.
"Why, lass, there's nothing to tell. There was more mouths at home than could be fed. Tom,
     that's Will's father (you don't know Will, but he's a sailor to foreign parts), had come to
     Manchester, and sent word what terrible lots of work was to be had, both for lads and lasses.
     So father sent George first (you know George, well enough, Mary), and then work was scarce out
     toward Burton, where we lived, and father said I maun try and get a place. And George wrote as
     how wages were far higher in Manchester than Milnthorpe or Lancaster; and, lasses, I was young
     and thoughtless, and thought it was a fine thing to go so far from home. So, one day, th'
     butcher he brings us a letter fra George, to say he'd heard on a place—and I was all agog to
     go, and father was pleased, like; but mother said little, and that little was very quiet. I've
     often thought she was a bit hurt to see me so ready to go—God forgive me! But she packed up my
     clothes, and some o' the better end of her own as would fit me, in yon little paper box up
     there—it's good for nought now, but I would liefer live without fire than break it up to be
     burnt; and yet it's going on for eighty years old, for she had it when she was a girl, and
     brought all her clothes in it to father's, when they were married. But, as I was saying, she
     did not cry, though the tears was often in her eyes; and I seen her looking after me down the
     lane as long as I were in sight, with her hand shading her eyes—and that were the last look I
     ever had on her."
Alice knew that before long she should go to that mother; and, besides, the griefs and bitter
     woes of youth have worn themselves out before we grow old; but she looked so sorrowful that the
     girls caught her sadness, and mourned for the poor woman who had been dead and gone so many
     years ago.
"Did you never see her again, Alice? Did you never go home while she was alive?" asked
     Mary.
"No, nor since. Many a time and oft have I planned to go. I plan it yet, and hope to go home
     again before it please God to take me. I used to try and save money enough to go for a week
     when I was in service; but first one thing came, and then another. First, missis's children
     fell ill of the measles, just when th' week I'd ask'd for came, and I couldn't leave them, for
     one and all cried for me to nurse them. Then missis herself fell sick, and I could go less than
     ever. For, you see, they kept a little shop, and he drank, and missis and me was all there was
     to mind children, and shop, and all, and cook and wash besides."
Mary was glad she had not gone into service, and said so.
"Eh, lass! thou little knows the pleasure o' helping others; I was as happy there as could
     be; almost as happy as I was at home. Well, but next year I thought I could go at a leisure
     time, and missis telled me I should have a fortnight then, and I used to sit up all that winter
     working hard at patchwork, to have a quilt of my own making to take to my mother. But master
     died, and missis went away fra Manchester, and I'd to look out for a place again."
"Well, but," interrupted Mary, "I should have thought that was the best time to go home."
"No, I thought not. You see it was a different thing going home for a week on a visit, may be
     with money in my pocket to give father a lift, to going home to be a burden to him. Besides,
     how could I hear o' a place there? Anyways I thought it best to stay, though perhaps it might
     have been better to ha' gone, for then I should ha' seen mother again;" and the poor old woman
     looked puzzled.
"I'm sure you did what you thought right," said Margaret, gently.
"Ay, lass, that's it," said Alice, raising her head and speaking more cheerfully. "That's the
     thing, and then let the Lord send what He sees fit; not but that I grieved sore, oh, sore and
     sad, when toward spring next year, when my quilt were all done to th' lining, George came in
     one evening to tell me mother was dead. I cried many a night at after; [3] I'd no time for crying by day, for that missis was terrible strict; she would not
     hearken to my going to th' funeral; and indeed I would have been too late, for George set off
     that very night by th' coach, and th' letter had been kept or summut (posts were not like th'
     posts now-a-days), and he found the burial all over, and father talking o' flitting; for he
     couldn't abide the cottage after mother was gone."
"Was it a pretty place?" asked Mary.
"Pretty, lass! I never seed such a bonny bit anywhere. You see there are hills there as seem
     to go up into th' skies, not near may be, but that makes them all the bonnier. I used to think
     they were the golden hills of heaven, about which my mother sang when I was a child,

'Yon are the golden hills o' heaven,
Where ye sall never win.'
Something about a ship and a lover that should hae been na lover, the ballad was. Well, and
     near our cottage were rocks. Eh, lasses! ye don't know what rocks are in Manchester! Gray
     pieces o' stone as large as a house, all covered over wi' moss of different colours, some
     yellow, some brown; and the ground beneath them knee-deep in purple heather, smelling sae sweet
     and fragrant, and the low music of the humming-bee for ever sounding among it. Mother used to
     send Sally and me out to gather ling and heather for besoms, and it was such pleasant work! We
     used to come home of an evening loaded so as you could not see us, for all that it was so light
     to carry. And then mother would make us sit down under the old hawthorn tree (where we used to
     make our house among the great roots as stood above th' ground), to pick and tie up the
     heather. It seems all like yesterday, and yet it's a long long time agone. Poor sister Sally
     has been in her grave this forty year and more. But I often wonder if the hawthorn is standing
     yet, and if the lasses still go to gather heather, as we did many and many a year past and
     gone. I sicken at heart to see the old spot once again. May be next summer I may set off, if
     God spares me to see next summer."
"Why have you never been in all these many years?" asked Mary.
"Why, lass! first one wanted me and then another; and I couldn't go without money either, and
     I got very poor at times. Tom was a scapegrace, poor fellow, and always wanted help of one kind
     or another; and his wife (for I think scapegraces are always married long before steady folk)
     was but a helpless kind of body. She were always ailing, and he were always in trouble; so I
     had enough to do with my hands and my money too, for that matter. They died within twelvemonth
     of each other, leaving one lad (they had had seven, but the Lord had taken six to Himself),
     Will, as I was telling you on; and I took him myself, and left service to make a bit on a
     home-place for him, and a fine lad he was, the very spit of his father as to looks, only
     steadier. For he was steady, although nought would serve him but going to sea. I tried all I
     could to set him again a sailor's life. Says I, 'Folks is as sick as dogs all the time they're
     at sea. Your own mother telled me (for she came from foreign parts, being a Manx woman) that
     she'd ha thanked any one for throwing her into the water.' Nay, I sent him a' the way to
     Runcorn by th' Duke's canal, that he might know what th' sea were; and I looked to see him come
     back as white as a sheet wi' vomiting. But the lad went on to Liverpool and saw real ships, and
     came back more set than ever on being a sailor, and he said as how he had never been sick at
     all, and thought he could stand the sea pretty well. So I telled him he mun do as he liked; and
     he thanked me and kissed me, for all I was very frabbit [4] with
     him; and now he's gone to South America, at t'other side of the sun, they tell me."
Mary stole a glance at Margaret to see what she thought of Alice's geography; but Margaret
     looked so quiet and demure, that Mary was in doubt if she were not really ignorant. Not that
     Mary's knowledge was very profound, but she had seen a terrestrial globe, and knew where to
     find France and the continents on a map.
After this long talking Alice seemed lost for a time in reverie; and the girls, respecting
     her thoughts, which they suspected had wandered to the home and scenes of her childhood, were
     silent. All at once she recalled her duties as hostess, and by an effort brought back her mind
     to the present time.
"Margaret, thou must let Mary hear thee sing. I don't know about fine music myself, but folks
     say Margaret is a rare singer, and I know she can make me cry at any time by singing 'Th'
     Owdham Weaver.' Do sing that, Margaret, there's a good lass."
With a faint smile, as if amused at Alice's choice of a song, Margaret began.
Do you know "The Oldham Weaver?" Not unless you are Lancashire born and bred, for it is a
     complete Lancashire ditty. I will copy it for you.  

THE OLDHAM WEAVER.
Oi'm a poor cotton-weyver, as mony a one knoowas,
 Oi've nowt for t' yeat, an' oi've woorn eawt my clooas,
 Yo'ad hardly gi' tuppence for aw as oi've on,
 My clogs are boath brosten, an' stuckins oi've none,
Yo'd think it wur hard,
To be browt into th' warld,
 To be—clemmed, 
[5]
 an' do th' best as yo con.
II.
Owd Dicky o' Billy's kept telling me lung,
 Wee s'd ha' better toimes if I'd but howd my tung,
 Oi've howden my tung, till oi've near stopped my breath,
 Oi think i' my heeart oi'se soon clem to deeath,
Owd Dicky's weel crammed,
He never wur clemmed,
 An' he ne'er picked ower i' his loife. 
[6]
III.
We tow'rt on six week—thinking aitch day wur th' last,
 We shifted, an' shifted, till neaw we're quoite fast;
 We lived upo' nettles, whoile nettles wur good,
 An' Waterloo porridge the best o' eawr food,
Oi'm tellin' yo' true,
Oi can find folk enow,
 As wur livin' na better nor me.
IV.
Owd Billy o' Dans sent th' baileys one day,
 Fur a shop deebt oi eawd him, as oi could na pay,
 But he wur too lat, fur owd Billy o' th' Bent,
 Had sowd th' tit an' cart, an' ta'en goods fur th' rent,
We'd neawt left bo' th' owd stoo',
That wur seeats fur two,
 An' on it ceawred Marget an' me.
Then t' baileys leuked reawnd as sloy as a meawse,
When they seed as aw t' goods were ta'en eawt o' t' heawse,
 Says one chap to th' tother, "Aws gone, theaw may see;"
 Says oi, "Ne'er freet, mon, yeaur welcome ta' me."
They made no moor ado
But whopped up th' eawd stoo',
 An' we booath leet, whack—upo' t' flags!
VI.
Then oi said to eawr Marget, as we lay upo' t' floor,
 "We's never be lower i' this warld, oi'm sure,
 If ever things awtern, oi'm sure they mun mend,
 For oi think i' my heart we're booath at t' far eend;
For meeat we ha' none;
Nor looms t' weyve on,—
 Edad! they're as good lost as fund."
VII.
Eawr Marget declares had hoo cloo'as to put on,
 Hoo'd goo up to Lunnon an' talk to th' greet mon;
 An' if things were na awtered when there hoo had been,
 Hoo's fully resolved t' sew up meawth an' eend;
Hoo's neawt to say again t' king,
But hoo loikes a fair thing,
 An' hoo says hoo can tell when hoo's hurt.
The air to which this is sung is a kind of droning recitative, depending much on expression
     and feeling. To read it, it may, perhaps, seem humorous; but it is that humour which is near
     akin to pathos, and to those who have seen the distress it describes, it is a powerfully
     pathetic song. Margaret had both witnessed the destitution, and had the heart to feel it; and
     withal, her voice was of that rich and rare order, which does not require any great compass of
     notes to make itself appreciated. Alice had her quiet enjoyment of tears. But Margaret, with
     fixed eye, and earnest, dreamy look, seemed to become more and more absorbed in realising to
     herself the woe she had been describing, and which she felt might at that very moment be
     suffering and hopeless within a short distance of their comparative comfort.
Suddenly she burst forth with all the power of her magnificent voice, as if a prayer from her
     very heart for all who were in distress, in the grand supplication, "Lord, remember David."
     Mary held her breath, unwilling to lose a note, it was so clear, so perfect, so imploring. A
     far more correct musician than Mary might have paused with equal admiration of the really
     scientific knowledge, with which the poor depressed-looking young needle-woman used her superb
     and flexile voice. Deborah Travers herself (once an Oldham factory girl, and afterwards the
     darling of fashionable crowds as Mrs. Knyvett) might have owned a sister in her art.
She stopped; and with tears of holy sympathy in her eyes, Alice thanked the songstress, who
     resumed her calm, demure manner, much to Mary's wonder, for she looked at her unweariedly, as
     if surprised that the hidden power should not be perceived in the outward appearance.
When Alice's little speech of thanks was over, there was quiet enough to hear a fine, though
     rather quavering, male voice, going over again one or two strains of Margaret's song.
"That's grandfather!" exclaimed she. "I must be going, for he said he should not be at home
     till past nine."
"Well, I'll not say nay, for I've to be up by four for a very heavy wash at Mrs. Simpson's;
     but I shall be terrible glad to see you again at any time, lasses; and I hope you'll take to
     one another."
As the girls ran up the cellar steps together, Margaret said: "Just step in and see
     grandfather. I should like him to see you."
And Mary consented.
 
 
