
CHAPTER XIX. Tribute from Oileymead.  
Kate Vavasor, in writing to her cousin Alice, felt some little difficulty in excusing
      herself for remaining in Norfolk with Mrs. Greenow. She had laughed at Mrs. Greenow before she
      went to Yarmouth, and had laughed at herself for going there. And in all her letters since,
      she had spoken of her aunt as a silly, vain, worldly woman, weeping crocodile tears, for an
      old husband whose death had released her from the tedium of his company, and spreading lures
      to catch new lovers. But yet she agreed to stay with her aunt, and remain with her in lodgings
      at Norwich for a month.
But Mrs. Greenow had about her something more than Kate had acknowledged when she first
      attempted to read her aunt's character. She was clever, and in her own way persuasive. She was
      very generous, and possessed a certain power of making herself pleasant to those around her.
      In asking Kate to stay with her she had so asked as to make it appear that Kate was to confer
      the favour. She had told her niece that she was all alone in the world. "I have money," she
      had said, with more appearance of true feeling than Kate had observed before. "I have money,
      but I have nothing else in the world. I have no home. Why should I not remain here in Norfolk,
      where I know a few people? If you'll say that you'll go anywhere else with me, I'll go to any
      place you'll name." Kate had believed this to be hardly true. She had felt sure that her aunt
      wished to remain in the neighbourhood of her seaside admirers; but, nevertheless, she had
      yielded, and at the end of October the two ladies, with Jeannette, settled themselves in
      comfortable lodgings within the precincts of the Close at Norwich.
Mr. Greenow at this time had been dead very nearly six months, but his widow made some
      mistakes in her dates and appeared to think that the interval had been longer. On the day of
      their arrival at Norwich it was evident that this error had confirmed itself in her mind.
      "Only think," she said, as she unpacked a little miniature of the departed one, and sat with
      it for a moment in her hands, as she pressed her handkerchief to her eyes, "only think, that
      it is barely nine months since he was with me?"
"Six, you mean, aunt," said Kate, unadvisedly.
"Only nine months" repeated Mrs. Greenow, as though she had not heard her niece. "Only nine
      months!" After that Kate attempted to correct no more such errors. "It happened in May, Miss,"
      Jeannette said afterwards to Miss Vavasor, "and that, as we reckons, it will be just a
      twelvemonth come Christmas." But Kate paid no attention to this.
And Jeannette was very ungrateful, and certainly should have indulged herself in no such
      sarcasms. When Mrs. Greenow made a slight change in her mourning, which she did on her arrival
      at Norwich, using a little lace among her crapes, Jeannette reaped a rich harvest in gifts of
      clothes. Mrs. Greenow knew well enough that she expected more from a servant than mere
      service;—that she wanted loyalty, discretion, and perhaps sometimes a little secrecy;—and as
      she paid for these things, she should have had them.
Kate undertook to stay a month with her aunt at Norwich, and Mrs. Greenow undertook that Mr.
      Cheesacre should declare himself as Kate's lover, before the expiration of the month. It was
      in vain that Kate protested that she wanted no such lover, and that she would certainly reject
      him if he came. "That's all very well, my dear," Aunt Greenow would say. "A girl must settle
      herself some day, you know;—and you'd have it all your own way at Oileymead."
But the offer certainly showed much generosity on the part of Aunt Greenow, inasmuch as Mr.
      Cheesacre's attentions were apparently paid to herself rather than to her niece. Mr. Cheesacre
      was very attentive. He had taken the lodgings in the Close, and had sent over fowls and cream
      from Oileymead, and had called on the morning after their arrival; but in all his attentions
      he distinguished the aunt more particularly than the niece. "I am all for Mr. Cheesacre,
      Miss," said Jeannette once. "The Captain is perhaps the nicerer-looking gentleman, and he
      ain't so podgy like; but what's good looks if a gentleman hasn't got nothing? I can't abide
      anything that's poor; neither can't Missus." From which it was evident that Jeannette gave
      Miss Vavasor no credit in having Mr. Cheesacre in her train.
Captain Bellfield was also at Norwich, having obtained some quasi-military employment there
      in the matter of drilling volunteers. Certain capacities in that line it may be supposed that
      he possessed, and, as his friend Cheesacre said of him, he was going to earn an honest penny
      once in his life. The Captain and Mr. Cheesacre had made up any little differences that had
      existed between them at Yarmouth, and were close allies again when they left that place. Some
      little compact on matters of business must have been arranged between them,—for the Captain
      was in funds again. He was in funds again through the liberality of his friend,—and no payment
      of former loans had been made, nor had there been any speech of such. Mr. Cheesacre had drawn
      his purse-strings liberally, and had declared that if all went well the hospitality of
      Oileymead should not be wanting during the winter. Captain Bellfield had nodded his head and
      declared that all should go well.
"You won't see much of the Captain, I suppose," said Mr. Cheesacre to Mrs. Greenow on the
      morning of the day after her arrival at Norwich. He had come across the whole way from
      Oileymead to ask her if she found herself comfortable,—and perhaps with an eye to the Norwich
      markets at the same time. He now wore a pair of black riding boots over his trousers, and a
      round topped hat, and looked much more at home than he had done by the seaside.
"Not much, I dare say," said the widow. "He tells me that he must be on duty ten or twelve
      hours a day. Poor fellow!"
"It's a deuced good thing for him, and he ought to be very much obliged to me for putting
      him in the way of getting it. But he told me to tell you that if he didn't call, you were not
      to be angry with him."
"Oh, no;—I shall remember, of course."
"You see, if he don't work now he must come to grief. He hasn't got a shilling that he can
      call his own."
"Hasn't he really?"
"Not a shilling, Mrs. Greenow;—and then he's awfully in debt. He isn't a bad fellow, you
      know, only there's no trusting him for anything." Then after a few further inquiries that were
      almost tender, and a promise of further supplies from the dairy, Mr. Cheesacre took his leave,
      almost forgetting to ask after Miss Vavasor.
But as he left the house he had a word to say to Jeannette. "He hasn't been here, has he,
      Jenny?" "We haven't seen a sight of him yet, sir,—and I have thought it a little odd." Then
      Mr. Cheesacre gave the girl half-a-crown, and went his way. Jeannette, I think, must have
      forgotten that the Captain had looked in after leaving his military duties on the preceding
      evening.
The Captain's ten or twelve hours of daily work was performed, no doubt, at irregular
      intervals,—some days late and some days early,—for he might be seen about Norwich almost at
      all times, during the early part of that November;—and he might be very often seen going into
      the Close. In Norwich there are two weekly market-days, but on those days the Captain was no
      doubt kept more entirely to his military employment, for at such times he never was seen near
      the Close. Now Mr. Cheesacre's visits to the town were generally made on market-days, and so
      it happened that they did not meet. On such occasions Mr. Cheesacre always was driven to Mrs.
      Greenow's door in a cab,—for he would come into town by railway,—and he would deposit a basket
      bearing the rich produce of his dairy. It was in vain that Mrs. Greenow protested against
      these gifts,—for she did protest and declared that if they were continued, they would be sent
      back. They were, however, continued, and Mrs. Greenow was at her wits' end about them.
      Cheesacre would not come up with them; but leaving them, would go about his business, and
      would return to see the ladies. On such occasions he would be very particular in getting his
      basket from Jeannette. As he did so he would generally ask some question about the Captain,
      and Jeannette would give him answers confidentially,—so that there was a strong friendship
      between these two.
"What am I to do about it?" said Mrs. Greenow, as Kate came into the sitting-room one
      morning, and saw on the table a small hamper lined with a clean cloth. "It's as much as
      Jeannette has been able to carry."
"So it is, ma'am,—quite; and I'm strong in the arm, too, ma'am."
"What am I to do, Kate? He is such a good creature."
"And he do admire you both so much," said Jeannette.
"Of course I don't want to offend him for many reasons," said the aunt, looking knowingly at
      her niece.
"I don't know anything about your reasons, aunt, but if I were you, I should leave the
      basket just as it is till he comes in the afternoon."
"Would you mind seeing him yourself, Kate, and explaining to him that it won't do to get on
      in this way. Perhaps you wouldn't mind telling him that if he'll promise not to bring any
      more, you won't object to take this one."
"Indeed, aunt, I can't do that. They're not brought to me."
"Oh, Kate!"
"Nonsense, aunt;—I won't have you say so;—before Jeannette, too."
"I think it's for both, ma'am; I do indeed. And there certainly ain't any cream to be bought
      like it in Norwich:—nor yet eggs."
"I wonder what there is in the basket." And the widow lifted up the corner of the cloth. "I
      declare if there isn't a turkey poult already."
"My!" said Jeannette. "A turkey poult! Why, that's worth ten and sixpence in the market if
      it's worth a penny."
"It's out of the question that I should take upon myself to say anything to him about it,"
      said Kate.
"Upon my word I don't see why you shouldn't, as well as I," said Mrs. Greenow.
"I'll tell you what, ma'am," said Jeannette: "let me just ask him who they're for;—he'll
      tell me anything."
"Don't do anything of the kind, Jeannette," said Kate. "Of course, aunt, they're brought for
      you. There's no doubt about that. A gentleman doesn't bring cream and turkeys to—
      I've never heard of such a thing!"
"I don't see why a gentleman shouldn't bring cream and turkeys to you just as well as to me.
      Indeed, he told me once as much himself."
"Then, if they're for me, I'll leave them down outside the front door, and he may find his
      provisions there." And Kate proceeded to lift the basket off the table.
"Leave it alone, Kate," said Mrs. Greenow, with a voice that was rather solemn; and which
      had, too, something of sadness in its tone. "Leave it alone. I'll see Mr. Cheesacre
      myself."
"And I do hope you won't mention my name. It's the most absurd thing in the world. The man
      never spoke two dozen words to me in his life."
"He speaks to me, though," said Mrs. Greenow.
"I dare say he does," said Kate.
"And about you, too, my dear."
"He doesn't come here with those big flowers in his button-hole for nothing," said
      Jeannette,—"not if I knows what a gentleman means."
"Of course he doesn't," said Mrs. Greenow.
"If you don't object, aunt," said Kate, "I will write to grandpapa and tell him that I will
      return home at once."
"What!—because of Mr. Cheesacre?" said Mrs. Greenow. "I don't think you'll be so silly as
      that, my dear."
On the present occasion Mrs. Greenow undertook that she would see the generous gentleman,
      and endeavour to stop the supplies from his farmyard. It was well understood that he would
      call about four o'clock, when his business in the town would be over; and that he would bring
      with him a little boy, who would carry away the basket. At that hour Kate of course was
      absent, and the widow received Mr. Cheesacre alone. The basket and cloth were there, in the
      sitting-room, and on the table were laid out the rich things which it had contained;—the
      turkey poult first, on a dish provided in the lodging-house, then a dozen fresh eggs in a soup
      plate, then the cream in a little tin can, which, for the last fortnight, had passed regularly
      between Oileymead and the house in the Close, and as to which Mr. Cheesacre was very pointed
      in his inquiries with Jeannette. Then behind the cream there were two or three heads of
      broccoli, and a stick of celery as thick as a man's wrist. Altogether the tribute was a very
      comfortable assistance to the housekeeping of a lady living in a small way in lodgings.
Mr. Cheesacre, when he saw the array on the long sofa-table, knew that he was to prepare
      himself for some resistance; but that resistance would give him, he thought, an opportunity of
      saying a few words that he was desirous of speaking, and he did not altogether regret it. "I
      just called in," he said, "to see how you were."
"We are not likely to starve," said Mrs. Greenow, pointing to the delicacies from
      Oileymead.
"Just a few trifles that my old woman asked me to bring in," said Cheesacre. "She insisted
      on putting them up."
"But your old woman is by far too magnificent," said Mrs. Greenow. "She really frightens
      Kate and me out of our wits."
Mr. Cheesacre had no wish that Miss Vavasor's name should be brought into play upon the
      occasion. "Dear Mrs. Greenow," said he, "there is no cause for you to be alarmed, I can assure
      you. Mere trifles;—light as air, you know. I don't think anything of such things as
      these."
"But I and Kate think a great deal of them,—a very great deal, I can assure you. Do you
      know, we had a long debate this morning whether or no we would return them to Oileymead?"
"Return them, Mrs. Greenow!"
"Yes, indeed: what are women, situated as we are, to do under such circumstances? When
      gentlemen will be too liberal, their liberality must be repressed."
"And have I been too liberal, Mrs. Greenow? What is a young turkey and a stick of celery
      when a man is willing to give everything that he has in the world?"
"You've got a great deal more in the world, Mr. Cheesacre, than you'd like to part with. But
      we won't talk of that, now."
"When shall we talk of it?"
"If you really have anything to say, you had by far better speak to Kate herself."
"Mrs. Greenow, you mistake me. Indeed, you mistake me." Just at this moment, as he was
      drawing close to the widow, she heard, or fancied that she heard, Jeannette's step, and, going
      to the sitting-room door, called to her maid. Jeannette did not hear her, but the bell was
      rung, and then Jeannette came. "You may take these things down, Jeannette," she said. "Mr.
      Cheesacre has promised that no more shall come."
"But I haven't promised," said Mr. Cheesacre.
"You will oblige me and Kate, I know;—and, Jeannette, tell Miss Vavasor that I am ready to
      walk with her."
Then Mr. Cheesacre knew that he could not say those few words on that occasion; and as the
      hour of his train was near, he took his departure, and went out of the Close, followed by the
      little boy, carrying the basket, the cloth, and the tin can.
