
CHAPTER I. Mr. Vavasor and His Daughter.  
Whether or no, she, whom you are to forgive, if you can, did or did not belong to the Upper
      Ten Thousand of this our English world, I am not prepared to say with any strength of
      affirmation. By blood she was connected with big people,—distantly connected with some very
      big people indeed, people who belonged to the Upper Ten Hundred if there be any such division;
      but of these very big relations she had known and seen little, and they had cared as little
      for her. Her grandfather, Squire Vavasor of Vavasor Hall, in Westmoreland, was a country
      gentleman, possessing some thousand a year at the outside, and he therefore never came up to
      London, and had no ambition to have himself numbered as one in any exclusive set. A
      hot-headed, ignorant, honest old gentleman, he lived ever at Vavasor Hall, declaring to any
      who would listen to him, that the country was going to the mischief, and congratulating
      himself that at any rate, in his county, parliamentary reform had been powerless to alter the
      old political arrangements. Alice Vavasor, whose offence against the world I am to tell you,
      and if possible to excuse, was the daughter of his younger son; and as her father, John
      Vavasor, had done nothing to raise the family name to eminence, Alice could not lay claim to
      any high position from her birth as a Vavasor. John Vavasor had come up to London early in
      life as a barrister, and had failed. He had failed at least in attaining either much wealth or
      much repute, though he had succeeded in earning, or perhaps I might better say, in obtaining,
      a livelihood. He had married a lady somewhat older than himself, who was in possession of four
      hundred a year, and who was related to those big people to whom I have alluded. Who these were
      and the special nature of the relationship, I shall be called upon to explain hereafter, but
      at present it will suffice to say that Alice Macleod gave great offence to all her friends by
      her marriage. She did not, however, give them much time for the indulgence of their anger.
      Having given birth to a daughter within twelve months of her marriage, she died, leaving in
      abeyance that question as to whether the fault of her marriage should or should not be
      pardoned by her family.
When a man marries an heiress for her money, if that money be within her own control, as was
      the case with Miss Macleod's fortune, it is generally well for the speculating lover that the
      lady's friends should quarrel with him and with her. She is thereby driven to throw herself
      entirely into the gentleman's arms, and he thus becomes possessed of the wife and the money
      without the abominable nuisance of stringent settlements. But the Macleods, though they
      quarrelled with Alice, did not quarrel with her à l'outrance. They snubbed herself
      and her chosen husband; but they did not so far separate themselves from her and her affairs
      as to give up the charge of her possessions. Her four hundred a year was settled very closely
      on herself and on her children, without even a life interest having been given to Mr. Vavasor,
      and therefore when she died the mother's fortune became the property of the little baby. But,
      under these circumstances, the big people did not refuse to interest themselves to some extent
      on behalf of the father. I do not suppose that any actual agreement or compact was made
      between Mr. Vavasor and the Macleods; but it came to be understood between them that if he
      made no demand upon them for his daughter's money, and allowed them to have charge of her
      education, they would do something for him. He was a practising barrister, though his practice
      had never amounted to much; and a practising barrister is always supposed to be capable of
      filling any situation which may come his way. Two years after his wife's death Mr. Vavasor was
      appointed assistant commissioner in some office which had to do with insolvents, and which was
      abolished three years after his appointment. It was at first thought that he would keep his
      eight hundred a year for life and be required to do nothing for it; but a wretched
      cheeseparing Whig government, as John Vavasor called it when describing the circumstances of
      the arrangement to his father, down in Westmoreland, would not permit this; it gave him the
      option of taking four hundred a year for doing nothing, or of keeping his whole income and
      attending three days a week for three hours a day during term time, at a miserable dingy
      little office near Chancery Lane, where his duty would consist in signing his name to accounts
      which he never read, and at which he was never supposed even to look. He had sulkily elected
      to keep the money, and this signing had been now for nearly twenty years the business of his
      life. Of course he considered himself to be a very hardly-used man. One Lord Chancellor after
      another he petitioned, begging that he might be relieved from the cruelty of his position, and
      allowed to take his salary without doing anything in return for it. The amount of work which
      he did perform was certainly a minimum of labour. Term time, as terms were counted in Mr.
      Vavasor's office, hardly comprised half the year, and the hours of weekly attendance did not
      do more than make one day's work a week for a working man; but Mr. Vavasor had been appointed
      an assistant commissioner, and with every Lord Chancellor he argued that all Westminster Hall,
      and Lincoln's Inn to boot, had no right to call upon him to degrade himself by signing his
      name to accounts. In answer to every memorial he was offered the alternative of freedom with
      half his income; and so the thing went on.
There can, however, be no doubt that Mr. Vavasor was better off and happier with his almost
      nominal employment than he would have been without it. He always argued that it kept him in
      London; but he would undoubtedly have lived in London with or without his official occupation.
      He had become so habituated to London life in a small way, before the choice of leaving London
      was open to him, that nothing would have kept him long away from it. After his wife's death he
      dined at his club every day on which a dinner was not given to him by some friend elsewhere,
      and was rarely happy except when so dining. They who have seen him scanning the steward's list
      of dishes, and giving the necessary orders for his own and his friend's dinner, at about half
      past four in the afternoon, have seen John Vavasor at the only moment of the day at which he
      is ever much in earnest. All other things are light and easy to him,—to be taken easily and to
      be dismissed easily. Even the eating of the dinner calls forth from him no special sign of
      energy. Sometimes a frown will gather on his brow as he tastes the first half glass from his
      bottle of claret; but as a rule that which he has prepared for himself with so much elaborate
      care, is consumed with only pleasant enjoyment. Now and again it will happen that the cook is
      treacherous even to him, and then he can hit hard; but in hitting he is quiet, and strikes
      with a smile on his face.
Such had been Mr. Vavasor's pursuits and pleasures in life up to the time at which my story
      commences. But I must not allow the reader to suppose that he was a man without good
      qualities. Had he when young possessed the gift of industry I think that he might have shone
      in his profession, and have been well spoken of and esteemed in the world. As it was he was a
      discontented man, but nevertheless he was popular, and to some extent esteemed. He was liberal
      as far as his means would permit; he was a man of his word; and he understood well that code
      of by-laws which was presumed to constitute the character of a gentleman in his circle. He
      knew how to carry himself well among men, and understood thoroughly what might be said, and
      what might not; what might be done among those with whom he lived, and what should be left
      undone. By nature, too, he was kindly disposed, loving many persons a little if he loved few
      or none passionately. Moreover, at the age of fifty, he was a handsome man, with a fine
      forehead, round which the hair and beard was only beginning to show itself to be grey. He
      stood well, with a large person, only now beginning to become corpulent. His eyes were bright
      and grey, and his mouth and chin were sharply cut, and told of gentle birth. Most men who knew
      John Vavasor well, declared it to be a pity that he should spend his time in signing accounts
      in Chancery Lane.
I have said that Alice Vavasor's big relatives cared but little for her in her early years;
      but I have also said that they were careful to undertake the charge of her education, and I
      must explain away this little discrepancy. The biggest of these big people had hardly heard of
      her; but there was a certain Lady Macleod, not very big herself, but, as it were, hanging on
      to the skirts of those who were so, who cared very much for Alice. She was the widow of a Sir
      Archibald Macleod, K.C.B., who had been a soldier, she herself having also been a Macleod by
      birth; and for very many years past—from a time previous to the birth of Alice Vavasor—she had
      lived at Cheltenham, making short sojourns in London during the spring, when the contents of
      her limited purse would admit of her doing so. Of old Lady Macleod I think I may say that she
      was a good woman;—that she was a good woman, though subject to two of the most serious
      drawbacks to goodness which can afflict a lady. She was a Calvinistic Sabbatarian in religion,
      and in worldly matters she was a devout believer in the high rank of her noble relatives. She
      could almost worship a youthful marquis, though he lived a life that would disgrace a heathen
      among heathens; and she could and did, in her own mind, condemn crowds of commonplace men and
      women to all eternal torments of which her imagination could conceive, because they listened
      to profane music in a park on Sunday. Yet she was a good woman. Out of her small means she
      gave much away. She owed no man anything. She strove to love her neighbours. She bore much
      pain with calm unspeaking endurance, and she lived in trust of a better world. Alice Vavasor,
      who was after all only her cousin, she loved with an exceeding love, and yet Alice had done
      very much to extinguish such love. Alice, in the years of her childhood, had been brought up
      by Lady Macleod; at the age of twelve she had been sent to a school at Aix-la-Chapelle,—a
      comitatus of her relatives having agreed that such was to be her fate, much in opposition to
      Lady Macleod's judgement; at nineteen she had returned to Cheltenham, and after remaining
      there for little more than a year, had expressed her unwillingness to remain longer with her
      cousin. She could sympathize neither with her relative's faults or virtues. She made an
      arrangement, therefore, with her father, that they two would keep house together in London,
      and so they had lived for the last five years;—for Alice Vavasor when she will be introduced
      to the reader had already passed her twenty-fourth birthday.
Their mode of life had been singular and certainly not in all respects satisfactory. Alice
      when she was twenty-one had the full command of her own fortune; and when she induced her
      father, who for the last fifteen years had lived in lodgings, to take a small house in Queen
      Anne Street, of course she offered to incur a portion of the expense. He had warned her that
      his habits were not those of a domestic man, but he had been content simply so to warn her. He
      had not felt it to be his duty to decline the arrangement because he knew himself to be unable
      to give to his child all that attention which a widowed father under such circumstances should
      pay to an only daughter. The house had been taken, and Alice and he had lived together, but
      their lives had been quite apart. For a short time, for a month or two, he had striven to dine
      at home and even to remain at home through the evening; but the work had been too hard for him
      and he had utterly broken down. He had said to her and to himself that his health would fail
      him under the effects of so great a change made so late in life, and I am not sure that he had
      not spoken truly. At any rate the effort had been abandoned, and Mr. Vavasor now never dined
      at home. Nor did he and his daughter ever dine out together. Their joint means did not admit
      of their giving dinners, and therefore they could not make their joint way in the same circle.
      It thus came to pass that they lived apart,—quite apart. They saw each other, probably daily;
      but they did little more than see each other. They did not even breakfast together, and after
      three o'clock in the day Mr. Vavasor was never to be found in his own house.
Miss Vavasor had made for herself a certain footing in society, though I am disposed to
      doubt her right to be considered as holding a place among the Upper Ten Thousand. Two classes
      of people she had chosen to avoid, having been driven to such avoidings by her aunt's
      preferences; marquises and such-like, whether wicked or otherwise, she had eschewed, and had
      eschewed likewise all Low Church tendencies. The eschewing of marquises is not generally very
      difficult. Young ladies living with their fathers on very moderate incomes in or about Queen
      Anne Street are not usually much troubled on that matter. Nor can I say that Miss Vavasor was
      so troubled. But with her there was a certain definite thing to be done towards such eschewal.
      Lady Macleod by no means avoided her noble relatives, nor did she at all avoid Alice Vavasor.
      When in London she was persevering in her visits to Queen Anne Street, though she considered
      herself, nobody knew why, not to be on speaking terms with Mr.. Vavasor. And she strove hard
      to produce an intimacy between Alice and her noble relatives—such an intimacy as that which
      she herself enjoyed;—an intimacy which gave her a footing in their houses but no footing in
      their hearts, or even in their habits. But all this Alice declined with as much consistency as
      she did those other struggles which her old cousin made on her behalf,—strong, never-flagging,
      but ever-failing efforts to induce the girl to go to such places of worship as Lady Macleod
      herself frequented.
A few words must be said as to Alice Vavasor's person; one fact also must be told, and then,
      I believe, I may start upon my story. As regards her character, I will leave it to be read in
      the story itself. The reader already knows that she appears upon the scene at no very early
      age, and the mode of her life had perhaps given to her an appearance of more years than those
      which she really possessed. It was not that her face was old, but that there was nothing that
      was girlish in her manners. Her demeanour was as staid, and her voice as self-possessed as
      though she had already been ten years married. In person she was tall and well made, rather
      large in her neck and shoulders, as were all the Vavasors, but by no means fat. Her hair was
      brown, but very dark, and she wore it rather lower upon her forehead than is customary at the
      present day. Her eyes, too, were dark, though they were not black, and her complexion, though
      not quite that of a brunette, was far away from being fair. Her nose was somewhat broad, and
       retroussé too, but to my thinking it was a charming nose, full of character, and
      giving to her face at times a look of pleasant humour, which it would otherwise have lacked.
      Her mouth was large, and full of character, and her chin oval, dimpled, and finely chiselled,
      like her father's. I beg you, in taking her for all in all, to admit that she was a fine,
      handsome, high-spirited young woman.
And now for my fact. At the time of which I am writing she was already engaged to be
      married.
