
CHAPTER LVI. Another Walk on the Fells.  
George when he left the room in which he had insulted the lawyer, went immediately across to
      the parlour in which his aunt and sister were sitting. "Kate," said he, "put on your hat and
      come and walk with me. That business is over." Kate's hat and shawl were in the room, and they
      were out of the house together within a minute.
They walked down the carriage-road, through the desolate, untenanted grounds, to the gate,
      before either of them spoke a word. Kate was waiting for George to tell her of the will, but
      did not dare to ask any question. George intended to tell her of the will, but was not
      disposed to do so without some preparation. It was a thing not to be spoken of open-mouthed,
      as a piece of ordinary news. "Which way shall we go?" said Kate, as soon as they had passed
      through the old rickety gate, which swung at the entrance of the place. "Up across the fell,"
      said George; "the day is fine, and I want to get away from my uncle for a time." She turned
      round, therefore, outside the hill of firs, and led the way back to the beacon wood through
      which she and Alice had walked across to Haweswater upon a memorable occasion. They had
      reached the top of the beacon hill, and were out upon the Fell, before George had begun his
      story. Kate was half beside herself with curiosity, but still she was afraid to ask. "Well,"
      said George, when they paused a moment as they stepped over a plank that crossed the boundary
      ditch of the wood: "don't you want to know what that dear old man has done for you?" Then he
      looked into her face very steadfastly. "But perhaps you know already," he added. He had come
      out determined not to quarrel with his sister. He had resolved, in that moment of thought
      which had been allowed to him, that his best hope for the present required that he should keep
      himself on good terms with her, at any rate till he had settled what line of conduct he would
      pursue. But he was, in truth, so sore with anger and disappointment,—he had become so nearly
      mad with that continued, unappeased wrath in which he now indulged against all the world, that
      he could not refrain himself from bitter words. He was as one driven by the Furies, and was no
      longer able to control them in their driving of him.
"I know nothing of it," said Kate. "Had I known I should have told you. Your question is
      unjust to me."
"I am beginning to doubt," said he, "whether a man can be safe in trusting any one. My
      grandfather has done his best to rob me of the property altogether."
"I told you that I feared he would do so."
"And he has made you his heir."
"Me?"
"Yes; you."
"He told me distinctly that he would not do that."
"But he has, I tell you."
"Then, George, I shall do that which I told him I should do in the event of his making such
      a will; for he asked me the question. I told him I should restore the estate to you, and upon
      that he swore that he would not leave it to me."
"And what a fool you were," said he, stopping her in the pathway. "What an ass! Why did you
      tell him that? You knew that he would not, on that account, do justice to me."
"He asked me, George."
"Psha! now you have ruined me, and you might have saved me."
"But I will save you still, if he has left the estate to me. I do not desire to take it from
      you. As God in heaven sees me, I have never ceased to endeavour to protect your interests here
      at Vavasor. I will sign anything necessary to make over my right in the property to you." Then
      they walked on over the Fell for some minutes without speaking. They were still on the same
      path,—that path which Kate and Alice had taken in the winter,—and now poor Kate could not but
      think of all that she had said that day on George's behalf;—how had she mingled truth and
      falsehood in her efforts to raise her brother's character in her cousin's eyes! It had all
      been done in vain. At this very moment of her own trouble Kate thought of John Grey, and
      repented of what she had done. Her hopes in that direction were altogether blasted. She knew
      that her brother had ill-treated Alice, and that she must tell him so if Alice's name were
      mentioned between them. She could no longer worship her brother, and hold herself at his
      command in all things. But, as regarded the property to which he was naturally the heir, if
      any act of hers could give it to him, that act would be done. "If the will is as you say,
      George, I will make over my right to you."
"You can make over nothing," he answered. "The old robber has been too cunning for that; he
      has left it all in the hands of my uncle John. D–––– him. D–––– them both."
"George! George! he is dead now."
"Dead; of course he is dead. What of that? I wish he had been dead ten years ago,—or twenty.
      Do you suppose I am to forgive him because he is dead? I'll heap his grave with curses, if
      that can be of avail to punish him."
"You can only punish the living that way."
"And I will punish them;—but not by cursing them. My uncle John shall have such a life of it
      for the next year or two that he shall bitterly regret the hour in which he has stepped
      between me and my rights."
"I do not believe that he has done so."
"Not done so! What was he down here for at Christmas? Do you pretend to think that that
      make-believe will was concocted without his knowledge?"
"I'm sure that he knew nothing of it. I don't think my grandfather's mind was made up a week
      before he died."
"You'll have to swear that, remember, in a court. I'm not going to let the matter rest, I
      can tell you. You'll have to prove that. How long is it since he asked you what you would do
      with the estate if he left it to you?"
Kate thought for a moment before she answered. "It was only two days before he died, if I
      remember rightly."
"But you must remember rightly. You'll have to swear to it. And now tell me this honestly;
      do you believe, in your heart, that he was in a condition fit for making a will?"
"I advised him not to make it."
"Why? why? What reason did you give?"
"I told him that I thought no man should alter family arrangements when he was so ill."
"Exactly. You told him that. And what did he say?"
"He was very angry, and made me send for Mr. Gogram."
"Now, Kate, think a little before you answer me again. If ever you are to do me a good turn,
      you must do it now. And remember this, I don't at all want to take anything away from you.
      Whatever you think is fair you shall have."
He was a fool not to have known her better than that.
"I want nothing," she said, stopping, and stamping with her foot upon the crushed heather.
      "George, you don't understand what it is to be honest."
He smiled,—with a slight provoking smile that passed very rapidly from his face. The meaning
      of the smile was to be read, had Kate been calm enough to read it. "I can't say that I do."
      That was the meaning of the smile. "Well, never mind about that," said he; "you advised my
      grandfather not to make his will,—thinking, no doubt, that his mind was not clear enough?"
She paused a moment again before she answered him. "His mind was clear," she said; "but I
      thought that he should not trust his judgement while he was so weak."
"Look here, Kate; I do believe that you at any rate have no mind to assist in this robbery.
      That it is a robbery you can't have any doubt. I said he had left the estate to you. That is
      not what he has done. He has left the estate to my uncle John."
"Why tell me, then, what was untrue?"
"Are you disappointed?"
"Of course I am; uncle John won't give it you. George, I don't understand you; I don't,
      indeed."
"Never mind about that, but listen to me. The estate is left in the hands of John Vavasor;
      but he has left you five hundred a year out of it till somebody is twenty-five years old who
      is not yet born, and probably never will be born. The will itself shows the old fool to have
      been mad."
"He was no more mad than you are, George."
"Listen to me, I tell you. I don't mean that he was a raging maniac. Now, you had advised
      him not to make any new will because you thought he was not in a fit condition?"
"Yes; I did."
"You can swear to that?"
"I hope I may not be called on to do so. I hope there may be no swearing about it. But if I
      am asked the question I must swear it."
"Exactly. Now listen till you understand what it is I mean. That will, if it stands, gives
      all the power over the estate to John Vavasor. It renders you quite powerless as regards any
      help or assistance that you might be disposed to give to me. But, nevertheless, your interest
      under the will is greater than his,—or than that of any one else,—for your son would inherit
      if I have none. Do you understand?"
"Yes; I think so."
"And your testimony as to the invalidity of the will would be conclusive against all the
      world."
"I would say in a court what I have told you, if that will do any good."
"It will not be enough. Look here, Kate; you must be steadfast here; everything depends on
      you. How often have you told me that you will stick to me throughout life? Now you will be
      tried."
Kate felt that her repugnance towards him,—towards all that he was doing and wished her to
      do,—was growing stronger within her at every word he spoke. She was becoming gradually aware
      that he desired from her something which she could not and would not do, and she was aware
      also that in refusing him she would have to encounter him in all his wrath. She set her teeth
      firmly together, and clenched her little fist. If a fight was necessary, she would fight with
      him. As he looked at her closely with his sinister eyes, her love towards him was almost
      turned to hatred.
"But that was what you meant when you advised him not to make the will because you thought
      his intellect was impaired!"
"No; not so."
"Stop, Kate, stop. If you will think of it, It was so. What is the meaning of his judgement
      being weak?"
"I didn't say his judgement was weak."
"But that was what you meant when you advised him not to trust it!"
"Look here, George; I think I know now what you mean. If anybody asks me if his mind was
      gone, or his intellect deranged, I cannot say that there was anything of the kind."
"You will not?"
"Certainly not. It would be untrue."
"Then you are determined to throw me over and claim the property for yourself." Again he
      turned towards and looked at her as though he were resolved to frighten her. "And I am to
      count you also among my enemies? You had better take care, Kate."
They were now upon the fell side, more than three miles away from the Hall; and Kate, as she
      looked round, saw that they were all alone. Not a cottage,—not a sign of humanity was within
      sight. Kate saw that it was so, and was aware that the fact pressed itself upon her as being
      of importance. Then she thought again of her resolution to fight with him, if any fight were
      necessary; to tell him, in so many words, that she would separate herself from him and defy
      him. She would not fear him, let his words and face be ever so terrible! Surely her own
      brother would do her no bodily harm. And even though he should do so,—though he should take
      her roughly by the arm as he had done to Alice,—though he should do worse than that, still she
      would fight him. Her blood was the same as his, and he should know that her courage was, at
      any rate, as high.
And, indeed, when she looked at him, she had cause to fear. He intended that she should
      fear. He intended that she should dread what he might do to her at that moment. As to what he
      would do he had no resolve made. Neither had he resolved on anything when he had gone to Alice
      and had shaken her rudely as she sat beside him. He had been guided by no fixed intent when he
      had attacked John Grey, or when he insulted the attorney; but a Fury was driving him, and he
      was conscious of being so driven. He almost wished to be driven to some act of frenzy.
      Everything in the world had gone against him, and he desired to expend his rage on some
      one.
"Kate," said he, stopping her, "we will have this out here, if you please. So much, at any
      rate, shall be settled to-day. You have made many promises to me, and I have believed them.
      You can now keep them all, by simply saying what you know to be the truth,—that that old man
      was a drivelling idiot when he made this will. Are you prepared to do me that justice? Think
      before you answer me, for, by G––––, if I cannot have justice among you, I will have revenge."
      And he put his hand upon her breast up near to her throat.
"Take your hand down, George," said she. "I'm not such a fool that you can frighten me in
      that way."
"Answer me!" he said, and shook her, having some part of her raiment within his clutch.
"Oh, George, that I should live to be so ashamed of my brother!"
"Answer me," he said again; and again he shook her.
"I have answered you. I will say nothing of the kind that you want me to say. My
      grandfather, up to the latest moment that I saw him, knew what he was about. He was not an
      idiot. He was, I believe, only carrying out a purpose fixed long before. You will not make me
      change what I say by looking at me like that, nor get it by shaking me. You don't know me,
      George, if you think you can frighten me like a child."
He heard her to the last word, still keeping his hand upon her, and holding her by the cloak
      she wore; but the violence of his grasp had relaxed itself, and he let her finish her words,
      as though his object had simply been to make her speak out to him what she had to say. "Oh,"
      said he, when she had done, "That's to be it; is it? That's your idea of honesty. The very
      name of the money being your own has been too much for you. I wonder whether you and my uncle
      had contrived it all between you beforehand?"
"You will not dare to ask him, because he is a man," said Kate, her eyes brimming with
      tears, not through fear, but in very vexation at the nature of the charge he had brought
      against her.
"Shall I not? You will see what I dare do. As for you, with all your promises—.
      Kate, you know that I keep my word. Say that you will do as I desire you, or I will be the
      death of you."
"Do you mean that you will murder me?" said she.
"Murder you! yes; why not? Treated as I have been among you, do you suppose that I shall
      stick at anything? Why should I not murder you—you and Alice, too, seeing how you have
      betrayed me?"
"Poor Alice!" As she spoke the words she looked straight into his eyes, as though defying
      him, as far as she herself were concerned.
"Poor Alice, indeed! D–––– hypocrite! There's a pair of you; cursed, whining, false,
      intriguing hypocrites. There; go down and tell your uncle and that old woman there that I
      threatened to murder you. Tell the judge so, when you're brought into court to swear me out of
      my property. You false liar!" Then he pushed her from him with great violence, so that she
      fell heavily upon the stony ground.
He did not stop to help her up, or even to look at her as she lay, but walked away across
      the heath, neither taking the track on towards Haweswater, nor returning by the path which had
      brought them thither. He went away northwards across the wild fell; and Kate, having risen up
      and seated herself on a small cairn of stones which stood there, watched him as he descended
      the slope of the hill till he was out of sight. He did not run, but he seemed to move rapidly,
      and he never once turned round to look at her. He went away, down the hill northwards, and
      presently the curving of the ground hid him from her view.
When she first seated herself her thoughts had been altogether of him. She had feared no
      personal injury, even when she had asked him whether he would murder her. Her blood had been
      hot within her veins, and her heart had been full of defiance. Even yet she feared nothing,
      but continued to think of him and his misery, and his disgrace. That he was gone for ever,
      utterly and irretrievably ruined, thrown out, as it were, beyond the pale of men, was now
      certain to her. And this was the brother in whom she had believed; for whom she had not only
      been willing to sacrifice herself, but for whose purposes she had striven to sacrifice her
      cousin! What would he do now? As he passed from out of her sight down the hill, it seemed to
      her as though he were rushing straight into some hell from which there could be no escape.

She knew that her arm had been hurt in the fall, but for a while she would not move it or
      feel it, being resolved to take no account of what might have happened to herself. But when he
      had been gone some ten minutes, she rose to her feet, and finding that the movement pained her
      greatly, and that her right arm was powerless, she put up her left hand and became aware that
      the bone of her arm was broken below the elbow. Her first thought was given to the telling him
      of this, or the not telling, when she should meet him below at the house. How should she
      mention the accident to him? Should she lie, and say that she had fallen as she came down the
      hill alone? Of course he would not believe her, but still some such excuse as that might make
      the matter easier for them all. It did not occur to her that she might not see him again at
      all that day; and that, as far as he was concerned, there might be need for no lie.
She started off to walk down home, holding her right arm steadily against her body with her
      left hand. Of course she must give some account of herself when she got to the house; but it
      was of the account to be given to him that she thought. As to the others she cared little for
      them. "Here I am; my arm is broken; and you had better send for a doctor." That would be
      sufficient for them.
When she got into the wood the path was very dark. The heavens were overcast with clouds,
      and a few drops began to fall. Then the rain fell faster and faster, and before she had gone a
      quarter of a mile down the beacon hill, the clouds had opened themselves, and the shower had
      become a storm of water. Suffering as she was she stood up for a few moments under a large
      tree, taking the excuse of the rain for some minutes of delay, that she might make up her mind
      as to what she would say. Then it occurred to her that she might possibly meet him again
      before she reached the house; and, as she thought of it, she began for the first time to fear
      him. Would he come out upon her from the trees and really kill her? Had he made his way round,
      when he got out of her sight, that he might fall upon her suddenly and do as he had
      threatened? As the idea came upon her, she made a little attempt to run, but she found that
      running was impracticable from the pain the movement caused her. Then she walked on through
      the hard rain, steadily holding her arm against her side, but still looking every moment
      through the trees on the side from which George might be expected to reach her. But no one
      came near her on her way homewards. Had she been calm enough to think of the nature of the
      ground, she might have known that he could not have returned upon her so quickly. He must have
      come back up the steep hill-side which she had seen him descend. No;—he had gone away
      altogether, across the fells towards Bampton, and was at this moment vainly buttoning his coat
      across his breast, in his unconscious attempt to keep out the wet. The Fury was driving him
      on, and he himself was not aware whither he was driven.
Dinner at the Hall had been ordered at five, the old hour; or rather that had been assumed
      to be the hour for dinner without any ordering. It was just five when Kate reached the front
      door. This she opened with her left hand, and turning at once into the dining-room, found her
      uncle and her aunt standing before the fire.
"Dinner is ready," said John Vavasor; "where is George?"
"You are wet, Kate," said aunt Greenow.
"Yes, I am very wet," said Kate. "I must go up-stairs. Perhaps you'll come with me,
      aunt?"
"Come with you,—of course I will." Aunt Greenow had seen at once that something was
      amiss.
"Where's George?" said John Vavasor. "Has he come back with you, or are we to wait for
      him?"
Kate seated herself in her chair. "I don't quite know where he is," she said. In the
      meantime her aunt had hastened up to her side just in time to catch her as she was falling
      from her chair. "My arm," said Kate, very gently; "my arm!" Then she slipped down against her
      aunt, and had fainted.
"He has done her a mischief," said Mrs. Greenow, looking up at her brother. "This is his
      doing."
John Vavasor stood confounded, wishing himself back in Queen Anne Street.
