
CHAPTER LI. Bold Speculations on Murder.  
George Vavasor was not in a very happy mood when he left Queen Anne Street, after having
      flung his gift ring under the grate. Indeed there was much in his condition, as connected with
      the house which he was leaving, which could not but make him unhappy. Alice was engaged to be
      his wife, and had as yet said nothing to show that she meditated any breach of that
      engagement, but she had treated him in a way which made him long to throw her promise in her
      teeth. He was a man to whom any personal slight from a woman was unendurable. To slights from
      men, unless they were of a nature to provoke offence, he was indifferent. There was no man
      living for whose liking or disliking George Vavasor cared anything. But he did care much for
      the good opinion, or rather for the personal favour, of any woman to whom he had endeavoured
      to make himself agreeable. "I will marry you," Alice had said to him,—not in words, but in
      acts and looks, which were plainer than words,—"I will marry you for certain reasons of my
      own, which in my present condition make it seem that that arrangement will be more convenient
      to me than any other that I can make; but pray understand that there is no love mixed up with
      this. There is another man whom I love;—only, for those reasons above hinted, I do not care to
      marry him." It was thus that he read Alice's present treatment of him, and he was a man who
      could not endure this treatment with ease.
But though he could throw his ring under the grate in his passion, he could not so dispose
      of her. That he would have done so had his hands been free, we need not doubt. And he would
      have been clever enough to do so in some manner that would have been exquisitely painful to
      Alice, willing as she might be to be released from her engagement. But he could not do this to
      a woman whose money he had borrowed, and whose money he could not repay;—to a woman, more of
      whose money he intended to borrow immediately. As to that latter part of it, he did say to
      himself over and over again, that he would have no more of it. As he left the house in Queen
      Anne Street, on that occasion, he swore, that under no circumstances would he be indebted to
      her for another shilling. But before he had reached Great Marlborough Street, to which his
      steps took him, he had reminded himself that everything depended on a further advance. He was
      in Parliament, but Parliament would be dissolved within three months. Having sacrificed so
      much for his position, should he let it all fall from him now,—now, when success seemed to be
      within his reach? That wretched old man in Westmoreland, who seemed gifted almost with
      immortality,—why could he not die and surrender his paltry acres to one who could use them? He
      turned away from Regent Street into Hanover Square before he crossed to Great Marlborough
      Street, giving vent to his passion rather than arranging his thoughts. As he walked the four
      sides of the square he considered how good it would be if some accident should befall the old
      man. How he would rejoice were he to hear to-morrow that one of the trees of the "accursed
      place," had fallen on the "obstinate old idiot," and put an end to him! I will not say that he
      meditated the murder of his grandfather. There was a firm conviction on his mind, as he
      thought of all this, that such a deed as that would never come in his way. But he told
      himself, that if he chose to make the attempt, he would certainly be able to carry it through
      without detection. Then he remembered Rush and Palmer—the openly bold murderer and the secret
      poisoner. Both of them, in Vavasor's estimation, were great men. He had often said so in
      company. He had declared that the courage of Rush had never been surpassed. "Think of him," he
      would say with admiration, "walking into a man's house, with pistols sufficient to shoot every
      one there, and doing it as though he were killing rats! What was Nelson at Trafalgar to that?
      Nelson had nothing to fear!" And of Palmer he declared that he was a man of genius as well as
      courage. He had "looked the whole thing in the face," Vavasor would say, "and told himself
      that all scruples and squeamishness are bosh,—child's tales. And so they are. Who lives as
      though they fear either heaven or hell? And if we do live without such fear or respect, what
      is the use of telling lies to ourselves? To throw it all to the dogs, as Palmer did, is more
      manly." "And be hanged," some hearer of George's doctrine replied. "Yes, and be hanged,—if
      such is your destiny. But you hear of the one who is hanged, but hear nothing of the twenty
      who are not."
Vavasor walked round Hanover Square, nursing his hatred against the old Squire. He did not
      tell himself that he would like to murder his grandfather. But he suggested to himself, that
      if he desired to do so, he would have courage enough to make his way into the old man's room,
      and strangle him; and he explained to himself how he would be able to get down into
      Westmoreland without the world knowing that he had been there,—how he would find an entrance
      into the house by a window with which he was acquainted,—how he could cause the man to die as
      though, those around him should think, it was apoplexy,—he, George Vavasor, having read
      something on that subject lately. All this he considered very fully, walking rapidly round
      Hanover Square more than once or twice. If he were to become an active student in the Rush or
      Palmer school, he would so study the matter that he would not be the one that should be hung.
      He thought that he could, so far, trust his own ingenuity. But yet he did not meditate murder.
      "Beastly old idiot!" he said to himself, "he must have his chance as other men have, I
      suppose," And then he went across Regent Street to Mr. Scruby's office in Great Marlborough
      Street, not having, as yet, come to any positive conclusion as to what he would do in
      reference to Alice's money.
But he soon found himself talking to Mr. Scruby as though there were no doubts as to the
      forthcoming funds for the next elections. And Mr. Scruby talked to him very plainly, as though
      those funds must be forthcoming before long. "A stitch in time saves nine," said Mr. Scruby,
      meaning to insinuate that a pound in time might have the same effect. "And I'll tell you what,
      Mr. Vavasor,—of course I've my outstanding bills for the last affair. That's no fault of
      yours, for the things came so sharp one on another that my fellows haven't had time to make it
      out. But if you'll put me in funds for what I must be out of pocket in June—"
"Will it be so soon as June?"
"They are talking of June. Why, then, I'll lump the two bills together when it's all
      over."
In their discussion respecting money Mr. Scruby injudiciously mentioned the name of Mr.
      Tombe. No precise caution had been given to him, but he had become aware that the matter was
      being managed through an agency that was not recognized by his client; and as that agency was
      simply a vehicle of money which found its way into Mr. Scruby's pocket, he should have held
      his tongue. But Mr. Tombe's name escaped from him, and Vavasor immediately questioned him.
      Scruby, who did not often make such blunders, readily excused himself, shaking his head, and
      declaring that the name had fallen from his lips instead of that of another man. Vavasor
      accepted the excuse without further notice, and nothing more was said about Mr. Tombe while he
      was in Mr. Scruby's office. But he had not heard the name in vain, and had unfortunately heard
      it before. Mr. Tombe was a remarkable man in his way. He wore powder to his hair,—was very
      polite in his bearing,—was somewhat asthmatic, and wheezed in his talking,—and was, moreover,
      the most obedient of men, though it was said of him that he managed the whole income of the
      Ely Chapter just as he pleased. Being in these ways a man of note, John Grey had spoken of him
      to Alice, and his name had filtered through Alice and her cousin Kate to George Vavasor.
      George seldom forgot things or names, and when he heard Mr. Tombe's name mentioned in
      connection with his own money matters, he remembered that Mr. Tombe was John Grey's
      lawyer.
As soon as he could escape out into the street he endeavoured to put all these things
      together, and after a while resolved that he would go to Mr. Tombe. What if there should be an
      understanding between John Grey and Alice, and Mr. Tombe should be arranging his money matters
      for him! Would not anything be better than this,—even that little tragedy down in
      Westmoreland, for which his ingenuity and courage would be required? He could endure to borrow
      money from Alice. He might even endure it still,—though that was very difficult after her
      treatment of him; but he could not endure to be the recipient of John Grey's money. By
      heavens, no! And as he got into a cab, and had himself driven off to the neighbourhood of
      Doctors' Commons, he gave himself credit for much fine manly feeling. Mr. Tombe's chambers
      were found without difficulty, and, as it happened, Mr. Tombe was there.
The lawyer rose from his chair as Vavasor entered, and bowed his powdered head very meekly
      as he asked his visitor to sit down. "Mr. Vavasor;—oh, yes. He had heard the name. Yes; he was
      in the habit of acting for his very old friend Mr. John Grey. He had acted for Mr. John Grey,
      and for Mr. John Grey's father,—he or his partner,—he believed he might say, for about half a
      century. There could not be a nicer gentleman than Mr. John Grey;—and such a pretty child as
      he used to be!" At every new sentence Mr. Tombe caught his poor asthmatic breath, and bowed
      his meek old head, and rubbed his hands together as though he hardly dared to keep his seat in
      Vavasor's presence without the support of some such motion; and wheezed apologetically, and
      seemed to ask pardon of his visitor for not knowing intuitively what was the nature of that
      visitor's business. But he was a sly old fox was Mr. Tombe, and was considering all this time
      how much it would be well that he should tell Mr. Vavasor, and how much it would be well that
      he should conceal. "The fat had got into the fire," as he told his old wife when he got home
      that evening. He told his old wife everything, and I don't know that any of his clients were
      the worse for his doing so. But while he was wheezing, and coughing, and apologizing, he made
      up his mind that if George Vavasor were to ask him certain questions, it would be best that he
      should answer them truly. If Vavasor did ask those questions, he would probably do so upon
      certain knowledge, and if so, why, in that case, lying would be of no use. Lying would not put
      the fat back into the frying pan. And even though such questions might be asked without any
      absolute knowledge, they would, at any rate, show that the questioner had the means of
      ascertaining the truth. He would tell as little as he could; but he decided during his last
      wheeze, that he could not lie in the matter with any chance of benefiting his client. "The
      prettiest child I ever saw, Mr. Vavasor!" said Mr. Tombe, and then he coughed violently. Some
      people who knew Mr. Tombe declared that he nursed his cough.
"I dare say," said George.
"Yes, indeed,—ugh—ugh—ugh."
"Can you tell me, Mr. Tombe, whether either you or he have anything to do with the payment
      of certain sums to my credit at Messrs. Hock and Block's?"
"Messrs. Hock and Block's, the bankers,—in Lom—bard Street?" said Mr. Tombe, taking a little
      more time.
"Yes; I bank there," said Vavasor, sharply.
"A most respectable house."
"Has any money been paid there to my credit, by you, Mr. Tombe?"
"May I ask you why you put the question to me, Mr. Vavasor?"
"Well, I don't think you may. That is to say, my reason for asking it can have nothing to do
      with yours for replying to it. If you have had no hand in any such payment, there is an end of
      it, and I need not take up your time by saying anything more on the subject."
"I am not prepared to go that length, Mr. Vavasor,—not altogether to go that
      length,—ugh—ugh—ugh."
"Then, will you tell me what you have done in the matter?"
"Well,—upon my word, you've taken me a little by surprise. Let me see. Pinkle,—Pinkle."
      Pinkle was a clerk who sat in an inner room, and Mr. Tombe's effort to call him seemed to be
      most ineffectual. But Pinkle understood the sound, and came. "Pinkle, didn't we pay some money
      into Hock and Block's a few weeks since, to the credit of Mr. George Vavasor?"
"Did we, sir?" said Pinkle, who probably knew that his employer was an old fox, and who,
      perhaps, had caught something of the fox nature himself.
"I think we did. Just look Pinkle;—and, Pinkle,—see the date, and let me know all about it.
      It's fine bright weather for this time of year, Mr. Vavasor; but these easterly
      winds!—ugh—ugh—ugh!"
Vavasor found himself sitting for an apparently interminable number of minutes in Mr.
      Tombe's dingy chamber, and was coughed at, and wheezed at, till he begun to be tired of his
      position; moreover, when tired, he showed his impatience. "Perhaps you'll let us write you a
      line when we have looked into the matter?" suggested Mr. Tombe.
"I'd rather know at once," said Vavasor. "I don't suppose it can take you very long to find
      out whether you have paid money to my account, by order of Mr. Grey. At any rate, I must know
      before I go away."
"Pinkle, Pinkle!" screamed the old man through his coughing; and again Pinkle came. "Well,
      Pinkle, was anything of the kind done, or is my memory deceiving me?" Mr. Tombe was, no doubt,
      lying shamefully, for, of course, he remembered all about it; and, indeed, George Vavasor had
      learned already quite enough for his own purposes.
"I was going to look," said Pinkle; and Pinkle again went away.
"I'm sorry to give your clerk so much trouble," said Vavasor, in an angry voice; "and I
      think it must be unnecessary. Surely you know whether Mr. Grey has commissioned you to pay
      money for me?"
"We have so many things to do, Mr. Vavasor; and so many clients. We have, indeed. You see,
      it isn't only one gentleman's affairs. But I think there was something done. I do,
      indeed."
"What is Mr. John Grey's address?" asked Vavasor, very sharply.
"Number 5, Suffolk Street, Pall Mall East," said Mr. Tombe. Herein Mr. Tombe somewhat
      committed himself. His client, Mr. Grey, was, in fact, in town, but Vavasor had not known or
      imagined that such was the case. Had Mr. Tombe given the usual address of Nethercoats, nothing
      further would have been demanded from him on that subject. But he had foolishly presumed that
      the question had been based on special information as to his client's visit to London, and he
      had told the plain truth in a very simple way.
"Number 5, Suffolk Street," said Vavasor, writing down the address. "Perhaps it will be
      better that I should go to him, as you do not seem inclined to give me any information." Then
      he took up his hat, and hardly bowing to Mr. Tombe, left the chambers. Mr. Tombe, as he did
      so, rose from his chair, and bent his head meekly down upon the table.
"Pinkle, Pinkle," wheezed Mr. Tombe. "Never mind; never mind." Pinkle didn't mind; and we
      may say that he had not minded; for up to that moment he had taken no steps towards a
      performance of the order which had been given him.
