
CHAPTER XXVIII INTERIM
The rooms which Milvain had taken for himself and his sisters were modest, but more
      expensive than their old quarters. As the change was on his account he held himself
      responsible for the extra outlay. But for his immediate prospects this step would have been
      unwarrantable, as his earnings were only just sufficient for his needs on the previous
      footing. He had resolved that his marriage must take place before Christmas; till that event
      he would draw when necessary upon the girls' little store, and then repay them out of Marian's
      dowry.
'And what are we to do when you are married?' asked Dora.
The question was put on the first evening of their being all under the same roof. The trio
      had had supper in the girls' sitting-room, and it was a moment for frank conversation. Dora
      rejoiced in the coming marriage; her brother
       had behaved honourably, and Marian, she trusted, would be very happy,
      notwithstanding disagreement with her father, which seemed inevitable. Maud was by no means so
      well pleased, though she endeavoured to wear smiles. It looked to her as if Jasper had been
      guilty of a kind of weakness not to be expected in him. Marian, as an individual, could not be
      considered an appropriate wife for such a man with such a future; and as for her five thousand
      pounds, that was ridiculous. Had it been ten — something can be made of ten thousand; but a
      paltry five! Maud's ideas on such subjects had notably expanded of late, and one of the
      results was that she did not live so harmoniously with her sister as for the first few months
      of their London career.
'I have been thinking a good deal about that,' replied Jasper to the younger girl's
      question. He stood with his back to the fire and smoked a cigarette. 'I thought at first of
      taking a flat; but then a flat of the kind I should want would be twice the rent of a large
      house. If we have a house with plenty of room in it you might come and live with us after a
      time. At first I must find you decent lodgings in our neighbourhood.'

'You show a good deal of generosity, Jasper,' said Maud, 'but pray remember that Marian
      isn't bringing you five thousand a year.'
'I regret to say that she isn't. What she brings me is five hundred a year for ten years —
      that's how I look at it. My own income will make it something between six or seven hundred at
      first, and before long probably more like a thousand. I am quite cool and collected. I
      understand exactly where I am, and where I am likely to be ten years hence. Marian's money is
      to be spent in obtaining a position for myself. At present I am spoken of as a "smart young
      fellow," and that kind of thing; but no one would offer me an editorship, or any other serious
      help. Wait till I show that I have helped myself, and hands will be stretched to me from every
      side. 'Tis the way of the world. I shall belong to a club; I shall give nice, quiet little
      dinners to selected people; I shall let it be understood by all and sundry that I have a
      social position. Thenceforth I am quite a different man, a man to be taken into account. And
      what will you bet me that I don't stand in the foremost rank of literary reputabilities ten
      years hence?'

'I doubt whether six or seven hundred a year will be enough for this.'
'If not, I am prepared to spend a thousand. Bless my soul! As if two or three years wouldn't
      suffice to draw out the mean qualities in the kind of people I am thinking of! I say ten, to
      leave myself a great margin.'
'Marian approves this?'
'I haven't distinctly spoken of it. But she approves whatever I think good.'
The girls laughed at his way of pronouncing this.
'And let us just suppose that you are so unfortunate as to fail?'
'There's no supposing it, unless, of course, I lose my health. I am not presuming on any
      wonderful development of powers. Such as I am now, I need only to be put on the little
      pedestal of a decent independence and plenty of people will point fingers of admiration at me.
      You don't fully appreciate this. Mind, it wouldn't do if I had no qualities. I have
      the qualities; they only need bringing into prominence. If I am an unknown man, and publish a
      wonderful book, it will make its way very slowly, or not at all. If I, become a known man,
      publish that very same book, its praise will echo over both hemispheres.
       I should be within the truth if I had said "a vastly inferior book," but I am in
      a bland mood at present. Suppose poor Reardon's novels had been published in the full light of
      reputation instead of in the struggling dawn which was never to become day, wouldn't they have
      been magnified by every critic? You have to become famous before you can secure the
       attention which would give fame .'
He delivered this apophthegm with emphasis, and repeated it in another form.
'You have to obtain reputation before you can get a fair hearing for that which would
      justify your repute. It's the old story of the French publisher who said to Dumas: "Make a
      name, and I'll publish anything you write." "But how the diable ," cries the author,
      "am I to make a name if I can't get published?" If a man can't hit upon any other way of
      attracting attention, let him dance on his head in the middle of the street; after that he may
      hope to get consideration for his volume of poems. I am speaking of men who wish to win
      reputation before they are toothless. Of course if your work is strong, and you can afford to
      wait, the probability is that half a dozen people will at last begin to shout that you have
      been monstrously neglected,
       as you have. But that happens when you are hoary and sapless, and when nothing
      under the sun delights you.'
He lit a new cigarette.
'Now I, my dear girls, am not a man who can afford to wait. First of all, my qualities are
      not of the kind which demand the recognition of posterity. My writing is for to-day, most
      distinctly hodiernal. It has no value save in reference to to-day. The question is: How can I
      get the eyes of men fixed upon me? The answer: By pretending I am quite independent of their
      gaze. I shall succeed, without any kind of doubt; and then I'll have a medal struck to
      celebrate the day of my marriage.'
But Jasper was not quite so well assured of the prudence of what he was about to do as he
      wished his sisters to believe. The impulse to which he had finally yielded still kept its
      force; indeed, was stronger than ever since the intimacy of lovers' dialogue had revealed to
      him more of Marian's heart and mind. Undeniably he was in love. Not passionately, not with the
      consuming desire which makes every motive seem paltry compared with its own satisfaction; but
      still quite sufficiently in love to have a great difficulty in pursuing his daily tasks. This
      did
       not still the voice which bade him remember all the opportunities and hopes he
      was throwing aside. Since the plighting of troth with Marian he had been over to Wimbledon, to
      the house of his friend and patron Mr. Horace Barlow, and there he had again met with Miss
      Rupert. This lady had no power whatever over his emotions, but he felt assured that she
      regarded him with strong interest. When he imagined the possibility of contracting a marriage
      with Miss Rupert, who would make him at once a man of solid means, his head drooped, and he
      wondered at his precipitation. It had to be confessed that he was the victim of a vulgar
      weakness. He had declared himself not of the first order of progressive men.
The conversation with Amy Reardon did not tend to put his mind at rest. Amy was astonished
      at so indiscreet a step in a man of his calibre. Ah! if only Amy herself were free, with her
      ten thousand pounds to dispose of! She, he felt sure, did not view him with indifference. Was
      there not a touch of pique in the elaborate irony with which she had spoken of his choice? —
      But it was idle to look in that direction.
He was anxious on his sisters' account. They
       were clever girls, and with energy might before long earn a bare subsistence; but
      it began to be doubtful whether they would persevere in literary work. Maud, it was clear, had
      conceived hopes of quite another kind. Her intimacy with Mrs. Lane was effecting a change in
      her habits, her dress, even her modes of speech. A few days after their establishment in the
      new lodgings, Jasper spoke seriously on this subject with the younger girl.
'I wonder whether you could satisfy my curiosity in a certain matter,' he said. 'Do you, by
      chance, know how much Maud gave for that new jacket in which I saw her yesterday?'
Dora was reluctant to answer.
'I don't think it was very much.'
'That is to say, it didn't cost twenty guineas. Well, I hope not. I notice, too, that she
      has been purchasing a new hat.'
'Oh, that was very inexpensive. She trimmed it herself.'
'Did she? Is there any particular, any quite special, reason for this expenditure?'
'I really can't say, Jasper.'
'That's ambiguous, you know. Perhaps it means you won't allow yourself to say?'

'No, Maud doesn't tell me about things of that kind.'
He took opportunities of investigating the matter, with the result that some ten days after
      he sought private colloquy with Maud herself. She had asked his opinion of a little paper she
      was going to send to a ladies' illustrated weekly, and he summoned her to his own room.
'I think this will do pretty well,' he said. 'There's rather too much thought in it,
      perhaps. Suppose you knock out one or two of the less obvious reflections, and substitute a
      wholesome commonplace? You'll have a better chance, I assure you.'
'But I shall make it worthless.'
'No; you'll probably make it worth a guinea or so. You must remember that the people who
      read women's papers are irritated, simply irritated, by anything that isn't glaringly obvious.
      They hate an unusual thought. The art of writing for such papers — indeed, for the public in
      general — is to express vulgar thought and feeling in a way that flatters the vulgar thinkers
      and feelers. Just abandon your mind to it, and then let me see it again.'
Maud took up the manuscript and glanced over it with a contemptuous smile. Having
       observed her for a moment, Jasper threw himself back in the chair and said, as
      if casually:
'I am told that Mr. Dolomore is becoming a great friend of yours.'
The girl's face changed. She drew herself up, and looked away towards the window.
'I don't know that he is a "great" friend.'
'Still, he pays enough attention to you to excite remark.'
'Whose remark?'
'That of several people who go to Mrs. Lane's.'
'I don't know any reason for it,' said Maud, coldly.
'Look here, Maud, you don't mind if I give you a friendly warning?'
She kept silence, with a look of superiority to all monition.
'Dolomore,' pursued her brother, 'is all very well in his way, but that way isn't yours. I
      believe he has a good deal of money, but he has neither brains nor principle. There's no harm
      in your observing the nature and habits of such individuals, but don't allow yourself to
      forget that they are altogether beneath you.'
'There's no need whatever for you to teach me self-respect,' replied the girl.

'I'm quite sure of that; but you are inexperienced. On the whole, I do rather wish that you
      would go less frequently to Mrs. Lane's. It was rather an unfortunate choice of yours. Very
      much better if you could have got on a good footing with the Barnabys. If you are generally
      looked upon as belonging to the Lanes' set it will make it difficult for you to get in with
      the better people.'
Maud was not to be drawn into argument, and Jasper could only hope that his words would have
      some weight with her. The Mr. Dolomore in question was a young man of rather offensive type —
      athletic, dandiacal, and half-educated. It astonished Jasper that his sister could tolerate
      such an empty creature for a moment; who has not felt the like surprise with regard to women's
      inclinations? He talked with Dora about it, but she was not in her sister's confidence.
'I think you ought to have some influence with her,' Jasper said.
'Maud won't allow anyone to interfere in — her private affairs.'
'It would be unfortunate if she made me quarrel with her.'
'Oh, surely there isn't any danger of that?'

'I don't know, she mustn't be obstinate.'
Jasper himself saw a good deal of miscellaneous society at this time. He could not work so
      persistently as usual, and with wise tactics he used the seasons of enforced leisure to extend
      his acquaintance. Marian and he were together twice a week, in the evening.
Of his old Bohemian associates he kept up intimate relations with one only, and that was
      Whelpdale. This was in a measure obligatory, for Whelpdale frequently came to see him, and it
      would have been difficult to repel a man who was always making known how highly he esteemed
      the privilege of Milvain's friendship, and whose company on the whole was agreeable enough. At
      the present juncture Whelpdale's cheery flattery was a distinct assistance; it helped to
      support Jasper in his self-confidence, and to keep the brightest complexion on the prospect to
      which he had committed himself.
'Whelpdale is anxious to make Marian's acquaintance,' Jasper said to his sisters one day.
      'Shall we have him here to-morrow evening?'
'Just as you like,' Maud replied.
'You won't object, Dora?'
'Oh no! I rather like Mr. Whelpdale.'

'If I were to repeat that to him he'd go wild with delight. But don't be afraid; I shan't.
      I'll ask him to come for an hour, and trust to his discretion not to bore us by staying too
      long.'
A note was posted to Whelpdale; he was invited to present himself at eight o'clock, by which
      time Marian would have arrived. Jasper's room was to be the scene of the assembly, and
      punctual to the minute the literary adviser appeared. He was dressed with all the finish his
      wardrobe allowed, and his face beamed with gratification; it was rapture to him to enter the
      presence of these three girls, one of whom he had, more suo , held in romantic
      remembrance since his one meeting with her at Jasper's old lodgings. His eyes melted with
      tenderness as he approached Dora and saw her smile of gracious recognition. By Maud he was
      profoundly impressed. Marian inspired him with no awe, but he fully appreciated the charm of
      her features and her modest gravity. After all, it was to Dora that his eyes turned again most
      naturally. He thought her exquisite, and, rather than be long without a glimpse of her, he
      contented himself with fixing his eyes on the hem of her dress and the boot-toe that
      occasionally peeped from beneath it.

As was to be expected in such a circle, conversation soon turned to the subject of literary
      struggles.
'I always feel it rather humiliating,' said Jasper, 'that I have gone through no very
      serious hardships. It must be so gratifying to say to young fellows who are just beginning:
      "Ah, I remember when I was within an ace of starving to death," and then come out with Grub
      Street reminiscences of the most appalling kind. Unfortunately, I have always had enough to
      eat.'
'I haven't,' exclaimed Whelpdale. 'I have lived for five days on a few cents' worth of
      pea-nuts in the States.'
'What are pea-nuts, Mr. Whelpdale?' asked Dora.
Delighted with the question, Whelpdale described that undesirable species of food.
'It was in Troy,' he went on, 'Troy, N. Y. To think that a man should live on peanuts in a
      town called Troy!'
'Tell us those adventures,' cried Jasper. 'It's a long time since I heard them, and the
      girls will enjoy it vastly.'
Dora looked at him with such good-humoured interest that the traveller needed no further
      persuasion.

'It came to pass in those days,' he began, 'that I inherited from my godfather a small, a
      very small, sum of money. I was making strenuous efforts to write for magazines, with
      absolutely no encouragement. As everybody was talking just then of the Centennial Exhibition
      at Philadelphia, I conceived the brilliant idea of crossing the Atlantic, in the hope that I
      might find valuable literary material at the Exhibition — or Exposition, as they called it —
      and elsewhere. I won't trouble you with an account of how I lived whilst I still had money;
      sufficient that no one would accept the articles I sent to England, and that at last I got
      into perilous straits. I went to New York, and thought of returning home, but the spirit of
      adventure was strong in me. "I'll go West," I said to myself. "There I am bound to find
      material." And go I did, taking an emigrant ticket to Chicago. It was December, and I should
      like you to imagine what a journey of a thousand miles by an emigrant train meant at that
      season. The cars were deadly cold, and what with that and the hardness of the seats I found it
      impossible to sleep; it reminded me of tortures I had read about; I thought my brain would
      have burst with the need of sleeping. At
       Cleveland, in Ohio, we had to wait several hours in the night; I left the
      station and wandered about till I found myself on the edge of a great cliff that looked over
      Lake Erie. A magnificent picture! Brilliant moonlight, and all the lake away to the horizon
      frozen and covered with snow. The clocks struck two as I stood there.'
He was interrupted by the entrance of a servant who brought coffee.
'Nothing could be more welcome,' cried Dora. 'Mr. Whelpdale makes one feel quite
      chilly.'
There was laughter and chatting whilst Maud poured out the beverage. Then Whelpdale pursued
      his narrative.
'I reached Chicago with not quite five dollars in my pockets, and, with a courage which I
      now marvel at, I paid immediately four dollars and a half for a week's board and lodging.
      "Well," I said to myself, "for a week I am safe. If I earn nothing in that time, at least I
      shall owe nothing when I have to turn out into the streets." It was a rather dirty little
      boarding-house, in Wabash Avenue, and occupied, as I soon found, almost entirely by actors.
      There was no fireplace in my bedroom, and if there had been I couldn't have afforded a fire.
      But that mattered little; what I had to do
       was to set forth and discover some way of making money. Don't suppose that I was
      in a desperate state of mind; how it was, I don't quite know, but I felt decidedly cheerful.
      It was pleasant to be in this new region of the earth, and I went about the town like a
      tourist who has abundant resources.'
He sipped his coffee.
'I saw nothing for it but to apply at the office of some newspaper, and as I happened to
      light upon the biggest of them first of all, I put on a bold face, marched in, asked if I
      could see the editor. There was no difficulty whatever about this; I was told to ascend by
      means of the "elevator" to an upper storey, and there I walked into a comfortable little room
      where a youngish man sat smoking a cigar at a table covered with print and manuscript. I
      introduced myself, stated my business. "Can you give me work of any kind on your paper?"
      "Well, what experience have you had?" "None whatever." The editor smiled. "I'm very much
      afraid you would be no use to us. But what do you think you could do?" Well now, there was but
      one thing that by any possibility I could do. I asked him: "Do you publish any fiction — short
      stories?" "Yes, we're always glad of a short
       story, if it's good." This was a big daily paper; they have weekly supplements
      of all conceivable kinds of matter. "Well," I said, "if I write a story of English life, will
      you consider it?" "With pleasure." I left him, and went out as if my existence were henceforth
      provided for.'
He laughed heartily, and was joined by his hearers.
'It was a great thing to be permitted to write a story, but then — what story? I
      went down to the shore of Lake Michigan; walked there for half an hour in an icy wind. Then I
      looked for a stationer's shop, and laid out a few of my remaining cents in the purchase of
      pen, ink, and paper — my stock of all these things was at an end when I left New York. Then
      back to the boarding-house. Impossible to write in my bedroom, the temperature was below zero;
      there was no choice but to sit down in the common room, a place like the smoke-room of a poor
      commercial hotel in England. A dozen men were gathered about the fire, smoking, talking,
      quarrelling. Favourable conditions, you see, for literary effort. But the story had to be
      written, and write it I did, sitting there at the end of a deal table; I finished it in less
      than a couple of days, a good long story, enough to
       fill three columns of the huge paper. I stand amazed at my power of
      concentration as often as I think of it!'
'And was it accepted?' asked Dora.
'You shall hear. I took my manuscript to the editor, and he told me to come and see him
      again next morning. I didn't forget the appointment. As I entered he smiled in a very
      promising way, and said, "I think your story will do. I'll put it into the Saturday
      supplement. Call on Saturday morning and I'll remunerate you." How well I remember that word
      "remunerate"! I have had an affection for the word ever since. And remunerate me he did;
      scribbled something on a scrap of paper, which I presented to the cashier. The sum was
      eighteen dollars. Behold me saved!'
He sipped his coffee again.
'I have never come across an English editor who treated me with anything like that
      consideration and general kindliness. How the man had time, in his position, to see me so
      often, and do things in such a human way, I can't understand. Imagine anyone trying the same
      at the office of a London newspaper! To begin with, one couldn't see the editor at all. I
      shall always think with profound gratitude of that
       man with the peaked brown beard and pleasant smile.'
'But did the pea-nuts come after that?' inquired Dora.
'Alas! they did. For some months I supported myself in Chicago, writing for that same paper,
      and for others. But at length the flow of my inspiration was checked; I had written myself
      out. And I began to grow home-sick, wanted to get back to England. The result was that I found
      myself one day in New York again, but without money enough to pay for a passage home. I tried
      to write one more story. But it happened, as I was looking over newspapers in a reading-room,
      that I saw one of my Chicago tales copied into a paper published at Troy. Now Troy was not
      very far off, and it occurred to me that, if I went there, the editor of this paper might be
      disposed to employ me, seeing he had a taste for my fiction. And I went, up the Hudson by
      steamboat. On landing at Troy I was as badly off as when I reached Chicago; I had less than a
      dollar. And the worst of it was I had come on a vain errand; the editor treated me with scant
      courtesy, and no work was to be got. I took a little room, paying for it day by day, and in
      the meantime I fed on those loathsome
       pea-nuts, buying a handful in the street now and then. And I assure you I looked
      starvation in the face.'
'What sort of a town is Troy?' asked Marian, speaking for the first time.
'Don't ask me. They make straw-hats there principally, and they sell pea-nuts. More I
      remember not.'
'But you didn't starve to death,' said Maud.
'No, I just didn't. I went one afternoon into a lawyer's office, thinking I might get some
      copying work, and there I found an odd-looking old man, sitting with an open Bible on his
      knees. He explained to me that he wasn't the lawyer; that the lawyer was away on business, and
      that he was just guarding the office. Well, could he help me? He meditated, and a thought
      occurred to him. "Go," he said, "to such and such a boarding-house, and ask for Mr. Freeman
      Sterling. He is just starting on a business tour, and wants a young man to accompany him." I
      didn't dream of asking what the business was, but sped, as fast as my trembling limbs would
      carry me, to the address he had mentioned. I asked for Mr. Freeman Sterling, and found him. He
      was a photographer, and his business at present was to go about getting orders for the
       reproducing of old portraits. A good-natured young fellow. He said he liked the
      look of me, and on the spot engaged me to assist him in a house-to-house visitation. He would
      pay for my board and lodging, and give me a commission on all the orders I obtained. Forthwith
      I sat down to a "square meal," and ate — my conscience, how I ate!'
'You were not eminently successful in that pursuit, I think?' said Jasper.
'I don't think I got half a dozen orders. Yet that good Samaritan supported me for five or
      six weeks, whilst we travelled from Troy to Boston. It couldn't go on; I was ashamed of
      myself; at last I told him that we must part. Upon my word, I believe he would have paid my
      expenses for another month; why, I can't understand. But he had a vast respect for me because
      I had written in newspapers, and I do seriously think that he didn't like to tell me I was a
      useless fellow. We parted on the very best of terms in Boston.'
'And you again had recourse to pea-nuts?' asked Dora.
'Well, no. In the meantime I had written to someone in England, begging the loan of just
      enough money to enable me to get home. The
       money came a day after I had seen Sterling off by train.'
An hour and a half quickly passed, and Jasper, who wished to have a few minutes of Marian's
      company before it was time for her to go, cast a significant glance at his sisters. Dora said
      innocently:
'You wished me to tell you when it was half-past nine, Marian.'
And Marian rose. This was a signal Whelpdale could not disregard. Immediately he made ready
      for his own departure, and in less than five minutes was gone, his face at the last moment
      expressing blended delight and pain.
'Too good of you to have asked me to come,' he said with gratitude to Jasper, who went to
      the door with him. 'You are a happy man, by Jove! A happy man!'
When Jasper returned to the room his sisters had vanished. Marian stood by the fire. He drew
      near to her, took her hands, and repeated laughingly Whelpdale's last words.
'Is it true?' she asked.
'Tolerably true, I think.'
'Then I am as happy as you are.'
He released her hands, and moved a little apart.

'Marian, I have been thinking about that letter to your father. I had better get it written,
      don't you think?'
She gazed at him with troubled eyes.
'Perhaps you had. Though we said it might be delayed until — '
'Yes, I know. But I suspect you had rather I didn't wait any longer. Isn't that the
      truth?'
'Partly. Do just as you wish, Jasper.'
'I'll go and see him, if you like.'
'I am so afraid — No, writing will be better.'
'Very well. Then he shall have the letter to-morrow afternoon.'
'Don't let it come before the last post. I had so much rather not. Manage it, if you
      can.'
'Very well. Now go and say good-night to the girls. It's a vile night, and you must get home
      as soon as possible.'
She turned away, but again came towards him, murmuring:
'Just a word or two more.'
'About the letter?'
'No. You haven't said — '
He laughed.
'And you couldn't go away contentedly
       unless I repeated for the hundredth time that I love you?'
Marian searched his countenance.
'Do you think it foolish? I live only on those words.'
'Well, they are better than pea-nuts.'
'Oh don't! I can't bear to — '
Jasper was unable to understand that such a jest sounded to her like profanity. She hid her
      face against him, and whispered the words that would have enraptured her had they but come
      from his lips. The young man found it pleasant enough to be worshipped, but he could not reply
      as she desired. A few phrases of tenderness, and his love-vocabulary was exhausted; he even
      grew weary when something more — the indefinite something — was vaguely required of him.
'You are a dear, good, tender-hearted girl,' he said, stroking her short, soft hair, which
      was exquisite to the hand. 'Now go and get ready.'
She left him, but stood for a few moments on the landing before going to the girls'
      room.

