
CHAPTER VIII
The portmanteau fell under the bed; he crushed into the red bulbous cover. Kreisler never
      sat on his bed except when going to get into it. For another man it would have replaced the
      absent armchair. In those moments of depression in which he did so he always, at once, felt
      more depressed, or quite hopeless. Head between hands, he now stared at the floor. Four or
      five hours! He must raise money, else he could not go to the dance. How absurd, this fuss
      about such a sum ! All the same, how the devil could he get it ?
“Small as it is, I shan’t get it,” he thought to himself. He began repeating this stupidly,
      and stuck at word “shan’t.” His brain and mouth clogged up, he stuttered thickly in his mind.
      He sprang up. But the slovenly, hopeless quality of the bed clung to him. This was a frivolous
      demonstration. He wandered to the window; stood staring out, nose flattened against the
      pane.
The sudden quiet and idleness of his personality was an awakening after the little nightmare
      of Suzanne. But it was not a refreshing one.
His portmanteau had always received certain consideration, as being, next the dress-suit,
      the most dependable article among those beneath his sway —  to come to his aid if their common
      existence were threatened. He had now thrown it under the bed with disgust. He and all his
      goods were rubbish for the streets.
He sauntered from the window to the bed and back. Whenever he liked, in a sense, he would
      open the door and go out; but still, until then (and when would he “like”
      ?) he was a poor prisoner. Outside, he took some strength and importance from others. In here
      he touched bottom and realized what the Kreisler-self was, with four walls round it.
His muscles were still full. They symbolized his uselessness. The thought, so harsh and
      tyrannical, 
        of his once more going to the window and gazing down at the street beneath made
      him draw back his chair. He sat midway in the room, looking steadily out at the housetops.
      But, like his vigorous muscles and his deadness, there was the same contradiction; his
      mechanical obstinacy as regards Anastasya and his comic activity at present to get to a
      dance.
Comrades at painting school, nodding acquaintances, etc., were once more run through. None
      valued his acquaintance at more than thirty centimes, if that.
Perhaps Anastasya had left Paris ? This solution, occurring sometimes, had only made his
      activity during the last few days more mad and mechanical —  the pursuit of a shadow.
Ten minutes later, through a series of difficult clockwork-like actions, he had got once
      more to Lejeune’s to have lunch. With disgust he took what had been his usual seat latterly,
      at the table in the recess; the one place, he was sure, Anastasya would never be found in
      again, wherever else she might be found.
Lunch nearly over, he caught sight of Lowndes. “Hi, Master Lowndes!” he called out —
      always assuming great bluffness and brutality, as he called it, with English people, and
      laborious opposite to “stiffness.” “How do you do ?”
The moment his eye had fallen on “Master” Lowndes this friend’s probable national
      opulence had occurred to him as a tantalizing fact. No gross decision could be come to in that
      moment. Lowndes was called to be kept there a little bit, while he turned things over and made
      up his mind. This was an acquaintance existing chiefly on chaff and national antithesis. It
      meant nothing to him. What matter if he were refused ? Lowndes not being a compatriot made it
      easier. Something must be sacrificed. Lowndes’ acquaintanceship was a possession something
      equivalent to a cheap ring, a souvenir. He must part with it, if necessary.
Lowndes grinned at sight of Kreisler. He had finished his own lunch and was just going off.
      He had almost forgotten his idea in coming to the 
       restaurant, that of seeing his German acquaintance. Swaying from side to side on
      his two superlatively elastic calves, he sat down opposite the good Otto, who leered back,
      blinking. He spoke German better than Kreisler any other language, so they used that, after a
      little flourish of English.
“Well, what have you been doing ? Working ?”
“No,” replied Kreisler. “I’m giving up painting and becoming a business man. My father has
      offered me a position !”
This subject seemed no more important than his speech made it, and yet it filled his life.
      Lowndes smiled correctly, not suspecting realities.
“Have you seen Douglas ?” This was a friend through whom they had known each other in
      Italy.
Why should this fellow lend him thirty francs ? The grin would not be there, he felt, had he
      been conscious that the other was thinking of the contents of his pocket. Not humour, but a
      much colder stuff no doubt mounted guard over his pocket-book, guarantee of this easiness and
      health. Oh, the offensive prosperity of the English, smugness of middle-class affluence ! etc.
      etc.
Kreisler imagined the change that would come over this face when there was question of
      thirty francs. Estrangement set in on his side already, anger and humiliation at the imagined
      expression. This was of help. Here was his chance of borrowing that very insignificant but
      illusive sum. The man was already an enemy. He would willingly have knocked him on the head
      and taken his money had they been in a quiet place.
The complacent health and humoristic phlegm with which he grinned and perambulated through
      life charged Kreisler with the contempt natural to his more stiff and human education. His
      relations with him hinging on mild racial differences, he saw behind him the long line of all
      the Englishmen he had ever known. “Useless swine,” he thought, “so pleased with his
      cursed English face, and mean as a peasant!”
“Oh, I was asked for my opinion on a certain
      matter this morning. I was asked what I thought of German women !”
“What reply did you make, Mr. Lowndes ?”
“I didn’t know what to say. I suggested that my friend should come along and get your
      opinion.”
“My opinion as an expert ? My fees as an expert are heavy. I charge thirty francs
      a consultation !”
“I’m sure he’d have paid that,” Lowndes laughed innocently. Kreisler surveyed him
      unsympathetically.
“What, then, is your opinion of our excellent females ?” he asked.
“Oh, I have no opinion. I admire your ladies, especially the pure Prussians.”
Kreisler was thinking: “If I borrow the money, there must be some time mentioned for paying
      back —  next week, say. He would be more likely to lend it if he knew where to find me. He
      must have my address.”
“Come and see me — some time,” he blinked. “52 Boulevard Pfeiffer, fourth floor, just
      beside the restaurant here. You see ? Up there.”
“I will. I looked you up at your old address a month or so ago; they didn’t know where
      you’d gone.”
Kreisler stared fixedly at him — a way of covering discomfiture felt at this news. The old
      address reminded him of several little debts there. For this reason he had not told them where
      he was going. The concierge would complain of her old tenant; probably, even, Lowndes might
      have been shown derelict tradesmen’s bills. Not much encouragement for his proposed victim
      !
Lowndes was writing on a piece of paper.
“There’s my address : Rue des Flammes.”
Kreisler looked at it rather fussily and said over: “5 Rue des Flammes. Lowndes.” He
      hesitated and repeated the name.
“R. W. — Robert Wooton. Here, I’ll write it down for you.”
“Are you in a hurry ? Come and have a drink
        at the Berne,” Kreisler suggested when he had made up his bill.
On the way Lowndes continued a discourse.
“A novelist I knew told me he changed the names of the characters in a book several times
      in the course of writing it. It freshened them up, according to him. He said that the majority
      of people were killed by their names. I think a name is a man’s soul.”
Kreisler forged ahead, rhythmically and sullenly.
“If we had numbers, for instance, instead of names, who would take the number thirteen ?”
      Lowndes wondered in German.
“I,” said Kreisler.
“Would you ?”
Every minute Kreisler delayed increased the difficulty. His energy was giving out. They were
      now sitting on the terrasse at the Berne. He had developed a particular antipathy to
      borrowing. An immense personal neurasthenia had grown up round this habit of his, owing to his
      late discomfitures. He already heard an awkward voice, saw awkward eyes. Then he suddenly
      concluded that the fact that Lowndes was not a German made it more difficult, instead of less§
      so, as he had thought. Why could he not take ? —  why petition ? He knew that if Lowndes
      refused he would break out; he nearly did so as it was. With disgust and fatigue he lay back
      in his chair, paying no attention to what Lowndes was saying. His mind was made up. He would
      not proceed with his designs on this dirty pocket. He became rough and monosyllabic. He wished
      to purify himself in rudeness of his preceding amiability.
Lowndes had been looking at a newspaper. He put it down and said he must go back to “
      work.” His “morning” had, of course, been interrupted by Tarr!
Kreisler still saw the expression on the Englishman’s face he had imagined, and restrained
      with difficulty the desire to spit in it. The nearness they had been to this demand must have
      affected, he thought, even his impervious companion. He had asked and been 
        refused, to all intents and purposes. He got up, left Lowndes standing there,
      and went into the lavatory at the side of the cafe, where he had a thorough wash in cold
      water.
Back at his table, he saw no sign of the Englishman, and sat down to finish his drink,
      considering what his next move should be.
Various pursuits suggested themselves. He might go and offer himself as model at some big
      private studios near the Observatoire. He could get a week’s money advanced him ? He would
      dress as a woman and waylay somebody or other on the boulevards. He might steal some money.
      Volker was the last. He came just after murder. He would go to Ernst Volker — he with his
      little obstinate resolve in obscurity of his mind no longer to be Kreisler’s acquaintance.
      Obstinacy in people of weak character is the perfectly exasperating thing. They have no right
      to their resoluteness — appearing weaker and meaner than ever in anomalous tenacity.
      Volker, naturally submissive, had broken away and was posing somewhere as a stranger. He .felt
      physical disgust; this proceeding was indecent.
A spirit that has mingled with another, suddenly covering itself and wishing to regain its
      strangeness, can be as indecent as a strange being suddenly baring itself. A man’s being is
      never divined so completely and pungently as when his friendship cools and he becomes once
      more a stranger. This is one of the moments when the imagination, most awake, sees best.
This little rat’s instinctive haste to separate from him was an ill omen : what did he care
      for omens ? he clamoured impatiently.
At this juncture in his reflections, from where he sat on the café terrace he saw Volker’s
      back, as he supposed, disappearing round a corner, as though trying to avoid a meeting. Blood
      came to his head with a shock. He nearly sprang forward in pursuit of this unsociable form.
      Rushing words of insult 
        rose to his lips, he fidgeted on his seat, gazed blankly at the spot where he
      had seen the figure. That it was no longer there exasperated him beyond measure. It was as
      though he considered that Ernst should have remained at the corner, immobile, with his back
      towards him, a visible mark and fuel for anger. He made a sign to the waiter, indicating that
      his drink would go into his “tick.” He then hurried off in the direction of Volker’s house —
      the direction also that the back had taken — determined to get something out of him. Kreisler,
      letting instinct guide his steps, took the wrong turning — following, in fact, his customary
      morning’s itinerary. He found himself suddenly far beyond the street Volker lived in, near
      Juan Soler’s atelier. He gazed down the street towards the atelier, then took off his
      glasses and began carefully wiping them. While doing this he heard words of greeting and found
      Volker at his elbow.
“Hallo ! You look pretty hot. You nearly knocked me over a minute ago in your haste,” he
      was saying.
Kreisler jumped — as the bravest might if, having stoutly confronted an apparition, it
      suddenly became a man of flesh and blood. Had his glasses been firmly planted on his nose
      things might have gone differently. He frowned vacantly at Ernst and went on rubbing them.
Volker saw that something was wrong. It would have been to his advantage also to “have out” anything that was there and have done with it. But in his attitude German sluggishness
      seemed appealing to the same element in Kreisler’s nature, claiming its support and
      sympathy.
“It’s dreadfully hot!” he said uneasily, looking round as though examining the heat. He
      stepped up on to the pavement out of the way of a horse-meat cart. The large-panelled
      conveyance, full of enormous outlandish red carcases, went rushing down the street, carrying
      an area of twenty yards of deafness with it. This explosion of sound had a pacifying effect on
      Kreisler; it made him smile for some reason or 
        other. Volker went on: “I don’t know whether I told you about my show.”
“What show ?” Kreisler asked rudely.
“In Berlin, you know. It has not gone badly. Our compatriots improve. I’ve got a
      commission to paint the Countess Wort. What have you been doing lately ?” There was a
      forbidding pause. “I’ve intended coming round to see you; but I’ve been sticking at home
      working. Have you been round at the Berne ?” He spoke rapidly and confidentially, as two
      business men meeting in the street and always in a hurry might try and compress into a few
      minutes, between two handshakes, a lot of personal news. He seemed to wish to combine
      conviction that he was very anxious to tell Kreisler all about himself and (by his hurried
      air) paralysis of the other’s intention to have an explanation.
“I am glad you are going to paint the Countess Wort. I congratulate you, Mr. Volker! I am
      in a hurry. Good day.”
Kreisler turned and walked towards the Atelier Juan Soler. For no reason (except that it
      was impossible) he could not get money from Volker. It was as though that money would not be
      real money at all. Supposing he got it; the first place he tried to pass it the man would say,
      “This is not money.” As for taking him to task, his red, correct face made it impossible; it
      had suddenly become a lesson and exercise that it would be ridiculous to repeat. He was not a
      schoolboy.
Volker walked away ruffled. He was mortified that, by apprehension of a scene, he had been
      so friendly. The old Otto had scored. He, Volker, had humiliated himself needlessly, for it
      was evident Kreisler’s manner had been misinterpreted by him.
Kreisler had not intended going to Soler’s that day. Yet there he was, presumably got there
      now to avoid Ernst Volker. He saw himself starting up from the Berne a quarter of an hour
      before, steaming away in pursuit of a skulking friend — impetus of angry thought carrying him
      far beyond his destination;

then Volker comes along and runs him into the painting school. He compared himself to one
      of those little steam toys that go straight ahead without stopping ; that any one can take up
      and send puffing away in the opposite direction. Humouring this fancy, he entered the studio
      with the gaze a man might wear who had fallen through a ceiling and found himself in a strange
      room in midst of a family circle. The irresponsible, resigned, and listless air signified
      whimsical expectancy. Some other figure would rise up, no doubt, and turn him
      streetwards again ?
A member of the race which has learnt to sleep standing up posed on the throne. He had
      suddenly come amongst brothers. He was as torpid as she, as indifferent as these mechanical
      students. The clock struck. With a glance at the massier, the model slowly and
      rhythmically abandoned her rigid attitude, coming to life as living statues do in ballets
      ; reached stiffly for her chemise. The dozen other figures, who had been slowly pulsing —
      advancing or retreating, suspended around her yellowness — now laboriously moved, relapsing
      aimlessly here and there, chiefly against walls.
He had been considering a fat back and especially a parting carried half-way down the back
      of the head. Why should not its owner, and gardener, he had reflected, continue it the whole
      distance down, dividing his head in half with a line of white scalp ? This man now turned on
      him sudden, unsurprised, placid eyes. Had he eyes, as well as a parting, at the back
      of his head ? Kreisler felt on the verge of courteous discussion as to whether that parting
      should or should not be gone on with till it reached the neck.
Three had struck. He left and returned to the neighbourhood of the Berne by the same and
      longest route, as though to efface in some way his previous foolish journey.
Every three or four hours vague hope recurred of the delayed letter, like hunger recurring
      at the hour 
        of meals. He went up to the loge of his house and knocked.
“Il n’y a rien pour vous !”
Four hours remained. The German party was to meet at Fraulein Lipmann’s after dinner.
