
CHAPTER V
Tarr soon regretted this last anti-climax stage of his adventure. He would have left
      Kreisler alone in future, but he felt that by frequenting him he could save Bertha from
      something disagreeable. With disquiet and misgiving every night now he sat in front of his
      Prussian friend. He watched him gradually imbibing enough spirits to work him up to his pitch
      of characteristic madness.
“After all, let us hear really what it all means, your Kreisler stunt, and Kreisler ?” he
      said to her four or five days after his reappearance. “Do you know that I act as a dam, or
      rather a dyke, to his outrageous flood of liquorous spirits every night ? Only my
      insignificant form is between you and destruction, or you and a very unpleasant Kreisler, at
      any rate. — Have you seen him when he’s drunk ?  — What, after all, does Kreisler
      mean ? Satisfy my curiosity.”
Bertha shuddered and looked at him with dramatically wide-open eyes, as though there were no
      answer.
“It’s nothing, Sorbert, nothing,” she said, as though Kreisler were the bubonic plague and
      she were making light of it.
Yet a protest had to be made. He had rather neglected the coincidence of his arrival and
      Bertha’s refusal to see Kreisler. He must avoid finding himself manoeuvred into appearing the
      cause. A tranquil and sentimental revenant was the rôle he had chosen. Up to a point he
      encouraged Bertha to see his boon companion and relax her sudden exclusiveness. He hesitated
      to carry out thoroughly his part of go-between and reconciler. At length he began to make
      inquiries. After all, to have to hold 
        back his successor to the favours of a lady, from going and seizing those
      rights (presumably temporarily denied him), was a strange situation. At any moment now it
      seemed likely that Kreisler would turn on him. This would simplify matters. Better
      leave lovers to fight out their own quarrels and not take up the ungrateful rôle of interferer
      and voluntary policeman. All his retrospective pleasure was being spoilt. But he was committed
      to remain there for the present. To get over his sensation of dupe, he was more sociable with
      Kreisler than he felt. The German interpreted this as an hypocrisy. His contempt and
      suspicion of the peculiar revenant grew.
Bertha was tempted to explain, in as dramatic a manner as possible, the situation to Tarr.
      But she hesitated always because she thought it would lead to a fight. She was often, as it
      was, anxious for Tarr.
“Sorbert, I think I’ll go to Germany at once,” she said to him, on the afternoon of his
      second visit to Renée Lipmann’s.
“Why, because you’re afraid of Kreisler ?”
“No, but I think it’s better.”
“But why, all of a sudden ?”
“My sister will be home from Berlin, in a day or two——”
“And you’d leave me here to ‘ mind ’ the dog.”
' “No. — Don’t see Kreisler any more, Sorbert. Dog is the word indeed ! He is mad
      : ganz verucht ! —  Promise me, Sorbert” — she took his hand — “not to go to the
      café any more !”
“Do you want him at your door at twelve tonight ? — I feel I may be playing the part of —
      gooseberry, is it——?”
“Don’t, Sorbert. If you only knew ! — He was here this morning, hammering for nearly half
      an hour. But all I ask you is to go to the café no more. There is no need for you to be mixed
      up in all this. I only am to blame.”
“I wonder what is the real explanation of Kreisler?” Sorbert said, pulled up by what she
      had said. “Have 
       you known him long — before you knew me, for instance ?”
“No, only a week or two — since you went away.”
“I must ask Kreisler. But he seems to have very primitive notions about himself.”
“Don’t bother any more with that man, Sorbert. You don’t do any good. Don’t go to the cafe
      tonight !”
“Why to-night ?”
“Any night.”
Kreisler certainly was a “new link” — too much. The chief cause of separation had become
      an element of insidious rapprochement.
He left her silently apprehensive, staring at him mournfully.
So that night, after his second visit to Fraulein Lipmann’s, he did not seek out Kreisler at
      his usual headquarters with his first enthusiasm.
