
 II.
The house where Sherman and his mother lived was one of those bare houses so common in
      country towns. Their dashed fronts mounting above empty pavements have a kind of dignity in
      their utilitarianism. They seem to say, “Fashion has not made us, nor ever do its caprices
      pass our sand-cleaned doorsteps.” On every basement window is the same dingy wire blind; on
      every door the same brass knocker. Custom everywhere! “So much the longer,” the blinds seem to
      say, “have eyes glanced through us”; and the knockers to murmur, “And fingers lifted us.”

 No. 15, Stephens’ Row, was in no manner peculiar among its twenty fellows. The
      chairs in the drawing-room facing the street were of heavy mahogany with horsehair cushions
      worn at the corners. On the round table was somebody’s commentary on the New Testament laid
      like the spokes of a wheel on a table-cover of American oilcloth with stamped Japanese figures
      half worn away. The room was seldom used, for Mrs. Sherman was solitary because silent. In
      this room the dressmaker sat twice a year, and here the rector’s wife used every month or so
      to drink a cup of tea. It was quite clean. There was not a fly-mark on the mirror, and all
      summer the fern in the grate was constantly changed. Behind this room and overlooking the
      garden was the parlour, where cane-bottomed chairs took the place of mahogany. Sherman had
      lived here with his mother all his life, and their old servant hardly remembered
       having lived anywhere else; and soon she would absolutely cease to remember the
      world she knew before she saw the four walls of this house, for every day she forgot something
      fresh. The son was almost thirty, the mother fifty, and the servant near seventy. Every year
      they had two hundred pounds among them, and once a year the son got a new suit of clothes and
      went into the drawing-room to look at himself in the mirror.
On the morning of the 20th of December Mrs. Sherman was down before her son. A spare,
      delicate-featured woman, with somewhat thin lips tightly closed as with silent people, and
      eyes at once gentle and distrustful, tempering the hardness of the lips. She helped the
      servant to set the table, and then, for her old-fashioned ideas would not allow her to rest,
      began to knit, often interrupting her knitting to go into the kitchen or to listen at the foot
      of the stairs. At last,
       hearing a sound upstairs, she put the eggs down to boil, muttering the while, and
      began again to knit. When her son appeared she received him with a smile.
“Late again, mother,” he said.
“The young should sleep,” she answered, for to her he seemed still a boy.
She had finished her breakfast some time before the young man, and because it would have
      appeared very wrong to her to leave the table, she sat on knitting behind the tea-urn: an
      industry the benefit of which was felt by many poor children—almost the only neighbours she
      had a good word for.
“Mother,” said the young man, presently, “your friend the locum tenens is off
      to-morrow.”
“A good riddance.”
“Why are you so hard on him? He talked intelligently when here, I thought,” answered her
      son.
“I do not like his theology,”
       she replied, “nor his way of running about and flirting with this body and that
      body, nor his way of chattering while he buttons and unbuttons his gloves.”
“You forget he is a man of the great world, and has about him a manner that must seem
      strange to us.”
“Oh, he might do very well,” she answered, “for one of those Carton girls at the
      rectory.”
“That eldest girl is a good girl,” replied her son.
“She looks down on us all, and thinks herself intellectual,” she went on. “I remember when
      girls were content with their Catechism and their Bibles and a little practice at the piano,
      maybe, for an accomplishment. What does any one want more? It is all pride.”
“You used to like her as a child,” said the young man.
“I like all children.”
Sherman having finished his breakfast, took a book of travels in one hand and a trowel in
      the
       other and went out into the garden. Having looked under the parlour window for
      the first tulip shoots, he went down to the further end and began covering some sea-kale for
      forcing. He had not been long at work when the servant brought him a letter. There was a stone
      roller at one side of the grass plot. He sat down upon it, and taking the letter between his
      finger and thumb began looking at it with an air that said: “Well! I know what you mean.” He
      remained long thus without opening it, the book lying beside him on the roller.
The garden—the letter—the book! You have there the three symbols of his life. Every morning
      he worked in that garden among the sights and sounds of nature. Month by month he planted and
      hoed and dug there. In the middle he had set a hedge that divided the garden in two. Above the
      hedge were flowers; below it, vegetables. At the furthest end from
       the house, lapping broken masonry full of wallflowers, the river said, month
      after month to all upon its banks, “Hush!” He dined at two with perfect regularity, and in the
      afternoon went out to shoot or walk. At twilight he set night-lines. Later on he read. He had
      not many books—a Shakespeare, Mungo Park’s travels, a few two-shilling novels, “Percy’s
      Reliques,” and a volume on etiquette. He seldom varied his occupations. He had no profession.
      The town talked of it. They said: “He lives upon his mother,” and were very angry. They never
      let him see this, however, for it was generally understood he would be a dangerous fellow to
      rouse; but there was an uncle from whom Sherman had expectations who sometimes wrote
      remonstrating. Mrs. Sherman resented these letters, for she was afraid of her son going away
      to seek his fortune—perhaps even in America.
       Now this matter preyed somewhat on Sherman. For three years or so he had been
      trying to make his mind up and come to some decision. Sometimes when reading he would start
      and press his lips together and knit his brows for a moment.
It will now be seen why the garden, the book, and the letter were the three symbols of his
      life, summing up as they did his love of out-of-door doings, his meditations, his anxieties.
      His life in the garden had granted serenity to his forehead, the reading of his few books had
      filled his eyes with reverie, and the feeling that he was not quite a good citizen had given a
      slight and occasional trembling to his lips.
He opened the letter. Its contents were what he had long expected. His uncle offered to take
      him into his office. He laid it spread out before him—a foot on each margin, right and
      left—and looked at it, turning the
       matter over and over in his mind. Would he go? would he stay? He did not like the
      idea much. The lounger in him did not enjoy the thought of London. Gradually his mind wandered
      away into scheming—infinite scheming—what he would do if he went, what he would do if he did
      not go.
A beetle, attracted by the faint sunlight, had crawled out of his hole. It saw the paper and
      crept on to it, the better to catch the sunlight. Sherman saw the beetle but his mind was not
      occupied with it. “Shall I tell Mary Carton?” he was thinking. Mary had long been his adviser
      and friend. She was, indeed, everybody’s adviser. Yes, he would ask her what to do. Then again
      he thought—no, he would decide for himself. The beetle began to move. “If it goes off the
      paper by the top I will ask her—if by the bottom I will not.”
The beetle went off by the
       top. He got up with an air of decision and went into the tool-house and began
      sorting seeds and picking out the light ones, sometimes stopping to watch a spider; for he
      knew he must wait till the afternoon to see Mary Carton. The tool-house was a favourite place
      with him. He often read there and watched the spiders in the corners.
At dinner he was preoccupied.
“Mother,” he said, “would you much mind if we went away from this?”
“I have often told you,” she answered, “I do not like one place better than another. I like
      them all equally little.”
After dinner he went again into the tool-house. This time he did not sort seeds—only watched
      the spiders.
