
 I.
Sherman and his mother rented a small house on the north side of St. Peter’s Square,
      Hammersmith. The front windows looked out on to the old rank and green square, the windows
      behind on to a little patch of garden round which the houses gathered and pressed as though
      they already longed to trample it out. In this garden was a single tall pear-tree that never
      bore fruit.
Three years passed by without any notable event. Sherman went every day to his office in
      Tower Hill Street, abused his work a great deal, and was not unhappy perhaps. He was probably
       a bad clerk, but then nobody was very exacting with the nephew of the head of the
      firm.
The firm of Sherman and Saunders, ship brokers, was a long-established, old-fashioned house.
      Saunders had been dead some years and old Michael Sherman ruled alone—an old bachelor full of
      family pride and pride in his wealth. He lived, for all that, in a very simple fashion. His
      mahogany furniture was a little solider than other people’s perhaps. He did not understand
      display. Display finds its excuse in some taste good or bad, and in a long industrious life
      Michael Sherman had never found leisure to form one. He seemed to live only from habit. Year
      by year he grew more silent, gradually ceasing to regard anything but his family and his
      ships. His family were represented by his nephew and his nephew’s mother. He did not feel much
      affection for them. He believed in his family—that
       was all. To remind him of the other goal of his thoughts hung round his private
      office pictures with such inscriptions as “S.S. Indus at the Cape of Good Hope,” “The
      barque Mary in the Mozambique Channel,” “The barque Livingstone at Port
      Said,” and many more. Every rope was drawn accurately with a ruler, and here and there were
      added distant vessels sailing proudly by with all that indifference to perspective peculiar to
      the drawings of sailors. On every ship was the flag of the firm spread out to show the
      letters.
No man cared for old Michael Sherman. Every one liked John. Both were silent, but the young
      man had sometimes a talkative fit. The old man lived for his ledger, the young man for his
      dreams.
In spite of all these differences, the uncle was on the whole pleased with the nephew. He
      noticed a certain stolidity that was of the family. It sometimes
       irritated others. It pleased him. He saw a hundred indications besides that made
      him say, “He is a true Sherman. We Shermans begin that way and give up frivolity as we grow
      old. We are all the same in the end.”
Mrs. Sherman and her son had but a small round of acquaintances—a few rich people, clients
      of the house of Sherman and Saunders for the most part. Among these was a Miss Margaret Leland
      who lived with her mother, the widow of the late Henry Leland, ship-broker, on the eastern
      side of St. Peter’s Square. Their house was larger than the Shermans, and noticeable among its
      fellows by the newly-painted hall door. Within on every side were bronzes and china vases and
      heavy curtains. In all were displayed the curious and vagrant taste of Margaret Leland. The
      rich Italian and mediæval draperies of the pre-Raphaelites
       jostling the brightest and vulgarest products of more native and Saxon schools.
      Vases of the most artistic shape and colour side by side with artificial flowers and stuffed
      birds. This house belonged to the Lelands. They had bought it in less prosperous days, and
      having altered it according to their taste and the need of their growing welfare could not
      decide to leave it.
Sherman was an occasional caller at the Lelands, and had certainly a liking, though not a
      very deep one, for Margaret. As yet he knew little more about her than that she wore the most
      fascinating hats, that the late Lord Lytton was her favourite author, and that she hated
      frogs. It is clear that she did not know that a French writer on magic says the luxurious and
      extravagant hate frogs because they are cold, solitary, and dreary. Had she done so, she would
      have been more circumspect about revealing her tastes.

 For the rest John Sherman was forgetting the town of Ballah. He corresponded
      indeed with Mary Carton, but his laborious letter writing made his letters fewer and fewer.
      Sometimes, too, he heard from Howard, who had a curacy in Glasgow and was on indifferent terms
      with his parishioners. They objected to his way of conducting the services. His letters were
      full of it. He would not give in, he said, whatever happened. His conscience was involved.
