
II.
A few days later Sherman was hurrying through the town of Ballah. It was Saturday, and he
      passed down through the marketing country people, and the old women with baskets of cakes and
      gooseberries and long pieces of sugarstick shaped like walking-sticks, and called by children
      “Peggie’s leg.”
Now, as two months earlier he was occasionally recognized and greeted, and, as before, went
      on without knowing, his eyes full of unintelligent sadness because the mind was making merry
      afar. They had the look we see in the eyes of animals and dreamers.
       Everything had grown simple, his problem had taken itself away. He was thinking
      what he would say to Mary Carton. Now they would be married, they would live in a small house
      with a green door and new thatch, and a row of beehives under a hedge. He knew where just such
      a house stood empty. The day before he and his mother had discussed, with their host of the
      Imperial Hotel, this question of houses. They knew the peculiarities of every house in the
      neighbourhood, except two or three built while they were away. All day Sherman and his mother
      had gone over the merits of the few they were told were empty. She wondered why her son had
      grown so unpractical. Once he was so easily pleased—the row of beehives and the new thatch did
      not for her settle the question. She set it all down to Miss Leland and the plays, and the
      singing, and the belladonna, and remembered with pleasure how
       many miles of uneasy water lay between the town of Ballah and these things.
She did not know what else beside the row of beehives and the new thatch her son’s mind ran
      on as he walked among the marketing country people, and the gooseberry sellers, and the
      merchants of “Peggie’s leg,” and the boys playing marbles in odd corners, and the men in
      waistcoats with flannel sleeves driving carts, and the women driving donkeys with creels of
      turf or churns of milk. Just now she was trying to remember whether she used to buy her wool
      for knitting at Miss Peters’s or from Mrs. Macallough’s at the bridge. One or other sold it a
      halfpenny a skein cheaper. She never knew what went on inside her son’s mind, she had always
      her own fish to fry. Blessed are the unsympathetic. They preserve their characters in an iron
      safe while the most of us poor mortals are going about the
       planet vainly searching for any kind of a shell to contain us, and evaporating
      the while.
Sherman began to mount the hill to the vicarage. He was happy. Because he was happy he began
      to run. Soon the steepness of the hill made him walk. He thought about his love for Mary
      Carton. Seen by the light of this love everything that had happened to him was plain now. He
      had found his centre of unity. His childhood had prepared him for this love. He had been
      solitary, fond of favourite corners of fields, fond of going about alone, unhuman like the
      birds and the leaves, his heart empty. How clearly he remembered his first meeting with Mary.
      They were both children. At a school treat they watched the fire balloon ascend, and followed
      it a little way over the fields together. What friends they became, growing up together,
      reading the same books, thinking the same thoughts.

 As he came to the door and pulled at the great hanging iron bell handle, the
      fire balloon reascended in his heart, surrounded with cheers and laughter.
