
CHAPTER XXXVI THE FURIES APPEASED
The case of Lady May proved less desperate. She had thrown herself into the deepest
      part of the lake, and would have been washed down by the current of the Guadalete—which was
      there running at a great speed—had not Ivor Mardol seized her as she rose the second time and
      carried her within a few yards of the shore. Thus she had escaped unhurt, while he, striking,
      as he last went down, on the sunken rocks, had received his deathblow. When the doctor came
      Lady May was sitting upright with her arms round her father's neck, weeping and imploring his
      forgiveness. She told him it was a sudden frenzy for which she could not account that tempted
      her to stand on the edge of the boat when it drifted. The name of Hippolyta she kept in her
      bosom, nor did she inquire for Rupert. The doctor at once insisted on her lying down. He
      prescribed rest for several days and light nourishment.
       'Who brought me out?' she asked. The doctor did not know his name; and would not
      of course mention the dangerous state in which her preserver lay. Thus the evening closed in.
      None of the strangers returned to the Fonda d'Oro. Accommodation was found for them in the
      dismantled wing at San Lucar. But there was little sleep that night for any. Ivor, kept awake
      by intense pain, but scarcely conscious, refused to take the narcotic. He did not want to die
      yet; such was his constant cry. There was so much to be done. He must have time.
And by the mercy of Heaven time was given. The pain grew less towards morning. He slept
      without morphia, and passed a comparatively easy day. In the afternoon he sent for Hippolyta,
      who, fatigued with the horrible scenes through which she had gone, had been ordered by the
      Mother Superior to take a few hours' rest in the morning. She no sooner came into the room
      than he held out his arms, 'My sister, my sister!' he cried in a feeble voice but with
      exceeding joy on his countenance. 'I am every one's sister,' she replied, smiling at the poor
      invalid. 'Are you in less pain now?' He laughed as she spoke. 'You are not every one's sister
      as you are mine,' he answered; and trying to turn towards Colonel Valence, but sinking down as
      he found the pain catching him, 'Tell her, father,' he went on with a gasp; 'she does not
      know. Why didn't you tell her yesterday?'

The Colonel had passed the night sleepless, like Hippolyta—he at the bedside of Ivor Mardol,
      she in a chair at some distance. But though he saw her move about him, and even called her by
      name, and kissed her on the cheek, he had spoken hardly at all; neither did he explain his
      words to the physician. And she, intent on so many things, could not realise their meaning. It
      was like a sudden flash, therefore, when her father, looking at the young man rather than at
      his long-lost Hippolyta, said calmly, 'This is your brother, my dear. He is the son of my
      first wife, Alice Davenant.' He drew her to him, and joined his children's hands.
There are meetings, recognitions, which refuse to be described. There is a joy in the depths
      of sadness greater than mortal can depict, though many have felt it. I shall not attempt to
      speak of the hours that succeeded, as, little by little, brother and sister came to understand
      that they were indeed what Colonel Valence told them. It was a feast for angels. In the
      melancholy convent, with an unhappy Rupert lying prostrate in his room, and Lady May coming
      back to the recollection of yesterday, with its poignant anguish and irremediable sin, nay,
      while the wings of death were hovering over them, Ivor and Hippolyta sat entranced, and knew
      that nothing could dim their joy. The new-found brother told, in feeble accents, and pausing
      at the end of almost every sentence, the story of his birth, and the reasons that had moved a
      father who, albeit in a
       stern way, loved his children, to put a veil of mystery between himself and his
      only son. Ivor would not allow Colonel Valence to take the word out of his mouth; an excessive
      gladness, mingled with reverence for his father, impelled him to repeat the strange story, as
      one child may delight to tell another the fairy-tale it has heard. Hippolyta listened with a
      sadder feeling. She was not surprised; but she was grieved at the remembrance of those many
      years during which she had not known a brother's love. She looked at her father wonderingly.
      If it was a rebuke, he did not take notice of it. He had no thought for any one but Ivor. And
      he sat, in the bent attitude of fatigue or sorrow, while they talked in low tones at his side,
      Ivor resting as well as he could, and Hippolyta holding her brother's hand.
Three children, it appeared, were born of the marriage with Lady Alice. Two were daughters,
      who died while they were quite young in London, where their parents had for the most part
      resided during the ten or eleven years of their wedded life. Lady Alice, who had always been
      of a delicate constitution, never quite recovered from the trouble of her last two years at
      Trelingham. She was absolutely submissive to Colonel Valence; she did not speak of her
      brother, and would have accompanied her husband on his Spanish expeditions, had he not
      insisted that she should stay in London and watch over the children. Twice he returned, and
      twice he was called on to follow the beloved remains of a
       daughter to the grave. He was not a man to bend under the storms of fate; he
      bore up, and he suffered acutely. His old daring spirit was unchanged, but every year beheld
      the growth of a sadder and a more saturnine humour in Colonel Valence. To his wife he was a
      perfect husband; to his associates a proud, resolute, unhappy man. At last the stroke fell
      which cut his life in twain. Lady Alice gave birth to a son, and died the same day. With
      failing breath she implored her husband, whose darkening brow and fierce intensity of grief
      struck her in the midst of her agony, not to visit on the child his mother's loss. And then
      she calmly passed away, having attained and enjoyed the one happiness on which she had set her
      heart. But the bereaved husband could not endure to look on Ivor. He turned his face when the
      nurse brought the poor wailing thing, and would have put it into his arms. Only Lady Alice's
      condition had kept him from returning to Spain, where the prospects of the democratic party
      were gloomy, and the presence of the bolder spirits was urgently needed. Long determined that
      no child of his should touch Lady Alice's fortune, or take a place in the succession to
      Trelingham, he saw that it was time to carry out a resolution which should endure into future
      years. Lord Trelingham was not yet married; his cousin, Mr. Davenant, who came next in the
      entail, was a middle-aged man about town, of easy fortune, and easier morals. He had not
      married, did not intend to marry, and viewed with the equanimity
       of selfishness the extinction which threatened both the elder and the younger
      lines of the ancient house to which he belonged. Colonel Valence had kept an eye on these
      things. It seemed by no means improbable that Lady Alice's surviving child would come into the
      Trelingham estate; and if he did so, and were a man of ability or character, he would not find
      it impossible to get the title of Trelingham revived in his favour. That must not be, said the
      Colonel, and he shaped his action accordingly.
He had long known and admired the stern integrity of Mr. Mardol. At one time their
      principles had been almost the same; and though they never met without discussing the question
      of 'physical force,' they remained on terms of friendship, and, I might say, of affection. At
      this juncture, then, Colonel Valence entrusted Ivor to the keeping of the old philosopher and
      his wife. He did not say whose child it was, or what motives made such a step necessary. Nor
      did they ask. Mr. Mardol consented on two conditions. One was that Ivor should be told, when
      capable of understanding it, that he was not their child; the other, that he should be
      educated strictly on the lines of the humanitarian philosophy. We have seen that both were
      fulfilled. Colonel Valence believed that a little knowledge of life would lead his son to
      sufficiently stern principles, and he trusted no one like Mr. Mardol.
He went abroad, and was absent from England
       many years. During the interval Lord Trelingham had married, but the only issue
      was a daughter, Lady May. Mr. Davenant, too, had been caught by a clever woman, and
      surrendered his bachelor independence. He had one son, a child of two years old. Thus the
      danger of the succession seemed to have been averted from Ivor. But Lady Alice's fortune still
      awaited him, and there was no security that he would not, on Colonel Valence's decease, be
      taken up by his mother's people, and lost to the cause of democracy. The Colonel, therefore,
      persisted in his old plan of bringing up Ivor Valence as Ivor Mardol, and training him to the
      habits of life and thought which befitted an engraver's son. He could now bear to look on the
      boy; he loved him after a silent fashion of his own. But he was resolved, cost what it might,
      to keep the vow he had spoken in the picture-gallery at Trelingham Court. No child of his
      should touch any part of that inheritance, great or small. He might have acknowledged Ivor at
      an earlier date, if the young man had not shown such tenacity in adhering to the peaceful
      principles of Mr. Mardol. But while he did so, the mystery continued. Rather than endanger it,
      Colonel Valence, on learning the presence of Ivor's friend, the artist, at Trelingham, had at
      once quitted Falside; and he stayed away as long as Ivor dwelt in the Hermitage. From
      Hippolyta he kept the secret as carefully as from all the world. He allowed himself the
      pleasure of making her copy his epistles to her brother in
       a cypher of which she had not the key; and to the same motive we must attribute
      the commission he gave her, which led to her visiting the chalet, and making the acquaintance
      of Rupert Glanville. All this Ivor could not know, or repeat if he had known. But he told
      Hippolyta of his early dreams, his longing for home and a sister's affection, his grief lest
      she should have gone astray on leaving Rupert, his estrangement from Colonel Valence after the
      meeting in Denzil Lane. 'And you,' he said, the smile coming into his eyes,—'it was you that
      ended it; you that brought father and me together. When you wrote to the Duke of Adullam,—oh,
      I know him, he has been a kind friend to me,—and said what you had done, and that you desired
      to see your father before leaving this house, the Duke sent for me. He was aware that a
      difference had arisen between me and Mr. Felton, as I called him. It does not matter now. By
      and by I will come back to that, when I am dying,'—his smile was ineffable,—'but, you know,
      the Duke thought it was time I should learn everything. Do you remember meeting him?'
'Once, years ago, when I was quite a child; but he took no notice of me.'
'He was acquainted with your history, nevertheless, and had been told more of it by Rupert
      than I knew. And he went over it all from the beginning. He sent me the same evening to Paris,
      to Mr. Felton. And I found him, and how surprised he was, and glad too, when he saw that the
      secret had
       come out! He did not wish me to be a Davenant or to be tempted by the glories of
      Trelingham. That was why he had denied himself, and, in a manner, disowned me, poor boy! As if
      I cared for Trelingham!'
He was obliged to stop. The pain returned; but he still kept the vivacious happy look that
      lightened his plain features and made them beautiful. The Colonel had heard every word,
      smiling a little, a very little, but not interrupting. His eyes now met Hippolyta's. She went
      over to him and kissed him. 'Father,' she said, 'why did you keep such a pleasant thing from
      me as the knowledge that I had a brother all those years? Had I known it I should have been
      saved. But do not trouble now. The lost can be saved as well as those that never went astray.
      I am not miserable; oh no, I wish others were as happy.' Her thoughts turned to Rupert and
      Lady May, and she ended with a sigh. Then, recovering herself, she persuaded her brother to
      take some of the morphia prescribed. It soothed the pain; it did not make him sleep. He would
      have continued talking, but she put her finger on her lip, and sat near him, and they were
      again in the sweet heaven where all that we love is restored. He turned his head on the
      pillow, and, looking at her, said, 'I do not think I shall die to-night. But watch, and if I
      seem to be losing consciousness, tell me, and send for the others. I should like to see
      Rupert. He was in the room last night when I could not speak. Is—?' he stopped.

'Dear,' she said, 'you must not hurt yourself. When the good God wills, He will take you. I
      know you are not afraid. That is right. We shall not be lost to one another.'
'Oh, I am not afraid,' was the simple answer; 'I believe in God. My God is light and
      goodness. How should I fear? But,' he went on, making an effort, 'I wanted to ask—something.
      Is May—is Rupert's wife with him?'
Hippolyta looked at him in complete surprise. Did he not know whom he had rescued? She was
      afraid to reply. How to question him without giving him a shock? It was a most unexpected
      difficulty.
'You are a long while answering, sister?' he said, smiling. He liked to call her sister. She
      must speak.
'Would it hurt you to talk about yesterday?' she began.
'In what way?' he inquired.
'About—about the accident,' she said hesitatingly. 'I know you and father were the two
      visitors that arrived. But how came you to be on the terrace?'
'Simply enough. You were a long time coming, father was impatient to see you, and so was I,
      you may be sure. And our combined impatience made sitting in a bare room impossible. We went
      out and walked up and down. Then I saw some one in a boat, a woman, rowing across the lake,
      and she stopped all at once, put down the oars, stood up,—she gave a wild scream which seemed
      to go up
       into the sky, and the next minute she was in the water. I ran down as fast as I
      could and jumped in. I remember nothing else except the weight round my neck as I sank.'
'But you rescued her; you saved her life,' said Hippolyta. His eyes were very pleasant to
      see. 'And don't you know who it was?' she went on, with a meaning look which he somehow failed
      to make out.
'No; how should I?' He caught the look now, stopped, grasped Hippolyta's hand tighter, and
      said, with a most innocent confusion, blushing like a girl, 'No, don't tell me it was—'
'It was Lady May,' she whispered gently.
'Ah, God be praised,' he said. 'And I shall die! I rescued her and I shall die! I could not
      return to the common life after such a thing. Why, it is better than dying in battle, which is
      but putting your life against another's. Oh, how good God is! Did I not tell you, Hippolyta,
      that He is light and goodness.'
'Hush,' said his sister, pointing to Colonel Valence. Her heart was torn at the expectation
      of so near a calamity, but she dreaded even more for her father than herself. She knew what
      ardent passions were concealed under that imperturbable appearance of calm. It was lava
      beneath snow, and in a moment the surface might melt. But Colonel Valence, who sat a silent
      listener while Ivor gloried in death, now broke in upon their dangerous conversation. 'I did
       not know it was Lord Trelingham's daughter,' he said, 'and I could wish it had
      been some one else. Must you be sacrificed for the house of Davenant, alive and dead?' he
      asked bitterly. 'But for them you would have always had a father, and I should not be losing a
      son.' He controlled himself with a strong effort. 'Never mind me, Ivor,' he said; 'I talk at
      random. Do not look so excited. The danger is great, but we must, we will hope.'
'What should I hope for, except to die?' said he; 'but I will not be excited. I will try to
      sleep; and to-morrow you are to send for them all.' His head fell on the pillow and he slept,
      breathing heavily at times and starting with pain, but with an expression of the most perfect
      happiness on lips and brow. Hippolyta watched him, her own lips moving occasionally in prayer.
      She thought of Electra in the touching story, who did the like office for a stricken brother.
      'But here are no Furies,' she said.
For him there could be none. Was it so as regarded Rupert and the other poor thing, who had
      nearly cast away her life and had sacrificed Ivor's? The next morning brought Hippolyta a task
      which she would have deemed the most malignant stroke of destiny had she not learned, like her
      brother, to believe in God. As she came from the early mass, celebrated where San Lucar's
      shrine had formerly stood, Tom Davenant, waiting in the cloister bareheaded, besought a
      moment's audience. She had conventual duties to perform, but his speech was
       urgent, and she had leave to hear him. Taking her out on the terrace, he said
      abruptly, 'Miss Valence, I am not in the secret of Thursday's accident, and I do not know who
      is. But things are in a deplorable way between my cousin and her husband. Mr. Glanville, after
      spending many hours in his room, sent a message last night requesting permission to see Lady
      May. That was extraordinary enough from a husband to his wife. But, more extraordinary still,
      May refused to see him. The message was repeated, and a more peremptory denial returned. This
      morning, not an hour ago, my cousin rose, in spite of the doctor's orders, dressed herself,
      and insisted on the Earl's taking her back to the Fonda. Lord Trelingham could not but
      consent, and they at once went over in the very boat from which she fell into the stream. But
      that is not all. Before going she said in my presence that she had done with Mr. Glanville for
      ever, and looked upon herself as divorced. What, in Heaven's name, is it all about, and what
      are we to do? I cannot take such a message as that to Rupert.'
This was the longest speech Tom had made in his life. To Hippolyta its import was
      overwhelming. She lost all sense of her situation. It was the suicide over again; her own sin
      avenged on Rupert by Lady May. She stared at Tom Davenant without replying. 'I see you are as
      perplexed as myself,' said the kind-hearted young man; 'but you are the only person I can
      speak to. In these things one woman can influence
       another, and we men are no use. Go to Lady May, ask her to confide in you. And—I
      once thought you could persuade Mr. Glanville more easily than most. Try to get matters clear
      between them. It will kill her father.'
'Do nothing,' said Hippolyta, 'till I come back. Where is Mr. Glanville?' and she drew
      herself together as for a violent effort.
'He is in his room,' said Tom; 'let me show you the way.' He led her along the passages, up
      several flights of stairs, and into the disused wing. 'It is there,' he said, and made his way
      back to the terrace, leaving her tremulous and undecided before the door. She knocked.
      Rupert's voice said 'Come in,' and she entered.
He was sitting at a table, his head bent down, a picture of fatigue and misery. Since the
      accident, though he had eaten what was set before him, he seemed to have neither slept nor
      washed. He was haggard and forlorn,—a contrast indeed to the brilliant Rupert Glanville for
      whom nothing could be too refined, and no living too delicate. Hippolyta looked at him with
      unspeakable pity. He started on seeing her. 'What!' he cried, 'has May sent you to tell me our
      marriage is broken? It would be a rare piece of wit,' and he laughed. The sound was like a
      knife driven into her side.
'For God's sake, Rupert,' she exclaimed, 'do not give way to the tempter. Pity me. Pity
      yourself.'
'I do,' he said grimly. 'Look, Hippolyta. Last
       night, after thinking till my head was ready to burst, I resolved that I would
      be a man, as you said,—I should be pleasing you, at any rate,—and I sent to that wife of mine,
      to the—the suicide, you know, saying I wanted to see her. I meant to beg her pardon, make
      peace, and leave you. That was fair, I suppose?'
She could not understand that Rupert, Rupert Glanville, was saying such things Whither had
      the man vanished to whom she once gave herself? This was not he. 'Yes, it was fair,' she said,
      trembling.
He laughed again, and struck his hand on the table. 'Ay, one would have thought so,' he
      cried, 'but not she. She sent me back a dog's message, take it or leave it, all the same to
      her. She said no, I might go where I pleased, but I should not be in the room where Lady May
      Davenant found herself. I was humble; I sent again. Her answer was contempt. Have I done
      enough? If you like we will go away together. But you have changed too. You were the first to
      change. The woman's fashion, not the man's. Ivor is worth a thousand of you. And he must die
      because of Lady May Davenant. Well, I can follow him.'
'Rupert,' she said once more, in the gentlest tones she had ever used towards him, 'look at
      me.' The subdued tenderness effected more than a torrent of eloquence would have done. He
      stopped in the midst of his wild words and fixed his eyes on Hippolyta's grief-stained face.
      'You are suffering,' he said more quietly.

She put her hand to her heart. 'Were it not for resolution,' she said, 'I should be dying.
      Do you believe that a woman can give up all that I have given up and not feel it? I might
      rave, like you, if I thought only of myself. It is my fault,—mine, I confess it before God and
      man. These deaths, these suicides, these divisions of heart from heart, I did it all, unclean
      as I am. But help me, Rupert, to make amends. Ivor, my brother Ivor, must die. Be it so. I
      surrender him to God. He is innocent. He can afford to die. But you must live. Lady May shall
      not lose her soul for me. Help me, help me to set these things right. Be patient, it is all I
      ask. And when Lady May relents, accept her affection. If you do not, Rupert,' she continued
      sorrowfully, 'my punishment will be greater than I can bear. It will kill me. Have you no
      compassion for Hippolyta?'
She could speak no more. But Rupert was coming to himself, and he began to see the character
      of the woman who, if she had sinned, was nobly repentant, in the divine light which shone
      round it. Rising from his seat with a sudden motion, and passing his hand over his forehead as
      though to brush away the illusions which had clouded his fancy, he said, taking her hand,—nor
      did she refuse it,— 'Count on me in life and death. You have brought the true Rupert Glanville
      from the tomb. I will wait for you.'
'No; come with me,' she said. And they went down to the river side.

Several boats were lying there, into one of which Hippolyta entered, signing to Rupert that
      he should take the oars. He did so, not reluctantly, for he had now determined that he would
      obey, at all costs, whatever directions she should give. But a great wonder came upon him when
      she bade him row towards the Fonda d'Oro. He was not aware of Lady May's departure. Tom
      Davenant, standing at an upper window, saw them push off from shore; but, mindful of
      Hippolyta's command, made no attempt to follow them. Rupert, pulling a silent stroke, thought
      of the one occasion, and one only, on which he had conveyed Hippolyta over a broad sheet of
      water like this, after their first meeting in the Hermitage. They had been as voiceless and
      recollected then, her eyes directed towards the bank, and eager to gain it. When they touched
      land, at the side of the hotel, he thought it was time to ask the reason of their crossing;
      but she did not reply. She left him to fasten the boat; put a question to the hotel-keeper who
      had come forth to welcome them, and, on hearing his answer, motioned Rupert to enter the
      house, which he did in the same state of amazement as before. She pushed a door open. It was
      the dining-room. 'Stay here,' she said, 'and, above all, keep perfectly quiet until I send to
      you.'
'Will it be long?' he inquired.
She shook her head. 'I cannot say,' was her answer; 'but wait.' She went noiselessly
      upstairs.
Again she was venturing a hazardous experiment.
       She tapped at Lady May's door. There seemed to be no answer, but without
      hesitation she opened and went in. The woman she sought was lying on the coarse sofa which the
      place afforded as a couch, half-asleep, and sprang up at her entrance. When she saw Colonel
      Valence's daughter, she pointed imperiously to the door. 'How came you in, Miss Valence?' she
      said in her haughtiest tones; 'you are intruding. Have the goodness to leave me.'
'When I have done what I came for,' answered her visitor firmly, taking no offence at the
      rudeness of her reception.
'And pray what is that? The sooner you explain, the sooner will your visit be over.'
Hippolyta coloured. 'You are very cruel,' she said; 'what have I done to you? I never
      wronged you.'
'What, never wronged me!' exclaimed Lady May. 'You take my husband's love, you drive me to
      death, and—it is no wrong! You desolate a home, you come to gloat over the work of your hands,
      but still you do not wrong me! I wrong myself to talk with Mr. Glanville's discarded
      concubine. Go to him. He may take you back again. It will save you from the streets, which
      would be your other alternative. But leave me. Your presence is an insult.'
Shame burnt in her victim's face, crimson, hectic. Hot tears rained from her eyes, and the
      heart of Hippolyta seemed almost broken as she sobbed aloud. Rupert's step made itself audible
      in the room
       below. He could not help fancying that a quarrel was going on somewhere in the
      house, though he knew not where; and it made him uneasy. He began to walk up and down. At the
      sound Hippolyta stilled her weeping. She was afraid he would come up. It was no time to think
      of herself. But she understood the character of Lady May, and she replied deliberately, 'If I
      were a thousand times what you call me, and what I am, you would still be in the wrong, and
      not I. Was it your husband that I loved or followed? Did Rupert Glanville love you first? And
      when I had once forsaken him, did I, by word or token, acquaint him with my existence till the
      day he came upon me in the church of San Lucar? I have sinned against all women, but not
      against you, Lady May. I ask pardon of the womanhood I have stained and shamed, but not of
      you. When I feared you were dying, I asked your forgiveness; the disaster, though not my
      fault, was yet by my occasion. Now you are saved; my brother has given his life for yours, and
      you owe me thanks, not pardon.'
'Your brother! I did not know you had one,' said Lady May, feeling unexpectedly weak where
      she had thought to be irresistible. It is the way with these proud natures. They must be
      attacked in front if you would conquer them. May Davenant was accustomed to follow her own
      will, to think every one weak compared with herself, and to take their compliance for granted.
      Even Rupert, since their marriage, had been as yielding as the rest.

But Hippolyta had not studied her rival in vain. She knew that she must strike hard. And she
      went on, 'Yes, my brother, and your cousin,—Ivor Mardol, as he is called,—but he is the son of
      Lady Alice, with the blood of Davenant in his veins. He is dying, and you are saved. What will
      you do for him? Will you be ungrateful and unjust?'
'But what can I do?' replied May, with a strange feeling of perplexity, sitting down on the
      sofa from which she had risen. There was a soft expression in Hippolyta's looks which troubled
      her. 'What can I do?' she repeated.
'You can make your husband happy,' said Ivor's sister; 'dear Lady May, try to understand.
      You have a noble heart; you have not wronged me or any one. It is only that you think I stand
      between you and Rupert. But I do not. I have given him up,' her voice trembled, sank, and grew
      firm again, as she continued, 'Is it not three years since I left him? A few weeks hence and I
      shall be sailing for India. What can prevent you from being happy as before. Ivor asks it. I
      ask it. See, I kneel to you.'
She was there, kneeling on the ground, an image of humble supplication. May did not know
      what to say or think. Was this the woman she had insulted? She was overcome; she had no
      argument left. Putting her arms round Hippolyta, with a burst of weeping, she whispered
      faintly, as she bent down her face to the other, 'But he will always love you.'
'No, no,' answered the noble creature, making a
       supreme act of self-renunciation; 'it is over, and the Hippolyta Valence he
      cared for is dead and buried. When you leave this place, it will be like a dream. I shall die
      in the East; that is in my vow.'
She rose, but continued longer in the same strain, pleading as if for her own soul. The
      scales fell from May Davenant's eyes; and in the moment that she was humbled she saw light.
      'We have both sinned,' she said at last, 'but my sin was the greater. Advise me what to do.
      Shall I send for Rupert? Perhaps he will not come. Are there any words that will bring him,
      after the message I sent last night?'
'He is here,' replied Hippolyta in a soft whisper.
Lady May flushed with delight. 'Oh, tell him to come,' she cried.
'Nay,' said Hippolyta, smiling mournfully, 'it is the wife's duty to seek the husband. He is
      lord and master. Come, he is downstairs.' She took Lady May by the hand. They descended the
      stairs with beating hearts, united, yet how different from one another! When they reached the
      door of the dining-room Hippolyta opened it, and pushing Lady May gently forward, said, 'Go
      in, and speak as your heart bids you.'
She saw the door close, and grasping her crucifix tightly, went down to the boat. Lady May,
      on entering and seeing Rupert, threw herself into his arms. They held one another fast for a
      long while without speaking. It seemed as if a cloud had melted and left them face to face and
      soul to soul.
       As they stood in that silent embrace, the sound of plashing oars broke upon
      them. They looked out, still holding one another, and beheld the veiled figure in the boat,
      which one of the hotel servants was rowing to San Lucar. Hippolyta's face was turned from them
      and her head bent. The great solemn light seemed to move with her. It was almost noon.
'She is an angel,' said Rupert devoutly. And he told how she had come to him and brought him
      to the Fonda d'Oro.
'She has saved me as well as you,' answered Lady May. 'Is she not the noblest woman on
      earth?'
'She is in heaven,' he murmured. And his wife understood now what was meant by the feeling
      that transcended love, of which she had dreamt long ago in the picture-gallery at Trelingham.
      The love was her own. The something higher had been given to Hippolyta.
They spent the evening in quiet, restored to one another. Lord Trelingham, exhausted by all
      he had gone through, and unable to comprehend his daughter's abrupt changes of disposition,
      looked on, mildly thankful that husband and wife were again as he had seen them before coming
      to San Lucar. Late at night Tom Davenant came in. He had been informed of the reconciliation
      by Hippolyta, learning at the same time, to his great amaze, the relation in which they all
      stood to Ivor. He begged earnestly for admittance to his friend's presence. He could not be
      refused; and the
       meeting was another draught of happiness to the agonised patient, whose
      sufferings increased from hour to hour, but whose joy could not be diminished. Tom sat by him
      till the clock struck ten. He then bethought himself of the party at the Fonda d'Oro, who
      would be waiting for intelligence from the sick chamber; and he rowed across in the moonlight.
      By that time Lord Trelingham had learnt nearly all that they could tell him of Ivor's life and
      parentage. It was an utter surprise, but an equal pleasure. He was ready to love the young
      man, for whom he had conceived a high esteem at Trelingham; and his daughter's preserver could
      not be too near or too dear to him. The news which Tom brought of his sufferings threw a gloom
      over their lately-restored happiness. He left them, for he would not stay from Ivor a moment
      more than he could help. Lady May began to dread the Nemesis of her ill deeds which seemed to
      threaten; her nerves were shattered by continual emotion; she passed a feverish night, and
      could not rise next morning.
It was Sunday. A cloudless tranquil sky overhead, the water rippling on the lake, the church
      bells sounding from Sepúlveda and San Lucar, the gardens and the cornfields rejoicing
      together, made a world in which sorrow might seem to have no place. Rupert tended Lady May
      with the exceeding gentleness he knew how to use; Lord Trelingham came and went, said little,
      but was happy. Several times they cast anxious glances towards the convent. What was
       going on within its walls? But the afternoon passed, and they had no tidings.
      Was their friend better? Why did not Tom Davenant come? Rupert and May knew well, though they
      could not whisper it, that Hippolyta would come no more.
As the lovely sunset was flushing the waters and irradiating height and hollow, they saw a
      boat traversing the stream. When it touched, a messenger sprang out and ran up to them where
      they sat in the verandah. They must come at once. Ivor Mardol was dying.

