
CHAPTER XXXII LIGHT OR LIGHTNING?
The torment of the next few days in Rupert's soul no words can express. He seemed
      to be lying on the rack, waiting, palpitating, suffering new anguish every moment, while the
      hours drew on and on, and would not finish. There was excitement all over Europe, of which the
      daily papers gave a vivid reflection,—excitement among the adherents of governments and
      aristocracies, which had received a deadly shock in the assassination of the Tsar; excitement
      as great, but felt like a subterranean earthquake, among the revolutionists that had dealt it.
      Rupert's one anxiety was to catch in the welter of confused voices the name of Hippolyta. He
      scanned the journals eagerly, and went every morning and evening to Grafton Place, in the hope
      of hearing through Ivor Mardol that some one had brought information from St. Petersburg. And
      as refugee after refugee appeared in London, but Colonel
       Valence did not return, and nothing was said of his daughter, the artist's
      despair became uncontrollable. His suspicions of Mardol woke from the slumber into which they
      had been cast by that evening at the Duke of Adullam's. He began to devise wild schemes of
      penetrating into the Russian prisons and seeing with his own eyes whether they held Hippolyta.
      Wandering restless and uncertain, he forgot to eat or drink, he could not sleep, his studio
      was abandoned, his whole existence seemed to be falling into confusion. Ivor was all kindness
      and brotherly love; but he could not enlighten Rupert, for he was still in the dark himself.
      He did not dare to hint what he surmised.
Things were in this condition, and Rupert was looking the picture of fatigue and
      disappointment, when Bernstein the Jew presented himself one afternoon to complain that for
      several days Glanville had sent him no report, not even that of his first meeting with the
      anarchists, which, he said, must have taken place. The artist looked at him wearily.
'What is the use of my telling you?' he said; 'you will not find out anything. You have
      failed utterly up to this.'
'Yes,' answered Bernstein composedly, 'I have failed. Did I not warn you that so it might
      be, when I heard of the twofold motive? I said, "To find Mrs. Malcolm I cannot promise." But,
      we say in German, no thread so fine is spun that it comes not to the sun. And thus it will
      prove. I have
       caused to be inserted your advertisements in the Times . There is no
      answer yet. Perhaps the true answer was the news from Russia. We must wait But,' continued he,
      'two things I have found. One is that there is search going on for Miss Valence by the side of
      ours. My people have met other people below, in the under-world of which I did speak to you
      when first I came. And the second, I can tell you what has happened to the young woman, Annie
      Dauris.'
'What?' inquired Rupert. He did not care much. Annie Dauris was nothing to him.
'She is dead,' said the Jew calmly.
'Dead?' echoed the artist in his absent voice; 'it was soon over then. How do you know?'
'Because I saw her lying dead in—Hospital,' was the answer.
Rupert became interested. 'Ah,' he said, 'it was the first hospital I went into that night.
      Stay,' he continued, turning to the Jew, 'was Annie Dauris fair, light-haired, rather pretty,
      but with a careworn expression? Can it have been the patient I saw that could not speak and
      looked at me attentively?'
'Yes,' said Bernstein, 'yes, it is the same. She was brought from the lodging-house
      poisoned, and was, in a manner, restored to life. But she was never able to speak. While she
      had the fever her child was born. The mother and the child are dead. The inquest was
      yesterday. Her father and her companion, Charlotte Fraser, identified the body. It
       was Annie Dauris, and I think she knew too much and was murdered.'
'By whom?' asked Rupert.
The Jew shrugged his shoulders. 'You would not believe me,' he said, 'therefore I hold my
      tongue. You are not a strong character, Mr. Glanville. Your friend Mr. Mardol is the
      strong character. He can and will turn you round his finger, and lead you about by the nose.
      Pardon me, but is it not so? You go to him twice daily; you sit long with him. You do not send
      me a memorandum. It is clear that you believe him your friend again.'
'What if I do?' exclaimed Rupert; 'you can go on searching, all the same. Who else, I
      wonder, is looking for Hippolyta?' he said to himself thoughtfully; 'it must be the Duke of
      Adullam.'
Bernstein caught the words and frowned till his black eyebrows met. An expression of alarm
      passed over his countenance. 'I know that name,' he said; 'it is a mock-name of a great noble
      who does much in my world. You and Mr. Mardol went to his house and stayed there many hours
      such a night. Why went you?'
'That is my business,' answered Rupert; 'and now, Mr. Bernstein, understand that I give you
      full permission to go on with your search, but I have no longer the assurance that my friend
      Mardol has done me an injury.'
'Your friend Mardol, I say, is the clever man,' repeated Bernstein. 'I will search, for it
      is a strange
       case. But if I make clear to myself that Mrs. Malcolm was in Petersburg, and is
      taken, or—,' he stopped; then after a pause went on, 'shall I bring you the news, whatever it
      may happen to be?'
'Yes,' answered Rupert in a low but steady tone; 'let me know the worst.' He perceived that
      Bernstein's conjectures were taking the same direction as his own. It shook him violently.
      When the Jew left and he was sitting alone, with his head bowed, thinking, always thinking, as
      the day went on, the most terrible imaginations came flocking round him; and one, which
      recurred like a monomania, drove him from the house. He saw himself lying on the floor of his
      dressing-room, shot through the heart, a pistol lying at his right hand. There was a gloomy
      fascination in imagining the look of deadly calm on his face, the attitude of his limbs as he
      lay where he had fallen, the disorder in the room, and the silence brooding over it. A little
      more and he would have begun to mount the stairs which led to his bedchamber. It must not be.
      'Not yet, not yet,' he murmured, as though soothing a child. He would go to Ivor. He would
      stay under his roof tonight and to-morrow, in the neighbourhood of his schoolboy friend. He
      felt chill and heartsick beyond all he had experienced. But he did not venture to sleep in his
      own house.
Ivor was waiting, not to give him news,—there was none,—but to say that an old friend had
      requested him to be that evening at the Spartans', in
       Denzil Lane. He proposed to take Rupert. 'It will be a stormy meeting,' Ivor
      continued, 'for I have not attended a lodge, except one, since you called me to Trelingham,
      and that ended in my banishment. But there is always some comfort. The friend I am going to
      meet has more acquaintance with the inner circles of our society than any man living. He is
      sure to know Colonel Valence under some name or other. I wish you could tell me all that you
      have learnt about that mysterious personage. But the Duke of Adullam has warned me not to
      ask.'
The low fever that had taken possession of Rupert grew upon him every hour. He did not talk;
      and when dinner came, eating was impossible. His friend began to think he had better go to
      Denzil Lane by himself and bring back what news there might be. But he no sooner proposed it
      than the artist, rising up, said in a melancholy tone, 'For God's sake, Ivor, do not leave me
      to-night. I have lost all control of my imagination. My thoughts, my fancies are suicidal.
      Find Hippolyta I must, or go mad.'
They left the house late, in silence, walking along the crowded streets without exchanging
      an observation. Ivor had his own sad thoughts, apart from the anguish of his friend. He did
      not know whose fate trembled in the balance that evening, his or Rupert's. The strange
      acquaintance between himself and the Duke of Adullam had made it comparatively easy to face
      the so-called Athenians, with whom he had never
       entirely broken. The Spartans, as their name denoted, were much less tolerant of
      private opinion, and ready to inflict the severest penalties on dissentients or renegades.
      Ivor was walking up to the cannon's mouth. He knew his men, and did not promise himself a
      speedy reconciliation with them or an untroubled lease of life. And the reception he met on
      entering would have discouraged a bolder man.
It was the large, bare committee-room, which we remember, in the decayed house at Denzil
      Lane, where Hippolyta and Ivor held their first conversation. The passage was not lighted, and
      Ivor, leading Rupert in the dark, had to knock twice ere he gained admission. A species of
      warder, wearing a red sash across his breast, stood inside, jealously guarding the entrance.
      On opening he recognised the engraver, drew back, and seemed uncertain whether he should be
      allowed to pass. But at the sight of Rupert closely following on the heels of his friend the
      warder put out his hand, laying it rather heavily on the artist's shoulder, and said in a
      quick, rough undertone, 'What do you want here?' Rupert stood perfectly still. Ivor, just
      looking at the doorkeeper, said two or three words and held out a scrap of paper. The effect
      was instantaneous. The grim warder drew aside; Rupert passed in; and the two friends, making
      their way up the room, seated themselves, by Ivor's choice, where they could see all that was
      going forward and keep an eye on the door.

Rupert, somewhat roused from his lethargy, looked round and thought he had never been in
      such a place before. The scene resembled a night-school rather than a Socialist meeting. The
      great windows at either end were closed with wooden shutters and iron bars; three jets of gas
      hanging from the plastered ceiling threw a crude light on the benches occupied by some thirty
      or forty men, who seemed, by their dress and general appearance, to belong to the steadier
      sort of mechanics. There was a tribune, or master's pulpit, at the upper end away from the
      door, which was at present empty. Near it was the table, covered with green baize, at which
      Hippolyta had seated herself while Ivor uttered his thoughts to her the first morning they
      met. But Rupert did not know that Hippolyta had ever been in the room. He felt almost as much
      surprise here as at the Duke of Adullam's. He had expected a larger meeting, and not this kind
      of people. In his mind there went with Socialism something squalid, frowsy, unkempt, and
      forlorn. But these men seemed to be in receipt of wages enabling them to dress decently; they
      had an educated look; and many of them were turning over the journals or reading written
      documents. Among them were evidently a certain number of foreigners. They all looked up on the
      entrance of Ivor Mardol. Seeing Rupert, they looked inquiringly at one another; and a second
      officer, in red sash like the doorkeeper, came up and asked him who he was. Rupert pointed to
      Ivor; again the scrap of
       paper was shown, again the magic working followed. The men bent over their
      journals and documents. There was apparently no business going on, or it had not begun.
In the midst of the silence a slight young man went from his place at the side of the hall
      into the pulpit, carrying with him a bundle of papers. The rest laid down what they were
      reading, and threw themselves into listening attitudes. The secretary, if such he was, began
      to run over what seemed an interminable list of meetings, resolutions, and subscriptions —a
      recital which, tedious though it proved to Rupert, had clearly a deep interest for the
      assembly, Ivor himself appearing to follow it point by point. More than once the reader was
      interrupted, now by low earnest murmurs of approbation, and now by marks of the reverse. A
      bystander would have said that in this committee of anarchists the old sections of the
      Revolution had renewed themselves. But the artist, weary of these monotonous proceedings, and
      attending but little to the hum of conversation, which by degrees grew louder, could hardly
      have told when the secretary ended, or what shape of man took his place in the pulpit. He did
      not suppose Colonel Valence would haunt assemblies of this species; and Ivor's friend
      apparently was yet to arrive.
From such stupor, consequent partly on the illness he was feeling, Rupert awakened at the
      sound of Ivor's voice. He opened his eyes and looked about.
       His friend had arisen in his place, and the speaker in the pulpit had come to a
      pause. The rest were dead silent.
'Ay,' said Ivor, with a fine ring of scorn in his accents, 'things are going the way I
      foretold. But they shall not without one more protest from me. After that, you may do with me
      as you like. I suppose there must be martyrs of the new Gospel as there were of the old. You,'
      he continued, facing the man in the pulpit, 'are preaching assassination. You tell us it is an
      article in the creed of anarchy. And I tell you, here, not for the first time, that it is no
      article in the creed of humanity.'
'Sit down, can't you?' shouted one of the men across the room; 'your turn 'll come by and
      by. Why can't you let the man speak?'
'By all means,' said Ivor. 'It is out of order, I suppose, to protest that our society is
      not a company of assassins.' And he sat down, flushed and excited. Rupert pressed his
      hand.
The other took up his interrupted speech; and the artist for the first time heard a sermon,
      in well-chosen language and with apposite illustrations, on the text of dynamite. A stern
      gospel, which the fanatic standing before them clearly believed in. He was a thoughtful,
      mild-looking man, young, well educated, and fluent in address, a foreigner, or of foreign
      descent. He was much applauded, though not by all; and he knew when to leave off. The
      impression made was deep and solemn, like that which a High
       Calvinist might have produced in his epoch by proclaiming that hardly any one
      present would be saved, and by adding that the more of them were lost the greater would be
      God's glory. As soon as he turned to come down from the pulpit, Ivor stood up again. Voices
      cried, 'To the front, to the front;' but he did not stir. The noise died away. Looking very
      steadily at the brethren who crowded nearer to him, he said, 'I doubt that I belong to you,
      and I will not go into your tribune.'
There was a strong murmur of disapproval, which seemed to loosen his tongue.
'How should I belong to you,' he cried, 'when you will take warning neither by the
      Revolution nor by the Governments, when you are mad enough to dream of creating a new world by
      the methods which have ruined the old? You disown your greatest teachers. You—I say you—are
      restoring absolute government, the Council of Ten, the Inquisition, and the Committee of
      Public Safety. You, as much as any king, or priest, or aristocrat, stand in the way of
      progress.'
There was a great outcry. 'Proof, proof,' exclaimed some; 'renegade,' 'reactionary,'
      'traitor,' came hurled from the lips of others, while Ivor stood unmoved amid the commotion he
      had excited. He smiled disdainfully, and lifted his hand to command silence, but for a time it
      seemed as if the meeting would break up in confusion. There were two or three, however, bent
      on restoring order and hearing
       what he had to say. The tumult grew less, and Ivor, as soon as he could make
      himself audible, exclaimed, 'Do you want proof? It is waiting for you. I will prove myself no
      renegade by showing who is. I say that this lodge was founded on our faith in humanity. Its
      creed, when I joined it, condemned regicide, assassination, and private war. It would have
      condemned dynamite, had that hellish weapon been invented. I say again that I am a son of the
      Revolution, which has made freedom possible and will make it a universal fact, if we and the
      like of us do not throw it back a thousand years. What are my proofs? you ask. They are
      illustrious and decisive parallels; they are the principles on which alone a scientific and
      progressive reconstruction of society can be attempted. Do you believe that Voltaire or Goethe
      would have countenanced regicide while the printing-press remained? Would Rousseau have taught
      Émile the Gospel of dynamite? Is Victor Hugo a mere and sheer anarchist?'
'Bah,' said a thickset, deep-toned German, interrupting him. 'Why quote men of letters?'
'Because they are the priests and prophets without whom no revolution could have existed,'
      returned Ivor; 'because they see the scope, and measure the path, of our endeavouring; because
      it is by their methods, and not by yours, that we shall win.'
'Slow methods,' retorted another, 'while the people are starving.'
'Dynamite will not help them to live,' said Ivor.
       'You may blow up Winter Palaces and kill Emperors with it. You will not gain the
      intelligent, or the men of science, or the good anywhere, by the sound of its explosion.'
'We want a mental and spiritual democracy as well as the rest,' interrupted a third; 'we
      care not a jot for aristocracies of intelligence or benevolence. That is why we call ourselves
      Sparta.'
'I know,' said Ivor, his face kindling; 'but your new Sparta is worse than the old.
       You aim at a democracy! Yes, at one which seen from behind is despotism. You will
      not tolerate differences of opinion; they must be abolished with the dagger. That is your
      Inquisition. You make a slave of every man that joins you, and punish his so-called
      infractions of the rule with death. That is your Council of Ten. You decree the destruction of
      the innocent, the blowing-up of cities, the plunder of the poor by your howling rabble. That
      is Saint Bartholomew and the Committee of Public Safety. Oh, my friends, you need not lose
      patience,' he went on, as the interruptions began again. 'When I have spoken to the end there
      will be time enough to kill me. But this, in the face of your threatenings, I repeat, that you
      have forgotten the very purpose of the Revolution.'
'Have we?' was the cry. 'Let us hear it, then.'
'Read it in Victor Hugo,' he replied, 'if nowhere else. The Revolution means liberty and
      light. It means equality in the best things, the only things
       worth having—love and justice and truth. It means reason, not dynamite. Ah, my
      brothers,' said Ivor, his voice softening, 'how comes it that we have lost faith in the heart,
      the mind, the brain of Humanity? Why must we turn, like wild beasts, to our fangs and our
      claws, to the poison of the rattle-snake and the teeth of the tiger?'
'Why?' exclaimed one who had not yet spoken; 'because we are fighting with tigers and
      rattle-snakes. How else are we to conquer?'
'Your conception of humanity, then,' said Ivor, 'does not include the governing classes.
      Have all revolutionists been ignorant? have all sprung from the people? You invert the
      pyramid; but your anarchy is only aristocracy turned upside down. You want the guillotine, the
      infernal machine, the flask of nitro-glycerine, as the Governments want their hangman and
      their headsman. Oh, worthy successor of Robespierre, I congratulate you.'
'Robespierre was the greatest and holiest of revolutionists, always excepting Marat,'
      answered the other sullenly.
Ivor was not to be daunted. He went on with his theme. 'How did Robespierre differ from
      Torquemada?' he inquired. 'Their views of the next world might not be the same, but they were
      pretty much of a mind in dealing with this. If the Jesuits were regicides on principle, were
      the Jacobins any better? A fine revolution,' he exclaimed, 'when you change the men, but carry
      out the measures more
       obstinately than before; when you snatch the people from the lion's mouth to
      fling them to jackals and hyenas! You tell me that force alone will conquer force. It was not
      by force that Christianity won its way to Empire. When it took up the sword it struck, indeed,
      a deadly blow, but into its own heart. Are we going to repeat the mistake, and abolish the
      principles of '89 by the guillotine of '93? Conquer force by force? Not in this battle, be you
      sure of that. It is a battle against darkness, and only light will scatter it. Therefore I
      conclude,' he said, raising his voice and speaking with impassioned earnestness, 'that the
      resolution which would commit our lodge to a policy of dynamite is nothing short of apostasy
      from the principles on which it was founded; and I, for one, will dare or endure the utmost
      rather than assent to it.'
'What will you put in its stead?' The question rang out clear through the room, drawing
      every eye towards the speaker, who had come in while Ivor was replying to the interruptions of
      his opponents. He was a tall man, wrapped in a cloak with which until now he had covered his
      face where he sat by the door. At the sound of his voice Ivor gave a start. Rupert, looking
      that way, saw the man rise from his seat and press towards the tribune. He let his cloak fall,
      and from that moment the artist's eyes were rivetted on his pale and haughty countenance.
      Again, as at the beginning of Ivor's speech, there was complete silence, and the men present
      looked at one another in expectation
       of something unusual. Ivor, standing up while the stranger passed, made no
      attempt to resume. The stillness became intense.
'You are debating a question to-night,' said the stranger, as he looked at them from the
      tribune he had mounted, 'on which the future of the world hangs. Let me help you to solve it.
      All the lodges in Europe have been debating it too, since a certain afternoon when the
      telegraph brought news from Petersburg. The French Revolution has become cosmopolitan; the
      nations are on the march, and they must have their '93. Anarchy first, then order. When France
      challenged the kings to battle, it flung them the head of a king. We have done more; we are
      going to pull down the Europe of the kings, with all its wealth, feudalism, ranks, and
      classes, till we have swept the place clean. And,' he paused, 'our gage of battle is the
      shattered body of the Tsar.'
There could be no mistaking how the applause went now. It was violent and vociferous. The
      stranger hardly seemed to notice it. When silence was restored he went on in a musing voice,
      low but exceedingly distinct, as if speaking to himself. 'When I was a boy I too had my
      dreams,' he said, and he glanced towards Ivor. 'I believed in Goethe and Voltaire, in Victor
      Hugo and the sentimentalists. I thought the struggle was for light. I see it is for bread.
      Look out in the streets to-night and consider the faces that pass. Beyond these walls,' his
       voice sank lower, but it was wonderfully clear throughout, 'lies the anarchy of
      London. Rags, hunger, nakedness, tears, filth, incest, squalor, decay, disease, the human
      lazar-house, the black death eating its victims piecemeal,—that is three-fourths of the London
      lying at these doors. Whose care is it? Nay, who cares for it? The piles of the royal palace
      are laid deep in a lake of blood. And you will leave it standing? You talk of light; you
      prefer sentiment to dynamite and assassination! What a meek Christian you are!'
'No,' returned Ivor, with heightened colour in his face, 'I am neither meek nor a Christian.
      The lake of blood is a terror to me as to you. That is not the question. You know me too well
      to imagine it,' he said almost fiercely. 'The question is whether a second anarchy will cure a
      first. I say no. I prefer sentiment to assassination? Very well, why should I not? But I
      prefer reason and right even to sentiment. I appeal to what is deepest in the heart of
      man.'
The stranger laughed unpleasantly and resumed, as though dismissing the argument. 'I have
      seen battles,' he said, 'in which there were heroism, and madness, and the rush of armies
      together, and the thunder of cannon, and wild, raging cries in the artillery gloom, enough to
      intoxicate a man with the bloody splendours of war. But I never beheld anything more heroic or
      glorious'—he smiled, his voice fell, and he gave a long, peculiar glance down the
       hall—'than the overture to our great enterprise. It cost many days to think it
      out; it was accomplished in a moment.' Then, in the strange, musing tone of one that has a
      vision before him, 'I saw him stagger, lean his arm against the parapet, and fall, shattered
      as with a thunderbolt. It was not the death of a man; it was the annihilation of a
      tyranny.'
'And the springing up of a fresh tyranny from his blood,' cried Ivor, unable, amid the
      cheering of the others, to contain himself.
'Ah, it was a fine sight,' continued the speaker, as though he had not been interrupted,
      'and new in its kind. The great White Tsar has often been murdered —by his wife, his son, his
      brother; Nicholas committed suicide, and so did Alexander the First. But never until now have
      the people done justice on their executioner.'
Then in the same quiet voice, where passion was so concentrated that it gave only a dull red
      intensity of expression, but none of those lyric cries that lift up the soul, he recited,
      without naming person or place, the tragedy of which he had been a witness and one of the
      prime movers. No sound of protest came while he was speaking. The audience hung spellbound on
      his words; and the sombre, sanguinary picture unrolled itself in all its dreadfulness before
      their vision. Like a tragic messenger, he told the tale graphically, yet as though he had no
      part in it; but the conviction, unanimous in that meeting, of the share he had taken added a
      covert fear, a wonder
       not unmixed with something almost loathsome, as the man stood there, his hands
      clean, but the scent of blood clinging to his raiment. Ivor listened, his head bowed down,
      motionless. Rupert never once turned his eyes from the stranger, who moved along the lines of
      the story swiftly, quietly, painting with lurid tints, and not pausing till he had shown the
      mangled remains of the victim wrapped in his bloody shroud.
'That was not all the blood spilt in the tragedy,' he concluded. 'We, too, lost our
      soldiers, but they were willing to die. And now that you have seen the deed through my eyes,
      judge whether it was rightly done.'
'Stay,' said Ivor, rising again, and in his agitation leaning heavily upon Rupert's
      shoulder, 'before you judge let me ask on what principles your verdict is to be founded. Will
      you take those of the Revolution, or return to those of Absolutism?'
'The Revolution, the Revolution,' cried many voices.
'One of them,' returned the young man, 'is fraternity. Where did his murderers show pity to
      the Tsar? Another is humanity, to employ the arms of reason, to enlighten blindness, not
      strike it with the sword. Must war be perpetual, or where is retaliation to cease? I have
      always thought that pardon, light, and love were the watchwords of our cause; and I looked
      forward to the day when men should live in peace with one another. To be a man, I understood,
      was to bear a charmed life, on
       which no other man should lay a daring hand. Murder, I was told, is sacrilege.
      Am I now to unlearn all these truths, and join the crusade of dynamite-throwers instead of the
      crusade of reason? That is the counter-revolution indeed. I, for one, will have nothing to do
      with it. Take my vote, which condemns anarchy, whether in the heights or in the depths, and
      let me go.'
He moved out of his seat towards the door, pulling Rupert after him. In an instant the way
      was barred. Some few, whose secret thoughts had been expressed in Ivor's indignant language,
      held aloof; the rest were all speaking excitedly, and reiterating the words 'traitor' and
      'informer,' which had been previously hurled at the head of the dissentient. Ivor, unable to
      reach the entrance and surrounded on every side by angry faces and uplifted arms, was in no
      slight peril. But he did not seem to notice; he was collected and silent. Once he looked
      towards the stranger, and their eyes met. It is impossible to say what would have happened
      next, for more than one foreigner had drawn a knife from his pocket and there was a gleam of
      steel in the air, when, striding down from the tribune and pushing his way through the crowd,
      Ivor's antagonist arrived in front of him. The others fell back. To Rupert it appeared that
      they obeyed this man as a chief.
'Where are you going, Ivor Mardol?' he said in his distinct accents. 'Are you proposing to
      denounce your friends?'

'Denounce? What do you take me for?' replied Ivor. 'I shall never enter this committee-room
      again. I give up the society, and you may inflict on me any punishment you please, but I am
      neither a spy nor an informer. You know where to find me. I have not been hiding for the last
      six months. In spite of your threatenings I have walked the streets of London. These men know,
      for some of them have seen me.'
'And this friend of yours, who has not spoken a word all the evening?' inquired the other;
      'is he, like yourself, a partisan of light or a spy?'
'It matters not what he is,' replied Ivor; 'he has authority for coming hither which even
      you will not dispute.' And for the third time he held out the scrap of paper.
The stranger looked at it closely, gave it back, and said, turning round to the brotherhood,
      'We must let them go. It would be dangerous to have any quarrelling in this place. Public
      opinion is roused, and what has been done is compromising enough to the whole order. I will be
      responsible, and will watch over their movements myself.'
Amid confusion a strong character maintains its ascendency. The stranger was determined and
      cool; Ivor had shown no timidity; and Rupert's silence implied that self-possession of the
      Englishman which appears so formidable a thing to the average foreigner. It would seem as
      though the three men settled the business among them, while the meeting looked on.
       'Wait till I join you,' said the stranger, leading the friends through the lane
      which was made for them to the entrance. Ivor bowed silently, and refused his proffered hand.
      The door closed behind them, there was still no light in the passage; and not a word was
      spoken till the young men were in the street. Then Rupert, grasping Ivor's arm and pulling him
      towards the gas-lamp which shed a dull, flickering light in front of the great doorway, said
      with the utmost vehemence, 'Why did you tell me a falsehood? You said you did not know him.
      That, Ivor, that is Colonel Valence.'
Ivor staggered back. 'What, Rupert?' he exclaimed.
'Colonel Valence, I tell you,' replied his friend. 'I knew him the moment I set eyes on
      him.'
The engraver was bewildered still. 'Is it possible?' he said to himself. 'Ah, was that the
      resemblance I fancied, but could not account for, in Mrs. Malcolm?' He fell into a deep
      silence.
Rupert shook his arm impatiently. 'When are you going to explain?' he said. 'You knew them
      both, and you would never have told me. Oh, what a false friend you have been, Ivor!'
'No,' said the other, rousing himself; 'spare me your reproaches. I do not deserve them. I
      know that man, have known him these sixteen years; but he is Mr. Felton, not Colonel
      Valence.'
'I tell you,' returned the other with emphasis, 'it is Colonel Valence. Voice, and manner,
      and
       appearance,—I recognise them all. I met and talked with him in Trelingham
      churchyard the day after I went there.'
Ivor made him recount the incident, while they walked up and down in front of the house,
      waiting till the lodge broke up. But the artist was impatient, and said hardly a word of Lady
      Alice. His thoughts were set on Hippolyta. The old man— Colonel Valence looked older than
      ever—must surely know what had become of her. But would he tell Rupert? He was rigid and
      unfeeling, capable of leading his child into the thick of battle and with dry eyes beholding
      her perish, so long as the cause triumphed. Glanville, when he had ended the short recital,
      turned again to cross-examine his friend. What did Ivor know of Mr. Felton? Not much, or more
      truly nothing, apart from the Socialist designs wherein both of them had been engaged. He
      still persisted in declaring that he had never communicated with Miss Valence, nor set eyes on
      her till she came to the spot where they were now standing. There was something in her face
      that vaguely recalled, he could not have said whose features, but he now saw they were Mr.
      Felton's. The artist thought of the documents which Bernstein had seen in Ivor's desk, in the
      writing of Hippolyta; but he felt ashamed to mention them. How did he know they were
      there?
It was a bitterly cold night, and Rupert shivered as they went to and fro in the windy
      street, not
       speaking while there was any one near, and having occasionally to pause lest the
      throng that at moments swept by should carry them away from the house, and Colonel Valence
      should escape them. For the artist was sure that he had been recognised by the old man as he
      came towards them from the tribune. Nothing but Ivor's perilous situation had kept him from
      challenging him there and then. The feeling of suspense was horrible; and Ivor, overwhelmed at
      the discovery that his guardian, his stern and pitiless friend, was Mrs. Malcolm's father,
      walked by Glanville's side, voiceless, trying to piece together the details of this strange
      story. In what way had his own solitary life come to be entangled with that of the woman who
      had disappeared, and with her father's? Was she alive or dead? His affection for Mr. Felton
      had never been strong; it was now annihilated by the exultant cynicism with which that prophet
      of evil had depicted the Tsar's tragedy. It had almost turned to loathing.
The men were coming out. Rupert, standing under the street lamp, scanned their features as
      they passed; and when the stream slackened made a sign to Ivor, and pushed into the hall,
      where a tallow candle was burning at the head of the stairs. The man he sought was on the
      threshold of the committee-room. Its door, wide open, showed the gas flaring within. When the
      last man had issued forth, Ivor, darting in front of Rupert, said eagerly, 'Mr. Felton, come
      this way,' and went in, followed
       by Rupert and the old man. No sooner was the door shut, and the three by
      themselves, than Ivor, in a trembling voice, cried out, 'Rupert says you are Colonel Valence.
      Is it true?'
His guardian looked at them in turn. 'It must have come,' he said under his breath. 'Yes,
      Ivor,' he went on in a louder tone, 'I am Colonel Valence. Do you know anything about me?'
Rupert, who could wait no longer, struck in. 'What has become of Hippolyta?' he asked, his
      face growing pale. The name would hardly pass his lips. Colonel Valence, forgetting Ivor,
      wheeled round, and gave an astonished glance at the artist.
'Is not she at Falside?' he demanded in turn.
'The Jew said there was no one there but the servants,' answered Rupert confusedly.
'The Jew? What Jew? Have you gone out of your mind?' exclaimed the Colonel, more and more
      perplexed. 'Has my daughter left home since I went away? I thought by this time you would have
      arranged everything.'
'She is lost,' said Rupert gloomily. He did not know what to think. He saw that Colonel
      Valence was troubled, but not like a man who had seen his child die, or left her in prison
      with the surviving assassins at Petersburg. He asked for explanations. Question and answer
      succeeded each other rapidly. Her father appeared to learn for the first time that Hippolyta
      had come to London, had taken a false name, had met Ivor Mardol. Rupert, in the presence
       of his friend, and to her father's face, could not describe how she had given
      herself to him. He kept back what he could; but Colonel Valence did not press him, did not
      seem to think of dishonour in connection with Hippolyta. He inquired only how many days she
      had been missing, what she had taken as provision for her journey, and whether she had
      received any letters. Rupert told all he knew, and mentioned the second letter, besides his
      own, which Mrs. Leeming had handed to her the last evening she spent at Forrest House.
'That was from me,' said the Colonel, 'announcing that I should probably return to Falside
      in the course of three weeks. I allowed a margin for accidents, and the time is out. I told
      her where I was. It is conceivable that she went abroad in the hope of meeting me, or of
      helping me in Petersburg. Hippolyta was always a creature of impulse. She must be at Falside.
      Lost! No, my dear Glanville, do not think it. We will all three go down to the West
      to-morrow.'
'Not I,' said Ivor, turning away.
'Why not?' inquired his guardian.
He answered firmly, 'Because I have done with you, Mr. Felton. I said so to myself a hundred
      times while you were speaking, and I mean it. You are —' he stopped.
'What am I?' asked the other quietly, with a severe light in his eyes.
'You are worse than a murderer, that is what
       you are,' cried Ivor Mardol with great passion. 'Others commit bloody deeds, but
      you make a religion of them.'
Colonel Valence frowned. 'Boy, boy, you must not talk to me in that fashion,' he said. 'What
      I have advocated is justice, not murder. Have done with your tenderness for crowned criminals,
      and come with me to Falside.'
'I shall do no such thing,' replied Ivor. 'Goodnight, Rupert. When you have found Mrs.
      Malcolm, let me know.'
He was going. Rupert caught hold of him. 'Dear Ivor,' he said, 'be a friend to me. If I do
      not come upon Hippolyta soon, I shall—I don't know what I shall do—something desperate. Never
      mind Colonel Valence. Come and help in the search.'
But Ivor was not to be shaken. He kept his eyes carefully averted from the spot where his
      guardian was standing, in a strange attitude of grief and scorn. The Colonel did not speak,
      and Rupert went on entreating, but to no purpose. At last Ivor said, 'I will never come under
      the same roof again with Mr. Felton'—the old man winced slightly, but was silent as before;
      'never,' continued Ivor, 'while I live. If you want me, Rupert, I can go down to Trelingham
      and stay at the Hermitage, while you are searching for Miss Valence. I doubt, I doubt,' he
      concluded, shaking his head mournfully, 'that you will find her.'
'What makes you doubt?' asked Glanville.

'The way she seems to have left you,' replied his friend. 'She had a strong will, and she
      must have meant,—oh, my dear fellow, I know it is hard,—but she intended her flight to be a
      separation for ever, or she would not have left you without a sign.'
'She must be at Falside,' repeated Colonel Valence in a low voice.
'Come, Ivor,' said Rupert entreatingly.
'To Trelingham, if you please,' answered his friend. 'I know the Earl is kind and will
      understand that you want me. But never to that—that other house.'
Colonel Valence, in a gentler way than he had hitherto shown, said, 'Ivor, I am an old man.
      My principles are a part of my experience, which all the discussion in the world cannot alter.
      Come and stay with me at Falside with your friend, with Hippolyta. Let us enjoy a few days of
      happiness together.'
Such language from the stern Mr. Felton surprised Ivor. It was unlike him, not in his
      character. But this night had made him odious. The scent of murder hung about him yet. It was
      impossible that any change in his bearing could take away the guilt of what he had said and
      done. As a final answer, Mardol turned to the artist and said with decision, 'When you return
      from Falside, you will find me at the chalet. I will write at once to Lord Trelingham, if you
      can give me his address.'
And so saying he went out of the room, without looking round. He supposed Rupert would stay,
      to make arrangements for the journey of to-morrow.
       When he gained the street he paused, considered for a moment, and walked hastily
      towards Grafton Place. His thoughts were in a tumult; he scarcely knew which way he was going.
      In the midst of his painful and distracted musings he heard steps behind him, as of some one
      coming rapidly on. A moment after Rupert was by his side. 'Why did you not wait?' he said, out
      of breath. 'Colonel Valence is gone. We are to travel together by the fast train at ten
      o'clock. Here is Lord Trelingham's address. What shall you do?'
'I will follow in the afternoon,' replied Ivor. 'But, Rupert, prepare yourself for
      disappointment. I am almost certain Miss Valence is not there.'
'You cannot tell me where she is, all the same?' inquired the artist, half angrily.
'I can tell you nothing, because I know nothing. I have searched where I could. Miss Desmond
      has not seen her. The Duke of Adullam thinks—but it matters not what he thinks. It is mere
      conjecture. The best thing we can do is to go back to Trelingham Court,—you to finish the
      Great Hall, and I to bear you company. If Miss Valence is living, she either cannot or will
      not inform you of her existence. You may as well wait for news at the Court as anywhere. You
      will have work to distract you.'
Rupert accompanied Ivor in silence to his own door, and went home.

