
CHAPTER IX ANIMUM PICTURA PASCIT INANI
Now that Destiny had got a number of threads in her hand, on every one of which
      hung a human life, she proceeded, with the haste and fury of a seemingly blind inspiration, to
      entangle them. It was not merley to paint pictures that Rupert Glanville had come to
      Trelingham. Little as he dreamt it, the central knot of his fortune was there to be tied; he
      was to act and be acted upon, to drive and be driven, to be caught up as by a swiftly-turning
      wheel and hurried round with it. Nor did Ivor Mardol quit his London solitude and find
      delicious shelter in the Hermitage that he might be satiate with rustic beauty and add a new
      leaf to his sketch-book. By sure degrees the pleasant intercourse that marked the beginning of
      their stay among strangers yielded to an intimacy which, at first promising larger
      gratification, led to the most unexpected consequences.
I have often thought how much turns on the minor
       personages in a drama, whether on the stage or off it. Had Tom Davenant not been
      kept an invalid in his room for some three weeks by low fever; had his mother, a woman of the
      world, not returned to London after the briefest of visits; had the Countess been less
      absorbed, or Lord Trelingham more observant, Lady May and the artist could surely never have
      spent hour after hour tête-à-tête while she was sitting for her portrait. But the
      Earl, intent on dossals and mosaics and altar-flagons, had not a moment to spare in the
      morning, and seldom looked in, although from time to time he inspected the picture with marked
      satisfaction. The Countess moved hither and thither in her restless way, came and went, threw
      in a mocking word when the conversation flew above her comprehension, sat dreaming her own
      dreams by the window, and, whether from negligence or wilfulness, turned a deaf ear to most
      that was said. She could not, therefore, be supposed to perceive how artistic discussion and
      talk upon general topics were giving way to more intimate personal communings, at least on the
      part of Lady May, and that mischief was gathering. She had her own reasons, perhaps; and we
      may as well endeavour to find them out.
Look at this little scene. It was a mellow afternoon, and Tom Davenant, weak but
      convalescent, was sitting propped up in an easy-chair by the drawing-room fire. It was the
      first day he had left his room. Glanville, at no great distance, was writing
       a letter; Lady May, engaged upon some trailing piece of embroidery that fell
      about her feet, seemed wholly occupied in what she was doing, and neither spoke nor looked up;
      while the Countess, demurely seated where she could keep a charitable eye on the invalid, was
      wondering how she might persuade him to talk. For it was part of her infatuation to like the
      sound of that young man's pleasant but not astonishingly musical voice. Her longing was to be
      satisfied without effort on her side. Tom laid down the newspaper he was holding, and,
      stifling a yawn, said to Glanville, whom he had come to like rather: 'The worst of being
      knocked up is that a fellow doesn't know what to do with himself. He can't read anything
      except the Field ; and I've read it all through now. I must hark back, I suppose, and
      see whether I've skipped a page;'and he took up the discarded journal again.
'Shall I read to you, Cousin Tom?'said Karina softly.
'No, thank you,'he answered; adding, after a while, with some annoyance in his tone, 'I
      wish, Countess, you would get out of that way of calling me Cousin Tom. You know I haven't the
      honour of being your cousin, and it is stupid.'
The Countess blushed, but attempted a smile. 'I know,'she said, 'I am not so much your
      cousin as Lady May; but, if I am hers, you ought to be mine. Don't you think so, Mr.—Mr.
      Davenant?'The curious mingling of sarcasm, fright, and tenderness
       with which the Countess uttered his name thus formally was worth observing.
      Glanville, hitherto intent on his letter, began to feel an interest in the little comedy. He
      knew nothing of the relation in which the Countess stood to the house of Trelingham; he had
      never even caught her family name. To the servants she was 'the Countess'and 'her Ladyship.'
      The Earl and his daughter addressed her as Karina; but Tom Davenant, as it now struck the
      artist, at all times spoke to her as 'Countess,'and never bestowed on her a Christian
      vocative. Sometimes, though seldom, he would call Lady May by her name; but this favour was
      witheld from the light-tongued Karina.
'Don't I think so?'echoed Tom. 'Not by any means. You are May's first cousin, because her
      mother and yours were sisters. But May and I are related on the father's side. You might as
      well have argued that your husband was my cousin because he married you. Poor
      fellow!'concluded Tom in sympathetic accents,—but whether pitying the Countess's late husband
      (she was a widow then, it seemed) on the score of his marriage or his decease, Glanville could
      not determine.
'Poor fellow!'sighed the Countess; 'I know you liked him, and he suffered so dreadfully at
      the last. It is not pleasant dying at two and twenty. But no, Mr.—Mr. Davenant,'she observed,
      brightening up after her transient expression of regret; 'the Lutenieffs are too proud to
      acknowledge kinship with any
       but old Russian families. The Countess Lutenieff never forgave me for being
      half-English. She threw it in my teeth often enough.'
'Well,'said Tom, relenting, 'if you have suffered in the cause, I suppose it is fair that
      you should call any English gentleman you choose your cousin. But—'
She interrupted him. 'Thank you so much, Cousin Tom,'she said archly, though with
      contentment in her looks. 'After all, you will want a cousin when May gives up that
      dignity.'Tom was silent, but turned his head in the direction of the real cousin. If she heard
      anything, she made no sign.
'I don't know what you are talking about,'said the young man, when he saw that Lady May paid
      no attention to the Countess. 'It seems to me that you say whatever comes into your head. I
      shall go back to my room now and lie down. This fire is too hot, and I can't smoke here if I
      want.'
The Countess begged him to stay; she would take the coals off the fire; she would open a
      window so that he should not feel the draught. But her entreaties were unavailing. Tom walked
      slowly to the door and disappeared.
When he was gone, Glanville, who had not relished the end of this argument, and feared that
      the Countess—Lutenieff, since that was her name— might follow it up with unpleasant
      revelations, dashing some faint but idle dreams of his, rose, and passing through the long
      window, strolled out on the terrace.
       To what was that mischievous sprite alluding? How could Lady May cease to be
      Tom's cousin? By marrying him? There was no other way. Glanville recalled her father's look
      that night when Tom was brought home from Yalden. He had not thought of it since. The cousins
      were so little together, and his attention had been drawn so strongly to Karina's worship of
      Tom Davenant, that the idea of an engagement between him and Lady May had completely vanished.
      'Well, what if it were true?'he asked himself. 'How did that concern him?'Not a great deal,
      his conscience replied. Should he feel mortified, or vexed, if the lady wedded her cousin?
      Why, yes; he must admit it would be a disappointment. But would his heart be broken? Did he
      feel that life would have lost its sweetness were she married? There was no answering throb.
      His heart was sound, apparently. He would think it over in the presence of Lady May; perhaps
      the calmness he felt was deceptive. And so deciding, he approached the window. Scarcely had he
      come within earshot than the Countess's laughing voice broke on him. She spoke rapidly, and
      the sentence, complete in meaning, struck at once into his understanding and stayed there.
      'But if you don't care for Tom, you must refuse him.'Such were the words. She was clearly
      addressing Lady May. Glanville fled to the other end of the terrace; he was aghast at having
      heard what was not intended for his hearing. To forget the sentence was, however, impossible.
       The Countess had spoken in loud tones, but her laugh sounded unnatural and her
      voice was sharp and peremptory. It seemed to insist on a thing which was not certain to be
      conceded. Could there be an engagement, and Lady May so little anxious about her betrothed, so
      free from jealousy of the Countess, so much—he paused for the right word—interested in
      another?
Next day when they were in the picture-gallery, he found himself insensibly leading to the
      subject. 'It is strange, Lady May,'said he, 'that I never heard the Countess's family name
      till yesterday.'
'Did you not?'she inquired; 'I can fancy it, however. My Cousin Karina has been so
      constantly with us from childhood, and her marriage lasted so short a time, that we hardly
      think of her as a Lutenieff. Her own name, which we never liked, was Karen Zarkoff. My aunt
      married a Zarkoff; but he need not have disfigured his daughter by calling her Karen. So we
      changed it when she came to us quite young to Karina, spelling it with a K to make it
      look Russian. She lost both parents before she could speak. Her guardian sent her to England
      until she was sixteen, and then had her taken back to the Ukraine to marry Count Lutenieff,
      whom she had never seen in her life. There was no help for it. But she cried at leaving my
      Cousin Tom, who had been her idol ever since she played with him and me during a summer
      holiday, when we were all three in this house, as we are now. Nevertheless, she liked
       her husband after they were married; he was a gentle, consumptive young man,
      greatly attached to her and to Mr. Davenant, who visited them in Russia. At eighteen she
      became a widow, and is, in a measure, my father's ward. But she does what she pleases, and is
      always on the wing; for to reason with her or to keep her in one place is impossible.'
'And Mr. Davenant?'said Glanville, controlling his voice lest it should betray undue
      curiosity. 'His father is not living?'
'No; he died years ago, soon after his marriage. My father spoke of him the first morning
      you were here. He married late. Mr. Davenant is strictly under my father's guardianship till
      he comes of age, which will be in some months. You see,'she went on, 'Mr. Davenant is
      heir-presumptive to the title and esatates of Trelingham; and so,'she said, laughing, 'he
      requires to be taken great care of. He has a place of his own in the next county, but he does
      not stay there, except in the shooting season. He will make an excellent landlord, however,
      when he begins. But at present he is wild about sport. He came to Trelingham to join in the
      salmon-hunt which was so unluckily hindered by his accident.'
All this, told in a calm way, was interesting, but it threw no light on the question whether
      Lady May and her cousin were engaged. One point only seemed certain. Tom Davenant might be the
      idol of the Lady Karina's affections as much as he pleased
       or, very likely, did not please; to the Earl's daughter he was a cousin and
      nothing more. She spoke of him readily, without changing tone or colour, she lauded his
      manliness, and at the same time laughingly applied to him the charming words of her poet— 'It
      are such folk that loved idlenesse, And not delite hadde of no businesse, But for to hunt and
      hauke, and play in medes, And many other such idle dedes.' 
That negligent chaperon, the Countess, who had slipped away at the beginning of this
      conference, now returned; and there came an interval of silence, during which, if many fine
      strokes were added to the face that was growing perfect on canvas, not a few went deep into
      the heart of one, at least, in that speechless company.
And now, reader, I will draw away the curtain, and, with such skill as I may, endeavour to
      disclose the inward meaning of this simple and oft-repeated scene in the picture-gallery at
      Trelingham Court. What could eyes behold? On the one hand a lady, in the dark crimson,
      curiously embroidered with gold, which vested the Madonna of the Seraphim, and was here in
      some artistic drapery imitated,—a lady, I say, seated where the light fell on her meditative,
      earnest brow, glowing features, and massive dark hair arranged as in a crown, her whole
      attitude one of reflection and yet suggesting a concentrated passionateness which, when she
      spoke or acted, would manifest itself daringly; and on the other, moving lightly about
       the easel, glancing at the seated figure from time to time, smiling a little as
      he turned to lay on a colour, and murmuring to himself in the painters'dialect, a young man,
      of good height and graceful mien, of ruddy countenance too, like the lady, but, unlike her,
      with the yellow hair of the Norsemen or the Greeks, the sleeves of his velvet coat turned up
      over fine wristbands, and a certain air of distinction, of dainty though not effeminate
      carefulness in all his attire, which threw into strong relief the genius shining out of his
      bright and steady eyes. He was at once an artist, a refined man of the world, and an athletic,
      well-knit figure of youth and comeliness; one in whom the balance of thought and fancy, of
      reason and instinct would seem incapable of being over-thrown. The shade of melancholy which
      came, like a passing cloud, across his countenance when he was not speaking added that
      indescribable touch, that dim sense of the imperfection hidden in all fair things, apart from
      which we may admire and be dazzled with the splendour of a face, but do not feed our heart
      upon it.
A pleasant sight, you will say, and worthy of its surroundings in that stately room, where
      the portraits of three centuries looked from the walls, various in costume, feature, and
      bearing, yet a gracious assemblage of old and young, of knights and ladies, of warriors,
      statesmen, ambassadors, recalling confusedly the life of court and camp in which they had
      acted their part till life's poor play was o'er. In front of the great
       windows lay the wild moor, beautiful in desolation, framed in the silver sea,
      which, now at peace, sent up its multitudionous voices in a murmuring chorus that whispered
      things sweet and strange. The lady sank, and sank, and sank into deeper reverie. She listened
      to the echoes in her heart of all that had been in the past, began a sentence to let it fall
      unfinished, and mused upon the many days she had spent alone. She had been asked in
      marriage—by whom? By men whose birth and breeding, equal to her own, carried with it an
      outward semblance of perfection, but implied neither deep feeling nor elevated thought, nor
      enthusiasm for anything in earth or heaven except their free open-air life, their horses and
      dogs, their yachts in the Solent and rivers in Norway. Yes, she had not wanted suitors of a
      different kind either,—solemn-faced men, with brains as unpromising as Nimrod's, but whose
      narrow vision took in objects less picturesque; her father's friends, lay or clerical, who
      asked her to share their destiny and help to build schools in the East End, and churches at
      Earl's Court or Stoke Newington, to weave ecclesiastical garments according to the use of
      Sarum, and save mankind by acres of broadcloth fashioned into coats of the strictest
      orthodoxy.
She smiled at the notion; but her feeling was bitter enough. Riches, leisure, friends, the
      most delightful surroundings had been given her by Fortune. She was a great lady, to be envied
      and courted. But all these things were the embroidery of life; she wanted
       the simple greatness which comes of knowing and loving, not a gorgeous frame
      about the poor genre painting, which was all she had to show. How can a woman be
      noble, she asked herself, except by uniting her life to another which is governed by the
      highest thoughts? She could have devoted herself to a father, to a brother, if she had one,
      provided only he were intent on realising a great ideal. But her father's ideal? It did not
      tempt her. It was nothing but the digging up of old grave-clothes and multiplication of
      minutiæ; it was insular, parochial, sectarian. She had long felt that the controversies of
      little or no meaning which went on in her presence, and to which she was obliged to listen,
      were driving her in the opposite direction to her father; and, though she would not afflict
      him by disclosing what had taken place within her, she saw clearly that, perhaps for want of
      the right teacher, the religion in which she had been brought up had become to her merley a
      name. It gave her no principles, it had ceased to be the rule of her conduct. She longed for a
      light from Heaven; she did not remember that it sometimes leads astray. Unhappy she was and
      had been; dissatisfied, sick with longing for a world of which, in poem or romance, the
      outline was revealed like a cloud hanging steadfast, shining sun-bathed in the infinite blue.
      Was it all an impossible dream? Even so, she could not renounce it. To bend her gaze on the
      earth, and putting her hand into that of a man whose thoughts were fashioned of its gross
      elements; to
       travel on and on, over the barren moor, with no prospect before her but the
      waste and sundown, was to die ere her prime. She was resolved to drink of the fountain of
      life. She cared nothing for station, and heeded little of the world's judgment on those that
      descend. Unworthy she would not be, nor undutiful to her father. 'But I must live, I must
      live,'she often repeated when alone. To sit at the great banquet a spectator; to find every
      dish enchanted of which she desired to partake; to hear the music and not know its
      meaning,—this had been her martyrdom, and she could bear it no longer.
I cannot tell what might have befallen Lady May if the higher powers had shuffled the cards
      otherwise than they did, and not Glanville, but a person of less scrupulous delicacy had come
      across her in this despairing mood. To represent her as perfect would be pleasant to me; but
      she was not perfect; she was headstrong, passionate, imperious, and, from the absence of
      equally determined characters around her, she had, by long habit, become utterly independent
      of control. She loved her father dearly; but she was too clear-minded to regard his opinions
      with intellectual deference. And there was no one else. Her cousin, Tom Davenant, she looked
      upon as a man with the simplicity of a boy; he was her junior by six years, and the thoughts
      that vexed her would have been to him as unintelligible as the language of another planet. Did
      she want a chivalrous protector, he would have sprung to her aid; but she wanted no
       such thing; what she wanted was to go her own way. She guessed her cousin's
      mind; partly out of consideration for him she was now pausing on the path she had entered; but
      she did not mean to be affected by his generosity.
When her mother died, Lord Trelingham had thought it right to acquaint Mrs. Davenant with
      his resolution not to marry again. He wished Tom to know on what he might count in the future.
      Tom, who was then nineteen, sought an interview with the Earl, and with unspeakable confusion,
      but very decidedly, begged him so to arrange that the Trelingham estate might go to Lady May.
      It was a generous impulse, dictated by a good heart and ignorance of the legal impossibilities
      which stood in the way. The proposal could not be entertained. But Tom had gone further than
      Lady May was aware. The young man, finding one door shut, had tried another. He had asked Lord
      Trelingham to accept a proposal of marriage for his daughter, and to lay it before her when he
      should judge expedient. He had been brief and manly, saying little of his affection for Lady
      May, which, however, was apparent enough. He had consented to wait until he came of age; and,
      trusting implicitly in the Earl's honour, had quietly gone home and shot partridges. That
      something would be said to her when he was twenty-one, the lady surmised. She had, or soon
      would have, her answer ready.
For, wandering listlessly through the exhibitions of painting that make London a huge
      picture-gallery,
       she had been struck one day with a drawing of extraordinary breadth of power and
      splendid execution, to which corresponded in the catalogue the name of a young man who had
      leapt into fame at single bound some three years previously. For all description of the piece
      were a line and a half from Wordsworth—                      'Or lady of the mere, Sole
      sitting by the shore of old romance.' The rest of the gallery vanished from Lady May. She saw
      nothing but the wide woodland scene and the dim gray waters stretching away and away till no
      eye could follow, so distant was the gleam of the horizon, so many the foldings of the cloud
      which, with a flake of sunshine gilding it faintly, hung like a vision of dreams between sea
      and sky. There was something weird, ghostlike, unsatisfying in the appearance of that
      untenanted realm, where the elements reigned supreme, yet were themselves all
      unsubstantial—dim air, gray water, a hidden sun. But on the shore, her bare feet just touching
      the waves as they rolled indolently to where she sat, was a figure, so radiant with life and
      longing, of such exquisite shape and lovely countenance that the spectator drew back, as if
      intruding on a queen's privacy, yet was drawn again in wonder to the wistful eyes, full of an
      intense desire which sought and could not attain its object. It would be hard to express in
      language the contrast between that eager, throbbing life and the gray visions whereon it was
      feeding. Had but a
       youthful knight come breaking through the wild and careless brambles which
      closed her in on one side, or riding along the green forest path low down in the background on
      the other, it might have seemed that the artist was reproducing the old tale of Arthur and the
      brand Excalibur, given him by the lady of the mere. But there would come to this lady no King
      Arthur; she was beholding a vision unfulfilled— never, on any day, to be fulfilled. And yet
      how beauteous, how young a life, to be consumed in gazing, to be denied fruition! Lady May
      read the picture like her own story. She detected in it something which was not medieval, a
      kind of irony, bitter and sad, not intended by the poet when he wrote his magic verses, but
      perhaps of a deeper truth; for was not the romance he celebrated an idle thing, dedicating
      itself to sonnets and madrigals, and the ceremonies of the Court of Love? Behind its wan
      clouds the sun was shining, eclipsed only by them. 'Unsatisfied ideals,'she said, as she
      turned away; 'did the painter mean to warn us that Love can be contented only with Life, not
      with shadows?'
This picture was her book of Hours, her philosophy, for many a day. She lived in it; she saw
      its every detail, and could have drawn it from memory. As soon as her mind would let her, she
      begged Lord Trelingham to purchase the drawing; but it had made a great impression and was
      already sold. The intelligence grieved her like a personal loss, and she began to haunt the
      galleries where other works of
       Rupert Glanville's were on view. She had not been deceived in ranking him
      neither among the votaries of religious medievalism, nor with the school of sentimental
      landscape, so to call it, which has grown out of the study of the Middle Ages by men whose
      creed may be summed up in the words, 'Sin and be sad.'When Glanville chose a medieval subject,
      he treated it like one to whom larger worlds were known; he was free, ironical, and, as the
      critics said sometimes, joyously pagan. What he painted was full of life; life, running over
      at the brim, energetic, bold, adventurous, taking the infinite resources of existence for
      granted. But his pictures had in them nothing sensuous or over soft; they did not represent
      joy as the intoxication of a Silenus, still less did they affect the morbidezza , the
      pallid waxen tints which in their excessive refinement denote that the artist has sought
      beauty in decline and is enamoured of consumption. Glanville's art was healthy; one might
      almost have called it, to use the philosopher's jargon, optimist. But, as in the drawing which
      had first made him known to Lady May, so in all he painted, there were suggestions of the
      infinite unseen, the mysterious and strangely possible. He, too, it was apparent, sought and
      had not found. His ideal, like hers, was behind the clouds. She came unexpectedly on a small
      picture of his in a friend's drawing-room, and acknowledged, by the violence of her emotion,
      that she was falling in love with the unknown artist.
Did she think of subduing her passion, of putting
       away his remembrance? With all her force of character, and in spite of her wide
      attainment and unusual gifts, May Davenant was a very woman. She could do much; she could not
      forget, So, at least, she told her conscience when it warned her against caring about a man
      she had never seen. Might he not be low-born, ill-educated, anything but charming to look at?
      this worldly-wise conscience inquired. She did not believe it possible. No, his mind must be
      equal to his paintings; and what did the rest signify? His mind was himself; birth and
      appearance, good or ill, were but accessories. However, she would ask and be satisfied. Her
      father had a multitiude of friends in the world of art. She invited one of them to dinner, was
      very gracious to him in the drawing-room, and put her important questions among a sheaf of
      others, trivial, but sufficient to blind the deluded artist, who flattered himself that he was
      always welcome where ladies ruled. 'Did he know Glanville?'—'Oh yes, had met him several
      times; goodish sort of artist; made some lucky hits; was rather too deep for him, you
      know, but clever—decidedly.'—'Much in society?'—'A good deal, he should say; met him in the
      best houses, where he was a favourite; could tell capital stories, not too long; was not
      bad-looking; sang and played a little; fancied he came from somewhere on the Welsh
      border—Herefordshire, Shropshire, that way; had been told he was of good family, all extinct
      but himself; not a bad thing when one's family was all extinct
       but one's self, provided they mentioned one in their wills, ha, ha!'—'Rich, did
      he suppose?'—'Why, not, you know, rich, but landed proprietor, that sort of thing, etc.
      etc.'Lady May, having squeezed this sponge, left him dry, but not discontent, to the care of
      others; and told her conscience it might now keep quiet, which it did for a while, being
      terrified at a domineering way she sometimes used towards it. By and by it would take courage
      and speak again.
She might make his acquaintance, then, if she wished, and ask him to dinner, like his
      loquacious brother-artist? Yes, and then? How much was she likely to see or know of him in a
      London dining-room, or during a London season? She wanted more than that. He must be worthy of
      her friendship; nay, could she be certain that she was worthy of his?
She began to consider. Conscience, whispering maliciously somewhere within, hissed out, 'the
      Belle's Stratagem.' She laughed; she was in a good humour, and would see whether a stratagem
      were possible. Glanville must come to the house, must stay with them long enough to reveal his
      character as fully as she desired. How could it be accomplished? She had got so far in her
      meditation when Lord Trelingham came to her with the plans which various artists had submitted
      for decorating their Great Hall. Her father wanted the Arthurian legend painted on his walls,
      for it was a proud tradition that the Trelinghams were children of Uther. He had long meant
       to begin the work, and it was now high time, if he was to see it executed at
      all. The Great Hall, Arthur, Launcelot, the Lady of the Lake! It was all nature could do to
      stifle a cry. To hide her feelings May looked at the designs on the table. Not one but was
      inspired by the Idylls of the King —pretty, fantastic, old-faced, so to speak, but
      the only genius perceptible was Tennyson's. She swept them on one side. 'Mr. Glanville's is
      your artist, papa,'she boldly said. The Earl thought for a minute or two. He knew Mr.
      Glanville's productions well; strangely enough, he liked them. In design they were bold and
      clear; in execution, it was agreed on all hands, they were admirable. 'I will call on Mr.
      Glanville at his studio,' said the good man finally. When the door closed behind him, Lady May
      sank down trembling on her chair. What had she done?
This was the first of many interviews which Lord Trelingham held with Glanville, who never
      showed to such advantage as in adapting himself to men from whom he entirely differed. Valuing
      his own opinions too highly to bestow them on every chance comer, and not preaching them save
      by the indirect methods of art, the young man took pleasure in observing how variously the
      world appeared in other men's eyes; and he was therefore attentive to the Earl and charmed him
      in turn. To accept the commission, though brilliant, was another question. He did not want for
      money or fame; he hesitated to leave London for so many months as the task would
       demand; and he doubted that Lord Trelingham would enter into his conception of
      the cycle of the Morte d'Arthur , which was more rugged, primitive, and barbaric, but
      also of larger scope and nearer, as he believed, to the roots of life and reality, than the
      current interpretation. To his surprise, the formal ritualist did enter into his
      thought,—thanks very possibly to Mr. Truscombe, whose volume, then about to be published, had
      been seen by the Earl in manuscript, and whose sturdy realism had one element, at all events,
      in common with Glanville's more elevated historical views. Thus encountering no resistance
      where he had looked for it, and captivated by the mingled courtliness and good nature of the
      old man, Glanville consented to pay a visit to Trelingham, and, after seeing the Great Hall,
      to lay his designs (of which he drew out a lucid sketch) before him. He did not propose to
      call on the Earl in town; it was a busy time when his engagements stood six deep, and he must
      add to them if he intended an early departure. Lord Trelingham felt relieved. He had suggested
      to Lady May, after his first visit, that she should ask the artist to dinner, and she, a good
      deal to his surprise, had not exactly declined, but put it off, saying that it did not matter
      and they should have as much as they wanted of him in the country. It was a fancy on her part
      to begin their friendship away from London, in a less artificial atmosphere. The key-note of
      an acquaintance is so often struck in the first conversation, and
       how often wrong! Mr. Glanville would surely come to Trelingham; and, with a
      light heart, she delayed the dawn of a day whose varying fortunes she could by no means have
      guessed at. Resolute, however, she was in turning over this new leaf, that looked so fair in
      its gold-illumined border, of the book of her fate.
She would have blushed for shame had her intention pointed in the direction for which a
      hard, practical world would have given her credit. So rude and gross are the maxims upon which
      social arrangements are calculated that the motives of a lady, at the age of twenty-six, and
      still unmarried, who takes an interest in a young unmarried genius, seem even to the
      fair-minded, suspicious or self-evident. What can she want except to marry him? And there is
      much to be said for that view. Nevertheless, she does not always want to marry him; she may be
      seeking an object of admiration, of worship, which is not compatible at all times with
      marriage; or a friend to share her better thoughts; or simply a comrade whose amusing manners
      would be lost outside the circle of a numerous society by the domestic hearth. All this will
      be conceded by the philosopher who sees in life deeper problems than those of ordinary
      match-making; but even he, the wise observer, will shake his head when enthusiasm mounts so
      fast as it did in the bosom of Lady May. She, to her own seeming, had left behind her the
      'land of white and green,' the velvet-footed flower-besprinkled
       vally where youths and maidens choose one another; she was, and meant to
      continue, an 'old maid.' She did not call it the state of single blessedness; it was only not
      so miserable as would have been a life spent with any of the suitors that had come to her.
      What she did ask, had it ever been possible, was the 'marriage of true minds,' which is the
      inward grace of all outward union between man and woman. She dreamt now that in Rupert
      Glanville was such a true mind as she had hitherto sought in vain; but the time of marriage
      was past. With a sigh she looked back, and once more the land of white and green, the daisies
      and fresh springing grass, had melted into reminiscences of early youth. Glanville was
      unwedded; but he might still be her friend, and teach her something better than to feed on
      romance.
I daresay the reader will experience some contempt for Lady May, on hearing that a
      friendship like this, pitched just right between high and low, appeared in her eyes a state of
      life to which she and Glanville might be called. And yet she thought so. Inbred modesty would
      have forbidden her to take steps towards securing a lover; but how could it interfere with her
      winning a friend? Conscience, perplexed, though not entirely convinced, lay down to sleep
      again. The sacred epochs of fashion were passing quickly by. Lord Trelingham, who usually
      observed these times and seasons as he did Easter and Saints'-days,—although he never had
      witnessed a
       horse-race or owned a yacht,—went down early with Lady May to his country-seat,
      and summoned Mr. Truscombe to advise him in the selection of historic scenes for the Great
      Hall. Rupert Glanville likewise, as if he were acting of his own free will, and there were no
      Lady May in existence, took his ticket for Yalden on a certain morning, and, in so doing,
      burnt his ships. There was no going back the same man that he came.
Thus, at the end of a month, we find these two in the picture-gallery: Rupert, master of
      himself, uncertain whether he cares for the lady, certain that he does not care with any
      overwhelming passion; and she already doubting whether to bind herself to friendship and
      nothing beyond, or yield to this new absorbing influence which is wrapping her all round in
      its golden haze. To yield? But, if he should think of her only a friend, would it not be
      planting a dagger in her bosom, never to be withdrawn? He was courteous, attentive, full of
      pleasant wisdom, open as the day. He would have been a perfect brother. Was that the whole of
      it? She longed and feared and grew uneasy, and could find no rest. She knew, what Rupert,
      being only a man, was not likely to perceive, that Karina Lutenieff watched them; that she
      would have encouraged, had she dared, an affection which to her meant the surrender, by her
      cousin, of Tom Davenant. When the Countess spoke in the drawing-room about Lady May's giving
      up the dignity of cousinhood, she was moved by a
       mischievous desire to irritate all three who were sitting there. She had said,
      petulantly enough, when the gentlemen left, that it was a shame Lady May did not at once
      refuse Tom Davenant, since she seemed not to care for him. And Lady May had answered, 'Will
      you not allow me to wait till I am asked?' For though the Countess was afraid, and her cousin
      suspected, that something would occur on Mr. Davenant's coming of age, neither of them knew of
      his having already made a proposal in set terms.
There were moments, during these days of bewilderment and growing trouble, when Lady May, as
      she sat listening to Rupert, seemed to catch glimpses of a nobler order of things, where
      friendship and not love should be the primal element,—rifts in her golden haze through which
      the pure heavens were seen like unchanging sapphire, a great, free, illimitable world,
      passionless, tranquil, clear as the morning dawn. They came when he spoke of the artist's
      enthusiasm, of his yearning to express the unseen beauty which haunted his steps and whispered
      in his ear, and vanished so soon as he turned his head to look upon her. Or again, when he
      descanted on the secret loveliness of landscape, its infinite meanings, its mysterious
      half-tones, its silent touches lulling the spirit to rest, on the lapse of streams and the
      glory of foaming waters. While he forgot himself in speaking, she, in her rapt attention, saw
      the earthly vanish and themselves entering into a unity of which all the love we know is but a
      trembling shadow.
       And he spoke of history, of the old classic times, of religion, not as a man
      largely-informed indeed, but as a true artist, whose eye sees things in their grouping and
      judges them by the law of the beautiful. It was the high world she had longed to dwell in. How
      could she think of marriage if this were not the heart of it, the gold that made it precious?
      She grew ashamed now, though never before, humbled at the remembrance of what passionate
      desires she had allowed to come between her and the unsullied light. She would be worthy of
      him, of his large thoughts and heroic aims; for did he not make of his profession a heroism?
      After a morning spent like this, she went about her household tasks with an air of gentleness,
      a countenance so clear and eyes so washed in heavenly dews, that the Earl, moved to admiration
      of he knew not what that was exquisite about her, would say smilingly, 'You have put on your
      angel's face to-day, my dear; why don't you wear it always for our delight?'
Alas! she could not. Rupert himself was not always soaring on eagle's wing. He could be
      melancholy and dispirited; he was sometimes worn out with fatigue of which he rendered no
      account; for, as I have said, he united to a most winning frankness a reserve that none,
      except Ivor Mardol, attempted to break into. He was unequal, changeable, or, in his friend's
      complimentary phrase, iridescent. Trifles irritated him when serious misfortunes left him
      tranquil. He could be touchy at a
       word; and although in Lady May's presence he never displayed temper, it was not
      difficult to perceive that many things tried him. Some afternoons he would make an excuse for
      strolling out alone, and, going down to the boat-house, unmoor the skiff, leap into it, row
      across to Ivor sitting philosophically in the verandah of his hermitage, and running up the
      water-steps like a man pursued, fling himself down on the sofa in Ivor's study, and lie there
      silent till the bell summoned him to dinner. He returned, for the most part, in good though
      not exuberant spirits, and said not a syllable of where he had been or what doing since last
      they saw him. Trelingham was a pleasant house to stay at; for its owner possessed the
      hospitable grace of providing all things for your amusement and never asking whether you had
      availed yourself of them.
But these imperfections, proving that the serene spirit was human, had more danger for Lady
      May than their joint expeditions in quest of the Ideal. From pity to love is an easy step. She
      admired, she pitied, she began, despite her interest in the higher friendship, if we may call
      it so, to love. And mark, reader, for I must tell you the truth as I know it, she felt that,
      in so doing, she was descending; she did not admire her love, but yielded to it as a disease.
      I have heard say that falling in love is like falling asleep; it implies a quiescent, not an
      active will. So was it with Lady May. She felt herself falling asleep; her better resolutions
      melted away; her fear of consequences
       changed to an impetuous hope. The angel-face did not return so often; the golden
      haze thickened and shut out the sapphire. She began to long for an acknowledgment of affection
      from Glanville, as a fevered man longs for the cooling water. She would die rather than speak;
      surely she was no Countess Lutenieff to blazon her feelings before friends and strangers; but
      how slow the minutes moved until that draught was handed her? She kept her secret with an
      agony like the young Spartan's who felt the gnawing of the fox under his cloak and would not
      cry out though his vitals were torn. Had men so little perception when a woman was suffering?
      But could he return her love merely because she suffered? No, she would not have it in such a
      shape, on such conditions; she would wait and think of that higher world, and—and if nothing
      came of it, well, she could die. The lady of the lake seated by the dim gray waters, looking
      on the infinitely unfolding cloud, flecked with faint sunshine, the impenetrable thicket on
      one side of her, the deserted path away in the green forest behind her;—all the picture came
      back as when first she saw it, and the same feeling of desolation. Its irony was prophetic,
      its meaning likely to be fulfilled in her own life with which she was now making a last and
      desperate experiment.
Timid though she felt in approaching a subject that might betray her emotion, she could not
      refrain one morning from the inquiry what his meaning was in that composition. He asked her in
      turn, as was
       not unusual with him, to give him an account of it; whether it seemed to aim at
      anything except describing in colour what the poet had described in words. She was dreadfully
      embarrassed, and wished she had not spoken. In a low voice, hesitating at every sentence, she
      faltered out her surmises, her probably mistaken opinion, that it implied rather a longing for
      the unattainable than perfect joy in the realms of romance. Glanville, not laying aside his
      brush while she spoke, gave her a look of contentment from time to time, and said, when she
      could keep her voice no longer under control and took refuge in silence, 'I did not think to
      have made the meaning so clear. Either you have a quick discernment or my parable was plainly
      written. Yes, I did endeavour to convey an ironical suggestion that the beauty of old romance
      was deceptive, and less akin to the truth of existence, of the perfect ideal existence which
      it ought to be our aim to enjoy, than were the ghostly mere and its phantasmagoria of clouds
      to the creative sun. But,' he went on, 'you did not, perhaps, gather a second meaning I had
      put into the parable. That beautiful lady, who is all desire and wistfulness, seems to be
      passing idly through her hands the golden hair which has fallen down over breast and
      shoulders, while upon her knees lies the magic wand, forgotten. She understands, though
      dreamily, that she is beautiful; she has the rod of life within her grasp. But, charmed by the
      fantastic visions that pass along the sky, she sits
       entranced; and her beauty and her magic are of no avail. Were she but to rise
      and strike the waters, how marvellous a change would come over them! For she is the queen, not
      the slave of romance; it is for her that its realms were created, and all its uncertain
      glories do but reflect in weak sentimental imaginations, like those of
      children,knight-errants, and medieval troubadours, the fulness of her life. I have painted a
      second picuture, where the dreaming fay remembers that once upon a time she was the Lady
      Venus, the mother of the living and the delightful goddess. For, as you know, these
      mythologies are all pretty nearly identical in meaning. During the Middle Ages life and beauty
      lay under a spell; they were bewitched and all things with them. To strike into the depth of
      existence and fling one's sails upon every breeze, confident that shipwreck in the infinite
      was not possible,—do you think the boldest medieval spirit would have ventured it?'
'And can you believe,' she said, raising her countenance to his, 'that shipwreck is not
      possible? You often speak as though the supreme law were the law of beauty. Granting that,
      indeed, we need not fear to go upon the rocks.' But, in her own mind, she was far from
      granting it.
Rupert did not answer immediately. His thoughts went back to Colonel Valence and that
      forlorn afternoon in the churchyard. He seemed to hear the sad yet mocking tone in which
      Valence declared existence a universal shipwreck; and it gave him pause. Too
       large-minded to call a possibility in question because it was disagreeable, he
      preferred not to dwell upon it. After a while he answered gravely: 'There seems to be a
      controversy between the artists and the philosophers on this point, witness my friend Ivor
      Mardol and me. He does not pronounce all things evil, nor do I say they are at their best;
      nevertheless, I could not paint if I believed that beauty was less than the sovereign law. And
      he speaks of expiation, the tragic Nemesis, and I know not what.'
'Then you hope the best,' she said, 'although you see it nowhere realised. The lady of the
      mere is dreaming still; but she may awaken and with a stroke of her wand restore our lost
      ideals?'
'Yes,' he cried; 'I subscribe to that creed, on one condition.'
'What is it?' she asked anxiously.
'Let it be whispered in her ear that she is dreaming. We are near waking, it has been said,
      when we dream that we dream.'
'You would imply something I do not quite understand.'
'Well, then, so long as fantastic visions abuse her eyes she cannot resist them, because
      they are all her world. Let her see, however faintly, a different ideal; in comparing them
      both she will wake to perfect reason.'
Lady May sank back into her chair and meditated. The unreal vision was love which pined in
      secret and called forth no response. The reasonable union
       between herself and Rupert Glanville could only be friendship, if she saw a way
      to keep it as intimate as now it was becoming. But no way presented itself. He would marry and
      forget her. She must return to a lonely life. The days ran on; there was little change in
      them. And while her own countenance gazed upon her from the canvas, she beheld only the
      enchanted fay, her eyes full of wistfulness, looking out upon dim waters, upon a mist of weary
      sunshine, and a world of dreams. Would she ever awaken?

