
CHAPTER XXIV MANIBUS DATE LILIA PLENIS
When Rupert returned to Trelingham he found many things changed, nor was the
      prevailing tone similar to that which had struck him on his first arrival. One may truly say,
      with the French proverb, that love had passed that way; and though its effects were not
      visible on the surface, they were none the less real. Tom Davenant, twice foiled in his
      endeavour to make his cousin the heiress of her father's property, was gone; nor did it appear
      when he would return, if ever, during Lord Trelingham's lifetime. He was now in London with
      his mother, desperately uncertain what to do next, and projecting an expedition to South
      America or the Rocky Mountains as soon as he could light upon a companion. His absence, silent
      and shy though the young man had been, left a perceptible gap; to be with him, Rupert said,
      was as good as daily bread; it was wholesome and nourishing, although you could not detect a
      particular flavour in
       it. But he could no longer be reckoned a member of that household. Lady May did
      not mention him. The Earl was equally reticent. Other guests came and went; it was not a
      lonely place; but among them Rupert saw none to attract him, and he was not disposed to
      cultivate them from motives of worldly interest. He threw himself into his task, which had
      been neglected for so many summer days. He was up early and late, dined by himself as often as
      at the Earl's table, excused his solitude on the plea that he had devoured all his leisure
      while away, and lived on Hippolyta's letters, which came regularly every morning, forty-eight
      hours after they were written. For they had to be taken in and re-addressed at his London
      house.
One person had remained at the Court whom he heartily wished a thousand miles off; but she
      had apparently her own reasons for staying. I need not say that it was the Countess Lutenieff.
      In former days she had taken hardly more notice of him than of 'the mechanic,' Ivor Mardol.
      She now greeted him ostentatiously, came with her light insouciant manner into the
      Great Hall, tripped about on the scaffolding to the imminent risk of her own neck, and was, in
      short, much in his way. Rupert had not the brusque address of some great artists; he could not
      be rude to a lady (unless, Hippolyta would have interposed, he happened to be very much in
      love with her), and he was vexed by the presence and the babble of the Countess without
      knowing how to
       get rid of either. Lady May did not come so often. Her manner, too, was changed.
      She looked at him as much as ever, but she spoke less; and their confidences on both sides
      seemed to be at an end. She would stand and watch him painting. If he expressed a wish that
      anything, however slight, should be altered in his room, or in the hours at which the workmen
      came or went, though it were a passing fancy and he had not dreamt of its being seriously
      regarded, still the alteration was made, the wish was carried out. He felt uncomfortable; but
      with his sense of obligation, which would not rise to gratitude, was mingled a feeling of
      pity. He was quick enough now to perceive how intense and lasting was the passion which ruled
      in Lady May. What would happen when she came to know the truth, or, at least, as much of it as
      the world should ever be acquainted with? She and Hippolyta could never meet again; their
      paths had crossed once, and once only, then each had gone her way. And he was moving, and
      should ever move, on the path of Hippolyta. How would the Earl's daughter regard their union,
      which would of course to her have the semblance of marriage? All depended probably on how it
      came to her ears. Meanwhile Rupert, wholly delivered from the fancy that she had touched his
      affection, was so calm, so cold, and so civil, that to one less bent on conquering him the
      task which May Davenant had undertaken would have seemed desperate. Either he was inaccessible
      by nature, or the conquest was already made—by another. She did not appear
       to think so. She was wary, attentive, engrossed, letting not a hint escape from
      her, and watching every expression on his countenance, every slightest accident in the day's
      proceedings. Rupert felt that it was so; it gave him a great deal of occupation and made
      existence at Trelingham a penalty. He was not likely to be drawn away from Hippolyta by such
      an Argus-eyed creature. But he wished there were a Hermes to send her to sleep with his
      magic-wand.
Among other difficulties, one, which naturally presented itself to a lover, was that of
      visiting Falside, where he wished to consecrate by devout pilgrimage all the haunts of
      Hippolyta, making his memory identical with hers and taking to himself the past which she had
      lived without him. Should he go or not go? It was a serious question. At length he resolved to
      break the ice. The two ladies and he were standing aloft on a broad scaffold, in front of that
      picture representing Tristram and Iseult, which as a tableau vivant had stirred
      Hippolyta's jealousy. Rupert, touching the burnished gold of the chalice with his brush, and
      keeping his eyes on the fresco, said casually, 'I think I shall ride to Falside when I have
      done this piece of the day's work.'
'To Falside?' exclaimed the Countess, looking aside at Lady May. 'Oh, of course, to go on
      with your landscape, which, by the bye, we have never seen. What a pity it is that such a
      picturesque little demesne should be left in the charge of a couple of old servants!
       It might as well belong to a ghost or a dead man as to Colonel Valence, who is
      never at home.'
'But Miss Valence takes care of it,' said Rupert, always with his brush in his hand, intent
      on the shading of the chalice. He kept good control over his voice.
'Dear me!' cried Karina, now looking straight at Lady May and addressing her, 'how odd that
      Mr. Glanville should not know that Miss Valence has disappeared from Falside!'
'Disappeared!' said the artist boldly. 'What do you mean, Countess? Is that a term of
      romance for something very ordinary?'
'Ordinary or extraordinary,' she replied, 'it is true. A few days after you went to
      London—when was it, May?' interrupting herself suddenly.
'When was what?' said Lady May. 'I can't help you to an answer if you break off in the
      middle of a sentence.' She was blushing, and the plank on which she stood trembled.
Rupert put out his arm to keep her from falling, and drew her from the edge of the scaffold.
      'Take care, Lady May,' he said; 'there is always danger of accident when people begin talking
      up in the air like this. They forget that they are not on the ground.'
'Thank you,' she said in a low voice, coming nearer to the fresco. She was angry at having
      betrayed her motion. 'Well, Karina,' she said, recovering herself, 'what were you saying?'

'I was telling Mr. Glanville that Miss Valence had quitted Falside unexpectedly about a week
      after Cousin Tom's birthday; and that she did not inform us, in the brief note we received,
      either of her destination or of the causes which led to her sudden departure.'
There was a certain ill-natured emphasis in these formal words which amused Rupert. He
      thought himself quite a match for Madame de Lutenieff. So he laughed and answered, 'I did not
      know you were so much in Miss Valence's confidence. Has she been in the habit of notifying her
      movements and their motives to her feminine acquaintance? And has she really gone?'
'We were not mere acquiantance,' retorted Karina; 'you may remember, Sir Artist, how anxious
      she was to be received at Trelingham. One might have supposed it was the chief object of her
      life. And no sooner is she free of the house, than she vanishes into space without a word of
      explanation either to my cousin or to me, although we were both devotedly fond of her.'
'Don't exaggerate, Karina,' said Lady May from her place near Rupert; 'you were as fond of
      her as you would be of a new plaything for three days and a half; if she had not gone you
      would have got tired and found another plaything before long. As for me, I never pretended to
      be enthusiastic about Miss Valence. Her wish to put an end to the misunderstanding between
      papa and Colonel Valence was no doubt
       amiable. But I could not care for a young lady who held her principles.'
'What sort of principles?' inquired Rupert. He did not feel much attracted to Lady May while
      she was speaking. She to scorn Hippolyta! It was well for both that he knew how to hold his
      tongue.
'Oh, dangerous principles enough,' she answered. 'I do not know that I can or ought to
      describe them; but you may imagine that Colonel Valence would not teach his daughter the
      maxims of English society.'
'Now you are exaggerating,' interrupted the Countess; 'they were not English
      maxims, I grant. But they were romantic. Do you think, Mr. Glanville,' she went on, 'that
      there is no morality out of England? Miss Valence, my cousin, and I had a famous dispute on
      that subject before she went. I agreed with Miss Valence, and we were set down by Lady May as
      exceedingly naughty. Were we not, May?'
'You misrepresent me,' her cousin answered, 'and you are doing injustice to Miss Valence.
      But I have no particular pleasure in discussing her views, even if I fully understood them. I
      am not sorry she has left Falside for what may prove a long time. It was a dangerous and
      difficult connection, as I saw at the beginning. Not indeed,' she hastened to add, 'that any
      one was to blame, except Colonel Valence for bringing up his daughter on such a system. I am
      glad we visited her, and glad the acquaintance is probably over.'

'Did Miss Valence write that she should be away a long while?' asked Rupert.
The Countess replied, 'She spoke of leaving Falside and being uncertain whether she should
      return. It was a short note—two or three lines in haste, that was all.'
'Something connected with her father's plans, perhaps,' said Rupert; 'he is a great
      traveller.' It was necessary to find out whether the Countess suspected anything.
'And a great conspirator,' said Madame de Lutenieff. 'I should like to know him. What an
      entertaining history he must have lived through, always plotting and going about in disguise
      for thirty or forty years, like the villain in a play! But we don't know whether Miss Valence
      followed him from home. She may have gone off with one of those dark Italians that used to be
      seen at Falside. We did fancy, just for a moment,' pursued this hare-brained young lady—'but
      of course it was only a joke—that she was not altogether indifferent to—to—' she stopped and
      looked across at Lady May. But no help came from that quarter. Rupert felt the blood mounting
      in his cheeks.
'Go on, Countess,' he said resolutely; 'you don't finish your sentences this morning.' His
      tone of calm indifference disconcerted Madame de Lutenieff, who could not see his face.
'Oh, it was all nonsense,' she said with less spirit than usual; 'but in the country people
      have nothing
       to do except to invent stories about their friends. When you left the Court,
      instead of waiting till Cousin Tom's festival was over, and Miss Valence went away in a hurry,
      I said to Lady May that perhaps it had been arranged when you were dancing at the dress ball.
      But don't be wrathful, Mr. Glanville,' for he had now turned round with the brush in his hand;
      'I am never serious, you know, and I meant no harm.'
'Make your mind easy, Countess,' replied the artist; 'I am not likely to be wrathful over a
      little bit of romance, if I may apply the word as Lady May did just now. When Miss Valence
      left the ball to meet her father, I had no more notion that she would be quitting Falside in a
      week than you had. Less, perhaps. And you cannot guess whither she has gone?'
'Not in the least,' said Karina, somewhat crestfallen. She had not shaken Rupert's
      equanimity; nor was she further advanced on the subject of his relations to Hippolyta. But
      there was something else to be attempted, and Lady May's leaving the Great Hall when their
      conversation reached this point gave her the opportunity she longed for. With that engaging
      openness which, from being really a part of her character, had been submitted without
      difficulty to cultivation, and was now a weapon of attack and defence, she contrived to let
      Rupert know that Tom Davenant had proposed for his cousin's hand, but with the unexpected
      result which has been already chronicled. 'Unexpected,' went on the innocent Countess, 'for I
      need not tell you, Mr. Glanville, that Lady May has thereby
       surrendered, if I should not rather say forfeited, the most splendid prospect.
      She would have been Countess of Trelingham; she would have continued to live in the home of
      her childhood, and to have the control of this great property. But I do not blame her, oh no,'
      she exclaimed with pathetic fervour; 'I can guess the reason, and I admire the constancy with
      which she has resisted temptation.' Her eyes, though not capable of a deep expression, were
      searching the artist through and through.
He answered coolly, 'I suppose the reason is not hard to guess. Lady May did not care
      sufficiently for her cousin, who, if I am not impertinent in saying so, is one of the noblest
      young men I have come across.' He was returning good for evil, and the Countess smiled. Praise
      of her preux chevalier always melted her.
'Come,' she said, 'let us be friends, Mr. Glanville. I see you do not bear malice. You are
      right in supposing that Lady May does not care for my Cousin Tom. Shall I be indiscreet if I
      tell you that that is only half the reason?' And her eyes gleamed brightly.
'I should be indiscreet, perhaps,' was his answer, partly serious and partly ironical, 'if I
      allowed one lady to betray the thoughts of another; although they do say that is a way they
      have.'
'For shame, for shame!' she said. 'I shall tell you nothing now, and yet you are dying to
      hear.' She waited, but he would give her no encouragement.
'I am dying to finish my morning's work,' at last he said. It was hardly courteous, but why
      would she
       linger there? He went resolutely at his fresco again.
The Countess thought a little while before setting her foot on the ladder by which she had
      come up; and then, with a mischievous smile, said to him, 'I see all your ambition lies in
      your art. It is very natural, as I can testify, being a sort of artist myself. But should it
      ever take another direction, not quite so lofty, and yet loftier, come to me for information.'
      With which enigmatic sentence she descended to the floor of the Hall and went out.
Glanville, I am sorry to say, was anything but grateful; and his comments, delivered under
      his breath as he went on painting, would have astonished Madame de Lutenieff. For, though
      dissatisfied with her partial success, she had the witness of a good conscience, and would not
      have minded explaining to a female confidante the line of conduct she had pursued. There was
      only one rival in Mr. Tom Davenant's affections whom she feared, and that was Lady May. So
      long as his cousin remained single, Tom was capable of renewing his offer. Were she married,
      or engaged, and out of the way, Karina trusted that the young man would have eyes for her own
      attractions, which were not inconsiderable. She had almost convinced herself that Lady May was
      in love with the artist; that passionate scene in which Hippolyta had said so little and Lady
      May had been so vehement was ever present to her fancy; and in the hope of a further
      unravelling of the
       threads she, instead of following Mrs. Davenant and her son to London, had
      waited for Rupert's return. It was all important that he should know the offer had been made
      and rejected. She would help him to one of the most accomplished and stately of brides. It was
      of no consequence that Lady May would have to stoop a little in order to marry him, but of the
      utmost that he should understand she was there, waiting for him to fall on one knee and demand
      her hand. The Earl would not refuse, and the great danger would be averted. So the Countess
      reasoned, not foolishly from her point of view. It was a misfortune that Rupert would not
      accept her confidence, and that Lady May would endure no reference, on her part, to Rupert.
      How absurdly stiff and straitlaced was the morality of English people! Even that daring Miss
      Valence had shown extreme reserve in their last interview at Falside, and was now departed on
      an errand which might have some romance in it, but would be sure after all to end, as English
      stories did, with perfect propriety. Karina sighed; she was not made for this dull realm. She
      hoped, when the time came, she should persuade Tom to live abroad; not so much at Paris—Paris
      was not itself under the Third Republic—but at Vienna, Venice, Naples, with an interval once
      in a way at Monte Carlo. The Countess did not play, but she took great pleasure in looking on
      while others played.
The development of the drama which she desired
       to see at Trelingham was, however, interrupted a few days later. The Earl, never
      very strong, had been ailing for some time, and his physicians, after consultation, ordered
      him to take the waters at Schwalbach. He was unwilling to go, but they threatened him with the
      consequences; and Lady May, who was really and devotedly attached to her father, added her
      persuasion. She would of course accompany him. The Countess thought she might join them later
      on; and, as Glanville declared that he fully entered into Lord Trelingham's mind on the
      subject of the decorations, and would write frequently and give ample details of the progress
      of the work, it was decided that a move should be made. Thus the artist and Mr. Truscombe
      would be lords of the domain during his absence; but on Glanville's suggesting that he must
      occasionally quit the Court for other engagements, Lord Trelingham begged him to use all the
      freedom he might wish. It had been stipulated at the beginning that Rupert should take a fair
      time over the work and not hurry. When, therefore, he had been some three weeks at the Court,
      and his impatience to see Hippolyta again was reaching a feverish height, they all, to his
      infinite content, bade him farewell one fine morning. That afternoon he rode to Falside, and,
      winning admittance to the library, wrote thence a glowing epistle to Mrs. Malcolm, in which he
      rejoiced over his new-found liberty, and promised to be at Forrest House within the week.

He kept his word. Three days of unalloyed happiness passed like a flash of summer-lightning,
      lambent, swift, and beautiful. It seemed to Rupert that Hippolyta had subdued her melancholy.
      She was adorably candid and child-like, full of pretty fancies and loving conceits, reluctant
      to let him go, yet comforted with the hope of their union for good and all when the next few
      months were over. She had found occupation in gardening, and her list of the neighbouring poor
      was beginning to fill. Had she gone near an infected house, or exposed herself to danger? No,
      she answered laughingly; there was no infection within three miles. She had attended one
      sick-bed, and meant to attend it still, for it had gained her a pleasant intimacy. Further the
      story did not go. Rupert, too much in love with Hippolyta to hear all she said, hardly waited
      for the end of the sentence, but was bursting out, in the manner of happy mortals, with
      praises of her generosity and declarations of his unalterable affection. He went back to
      Trelingham more in love than ever; and if he did not yield to home-sickness now, it was by
      dint of incessant occupation.
The story which he would not let Hippolyta finish was pretty in its way. At Falside she had
      taken pleasure in her garden, and with help from Andres— who loved her as if he had been her
      mastiff, and took more care of her than she knew—the flower-beds had flourished gaily, and the
      wilderness above and below the cascade had blossomed like the rose.
       It was only to be expected that she should turn to the flowers again for
      consolation when Rupert went away. There was much to be done in the garden of Forrest House,
      for it had been neglected somewhat since Miss Foljambe's death. But the more there was to do
      the more Hippolyta was pleased; and every morning saw her in a costume that the work would not
      spoil, and in gardening gloves, engaged in weeding and trimming borders, and bringing back the
      straggling plants into some sort of order. The variety of flowers was unusual, and among them
      were lilies of all kinds, with many old-fashioned bulbs, tulips and hyacinths, which had been
      preserved in the greenhouse with more care than the rest. Hippolyta wanted no help; but, for
      the rougher tasks, she might obtain it from the man who looked after the stables— a kind of
      miscellaneous groom and ostler, who did not sleep on the premises.
She was alone in the garden, then, one pleasant forenoon, binding up some long creepers
      which had trailed over a bed of calceolarias, when the housekeeper, good Mrs. Leeming, came to
      her with a request. Might the gardener next door speak to her? 'Next door?' inquired
      Hippolyta; 'do you mean at the church?' Mrs. Leeming meant at the church, if it was giving no
      offence. 'None in the world,' said her mistress; 'why should it?' Well, the housekeeper did
      not know, but some people were set against Roman Catholics. Not Miss Foljambe, to be sure;
      that charitable lady had a kind word for
       all the world. And that was why the gardener came. 'Let him come now, then,'
      said Mrs. Malcolm, who had not learnt to tolerate servants' long stories. The housekeeper
      beckoned to a man that, during their short colloquy, had been standing at the gate. He came
      forward and took off his hat respectfully. He was a fine-looking man of about forty, tall and
      well made, with a clear glance in his gray eyes, and a good address. The housekeeper said,
      'Now, Mr. Dauris, tell Mrs. Malcolm what you want,' which introduction over, she discreetly
      retired.
Mr. Dauris, thus encouraged, and still more by the expression on Hippolyta's countenance,
      which was invariably gentle and sympathetic when she came across any of her own class, as she
      called them, said that he had made bold to come, now Forrest House was let, to beg for some
      flowers to decorate the altars in St. Cyprian's, of which he was gardener and sacristan.
      'But,' he added, 'there is not much of a garden, only narrow strips on the other side of the
      building, and in a shady corner down by the lane where hardly anything will grow.' He spoke
      perfectly correct English, without accent either provincial or of Bow Bells, and was indeed
      one of the many working men that know their native tongue, and are proud of it.
Two sentences were enough to interest Hippolyta. 'You would like me to give you some flowers
      for your church? I will, with pleasure,' she answered; 'but the garden is in a rather backward
      condition.
       Look round and tell me what will suit you best.' He thanked her; and as she
      walked to the greenhouse, with Mr. Dauris a little way behind, she considered whether he could
      not tell her something of the neighbourhood and the sick poor whom she was minded to take in
      charge. She put the question to him.
'Yes, indeed,' he answered, 'I know most of the poor about here. But it is not exactly a
      poverty-stricken place. On this side, along the Hill, you will not find any. You must cross
      the market and go down into the small streets beyond it, which are beginning to be crowded
      worse than I remember them. Our own people live there mostly. But it doesn't matter which door
      you open; you will find suffering and sin inside. The fathers at St. Cyprian's are there day
      and night; and I often hear them say that they can do no good. I don't wonder at it, seeing
      how the people are compelled to live.'
'No, nor do I,' said Hippolyta sorrowfully. And she was abiding within these golden gates,
      with every luxury at command, a garden and a palace to afford her pleasure at all hours, and
      neither care nor trouble! How were these things to be reconciled? She must not dwell on them.
      It could do no good just then.
'What made you come to me for flowers?' she asked, by way of turning the conversation, while
      she cut the best she could find.
Mr. Dauris, taking with a smile the bunch she
       held out to him, answered, 'I thought you might be like Miss Foljambe, who was
      very good to us and sent in flowers every Saturday for the Lady altar. She was not a Catholic;
      but she used to say that flowers were of God's religion, and could do nothing but good to
      anybody.'
'She was very right,' exclaimed Hippolyta, pleased with this saying of the lady in whose
      shadow she dwelt all day. It was like making her acquaintance, though dead. 'She was very
      right, indeed. A Spanish poet says, "Flowers are the thoughts of everlasting love." I will
      send you some for the Lady altar every Saturday; and lest I should forget, will you come to me
      next Saturday morning?'
'I shall be much pleased to do so,' replied the gardener, going away. 'But I beg your
      pardon,' he resumed, in a less cheerful tone, 'next Saturday I must take my poor wife, if she
      is well enough, to the infirmary'—he named one at a distance—'where the doctors have promised
      to see what they can do for her.'
'Is your wife very ill, then?' inquired Hippolyta. 'You did not mention her when I was
      asking you about the sick in the neighbourhood.'
'She has been ill this long while,' he said; 'but we are not in want, thank God. I earn a
      good income as a gardener—not here at St. Cyprian's,' he continued smiling, 'the fathers could
      not afford it; but a few doors down when you pass Church Lane. Our cottage is at the end of
      the lane.'

'But I should like very much to be of service to your wife, if I could,' said Hippolyta
      eagerly. 'What is the matter with her?'
'We call it a weak chest; but I am afraid it is more serious. The doctor tells me—however, I
      keep it from my wife, so please don't mention it, for fear it should frighten her—that one
      lung is quite gone and the other affected. She is obliged to lie down a good deal with pains
      in her head and back.'
'Poor thing, poor thing,' exclaimed Hippolyta; 'how sad for you both! Have you any
      children?'
'Two little boys,' he answered, 'and a girl. Annie is grown up, she is seventeen.'
'And is she at home? She ought to be a good help to her mother.'
'She is generally at home,' was the reply. 'She has been in service, but we did not like it
      for her. It was in a lady's house near Dorset Square.' The tone in which he spoke implied some
      dissatisfaction, either with Annie or with domestic service in general.
'Well, I am glad you have told me,' said Hippolyta; 'and do you think Mrs. Dauris would like
      me to come and see her?'
'Surely she would, if you were so kind; and I should like it too. But we are not in want of
      anything, thank God,' he repeated, 'and we would not take your time from those that are.'
'Oh, I will find time,' she answered cheerfully; 'may I come this afternoon, or will it be
      too soon? I could come to-morrow, in that case.'

'I will tell my wife at dinner-time,' he said, 'and you will be welcome at any hour. In the
      afternoon she does not suffer so much from headache.'
It was arranged accordingly. The gardener took his flowers and withdrew; and Hippolyta,
      roused at the anticipation of having an object for her benevolence, went on weeding and
      pruning with great animation. She did not know how tired she had been all this while of living
      like the sleeping beauty in the wood, alone in Elfland, with nothing to do, and her prince
      travelling in the distance or painting pictures at Trelingham Court. She ate her luncheon with
      more appetite, and counted the minutes till it was time for walking out. Mr. Dauris had told
      her how to find the cottage. It was less than a quarter of a mile from Forrest House, at the
      end of the rambling lane which led by the side of St. Cyprian's, and past detached dwellings
      with large gardens between them, into the more open country. Rupert and Hippolyta had driven
      that way once, but she had not observed the gardener's little house, although it might have
      drawn the attention of a lover of flowers, for it was embowered in honeysuckle and
      clematis.
She did not go there direct, but wandered about the countrified paths, under the shade of
      the great trees which made all that neighbourhood pleasant. Her thoughts were not sombre, as
      they had been. The conviction of fearless innocence, which in other days had allowed her to
      roam unattended, with
       Fancy for her sole companion, was strong within her. It was early in the
      afternoon, and the sun and the flowers were equally brilliant, when she stopped at the
      cottage-gate. She saw in front of her a two-storied house, standing back from the gravel
      pathway, on the edge of a triangular piece of turf which represented, no doubt, a more
      extensive village-green, now discommoned and taken in by the private dwellings scattered
      around. In front of Mr. Dauris's cottage were garden-beds, abounding in well-assorted hues,
      and, as was evident, carefully tended. The little porch in the middle was overrun with
      clematis; and when Hippolyta arrived the door stood open, giving a view of the passage beyond,
      with its strip of cocoanut matting. The green palings matched the green shutters, made like
      Venetian blinds, which adorned the windows on either side of the porch. It seemed a little
      nest of happiness, bright and warm, sunshine without and comfort within. 'There is sickness
      within, too,' said the compassionate Hippolyta, as she lifted the latch and went up the bit of
      walk which led to the front door. While she stood there, looking for bell or knocker, a little
      boy came running round the corner of the house from the garden behind. He was out of breath,
      and stopped when he saw the lady, a stranger to him. What a pretty boy he looked! The fairest
      of fair hair, hanging about his shoulders in ringlets, large laughing gray eyes, a face ruddy
      and white with pouting rosy lips, and his little frame panting with innocent life which
      mantled in
       blushes on his cheeks. He seemed between five and six, a sturdy boy, wearing his
      sailor's dress of dark blue with the pride which attends new clothes in children. After
      standing still and looking for a moment, he came up confidently. 'Do you want mother?' he
      inquired, 'because she is in that room,' pointing across to the open window on the other side
      of the porch. Hippolyta was very fond of children. She smiled and held out her hand, into
      which he put his own with great docility.
'I daresay it is your mother I want,' she answered, 'but first tell me who you are?'
'I am Willie,' he said. Children seldom give you the whole of their name at once.
'Willie what?' asked the strange lady.
'Willie Dauris,' he answered, with an impatient shake of his curls. 'Come in and see mother.
      You want mother.' He was very clear on that point, and evidently looked on a cross-examination
      of himself as time wasted. Hippolyta laughed, and still keeping hold of Willie's hand, knocked
      at the door on her right. A low voice answered 'Come in,' and Willie pushing open the door,
      Hippolyta followed.
The little boy, acting as master of the ceremonies, ran across the room where some one was
      lying on a large and comfortable-looking couch, propped up with pillows. 'The lady wants to
      see you, mother,' he said, beginning to climb on the couch. His mother motioned him to be
      still, and holding him with a thin white hand, turned her head towards Hippolyta,
       and said in a low but very taking voice, 'Are you Mrs. Malcolm?'
Hippolyta started at the sound of the name. She answered falteringly, 'I—I told Mr. Dauris
      this morning that I should like to come and see you. He mentioned that you were not well. Did
      he say I was coming?'
'Yes,' replied the invalid; 'he told me you would be so kind. You are very welcome, very
      welcome indeed. Willie, get Mrs. Malcolm a chair, and put it here,' pointing to a place near
      the couch. 'I lose my voice almost,' she went on, 'when the pain keeps on, and my hearing too.
      Did you ring?'
'No,' said Hippolyta; 'I was on the point of ringing when your boy—when Willie came. He
      tells me his name is Willie.'
'Yes,' said Mrs. Dauris; 'he is called after his father. He is our youngest. He will be six
      on the Assumption. A beautiful birthday for him, isn't it?'
Hippolyta was puzzled by the expression till she had thought a little. 'Oh,' she said, 'the
      Assumption of the Virgin, a festival of your religion. Yes, I suppose you would like that. And
      are you feeling better this afternoon? Your voice is quite clear and distinct.'
'A little better,' answered Mrs. Dauris. 'I hope to be so on Saturday and to go with my
      husband to the infirmary. It is a long way, but he can borrow a conveyance, he thinks.'
Hippolyta, delighted with the opportunity, offered
       her little carriage and insisted with affectionate firmness on its acceptance.
      She was already pleased with Mrs. Dauris, even as she had been with her husband. The light
      which fell upon the couch from the open window showed the invalid to be a woman of uncommon
      beauty, with delicate regular features, flushing when she spoke or looked at her visitor. She
      seemed tall and slender, so far as could be judged from her reclining position, for, as she
      explained to Hippolyta, she was unable to rise, much less to do any household work, that
      afternoon. 'The dinner things,' she said, 'are lying on the table waiting for Annie to clear
      them away. It is a great trial to me, for I was an active young woman, and I never thought to
      have suffered from this complaint. It is not in my father's or mother's family. But God's will
      be done.'
'I saw Annie,' said the little boy, with the brevity of his age.
His mother looked at him uneasily. 'Where did you see her, my darling?' she inquired.
'I don't know,' he said slowly, as if there was nothing more to be added. And then, after
      being silent for a minute or two, he chanted again in his pretty recitative, 'I saw Annie in
      the lane. She was talking to a gentleman. She cried. She said I was to go in. But I stayed in
      the garden.'
Mrs. Dauris looked agitated. Her hands trembled, and she said, 'That will do, my dear. Next
      time your sister tells you to come in, you must be obedient.'
Willie crept close to his mother. 'Have I been
       naughty?' he asked. 'What makes me naughty, mother?' The tears stood in her
      eyes, and Hippolyta could not help pitying her. She felt there was some sad story behind; and
      though not wishing to indulge curiosity, she would have given much to express the compassion
      that rose in her heart. An inspiration came to her. With the engaging smile which so often
      hovered about her lips, a mixture of kindliness and pity, she drew near to Mrs. Dauris, and
      said:
'I fear I am taking a great liberty, but if you do not mind, since your daughter is not here
      just now, I should be so glad to do anything you want. Let me put the room straight for
      you.'
'Oh no, you must not do that,' said Mrs. Dauris, eyeing her visitor with a good deal of
      astonishment, but with affection also. 'You are a lady, and it is not fit work for you.'
Hippolyta was quite at home in this sort of encounter. 'Never mind if I am a lady,' she
      reeplied; 'I have not lost the use of my hands. I can assure you that I am an adept in washing
      dishes.' And without more ado, in spite of the earnest and good-natured remonstrances of Mrs.
      Dauris, she laid aside her cloak, drew hot and cold water with the aid of Willie, who pointed
      out where everything was, but dispensed as far as possible with speaking, and was soon busy in
      remedying the disorder she had found on her arrival. It was not a difficult task, and she
      enjoyed it thoroughly. When all was done she insisted that
       the invalid should now try to eat something. There was no resisting her; and the
      poor consumptive patient made a better meal than she had done for a long while. When it was
      over they talked a little, and Hippolyta hoped that Annie might come in. But there was no sign
      of her, and she rose to go. Mrs. Dauris clasped her hand with fervent gratitude; Willie clung
      to her skirts, and was undecided whether to stay with his mother and cry, or to follow the
      lady to her unknown abode. She kissed the child, made Mrs. Dauris promise again to avail
      herself of the carriage, and went home in that healthy state of mind which is the consequence
      of any little effort done with simple intent, to be of service to another. About Annie, the
      girl of seventeen, whom her brother had seen talking to a gentleman and crying, she was, it
      must be admitted, curious. But her curiosity was in no sense equal to her sympathy.
Thus began an acquaintance which ripened ere long into friendship on both sides. Mr. Dauris,
      when informed by his wife of the circumstances of Hippolyta's visit, was at first indignant
      that she should have been allowed to stoop so low in her great kindness, and ended by
      conceiving towards her an enthusiastic respect which bordered on veneration. She was so young,
      so beautiful, and so unaffectedly gracious; she had such a delicate regard for their privacy,
      and was so timid in making advances, that in his own mind he did not know whether to call her
      an angel disguised in weeds of flesh, or a modest maiden whose ignorance
       concealed from her the humility of her behaviour. She seemed neither humble nor
      proud; all she did was with her a matter of course. She asked his opinion about other things
      than flowers, played with Willie and Charlie,—the elder boy, who had been at school on the
      occasion of her first visit,—sat for many hours by the side of the invalid, and ministered
      even more effectually to her sympathies than to her bodily wants. Hippolyta was soon
      recognised as a frequent and favoured visitor. When her hand was on the latch out came the
      boys, running to greet her, but making as little noise as they could, not to disturb their
      mother. In the evening she would sit with husband and wife instead of spending the hours after
      dinner in her solitary room; and she heard many a good word from the lips of both. She loved
      and admired their simple goodness. They made no inquiries either as to her religious beliefs
      or her story; they did not even mention Mr. Malcolm's name. This was not due to suspicion; it
      was native delicacy. The young lady did not speak of her husband, and they would not make so
      free as to begin.

