
CHAPTER XXVII THE DEEPS OF HELL
True to her appointment, Hippolyta arrived in Denzil Lane on the day and hour fixed
      by Ivor Mardol. The place of meeting was the committee-room, and Ivor came, as he had
      promised, accompanied by one whom he thought well qualified to guide Mrs. Malcolm through the
      labyrinth of London misery and to bring her out unscathed. It was a lady of high standing,
      great wealth, a heart larger than all the wealth of the world, and that wonderfully humanising
      experience which forty years of service among the poorest outcasts could not have failed to
      give. Miss Desmond, the daughter of an untitled but very ancient and noble line, was, in all
      but name and outward habit, a sister of charity. Endowed with a fortune in land and railway
      shares which amounted to some score of thousands a year, and which was entirely at her own
      disposal, she had early come to a determination that it should be spent in
       the endeavour to diffuse a little happiness around her. For she was modest and
      unassuming, with that quick discernment in matters of benevolence—she had no great learning or
      accomplishments of any other kind —which enabled her to see, almost in her first year's
      novitiate among the byways of the world, that money is only the beginning, and that
      philanthropy, like most things worth pursuing, is an arduous enterprise. She perceived that it
      was surrounded with difficulties; that it required a special tact if the result was not to be
      waste of resources, ingratitude, the demoralising of those who had seemed already at their
      lowest, and the added sufferings which arise at the remembrance of opportunities lost. It was
      clear that she must give something more than money and kind words,— she must give herself. The
      resolution cost her an effort. Miss Desmond's charity, flowing from a tender heart, was allied
      to the many virtues, and no less to the many vices which may spring from a quickness to feel
      and to suffer. She was naturally fastidious, shrinking from the sight of pain, and disposed to
      be indignant with those she could not help, from the very keenness of her sympathy with them.
      But she was, too, a simple-hearted Christian, not minding the varieties of creed which she
      took for granted among the other inexplicable facts around her; she read her Bible and found
      good in all its pages. 'To succeed through failure,' that was her device. Had any one accused
      her of paradox she would have answered quietly, 'Come and see,' pointing to the work of
       rescue which had been accomplished by following these divine tactics. She gave her time,
      her thought, her affectionate care, her never-ceasing diligence, to the task of winning from
      the miserable wretches whom she had taken for her province a little human trust; and when the
      heart was opened on both sides she gave wisely and abundantly of the lesser gifts, not now as
      a matter of pity and alms-deeds, but as to her brothers and sisters. For one that understood
      this exquisitely humble and loving spirit there were ten, there were fifty, ready to mock and
      to deceive. She knew it and bore the heavy burden as her Saviour bore the Cross on which He
      was to redeem the world. And she had her reward, often unexpected, but always exceeding great.
      The delight of her life was to save the young out of that terrible devouring fire through
      which they are passed to a worse than Moloch. She had ransomed many hundreds and sent them to
      the far continents which have been created to redress the injustice and lighten the shameful
      misery of a civilisation become so chaotic as our own. 'Her children,' for so she called them,
      wrote from all parts of the world to their mother, encouraging her by the prospect of their
      well-doing to continue this task of diving for pearls in the deep sea. She was a beautiful,
      welcome figure as she appeared in the fever-haunted dens and crowded fetid dwellings into
      which she never hesitated to pierce her way. It was on such errands of charity, now some years
      ago, that she had come across Ivor Mardol. Their work did
       not clash, and he was so gentle, clear-minded, and self-sacrificing, so little disposed
      to introduce dogmatic quarrels where the great text of love sufficed for a whole Gospel, that
      Miss Desmond and he became ere long the closest of friends, and she employed him to distribute
      her charities in many a case which did not seem to admit of her personal intervention.
Such was the guide whom Ivor had designed for Hippolyta. Knowing only that the young lady
      who called herself Mrs. Malcolm was of 'the movement,' and that she had been led, by her
      innocence and enthusiasm as he did not doubt, into one of the most fatal delusions which
      attended, if was not a part of, the revolutionary creed, he could not give Miss Desmond any
      information as to her antecedents or present mode of life. But he said enough to suggest that
      here too a good work might be accomplished if Mrs. Malcolm were allowed to go with her.
      Hippolyta assured him that she desired to labour among the people, and that all she sought was
      a sufficiently wide sphere, and some one to warn her when she was likely to make mistakes. All
      this, it may well be supposed, Miss Desmond cheerfully undertook; and their first interview
      brought out the most amiable qualities of the two women, so much alike in what they felt for
      the suffering multitude, and in all else so decidedly contrasted. Hippolyta Valence was at
      this time in the bloom of youth and beauty; she loved and was beloved; she did not anticipate
      sorrows of her own, and the immense happiness she
       enjoyed gave her a courage in dealing with the miseries she came across which added
      something heroic to her dauntless character. She still looked forward to playing a noble part
      in the revolution which was to bring all good things; and the sense of failure was an
      experience she had never gone through. Moments, I have said, of passing melancholy came to
      her, but they were like ripples on the stream raised by a breath of wind and dying down with
      it into the smooth waters.
How little did all these traits resemble the elderly Miss Desmond, now close upon her
      sixtieth year, of plain though not unlovely countenance, with silver- gray hair and slightly
      wrinkled forehead, tall and thin, not much given to smiling except when children came about
      her, and with a heart in which the sorrows of so many had taken up their abode! There was an
      air of tender resignation, or of resigned hope, in her movements, and a quietness in her
      manner of speech that seemed to make of the world in which she lived habitually one huge
      hospital, and of herself an unwearied seldom-sleeping nurse by the bedside of patients
      innumerable. And she had that calm wisdom which grows up in the soul and governs the thoughts
      when all the evil places of life have been explored with the ray of sunshine we call goodness.
      In Hippolyta there was, despite her marriage that was no marriage, the naïve goodness of
      childhood; she knew the world as in a picture-book. Whereas the spotless maiden lady, upon
      whose reputation no breath of
       slander had passed, went to and fro among the horrors of the great city as an angel
      might descend into the lake of fire, and by virtue of the heavenly element he brought with him
      return unharmed into the presence of the Most High. It is not knowledge that leads to
      wickedness always; indeed, I would rather say, there is a degree of knowledge with which
      wickedness is incompatible. And thus that strange-looking angel, Miss Desmond, opening her
      wings to shelter the young and beautiful Hippolyta, and bidding her fear no evil, descended
      with her into the Inferno of London.
There is a story told of one of the modern Catholic saints—is it San Filippo Neri, the
      Florentine? —who endeavoured to convert a young man of the world, the wicked world of other
      times, not ours, from the errors of his ways, but in vain. To all his admonitions the
      pleasure-seeker returned a mocking laugh. 'I see,' said the saint gravely, 'that I must deal
      with you in earnest. Kneel down and lay your head on my knee.' The young man, still laughing,
      did so. Filippo Neri laid both his hands on the bent head before him and prayed for some
      moments in silence. When he had ended he said, 'Now, get up and go your way.' The young man
      arose, his countenance fixed in horror, and departed without saying a word. But from that day
      he was a changed being; and those who knew him intimately whispered, that while he bent his
      head upon the saint's knee he beheld the underworld opened beneath him, with its
       vision of fire and hopeless torments. Such was the experiment Ivor Mardol was now
      attempting with Hippolyta Valence. What was to come of it the sequel must disclose.
That young man converted by San Filippo Neri did not speak often of his vision. There are
      many reasons, apart from a divine command, which seal the lips of those who are best
      acquainted with the secrets of the prison-house. It is enough to have been in hell. The
      horrors and fears of that abyss, which spouts its dark fire into the atmosphere of many a
      proud city, will not bear to be dwelt upon in the tender light of day; and no reader will
      expect from me more than the abstract and brief chronicle of what Hippolyta beheld during
      those months,—they were few but actively spent—in which she accompanied Miss Desmond, and laid
      to heart the revelation that was awaiting her. What did she see, you ask? Nay, rather, what
      did she not see, of things that would dim the very eyes of God with tears where He sits in
      glory, were it not for some secret anodyne that He keeps for the world's healing in His own
      good time? She descended into depth below depth; she heard the lives, recounted by themselves,
      of those to whom misery was their proper element; she gathered up the sighs of innocent
      children blasted by evil ere they knew that good existed; she attempted, but in vain, to
      reckon up the pangs that made each particular agony; she drew back to contemplate the
      universal woe in its length and height and breadth;
       but the spectacle was too much for her, and she could not see for weeping. 'Why,'
      she asked herself wonderingly, 'how did life continue under these iron laws? What hindered men
      and women from making an end of it all with themselves?' The conception of life to which she
      had been accustomed was an harmonious development of all its faculties under the guidance of
      reason; she had ever upon her lips such words as love, progress, light, the true, and the
      beautiful. Her world was an ordered music into which discords came only that they might
      enhance the effect. Not that she had dreamt the music was everywhere or always playing. That
      the multitudes were miserable had been, as she told Ivor Mardol, the foundation, the
      justification of her creed. But she seemed to have been speaking by rote when this immense and
      hideous tapestry, painted in all lurid colours, was unrolled before her. The creating word of
      her universe was love. And here, what had love become? It was little to say that she had left
      the realm of humankind to lose herself in a howling wilderness of wild beasts. These were not
      wild beasts; they were men and women. That was the culminating horror. Upon the rage, and
      hunger, and passion of the brute-world instinct puts a check. The tiger, when he is sated,
      falls asleep; the boa is torpid when he is gorged with prey. It was the absence of a governing
      principle, the boundless lust, the steady unintermittent fury, the feeding of death upon
      death, which made even Hippolyta's pitiful heart long for a
       flame to run through the sky from east to west and devour the uncleanness, though
      it should lick up with the same tongue whatever life was found within the horizon. There was
      no law, there was no light, there was no shame. She saw only a festering heap of human beings,
      flung on top of one another and kneaded into a pestilential mass by the iron heel of
      necessity. And morning after morning flowers sprang up on the black dunghill and turned their
      leaves hopelessly towards the sun that would not shine on them, and withered, and were
      trampled into the foul mass. For in this horrible world children were born by the hundred
      thousand—delicate children, sometimes beautiful, with their large tender eyes, always frail
      and in need of sustenance and of love. Every house into which Miss Desmond led her swarmed
      with children as a hive swarms with bees. When they were fortunate they died young. And how
      short was the youth of those that lived! At six years old a child in the deeps of London has
      seen most that can happen of foul, unclean, and heartbreaking on this planet of ours. But ere
      its birth it is predestined by the laws of the dark realm into which it must enter to be a
      devil's child and never to know the face of its Father in heaven. Its very breath and bones
      are made of vice. The typical child of the well-to-do classes looks beautiful, strong, happy,
      and innocent. The typical child, encountered again and again by Hippolyta as she moved in that
      short radius of which Denzil Lane was the centre—the
       angel of the house whom she beheld in every nook and corner of that dismal
      universe—was ugly, deformed, ailing, accustomed to stripes and blows, full of premature greed,
      a thing of rags and disease, old in sin, and steeped in impurity. No hand of redemption or
      blessing had ever come nigh it. And was there any production of Nature alone so complete in
      hideousness?
To be suddenly flung out of the blue ether into the abysses of death; to exchange the
      feeling of Rupert's love with all its glowing lights and hues of romance, as softly blended as
      the prismatic sheen of the dove's neck, for the desolation into which no love came,—this was
      the experience which Hippolyta had chosen to undergo. Her existence had been merged in his;
      they two were all the world to one another, and their life had taken the grandest sweep
      towards the Ideal, for it was full, and actual, and unselfish, and its fulness consisted in
      their thinking high thoughts and sharing in the most exquisite sentiments together. Now was
      Hippolyta to see how differently things might be ordered for men and women of like texture
      with herself and Rupert. The one great, astounding, miserable fact which smote her in the face
      wherever she turned was the absence, the utter ignorance on all sides, that such love could
      exist. The genius of Dante, it is well known, has conceived the central core, the innermost
      circle, of his Inferno as not fire but thick-ribbed ice. The breath of Lucifer
      freezes; it does not burn. This unexpected and most awful
       thought, containing in itself more than the poet was perhaps aware, recurred to
      Hippolyta many, many times during her pilgrimage among these living damned. She had expected
      to find an outburst of love, wild and exuberant as spring on the plains of the East. She found
      the very opposite. Instead of tropical heat and the quick succession of sentiments which might
      be justified in the poet's eyes by their warmth and intensity, what she perceived was—how
      shall I express it?—a cold fury, a chill and dreary animalism, in which the embers of himan
      feeling were hardly to be discerned. All things here had a wan, spectral appearance, not
      inconsistent with murderous impetuosity or the frenzy of hate and desire. But love? Ah, now
      she began to understand what a solemn and sacred word it was, how little to be confounded with
      the instincts which, having full sway among these dreadful simulacra of humanity,
      were but a madness added to the rest which made ascent towards the light impossible. Without
      saying it to herself, or indeed knowing that such a truth was becoming luminous to her, she
      felt that the noble conception of love had its roots in the reverence and reserve, in the
      great all-surrounding atmosphere of modesty, which makes the distinction between true
      refinement and barbarism, be the latter never so gilded. Where shame is wanting, love cannot
      exist. In these regions there was no such thing as solitude, privacy, or a house with closed
      doors. There was not room to move in, not air enough to breathe. The confusion
       of ages and sexes, of strong and feeble, even of good and bad, was beyond
      description. No slave-ship was ever more crowded than the miles of narrow streets through
      which Hippolyta, shuddering and sick at heart, was forced to thread her way. For those who
      dwelt in them Nature had no meaning; the green of the meadows, the grace of field and forest,
      the beauty of running water, nay, the very lights of heaven did not exist for them. All they
      knew was this living prison of human bodies which hemmed them round, and from the walls and
      roofs of which came incessantly, as in a falling shower, sounds of blasphemy, rage, cursing,
      pain, hunger and thirst, intoxication, insanity, and murder. It was not to be thought that
      love could unveil its shy face amid such horrors. The charm of love is, in the for once
      poetical imagery of Swedenborg, that it draws two spirits from the ends of heaven to meet and
      embrace, obeying the secret laws of affinity which make them and them only fit for one
      another. How preserve such transcendent personality in the thick of such a crowd as was here
      battling for life and trampling the fallen into a gory slime? It was a strange place to come
      to for the revelation of the sacredness, the singleness, so to speak, of love. Yet this was
      what Hippolyta learnt; and on her first meeting with Ivor Mardol she put her experience into
      such words as would most forcibly express it. They were together again in the committee-room,
      where Hippolyta was waiting for the arrival of Miss Desmond.

'But I cannot agree with you, Mr. Mardol,' she continued, 'that I have witnessed the evil
      consequences of Free Love. I see no love anywhere in this frightful chaos.'
'It is exactly the same thing,' he answered, not at all as if uttering a questionable
      saying.
'The same thing to love, and not to know its meaning? You are bent on mystifying me, I
      perceive.'
'Not at all. Both are forms of infinite caprice, of desires not brought under reason. Free
      Love and unbridled passion will ever be one to the multitude at large. If by Free Love,
      indeed, you mean the choice by one man of the one woman in all the world that Nature destined
      for him, and passing by all others as objects only of chivalrous devotion, not of personal
      attachment, do you know what star will rise in the sky of humanity?'
'Tell me,' she said, with great earnestness.
'The star of Duty,' he replied. 'There can be no rational freedom in love, or in aught else
      that belongs to our nature, when Duty is cast out.'
'And is it a duty,' she inquired, her eyes glowing as she spoke, 'to go on pretending to
      love when affection is dead?'
'No; but affection which has once taken on itself the yoke of duty will not die; it partakes
      of the spirit's immortality. You are still persuaded, I see, that instinct passion, and true
      love are but different names for one feeling. It is not so, believe me.
       The human element which transmutes instinct and passion to love is the will
      lighted up by reason.'
'Then love is never spontaneous, and your philosophy transforms it to a palace of ice.'
'Nothing was ever more spontaneous than love; but not all that is spontaneous should be
      confounded with it.'
'Ah, here comes Miss Desmond,' cried Hippolyta, relieved at her appearance, for she was
      beginning to feel a vague trouble like the first slight symptoms of a dangerous illness. 'I
      will go with her, and leave you to your abstractions, which do not suit me at all. I am sure
      Miss Desmond is not a Stoic.'
'And you think I am?' inquired Ivor with his usual serenity; 'well, never mind. Only apply
      what I have been saying to any cases you may meet in your excursion to-day, and let me know
      whether the idea of duty is not a key to unlock even a larger number of doors than your idea
      of sacred personality, —with which, observe, I have no quarrel. But we should beware of idols,
      and look life in the face. You will pardon my unmannerly presumption.'
He went away, convinced that Mrs. Malcolm would not let his words fall to the ground. She
      had that within, he felt sure, which prompted her to find a solution of some difficult problem
      closely affecting her happiness; though what it was he neither asked nor desired to know. He
      had learnt that it is best to wait until people begin to speak of their own accord. It was a
      simple word, Duty, but an infinite idea; and
       he knew how far it had led him on the path he was pursuing. If Mrs. Malcolm had
      need of it,—and with her the superstition of Free Love was evidently more than a mere
      opinion,—she would be reminded forcibly of its sacred character, of its supreme worth, by the
      contrast of so many myriad lives in which it found no place. 'Freedom,' he murmured as he went
      along; 'yes, the freedom to do right. That will carry us a little farther, I trow, than the
      freedom to destroy a man or an institution which happens to stand across the path of
      progress.'
He was not mistaken. Hippolyta dwelt more than she would have been willing to confess on
      those Stoic aphorisms, as she called them by way of lessening their importance. But her
      expeditions into a strange and dismal realm, these dazzling cross-lights, and great spaces of
      darkness, where it seemed that neither Conservative nor Revolutionist could discover a
      pathway, inflicted on Hippolyta the sense of deep disappointment, and little by little drew
      the clouds over her sky. Was it so very hard to make things better? Miss Desmond, though
      faithful to her task day and night, evidently thought so. Ivor Mardol thought so. Her father,
      who had begun with an impassioned belief that the progress of the Revolution meant universal
      happiness, had grown pessimist and saturnine as he reckoned up how little had yet been done.
      When Hippolyta spoke in the old eloquent way to Mardol of reconstructing society from summit
      to foundation, he answered sadly that the creative
       spirit did not come at call, and we wanted rulers of men not partisans of chaos.
      'When you have got your anarchy,' he said with a melancholy smile, 'what will you do with it?'
      Hippolyta could not refute his doubts. She had lived in dreams, then, and the waking reality
      did not at all resemble their pliant lovely shapes. It was stern, cold, unmanageable, like
      granite which has been melted but once by the primeval fires and can never be moulded again by
      the forces at man's command. Colonel Valence's daughter became at times unhappy, with a
      sensation as if she too were lying under anathema and had brought a curse, she knew not how,
      on herself and the miserable creatures whose wants she was endeavouring to supply.
A more tangible discomfort was the impossibility of discovering a trace of Maurice Regan.
      She could not now enjoy the leisure which had been hers at the beginning of her stay at
      Forrest House, and consequently she saw Annie Dauris not nearly so often. But whenever she
      did, the girl cried like a feverish child, 'Can you tell me anything of Maurice?' Hippolyta
      had consulted Ivor Mardol; and by his advice she neither called on Mr. Philip Regan nor told
      Annie that she would do so. Ivor made inquiries of the clergyman from time to time, but he
      received the invariable answer that Maurice Regan's only address was at his chambers, that he
      never came there but had his letters sent on, now to one place, now to another, and that
      apparently he lived a wandering life and was not to be met in London.
       Hippolyta did not see the advantage of telling these things to Annie; they would
      only make her restless, and, on the whole, if, as time went on, Maurice Regan kept out of her
      sight, she might give up the expectation of finding him, and resign herself to the life in her
      mother's cottage. There she would be safe whatever happened. Mrs. Malcolm did not venture to
      express her more painful thoughts to the gardener's wife. She hinted something, but Mrs.
      Dauris was very ill, did not realise what she heard, and repeated her assurance that Annie had
      only been foolish, not wicked. The girl herself was obstinately silent. Thus matters stood
      when Hippolyta, after a hard day at the East End, came in late and tired. She made a light
      dinner, and lying down, fell into a deep sleep which lasted longer than usual. About eight
      next morning she was awakened by the entrance of the housekeeper, who, with many apologies for
      disturbing her, announced that the little boy, Charlie Dauris, was in the hall, and begged
      earnestly to see Mrs. Malcolm. 'Does he say what it is about?' inquired Hippolyta, sitting up
      as she spoke. 'No, ma'am,' replied the good woman; 'I asked him, but he would not tell. He was
      crying, though; and I have no doubt they are in trouble. Perhaps his mother is worse.' The
      thought startled Hippolyta, who remembered how delicate Mrs. Dauris had been looking lately.
      She sprang up, and sending Mrs. Leeming downstairs, said she would come in a moment. What
      could it be? Making a hasty toilette,
       she ran down into the hall, where Charlie was standing, his eyes fixed on the
      ground, and great tears rolling down his cheeks. Hippolyta kissed the boy,—who was, as I have
      said, a favourite of hers, and of a very feeling, affectionate nature,—and took him into the
      dining-room. 'What is it, Charlie dear?' she said anxiously. 'Is your mother not so well?'
'Mother is very ill,' he answered; 'but it is not that. It is Annie. Oh, Mrs. Malcolm,' he
      said with a fresh burst of weeping, 'Annie's run away again, and she left this letter for you
      on her bed. Mother found it this morning when she went to call her.' And so saying he gave a
      sealed envelope into Hippolyta's hand. She went towards the light to read it. There were only
      a few lines, hastily scrawled, but when Mrs. Malcolm arrived at the end of them, she turned
      deadly pale, and sat down like one about to faint, putting her hand to her forehead in great
      and evident distress. It was shocking; it confirmed her worst expectations.
Annie wrote, in haste and agony, that she dared stay at home no longer. She reproached
      herself bitterly for not being so frank with Mrs. Malcolm as she ought to have been. The story
      she had told her about Maurice Regan was not the whole truth. He had been her true love, but
      he had ruined her; and she was going now to find the father of the child that should be born
      to her, and in case she could not find him to put an end to her misery. She would never, never
      come home again. She
       begged Mrs. Malcolm, for the love of God, to break the news as gently as she
      could to her poor mother. 'It will be her death,' were the concluding words of the letter;
      'but I cannot help it. I must go.'
Hippolyta did not know which way to look. She was dazed and confounded. While she had been
      endeavouring to rescue strangers at the other end of London this unhappy child had escaped her
      at her own door. How convey the fearful news to the mother, who would perhaps die of a broken
      heart, or to the father upon whom Annie had always so unjustly cast the blame of her wicked
      conduct? Oh, what a desolate home would that be when they knew the reason of their daughter's
      flight! The boy, meanwhile, stood looking at Mrs. Malcolm with tear-filled eyes, not venturing
      to ask her what his sister had written. But when he saw how she began to cry, he ran to her
      and put his arms affectionately round her neck. 'Poor Charlie,' she said, pressing him to her,
      'you have a bad sister. Never mind, we must do what we ought.' And, rising up, she hastily
      poured out a glass of water and put it to her lips. She could touch none of the breakfast that
      lay on the table. Her one thought was to go immediately to the cottage and do what she could
      to comfort Mrs. Dauris. The lady and the child were soon on their way, Charlie holding her
      hand fast and looking up to her from time to time as with panting breath they hurried along.
      Before they could reach the gate they saw Mrs. Dauris waiting for them
       on the threshold. Hippolyta keeping the letter in her bosom, where she had
      unconsciously thrust it, embraced the poor invalid with overflowing sympathy, and led her
      without saying a word into the house. There Mr. Dauris sat expecting her in the arm-chair by
      the window, his head bent upon his breast, absorbed in painful thoughts.
Hippolyta had never fulfilled such a task as now devolved upon her. To acquaint these
      friends whom she loved and pitied with their daughter's dishonour, to hint at her probable
      fate unless immediate steps were taken to find out whither she had gone, to soften their
      despair, and induce them to master their grief lest it should prove the occasion of Annie's
      irremediable ruin;—and to do all this, knowing that she could not appeal to religious
      principles in which she did not believe, or comfort them with the possibility of a marriage
      that would be the remedy of past and future;—it seemed a thing beyond the strength of woman.
      But Hippolyta was self-denying to an heroic degree. She would not utter what she did not
      believe. Nevertheless with tact and gentle feeling, in accents wherein all the tenderness of
      her nature found expression, she unfolded to them the story of shame. She could not hinder it
      from overwhelming them. It was a thunderbolt that smote the fabric of their happiness at the
      four corners and brought it to the ground. In comparison with the sin, the disgrace, the
      horror of what had befallen them, death was nothing.

'I could have borne to see her die,' said Mrs. Dauris, falling back on her couch and
      clasping her hands wistfully,—'that would have been only giving her back to God from whom we
      received her. But to think that my Annie should be her own murderer and perhaps her child's.'
      She could say no more.
'God's will be done,' said her husband reverently. 'I tried to bring my daughter up well.
      She has turned out perverse, and now we must bear her shame.'
Hippolyta suggested that Maurice Regan might yet be found. If Annie did not come upon his
      traces, they, with his brother's assistance, perhaps should fare better.
'I doubt it—I doubt it,' replied the gardener after a moment of sad reflection. 'And what
      though we do? We cannot compel him to marry the wretched creature he has ruined.'
It was impossible, in a house where the new ways of thought had not penetrated, to whisper
      that if the two young people were in love they might be happy together without marriage. To
      her intense surprise Hippolyta felt that the mere suggestion, though confined to her own
      breast, was not right. Would not perfect reciprocal affection, then, be enough unless marriage
      came to add its consecration? She sat thinking over it. When a little while had passed, and
      they were still silent, considering what to do first, she said hesitatingly, 'But I cannot
      help believing that he really did care for Annie; in which
       case, if he can only be told what has happened, he will come to her rescue.'
'Care for Annie,' echoed Mr. Dauris with deep disgust in his tones; 'forgive me, my dear
      lady, you know too little of the world or you would not say that. He cared for her as much as
      he would for a wildflower plucked out of a hedge. He cared for himself, the dastardly villain;
      that is all such men care for.'
The gardener rose and went to the door. 'It is the old story,' he said very bitterly; 'I
      must go to the police station once more and tell them to make inquiries. I shall soon be well
      known there, with my runaway daughter.'
'Oh Annie, Annie,' sobbed the mother, as her husband went out, 'how little you thought of
      the trouble your wilfulness would bring on us all. See what it is,' she continued, turning to
      Mrs. Malcolm, 'not to have any rule or check but your own pleasure. It means misery to every
      one belonging to you.'
What could Hippolyta say? She was stricken dumb.
But there was little occasion for her to say anything. The question was what could be done.
      Mrs. Dauris became so affected by the thought of Annie's past misconduct and present danger
      that she went from one fainting fit into another; and it was all Hippolyta could do to attend
      upon her while Charlie went to Forrest House to fetch Mrs. Leeming. For there was no one but
      the elder boy to watch
       over his mother; and it seemed advisable to communicate at once with Ivor Mardol,
      whose address Mrs. Malcolm fortunately knew. He was well acquainted with the ways of
      underground London; he could induce Mr. Philip Regan to make inquiries for his brother, and at
      the same time could plant scouts in the neighbourhood which Annie Dauris had been wont to
      frequent. Hippolyta, therefore, made haste to leave Mrs. Dauris in competent hands, took a
      melancholy meal at home, standing up in her desire to have done with it, and ordered the
      carriage to take her to Mr. Mardol's house, in Grafton Place. She had never been there
      previously, nor was she aware of the trade or profession, if any, to which Ivor belonged. It
      was so considerable a distance that the coachman, surprised, repeated the address to make sure
      he had not mistaken. She bade him impatiently drive on. The day was cold and the air brisk. To
      make sure of Mr. Mardol Hippolyta had despatched a message by telegraph, asking him not to
      leave Grafton Place till she arrived.
During the long journey, wrapped in the costly furs that Rupert had presented to her when
      the cold set in, Hippolyta had leisure for thinking. Her thoughts were far from pleasant. She
      blamed herself for not having offered better advice to Annie Dauris, whom she had encouraged,
      it now seemed to her, in making sentiment the mainspring of all her actions. Why not have
      shown her the folly of such ill-assorted love? Why, at least, not have put by the side of her
       wild romantic notions the stern truth which even at that moment she, Hippolyta,
      was learning under the guidance of Ivor Mardol and Miss Desmond? Why not have made more
      strenuous efforts to elicit her secret? But no, she had been absorbed in self, eager only to
      make out a strong case for that yielding to impulse which was the cause and explanation of
      Annie's downfall. Oh, she could have reviled herself bitterly; no words of condemnation could
      be too severe for her. If Annie had gone to such a friend as Miss Desmond, how differently
      matters might have fallen out. Then she began, as we all do when most occupied with the
      troubles of another, to look into her own situation. It was no longer so plain to her as it
      had been. True, she had wronged nobody, had brought no desolation to her father's heart, nor
      dishonoured his gray hairs. What she had done and was doing, the manner of life to which she
      had given herself, would have received Colonel Valence's approval, she knew quite well, had
      she been able to inform him of it. Her action was not the fruit of a passionate impulse; it
      had been calm and deliberate. Nor was she prepared to allow that society had the best of the
      argument, in spite of Ivor Mardol's demonstration from the chaotic deeps of life. It did not
      touch her, though it might be applicable to such as Annie Dauris. For all that she could not
      resist the uneasiness which seemed to be creeping over her, like a fog which makes the lights
      indistinct and the ways uncertain. She wished—and yet again how
       could she wish?—that Rupert were at home. He would have aided her to think as she
      ought. But not so, he would have encouraged her scruples, for he desired nothing so much as
      that they should marry like the rest of the world. There it was,—the rest of the world, the
      hardness, injustice, cruelty, luxury, unmanliness, the atheism of that most despicable and
      sordid kind which consists in blinding our eyes to the godlike which is in man. 'Ah,' said
      Hippolyta more than once as the carriage bore her along, 'I knew well it was the heart of the
      question. To surrender that one point is to acknowledge that there is no remedy, that men and
      women must go on suffering, hating, despairing, trampling down others, or being trampled on
      themselves. I will not believe it. Free love may be an impossible dream; these laws of
      marriage are a real and present slavery.' But again she asked herself whether she was not
      hurrying forward in the hope of finding Maurice Regan and persuading or compelling him to
      marry the girl whom he perhaps had ceased to love? 'What a tangle life is!' said
      Hippolyta.
The carriage stopped. Mrs. Malcolm looked out and saw a small, but rather quaint-looking
      house, two stories high, with a clean pavement in front of it, and a strip of open ground on
      each side, making with the wall of the adjoining houses a sort of passage leading probably to
      some enclosure beyond. She caught a glimpse of tall wooden beams standing upright, or slanting
      across one another at the end
       of the passage, and making that appearance against the sky which in a city always
      reminds one of shipbuilding. It was, in fact, a joiner's yard, with saw-mills attached, and
      the smell of fresh wood had something in it briny and sea-like. Hippolyta alighted, and at
      that moment Ivor Mardol opened the door and bade her come in. She entered after a word to the
      coachman, whom she desired to wait, as there might still be need of him.
The entrance-hall in which she found herself was square, with a low ceiling of some ancient
      woodwork; and the walls were hung with engravings or decorated with exquisite specimens of
      carving. A low, broad staircase, dark and polished, with massive wooden rail, led to the upper
      apartments. To the right a curtain of gilt leather hung over and concealed the entrance to
      Ivor's workroom. Holding it aside, the engraver, as that room would soon declare him to be,
      made way for Hippolyta, who was so tired that she threw herself into the first chair she saw,
      and being more agitated than at any former time in her life, more even than the night when she
      came to Rupert's studio, on sitting down burst into tears.
Ivor was alarmed and distressed. Ready, on receipt of Mrs. Malcolm's telegram, to believe
      that something had happened, he did not know what to conjecture. But he had seen enough of the
      lady before him to be assured that she was of a high-strung, resolute nature; and the fact
      that she kept her residence and the circumstances of her life a mystery,
       not only from himself, but from Miss Desmond, indicated that there were reasons
      for doing so of which her present visit to him might be the consequence. However, though Mrs.
      Malcolm wept, she did not faint. In a little while she recovered; and begging pardon for an
      unseasonable exhibition of feeling, which, as she said, could only add to the trouble, not
      lessen it, she proceeded to tell him the story of Annie Dauris's flight.
To Ivor, who did not know Annie Dauris, but saw much in Mrs. Malcolm to draw forth his
      admiration and esteem, it came as a relief. He had feared for the lady herself; the girl's
      case, though pitiable in the extreme, was one of every day. She might not be found; Maurice
      Regan, even when found, might decline to acknowledge or assist her. But Ivor would do all that
      lay in his power. He thanked Mrs. Malcolm for coming to him. It would save time if they drove
      at once to Mr. Philip Regan's and let him know the circumstance under which his brother's
      presence was immediately required. Hippolyta, who had anticipated all this, offered him a
      place in her carriage, and they set out.
'Shall you be leaving any of your work that requires to be finished?' said Hippolyta as soon
      as they were seated. 'I forgot to ask you before, I was so confused. Let me make it up to you
      if you are. I am rich,' she added, smiling rather mournfully, —'richer than I have any right
      to be.'
'You are very kind,' said Ivor; 'and I will let
       you know if anything of the sort happens before we have found Annie Dauris. But
      I, too, am richer than I ought to be. I have made money in unexpected ways, which I hoped to
      contribute towards the expenses of the "movement." But now I am cut off from the rest, I do
      not see my way to employing it profitably.'
'Why were you cut off?' asked Hippolyta; 'believe me, I do not ask in a spirit of feminine
      curiosity, but because, woman though I am, my relations with the various branches have been
      extensive, and I might be able to help you towards reinstatement.'
'You might do much,' he said, with his serious playfulness. 'No, my dear lady, unless a
      great change comes about in others—which is every day less likely—nothing can be done. If I
      could disclose the nature of my offences you would agree with me. They are the most serious,
      short of betrayal of secrets, that can be imagined. I am a lapsed heretic,' he went on half to
      himself, 'and fit only for the stake.'
It is next to impossible to carry on a conversation in any vehicle making its way through
      the streets of London; and but few words passed between Ivor and Hippolyta as they went
      towards St. Audry's. Their interview with Mr. Philip Regan was brief, and resulted only in
      their receiving the address of his brother Maurice's chambers. For, though as a clergyman he
      was properly and profoundly shocked, he seemed to take it as a matter of course that
       Annie Dauris had been the tempter and Mr. Maurice Regan the tempted. He was too
      well acquainted, he said, with the character of young women of that class to have any doubt on
      the subject. It seemed to Hippolyta that she had come unexpectedly in contact with a Pharisee;
      and, although she had heard of his kindness to the poor, and knew he spent much of his time in
      visiting them, she could not help fancying that he looked on himself as exceedingly clean, and
      on those to whom he stooped as exceedingly the opposite. With scornful amusement she pictured
      the surprise and disgust which would have taken hold of this handsome, clean-shaven,
      scrupulously fitted-up ecclesiastic, had he learned what manner of woman it was that came to
      plead the cause of Annie Dauris within his gates. He would write to his brother, certainly;
      but he trusted that Mrs. Malcolm was quite sure of the facts on which she was now moving.
      Hippolyta replied immediately, 'I am sure that Annie has left home; I believe she is a ruined
      girl; and I have every reason to think that she has gone in search of Mr. Regan. All I ask of
      you is to inform that gentleman, if you know where to reach him, of the contents of Annie's
      letter. I suppose,' she added with some bitterness, 'it is only unbelievers like Mr. Mardol
      that think a woman as well worth saving as a man.' The clergyman bowed stiffly and led them to
      the door. He gave less credit to Annie Dauris's story than ever.

