
CHAPTER CC.   A MAIDEN'S LOVE.
The two young ladies had now retired to the bed-chamber which Kate occupied at the farm, and
      which Ellen shared with her during her visit.
The respective characters of those two charming creatures were then incidentally contrasted
      and powerfully set forth, each in its peculiar phase, by means of occurrences apparently
      trivial to a degree, but which were nevertheless significant in the eyes of those who closely
      observed the nature of the human mind.
While Ellen was disrobing herself, she stood, in all the pride of her glorious beauty,
      before the mirror; in the reflection of which she also arranged her long, luxuriant hair
      previously to retiring to rest.
But Katherine, in the semi-obscurity of the remotest corner, laid aside her vestment; nor
      did she once think of approaching the glass.
Whence arose this discrepancy,—this pride on the one hand, and this bashfulness on the
      other?
It was that Ellen had been placed in those circumstances which had taught her the value and
      led
      her to appreciate the extent of her almost matchless charms:—her lovely
      countenance had served as a copy, and her exquisitely modelled form as a pattern for artists
      and sculptors;—during her brief dramatic career, she had been the object of unceasing
      adulation;—and when she forced Greenwood to espouse her, the splendour of her beauty had
      disarmed him of the resentment which he would otherwise have experienced in being compelled to
      sacrifice for her all his hopes of a brilliant matrimonial alliance. Hers was the pride of a
      loveliness which had produced her bread in the hour of her bitter need,—which was perpetuated
      in great works of art,—which had elicited the heart-felt admiration of many suitors of rank
      and name,—and which was still in all the freshness of health and youth. Still that pride was
      never obtrusive—not even conspicuous; for it was attempered by a natural generosity, an innate
      loftiness of soul which rendered her as adorable for her disposition as she was desirable for
      her beauty.
Katherine had long languished in a condition which compelled her to retire from observation.
      While she dwelt with the late executioner, she was glad to be able to shroud herself from
      public view. She was always neat and cleanly from principle, but not from pride. The
      germinations of self-complacency had been checked in their nascent state, though not
      completely obliterated; and now, if they were slightly expanding in the genial atmosphere of
      the improved circumstances which surrounded her, it was with a legitimate growth, such as no
      female mind should remain unacquainted with. For a certain degree of proper pride is necessary
      to woman,—to preserve her self-esteem, and to maintain her soul so happily poised that it may
      not fall into over-weening confidence on the one side, nor into an awkward and repulsive
      reserve on the other.
That chamber-scene would have made a fine and deeply interesting subject for the pencil of
      the artist, who would have delighted to shadow forth the variety of the female character,—here
      the glorious loveliness of the wife who dared not avow that sacred name,—there the retiring
      beauty of the young virgin.
But Katherine had not altogether escaped the influence of that blind deity who exercises so
      important a control over the destinies of us mortals.
How this happened we must leave her to describe in her own artless manner.
"I have been thinking, dear Kate," said Ellen, as she stood combing her long and silky hair,
      on which a lamp's reflection in the mirror shed a bright glory,—"I have been thinking that
      this is a dull and lonely place for you. Mr. and Mrs. Bennet are very kind and amiable people;
      but it will not be suitable for one whose worldly prospects are so good as yours, to remain in
      this solitude. You are literally buried here! I am almost inclined to take you with me to
      Markham Place for a short time, when the business with that old woman is decided. I am sure
      Richard would be pleased with such an arrangement."
"I should like to be with you, Ellen," was the reply: "but—for the present—I must remain
      here," added Katherine, with some little hesitation.
"Oh! no—you must come with me to Markham Place," exclaimed Ellen; "and the change of scene
      will please you. Besides—I have a secret to tell you, Kate."
"A secret!" repeated the maiden.
"Yes—a secret that will surprise you," continued Ellen. "I shall reveal it to you now; but
      you must not mention it to any one here—for particular reasons which I cannot explain to you
      at present. What should you think if I were to tell you that I am married?"
"You!—married!" exclaimed Katherine. "Then why are you still called Miss Monroe?"
"There are certain circumstances which compel me to keep my marriage a secret. When you come
      to Markham Place—as you must—you will see my father; but never in his presence, nor in that of
      Richard when he returns home, may you speak of me as a wife. And now do you know why I have
      told you this? Because, as I am determined that you shall come and pass at least a few days
      with me you will see my child——"
"Oh! Ellen, are you indeed a mother?" cried Katherine. "Are you not devotedly attached to
      your child? do you not fondle—play with it?"
"I am never wearied of its little company," answered Ellen. "It is a boy, and named after
      our mutual benefactor Richard. And now you know my secret. But tell me, Kate, wherefore you
      wish to remain pent up in this secluded dwelling? Has some happy youth in the neighbourhood
      touched your heart? You do not answer me. I cannot see you where you are; but I'll wager that
      you are blushing. Oh! if there be any truth in my suspicion, let it be revelation for
      revelation. We are friends—and you may confide in me."
"I know not how to answer you, Ellen;—and yet——"
"And yet you have a secret," returned the young wife, laughing; "oh! yes—you
       have a secret—and you must make me your confidant."
"I am willing to tell you all that relates to this foolish affair," said Katherine; "but
      that all is very little."
And she hesitated,—suffused with blushes even in the nook whither Ellen's eyes were not
      directed!
"Nay, continue," exclaimed Ellen. "I perceive that you are about to interest me with the
      commencement of a charming little love-tale. Seriously speaking, Kate—you will lose nothing by
      entrusting your secret to one who may be enabled to give you some useful counsel in a matter
      which is of far greater moment than young persons of our sex are induced to believe?"
"I will conceal nothing from you, Ellen," returned Katherine, in a low and timid tone. "It
      was only at the commencement of last week that I was rambling in the neighbourhood—on as fine
      a day as this one has been—when I met a young gentleman, who was crossing the same field as
      myself, but in an opposite direction. The path was very narrow; and he stood on one side to
      allow me to pass. I bowed in acknowledgment of his politeness, and he raised his hat. The
      glance that I threw upon him was of course only momentary; and I passed on. I thought no more
      of the incident——"
"He is doubtless very handsome," said Ellen, laughing. "All heroes of such romantic
      adventures are."
"Nay—hear me to the end," continued Katherine; "for since I have begun this silly tale, I
      may as well terminate it. The following day was fine; and I walked out again—as indeed I
      always do, when the weather will permit. I was proceeding through the same field——"

"The same field," observed Ellen slily.
"Oh! I can assure you, my dear friend, that you do me an injustice by the suspicion which
      your words imply," exclaimed Katherine. "I had totally forgotten the trifling incident of the
      preceding day; but I chose that path,—it was the same which we took this morning,—because it
      was dry and hard. To my surprise I again met that gentleman; and when he made way as before,
      to let me pass, he looked at me with an attention not rude, but still earnest. Our eyes
      met—and I passed hastily on. I felt myself blushing—I knew not why—to the very verge of my
      forehead. And yet I had done no wrong. I had glanced towards him as I acknowledged his
      politeness in stepping aside to allow me to pass; and it was by accident—at least on my
      part—that our eyes thus met. When I became more composed, I was angry at having been annoyed
      with myself. I then found myself involuntarily reflecting upon the handsome countenance,—for
      he is handsome, Ellen,—of which I had only so hasty a glimpse. I must admit that I
      thought of him more than once during the remainder of that day."
"Love at second sight, we must denominate it," observed Ellen, with a smile. "I will hazard
      a guess that the next day was fine,—for the weather is usually favourable in such
      circumstances,—and that you unwittingly found yourself rambling in the same path."
"Ah! Ellen, I am afraid that I was wrong—but all happened as you have described," said Kate,
      in a soft and melancholy tone; "and I obeyed some impulse for which I could not account. I
      candidly confess that I wondered, as I walked along, whether he would be there again;
      and when I did not perceive him, I experienced a sentiment of vexation. At length he appeared
      at the extremity of the field—he drew near—nearer and nearer. I felt ashamed of myself: it
      suddenly struck me that he must suppose I came thither on purpose to see him again. I never
      thought so little of myself—no, not even when I was pointed at as the presumed relative of an
      executioner. I turned abruptly round, and began to retrace my way towards the farm. I reached
      the low stile on the brow of the hill: at that moment I heard steps behind me. I cannot
      describe the sensations which I then experienced—a few short seconds of pleasing, painful
      suspense. Ere a minute had elapsed, the stranger stood by my side; and with a low bow he
      extended his hand to assist me in crossing the barrier. My head seemed to swim round; and I
      mechanically gave him my hand. He held it but for an instant as I passed into the next
      field;—and yet he pressed it gently—very gently;—still he pressed it! I know not whether I
      bowed or hurried abruptly on—I was so confused!"
"And during the remainder of that day you pondered on the incident," observed Ellen.
"Oh! how well you seem to divine all my thoughts—all my emotions!" exclaimed Katherine.
"Love has the same emblems—the same symbols, throughout the world," answered Ellen; "and it
      also has the same unvarying worship. Of the true nature of the great God there are many
      conflicting opinions; and different nations offer up their adoration in different manners. But
      to that blind deity whom we call Love, there is only one incense—and that is common to all
      humanity!"
"Then it was not wrong on my part to experience those emotions which I have explained to
      you?" said Katherine, with the most amiable naïveté.
"Wrong, dearest girl! oh, no!" exclaimed Ellen. "That heart must be a cold—a callous—a
      worldly-minded one, which never feels those most beautiful and holy of all sympathies! But go
      on with your narrative, Kate; for I feel convinced that you have seen your handsome lover
      since the day mentioned."
"I will tell you how we met again," said Katherine. "On the following day I did not stir
      abroad: I wished to take my usual ramble—but I feared that I should be doing wrong to incur
      the chance of meeting him again. As I was sitting at the parlour window, he passed. I
      was so taken by surprise—he appeared so unexpectedly,—ah! no—I am deceiving myself—I am
      deceiving you;—he came not altogether unexpectedly—for I had found myself wondering more than
      once whether he would again revisit this neighbourhood. He passed the window, then—as I have
      said; and I did not turn away until it was too late. He saw me—he seemed pleased: he bowed—and
      I slightly responded to his salutation. Then I retreated from the window, and did not approach
      it again during the rest of that day. The next day was wet and gloomy; and I felt persuaded
      that I should not see him. Will you blame me if I say that I was vexed at this circumstance?
      would you believe me if I declared that I treated it with indifference? But, ah! my annoyance
      was soon dissipated:—he passed the house at the same hour as on the preceding day! He was
      wrapped in a long military cloak; and when he saw me, he bowed with the same courtesy as
      heretofore;—but methought he smiled, as if with satisfaction at seeing me. And now you will
      say that I am a vain and foolish girl;—but, dearest Ellen, I an faithfully detailing to you
      all that occurred, and all the emotions I have experienced."
"Proceed, Katherine," said Ellen. "I become deeply interested in your narrative."
"The next day was fine once more; and I felt indisposed for want of exercise," continued the
      maiden. "I accordingly walked out—but in another direction. How I trembled at the slightest
      sound which resembled a footstep! How my heart beat when a bird flew past me! But my alarms—if
      I can honestly so call them—were without foundation: I beheld not the stranger that day. On
      the ensuing one I walked out again in the same direction; and, lost in thought, I rambled to a
      considerable distance. But at length I turned homewards once more; and when in sight of the
      farm, I suddenly beheld the stranger advancing towards me across a field. He was pursuing no
      direct path:—my heart beat violently—for something told me that he was coming that way only on
      my account! In a few moments we met: he bowed—I returned his salutation;—he suddenly took my
      hand, and pressed it—I hastily withdrew it—and passed rapidly on."
"This mute declaration of love is truly romantic," said Ellen, laughing, as she threw
      herself, half undressed, into an easy chair, and began to unlace the boots which enclosed her
      pretty feet.
Katherine had emerged from her nook, and was sitting on the side of the bed which was
      farthest removed from Ellen; and there, veiling her blushes behind the curtain, the young
      maiden continued her artless narrative.
"I know not how it was," she said: "but that gentle pressure seemed to remain upon my hand.
      I
      can even feel it now, when I think of it. Is not this very foolish, Ellen? But
      you wish me to tell you every thing; and therefore you must expect to be wearied with my
      frivolous details. The incident which I have just related made a profound impression upon me.
      The image of the stranger was constantly present to my memory throughout that day. I fancied
      that there was something sincere—and yet extremely respectful,—something fervent—and yet quite
      inoffensive,—in his manner towards me when he seized and pressed my hand. But I have forgotten
      to give you some idea of his appearance. He is young—tall—slight—and of a dark complexion. He
      seems to be of a foreign nation. His eyes are black and animated, and on his lip he wears a
      small moustache. His gait is elegant; and his manners are evidently those of a polished
      gentleman."

"And his name?" said Ellen. "He has doubtless communicated that?"
"He has never spoken a word to me," answered Katherine, with the most ingenuous seriousness.
      "We have not exchanged a syllable. I think, indeed, that I have already been sufficiently
      imprudent in allowing him to touch my hand. Still I could not have prevented him—he took it so
      suddenly!"
"And you have not exchanged a syllable!" exclaimed Ellen. "But it is as well that matters
      have remained where they appear to be. I will, however, give you my advice presently. In the
      meantime, continue your narrative."
"I have little more to say," answered Katherine, with a sigh. "On the following morning I
      met him once more—that was three days ago; and he accosted me evidently with the intention of
      speaking. But I hurried on; and he stopped. When I was at some distance, I cast a rapid glance
      round: he was still standing where I had left him. He saw that I threw that hasty look behind
      me; for——but, no——I cannot tell you the indiscretion of which he was guilty. It pains me to
      think of it; and perhaps he himself is conscious of his impropriety, for I have not seen him
      since."
"What, in heaven's name, did he do?" asked Ellen, surprised by the thoughtful seriousness of
      her young friend's manner.
"Do you wish me to tell you?" exclaimed Katherine.
      "Well—I must confess all! He kissed his hand to me."
"Were I not afraid of wounding your feelings, I should laugh immoderately, Kate," said
      Ellen. "Here was I on the tenter-hooks of expectation—awaiting some truly mortifying
      disclosure; and I find that the only fault which your swain has committed, is a delicate and
      mute declaration of his attachment. But to speak seriously once more. If you really entertain
      any sentiment of interest in behalf of this handsome stranger, you must allow time and
      circumstances to serve you. These romantic meetings, dear Katherine, are calculated to fill
      your young heart with hopes which may be cruelly disappointed. If he really experience a
      tender feeling towards you, he will find means to make it known in a more satisfactory, if not
      more intelligible manner. Then will be the proper time for your friends to ascertain who he
      is. For the present I cannot,—as I wish you well,—counsel you to incur the chance of meeting
      him in that wild way again. I am glad you have imparted this secret to me. It shall be sacred.
      But, oh! I am too intimately acquainted with the world to treat lightly or neglectfully a
      matter that may so nearly touch,—that does, perhaps, already to some extent concern,—your
      happiness; more than ever do I now desire that you should pass a few days with me at Markham
      Place. If your stranger really wishes to know more of you,—if his views be honourable, and his
      pretensions feasible, he will soon institute inquiries at the farm regarding you. Mr. Bennet
      will then know how to act. In the meantime there is no necessity to mention the affair to
      either him or his wife."
The tender interest of the subject had so completely absorbed all other ideas in the mind of
      Katherine, that—no longer under the restraint of the extreme bashfulness which had driven her
      into the obscure part of the chamber in order to lay aside her vesture—she had emerged from
      the concealment of the curtain, and gradually approached nearer and nearer towards Ellen,
      while the latter was affectionately offering her counsel.
The scene was now a most touching one.
In the large arm-chair reclined the young wife, her luxuriant hair, not yet arranged for
      repose, flowing in shining waves over her ivory shoulders, and forming a dark curtain behind
      her arching neck, the dazzling whiteness and graceful contour of which were thus enhanced with
      an effect truly enchanting;—while a stray curl of the glossy hair, detached from the mass
      behind, and more fortunate than its companions, fell on the glowing bosom which was without
      shame revealed in the sanctity of that chamber.
And, standing meekly before the young wife,—with downcast eyes and blushing cheeks,—was the
      young virgin,—her white arms supporting the loosened garments over her bosom in that sweet
      attitude of modesty which so many great masters have loved to delineate in their marble
      representations of female beauty.
It seemed as if Venus, the Queen of Love, were enthroned in the voluptuous negligence of the
      boudoir, and had suddenly assumed a demeanour befitting her sovereign sway, while she tutored
      one of her attendant Graces in some lesson whose importance demanded that unusual
      seriousness.
"And now, dearest Katherine," added Ellen, after a moment's pause, "I have given you the
      best advice which my humble capacity allows me to offer; and I think so well of you that I
      feel convinced of your readiness to follow it."
"I should be unworthy of your good opinion—I should despise myself, were I to hesitate a
      moment what course to pursue," returned Kate; and, yielding to the generous emotions of
      friendship, she threw herself on the bosom of her whom she had made the confidant of her young
      love.
"And you will consent to pass a short time with me at Markham Place?" said Ellen, embracing
      her affectionately.
"I will follow your counsel in all things, dear Ellen," replied the maiden, weeping from
      emotions of gratitude and love.
Human nature has no essence more pure,—the world knows nothing more chaste,—heaven has
      endowed the mortal heart with no feeling more holy, than the nascent affection of a young
      virgin's soul. The warmest language of the sunny south is too cold to shadow forth even a
      faint outline of that enthusiastic sentiment. And God has made the richest language poor in
      the same respect, because the depths of hearts that thrill with love's emotions are too sacred
      for the common contemplation. The musical voice of Love stirs the source of the sweetest
      thoughts within the human breast, and steals into the most profound recesses of the soul,
      touching chords which never vibrated before, and calling into gentle companionship delicious
      hopes till then unknown!
Yes—the light of a young maiden's first love breaks dimly but beautifully upon her as the
      silver lustre of a star glimmers through a thickly-woven bower; and the first blush that
      mantles her cheek, as she feels the primal influence, is faint and pure as that which a
      rose-leaf might cast upon marble. But how rapidly does that light grow stronger, and that
      flush deeper,—until the powerful effulgence of the one irradiates every corner of her heart,
      and the crimson glow of the other suffuses every feature of her countenance.
