
CHAPTER CXXVI. THE RECTOR OF SAINT DAVID'S.
IT is not necessary to explain to our readers the precise locality of the splendid Chapel of
      Ease known by the name of Saint David's. Suffice it to say, that it is situate not a hundred
      miles from Russell or Tavistock Square; and that the clergyman attached to it at the period of
      which we are writing was the Rev. Reginald Tracy.
It was Sunday morning.
A crowd of well-dressed persons, of both sexes, poured into the chapel of Saint David's. The
      street was lined with carriages; and when each in its turn drew up at the door of the sacred
      edifice, the élite of the aristocracy might have been observed to alight and hasten
      to form part of the immense congregation assembled to hear the most popular preacher of the
      day.
The interior of the chapel was vast, and of a convenient oblong form. It was lofty, and
      beautifully fitted up. On three sides were large and roomy galleries, amphitheatrically
      arranged with pews. The magnificent organ stood in the gallery over the entrance; and at the
      further end was the communion-table. The pulpit, with its annexed reading-desk, stood a little
      in front of the altar, and facing the organ. The pews both of the galleries and the body of
      the church were provided with soft cushions; for this was a proprietary chapel, and there was
      but a slender accommodation for the poor. Indeed, this class occupied plain benches in the
      aisles, and were compelled to enter by a small side-door so that they might not mingle with
      the crowd of elegantly dressed ladies and fashionable gentlemen that poured into the chapel
      through the grand entrance in front.
A policeman maintained order at the side-door, which admitted the humbler classes; but two
      beadles, wearing huge cocked hats and ample blue cloaks bedizened with broad gold-lace, and
      holding gilt wands in their hands, cleared the way for the wealthy, the great, and the proud,
      who enjoyed the privilege of entrance by means of the front gates.
"This way, my lord. Pray step this way, my lady," said the polite beadles, in their blandest
      tones. "The pew-opener is in attendance, my lord. My lady, here is the hymn-book, which your
      ladyship commanded me to procure for your ladyship. My lord, take care of the step. This door,
      ladies, if you please. Gentlemen, this way, if you would be so condescending. Yes,
      sir—certainly, sir—the pew-opener will find you a seat, sir—immediately, sir. Ladies,
      this way is less crowded. You will find the left aisle comparatively empty. My lord, straight
      forward, if your lordship will be so good. Ladies, the pew-opener is in attendance. This way,
      ladies and gentlemen!"
And at the side-door the policeman might be heard vociferating in somewhat like the
      following manner:—
"Now, then, you young woman, where the deuce are you pushing to? Want to get a good place,
      eh? What! with sich a rag of a shawl as that there?—I'm afeard I can't admit you. Now, boy,
      stand back, or I'll show you the reason why. I say, old woman, you ain't wanted here; we
      doesn't take in vimen with red cloaks. You'd better go to the dissenting chapel round the
      corner, you had: that's good enow for you. Holloa! what's this mean? a sweep in his Sunday
      toggery. Come, come; that's rayther too strong, chummy. You toddle off, now. Here, young
      woman, you may come in; you may—'cos you're very pretty: that way, my dear. Holloa! here comes
      a feller without a nose. No—no—that won't do at no price; my orders is partickler; no von
      comes here vithout a nose. Vy, you'd frighten all the great ladies out o' their vits. They
      already complains of the riff-raff that comes to this here chapel; so we must try and keep it
       se-lect—just like Gibbs's westry. Ha! ha! now then, who's that blaigaird a-talking
      so loud there? It's on'y me as can talk here at this door, 'cos I'm official—I am. This vay,
      young woman: push the door, my dear. Well, if you ain't married, I'm sure you ought to be.
      Now, then, who's that a guffawing like a rhinoceros? I'll clap a stopper on your mug, I will.
      Come, come; you go back, old chap: no workus-livery here; this is the wrong shop for the
      workus people; this is—I can tell yer. Vell, you're a genteel couple, I don't think—coming to
      a pro-pri-ai-tory chapel vithout no gloves, and fists as black as tinkers. Stand back
      there, boys, and let that young gal vith the yaller ribands come up: she's decent, she is.
      Yes, my dear,—you may go in, my dear. Now, then, stand back—no more comes in this mornin': the
      orgin's begun."
With these words the policeman thrust the poor people violently down the steps, entered the
      chapel, and closed the door in their faces.
The interior was crowded throughout; and it was very evident that curiosity and fashion,
      more than devotion, had congregated in that chapel the rank, wealth, and beauty that filled
      the pews below and above.
The solemn swell of the organ pealed through the sacred edifice; and then arose the morning
      hymn,
       sung by a select corps of choristers and by twelve youths belonging to the
      school of a celebrated professor of Music for the Millions.
A venerable clergyman, with hair as white as his own surplice, occupied the reading-desk;
      and in a pew close by the pulpit, was the cynosure that attracted all eyes—the Rev. Reginald
      Tracy.
The tall commanding form of this clergyman would have rendered him conspicuous amongst the
      congregation, had no other circumstance tended to endow him with popularity. His countenance
      was eminently handsome: his high and open forehead was set off, but not shaded, by dark brown
      hair which curled naturally; his hazel eyes beamed with the fire of a brilliant intellect; his
      Roman nose, small mouth, and well-turned chin formed a profile at once pleasing and
      commanding; and his large well-curled whiskers, meeting beneath his chin, confirmed the manly
      beauty of that proud and imposing countenance.
There was a profound, but totally unassuming, sense of the solemnity of the scene and of the
      sanctity of his profession in his manner and deportment: his voice did not join in the hymn,
      but his mind evidently followed the words, as he from time to time glanced at the book which
      he held in his hand.
Doubtless he was well aware—but nothing in his demeanour seemed to indicate this
      consciousness—that he was the centre of all attraction: though not servilely meek nor
      hypocritically austere, he was still surrounded by a halo of religious fervour which commanded
      the most profound respect.
And towards him were turned hundreds of bright eyes; and the glances of fair maids dwelt
      upon his countenance rather than on their books.
The hymn ceased, and the service proceeded.
At length the anthem succeeding the communion-service, filled the chapel with its solemn
      echoes, accompanied by the pealing of the magnificent organ. Then a simultaneous sensation
      pervaded the entire congregation, and all eyes were directed towards the Rev. Reginald Tracy,
      who was now ascending the steps to the pulpit.
The anthem was ended; the congregation resumed their seats; and the preacher commenced.
It is not, however, our intention to treat our readers to a sermon: suffice it to say, that
      the eloquence and matter of the discourse which the Rev. Reginald Tracy delivered upon this
      occasion, were well calculated to sustain his high reputation.
But of the attentive audience, no individual seemed to be more deeply impressed with his
      sermon than Lady Cecilia Harborough, who sate in a pew near the pulpit—next indeed to the one
      which the clergyman himself had occupied during the former part of the service.
She was alone; for on the previous day she had hired that pew for her own especial use.
Whenever the eyes of the preacher were turned in the direction where she sate, she appeared
      to be wiping away tears from her cheeks; for the sermon was on a solemn and pathetic
      subject.
More than once she fancied that he observed her; and her heart beat triumphantly in
      her bosom.
When the sermon was concluded she remained in her pew, and allowed the rest of the
      congregation to leave the chapel ere she moved from her seat. At length the sacred edifice was
      deserted, save by herself and two or three officials connected with the establishment.
In a few minutes the pew-opener—an elderly matron-like person—accosted her, and said, "If
      you please, ma'am, the doors will be closed almost directly."
"Could you—could you oblige me with a glass of water?" faltered Lady Cecilia: "I feel as if
      I were about to faint."
"Oh! certainly, ma'am," answered the pew-opener; and she hurried to the vestry.
Presently she returned, accompanied by the Rev. Reginald Tracy himself.
"Is the lady very unwell?" inquired the clergyman of the pew-opener, as they advanced
      together towards Lady Cecilia's seat.
"She seems very languid—quite overcome, sir," was the answer. "But this is the pew."
The clergyman stepped forward, and instantly recognised the fair indisposed.
"Lady Harborough!" he exclaimed. "Is your ladyship unwell?"
And taking the tumbler of water from the pew-opener, he handed it to the baronet's wife.
"It is nothing—the heat, I suppose," murmured Lady Cecilia; and she drank a portion of the
      water. "Thank you, Mr. Tracy, for your attention: I feel better—much better now."
"Will your ladyship step into the vestry and sit down for a few minutes?" inquired the
      clergyman, really concerned at the presumed indisposition of the lady.
"If it would not be indiscreet, I should esteem it a favour," answered Cecilia, still
      speaking in a tremulous and faltering tone.
Reginald Tracy instantly proffered his arm to the lady, and conducted her to the vestry,
      where the venerable clergyman who had read the service was calmly discussing a glass of
      sherry.
"I am ashamed—perfectly ashamed to give you all this trouble, Mr. Tracy," said Cecilia, as
      she accepted the chair which was offered her; "but the heat of the chapel—and, to tell the
      truth, the emotions which your beautiful discourse aroused within me—quite overcame me."
"The chapel was, indeed, very much crowded," answered Reginald Tracy, touched by the homage
      rendered to his talent in the second cause which Lady Cecilia alleged for her
      indisposition.
"Nevertheless, this little incident will not in future prevent me from becoming one of the
      most regular of your congregation," observed Cecilia, with a smile.
Mr. Tracy bowed, and smiled also.
Both had brilliant teeth, and it was impossible for either to fail to notice this beautiful
      feature in each other.
"I feel quite recovered now," said Cecilia, after a short pause, "and will return home. I
      offer you my best thanks for this kind attention on your part."
"Do not mention it, Lady Harborough. But I cannot permit you to return alone, after this
      indisposition: allow me to conduct you as far as your own door?"
"I could not think of taking you out of your way—"
"It happens that I have a call to make in Tavistock Square, and am actually going that way,"
      interrupted Reginald Tracy.
Lady Cecilia, like a well-bred person as she was, offered no farther objection, but accepted
      the clergyman's escort to her own abode.
During the short walk she rendered herself as agreeable as possible; though purposely
      conversing upon topics suitable to the sabbath, and to the profession of her companion. She
      also introduced one
       or two delicate, and apparently unsophisticated, allusions to the eloquence
      which had produced so deep an impression upon a crowded congregation, and the profound
      attention with which the sermon was received. Then she artfully, but with admirably assumed
      sincerity, questioned Mr. Tracy upon two or three passages in that discourse, and suffered him
      to perceive that not one word of it had been lost upon her.
Mr. Reginald Tracy was mortal like any other human being, and was not exempt from some of
      the weaknesses of that mortality. It was impossible for him not to experience a partial
      sentiment of pride and satisfaction at the impression which his eloquence had evidently made
      upon a young and beautiful woman; and that feeling became in the least degree more tender by
      the fact that this young and beautiful woman was leaning upon his arm.
Then how could he feel otherwise than flattered when, with her witching eyes upturned
      towards his countenance, she questioned him—so meekly and so sincerely, as he thought—upon the
      very passages of his sermon which he himself considered to be the best, and which he had
      studied to render the most effective? He was flattered—he smiled, and endeavoured to
      render himself agreeable to so charming a woman.
At length they reached the door of Lady Harborough's abode. The syren invited him to walk
      in, as a matter of course; but Mr. Tracy was compelled to forego that pleasure. He was really
      engaged elsewhere; or there is no saying but that he might have stepped in—only for a few
      minutes.
Lady Cecilia extended her hand to him at parting, and held his for just two or three
      moments, while she renewed her thanks for his attention. The action was perfectly natural; and
      yet the gentle contact of that delicate hand produced upon Reginald Tracy a sensation which he
      had never before experienced. It seemed to impart a glow of warmth and pleasure to his entire
      frame.
At length they separated; and as the Rector of Saint David's pursued his walk, he found his
      mind from time to time wandering away from more serious reflections, and reverting to the half
      hour which he had passed so agreeably in the society of Lady Harborough.
