
CHAPTER CCLV.   GIBBET AT MARKHAM PLACE.
It was at about eight o'clock in the evening when Gibbet alighted from a cab at the entrance
      of Markham Place.
He knocked timidly at the door; but the servant who answered the summons received him with
      respect—for not the veriest mendicant that crawled upon the face of the earth ever met with an
      insulting glance nor a harsh word from any inmate of that dwelling.
To Gibbet's question whether "His Highness was at home?" the domestic replied by a courteous
      invitation to enter; and being shown into a parlour—the very same where more than two years
      previously he and his father had one evening supped with our hero—he was shortly joined by the
      Prince.
The hump-back, well as he had been enabled to judge of the excellent qualities of Richard,
      was nevertheless surprised at the kind and affable manner in which that exalted personage
      hastened forward to welcome him; and tears of gratitude rolled down the poor creature's face
      as he felt his hands clasped in those of one whom he so profoundly respected and so
      enthusiastically admired.
Markham made him sit down, and rang the bell for wine and refreshments: then, noticing that
      the hump-back was in deep mourning, he hastened to question him as to the cause—which he
      nevertheless could well divine.
"Alas! my lord," answered Gibbet, "my poor father is no more! And latterly—ever since he
      knew your Highness—he was so affectionate, so kind towards me, that I feel his loss very
      painfully indeed!"
"Compose yourself, my good friend," said Richard; "and be solaced with the thought that your
      father has gone to a better world."
"It was but last week, my lord," continued Gibbet, drying his tears, "that he was apparently
      in the full enjoyment of health. Your Highness is aware—by means of the letters which you were
      so condescending as to permit me occasionally to address to you—that the business in which my
      father embarked in the country prospered well, and that, under an assumed name, we were
      leading a happy and a comfortable life. But my father was superstitious; and I think he
      frightened himself to death."
"Explain yourself, my friend," said Markham: "you interest me considerably."
"I should inform your Highness," proceeded John Smithers, "of an incident which occurred
      about two years ago. You recollect the letter that your Highness wrote to acquaint us that you
      had unravelled the mystery which had so long involved the birth of ——of——"
"Katherine—call her Katherine," said Richard, kindly. "You shall see her presently—and she
      would be offended with you were you to call her by any other name than that by which you knew
      her for so many years."
"Oh! my lord—now you afford me real joy!" ejaculated Gibbet, wiping his eyes once more. "But
      as I was about to say, it was in the middle of the very night before the letter reached us,
      that my father came to my room in a dreadful fright. He held a rushlight in his hand—and he
      was as pale
      as death. Horror was depicted on his countenance. I implored him to tell me what
      had disturbed him; and, when he had somewhat recovered his presence of mind, he said in a
      solemn and sepulchral tone—oh! I never shall forget it!—'John, I have just received a
       second warning. I was in the middle of a deep sleep, when something awoke me with a start;
       and by the dim light of the candle, I beheld the countenance of Harriet Wilmot gazing with a
       sweet and beneficent expression upon me through the opening of the curtains. It lingered for
       a few moments, and then faded away!'—Vainly did I reason with my father upon the
      subject: vainly did I represent to him that he was the sport of a vision—a fanciful dream. He
      shook his head solemnly, bade me mention the topic no more, and then returned to his room. For
      a few days afterwards he was pensive and thoughtful; but in a short time the impression thus
      strangely made upon him wore away, and he became cheerful and contented as usual."
"Ah! now I begin to comprehend the meaning of your observation that your poor father
      frightened himself to death!" exclaimed Richard. "But give me all the details."
"I will, my lord. Two years passed since that time, and the subject was never mentioned by
      either of us. Katherine, as your lordship knows, used to write to us frequently; and my father
      was always rejoiced to hear from her and of her great prosperity. We had a feast, my lord, on
      the day when she was united to that good Italian gentleman whom you wrote to tell us she was
      to marry; and I never saw my father in better spirits. Well, my lord, thus time slipped away;
      and all went on smoothly until last Monday week, when we retired to rest somewhat later than
      usual, having had a few friends to pass the evening. It was about two o'clock in the morning,
      and I was in a profound sleep, when some one burst into my room. I started up: my poor father
      fell fainting upon the bed. Assistance was immediately summoned—a surgeon was sent for—and the
      proper remedies were applied. But all in vain! He remained in a kind of torpor two days; and
      early in the morning of the third he seemed to recover a little. He opened his eyes and
      recognised me. A languid smile animated his features: he drew me towards him, and embraced me
      affectionately. Then, before he released me from his arms, he whispered in a faint tone,
       'John, I am dying—I know I am! The last warning has been given—I have seen her face a
       third time! But how beautiful she looked—so mild, so angelic!'—With these words his eyes
      closed—a sudden change came over him—and in a few minutes he was no more."
"And now, my poor friend," said Markham, wiping away a tear, while Gibbet's eyes were
      streaming, "you are without a companion—without a parent; and the many acts of kindness you
      showed to my sister when she was dependant on your father's bounty, have created for you deep
      sympathies in the hearts of those who will now endeavour to solace you in your present
      affliction."
"Oh! my lord, you are goodness itself!" ejaculated Gibbet: "but to-morrow I shall return
      into the country to realize the property which I now possess through my father's death—and
      then—and then, my lord——"
"You will come back to London—to this house," said Markham, emphatically.
"No, my lord—I shall repair to Liverpool, and thence depart for America," answered Gibbet,
      conquering his emotions and speaking more firmly than he had yet done. "Oh! do not seek to
      turn me from my purpose, my lord—for my happiness depends upon that step."
Richard surveyed the hump-back with unfeigned astonishment;—and this sentiment was strangely
      increased, when the poor creature, suddenly yielding to the impulse of his emotions, fell at
      our hero's feet, and catching hold of both his hands, exclaimed, "Oh! my lord, pardon me for
      what I have done! From our childhood I have loved Katherine—loved her devotedly,—first as a
      brother should love a sister—and then, my lord—oh! pardon me—but I knew not that she was by
      birth so high above me—I could not foresee that she would be some day acknowledged as the
      sister of a great Prince! And thus, my lord—if I have offended you by daring at one time to
      love Katherine more tenderly than I ought—you will forgive me—you will forgive me! And believe
      me, my lord, when I solemnly declare that never did I understand my own feelings in respect to
      her—never did I comprehend why her image was so unceasingly present to my imagination—until
      that letter came in which you announced to my father her approaching marriage. Then, my lord,
      then——but—oh! forgive me—pardon me for this boundless insolence—this impious presumption!"
Gibbet had spoken with such strange rapidity and such wild—startling—almost frenzied
      energy,—and the revelation his words conveyed had so astonished our hero, that the sudden
      seriousness which his countenance assumed was mistaken by the poor hump-back for severity.
But this error was speedily dissipated, when Markham, recovering from his bewilderment,
      raised him from the floor, conducted him to a seat, and, leaning over him, said in the kindest
      possible manner, "My dear friend, you have no forgiveness to ask—I no pardon to accord. In my
      estimation distinctions of birth are as nothing; and if you have loved my sister, it was a
      generous—an honest—a worthy attachment which you nourished. But, alas! my poor friend—that
      attachment is most unfortunate!"
"I know it, my lord—I know it!" cried Gibbet, tears streaming from his eyes: "and had I not
      been compelled to avow my secret, as an explanation of the motive which will induce me to seek
      another clime where I may commune with my own heart in the solitude of some forest on the
      verge of civilization—that secret would never have been revealed! And now, my lord," he added,
      hastily wiping his eyes and assuming a calm demeanour, "seek not to deter me from my
      purpose—and let us close our lips upon this too painful subject!"
"Be it as you will, my good friend," said the Prince. "But for this night, at all events,
      you will make my house your home."
Gibbet gave a reluctant consent; and, when his feelings were entirely calmed, Richard
      introduced him into the drawing-room where Isabella, Katherine and her husband, Ellen and Mr.
      Monroe were seated.
And here the reader may exclaim, "What! present the hump-back orphan of the late hangman to
      that elegant, refined, and accomplished Princess whose father sits upon a throne!"
Yes, reader: and it was precisely because this
      poor creature was deformed—an orphan—with what many might term a stigma on his
      parentage—and so lonely and desolate in the world, that Richard Markham took him by the hand,
      and introduced him into the bosom of his domesticity. But the Prince also knew that the
      unfortunate hump-back possessed a heart that might have done honour to a monarch; and our hero
      looked not to personal appearance—nor to birth—nor to fortune—nor to name,—but to the
      qualities of the mind!
And Isabella, who had heard all the previous history of those with whom Katherine had passed
      so many years of her life, welcomed that poor deformed creature even as her husband had
      welcomed him,—welcomed him, too, the more kindly because he was so deformed!
But we shall not dwell upon this scene:—we shall leave our readers to picture to themselves
      the delight of Katherine at beholding him whom she had long believed to be her cousin, and who
      was ever ready to catch the stripes that were destined for her,—her sorrow when she heard of
      the death of the hump-back's father,—and the happiness experienced by Gibbet himself at
      passing an evening in the society of the inmates of Markham Place.
Accident enabled him to obtain a few moments' conversation aside with Ellen; and to her he
      broke in as few words but in as delicate a manner as possible, the sad news which he had to
      communicate relative to Greenwood.
The young lady suppressed her grief as well as she could; but she shortly afterwards pleaded
      indisposition and retired early to her room—there to ponder and weep, without fear of
      interruption, over the fallen fortunes of her husband!
On the following morning, Gibbet—true to his resolve, which our hero no longer attempted to
      shake—took his departure from Markham Place, laden with the presents which had been forced
      upon him, and followed by the kindest wishes of those good friends whom he left behind.
