
CHAPTER LXIV. THE COUNTERPLOT.
ON the same day that the above conversation took place in the parlour of the boozing-ken on
      Saffron Hill, Markham was seated in his library, with several books before him. His
      countenance was pale, and bore the traces of recent illness; and an air of profound melancholy
      reigned upon his handsome features. He endeavoured to fix his attention on the volume beneath
      his eyes; but his thoughts were evidently far away from the subject of his studies. At length,
      as if to compose his mind, he turned abruptly towards his writing-desk, and took thence a note
      which he had already perused a thousand times, and every word of which was indelibly stamped
      upon his memory.
We can suppose a traveller upon Saara's burning desert,—sinking beneath fatigue, and
      oppressed by a thirst, the agony of which becomes maddening. Presently he reaches a well: it
      is deep and difficult of access;—nevertheless, the traveller's life or death reposes at the
      bottom of that well. In like manner did Markham's only hope lay in that letter.
No wonder, then, that he read it so often; no marvel that he referred to it when his mind
      was afflicted, and when the wing of his spirit was oppressed by the dense atmosphere of
      despair.
And yet the contents of that letter were simple and laconic enough:

"Richmond.
"The Countess Alteroni presents her compliments to Mr. Markham, and begs to acknowledge Mr.
       Markham's letter of yesterday's date.
"The countess expresses her most sincere thinks for a communication which prevented an
       arrangement that, under the circumstances disclosed, would have proved a serious family
       calamity."

"Yes—Isabella is saved!" said Markham to himself, as his eyes wandered over the contents of
      that most welcome note, which he had received some days previously: "it is impossible to
      mistake the meaning of that last sentence. She is saved—and I have been the instrument of her
      salvation! I have rescued her from an union with a profligate, an adventurer, a man of
      infamous heart! Surely—surely her parents will admit that I have paid back a portion of the
      debt of gratitude which their kindness imposed upon me! Yes—the countess herself seems to hold
      out a hope of reconciliation;—that note bids me hope! It is more than coldly polite—it is
      confidential:—it gives me to understand the results of my own letter denouncing the miscreant
      George Montague Greenwood."
Richard's countenance brightened as he reasoned thus within himself. But in a few moments, a
      dark cloud again displaced that gleam of happiness.
"Enthusiastic visionary that I am!" he murmured to himself. "I construe common politeness
      into a ground of hope: I fancy that every bird I see—however ill-omened—is a dove of promise,
      with an olive-branch in its mouth! Alas! mine is a luckless fate—and God alone can tell what
      strange destinies yet await me."
He rose from his chair, and walked to the window. The rain, which had poured down in
      torrents all the morning, had ceased; and the afternoon was fine and unusually warm for the
      early part of January. He glanced towards the hill, whereon the two trees stood, and thought
      of his brother—that much-loved brother, of whose fate he was kept so cruelly ignorant!
While he was standing at the window, buried in profound thought, and with his eyes fixed
      upon the hill, he heard a light step near him; and in a moment Ellen Monroe was by his
      side.
"Do I intrude, Richard?" she exclaimed. "I knocked twice at the door; and not receiving any
      reply, imagined that there was no one here. I came to change a book. But you—you are
      thoughtful and depressed."
"I was meditating upon a topic which to me is always fraught with distressing ideas,"
      answered Markham: "I was thinking of my brother!"
"Your brother!" ejaculated Ellen; and her countenance became ashy pale.
"Yes," continued Richard, not observing her emotion; "I would rather know the worst—if
      misfortunes have really overtaken him—than remain in this painful state of suspense. If he be
      prosperous, why should he stay away? if poor, why does he not seek consolation with me?"
"Perhaps," said Ellen, hesitatingly, "perhaps he is—in reality—much better off than—than—any
      one who feels interested in him."
"Heaven knows!" ejaculated Markham. "But ere now you observed that I was melancholy and
      dispirited; and I have told you wherefore. Ellen, I must make the same charge against you."
      
"Against me!" cried the young lady, with a start, while at the same time a deep blush
      suffused her cheeks.
"Yes, against you," continued Richard, now glancing towards her. "You may think that I am
      joking—but I never was more serious in my life. For the few days that you have been in this
      house, you have been subject to intervals of profound depression."
"I!" repeated Ellen, the hue of her blushes becoming more intensely crimson, as her glances
      sank confusedly beneath those of Markham.
"Alas! Ellen," answered Richard, "I have myself been too deeply initiated in the mysteries
      of adversity and sorrow,—I have drunk too deeply of the cup of affliction,—I have experienced
      too much bitter, bitter anguish, not to be able to detect the presence of unhappiness in
      others. And by many signs, Ellen, have I discovered that you are unhappy. I speak to you as a
      friend—I do not wish to penetrate into your secrets;—but if there be any thing in which I can
      aid you—if there be aught wherein my poor services or my counsels may be rendered
      available,—speak, command me!"
"Oh! Richard," cried Ellen, tears starting into her eyes, "how kind—how generous of you thus
      to think of me—you who have already done so much for my father and myself!"
"Were you not the companion of my childhood, Ellen? and should I not be to you as a brother,
      and you to me as a sister? Let me be your brother, then—and tell me how I can alleviate the
      weight of that unhappiness which is crushing your young heart!"
"A brother!" exclaimed Ellen, almost wildly; "yes—you shall—you must be a brother to me! And
      I will be your sister! Ah! there is consolation in that idea!"—then, after a moment's pause,
      she added, "But the time is not yet come when I, as a sister, shall appeal to you as a brother
      for that aid which a brother alone can give! And until then—ask me no more—speak to me no
      farther upon the subject—I implore you!"
Ellen pressed Richard's hand convulsively, and then hurried from the room.
Markham had scarcely recovered from the astonishment into which these last words had thrown
      him,—words which, coming from the lips of a young and beautiful girl, were fraught with
      additional mystery and interest,—when Whittingham entered the library.
"A young lad, Master Richard," said the old butler, "has called about the situation which is
      wacated in our household. I took the percaution of leaving word yesterday with the people at a
      public of most dubitable respectability called the Servants' Arms, where I call now
      and then when I go into town; and it appears that this young lad having called in there quite
      perspicuously this morning heard of the place."
"Let him step in, Whittingham," said Markham. "I will speak to him—although, to tell you the
      truth, I do not admire a public-house recommendation."
Whittingham made no reply, but opening the door, exclaimed, "Step in here, young man; step
      in here."
And Henry Holford stood in the presence of Richard Markham.
Whittingham retired.
"I believe you are in want of a young lad, sir," said Holford, "to assist in the house."
"I am," answered Markham. "Have you over served in that capacity before?"
"No, sir; but if you would take me and give me a trial, I should feel very much obliged. I
      have neither father or mother, and am totally dependant upon my own exertions."
These words were quite sufficient to command the attention and sympathy of the
      generous-hearted Richard. The lad was moreover of superior manners, and well-spoken; and there
      was something in his appeal to Markham which was very touching.
"What have you been before, my good lad?"
"To tell you the truth, sir," was the reply, "I have been a simple pot-boy in a
      public-house."
"And of course the landlord will give you a character?"
"Yes—for honesty and industry, sir; but—"
"But what?"
"I do not think it is of any use to apply to the landlord for a character, because—"
"Because what?" demanded Markham, seeing that the young man again hesitated. "If you can
      have a character for honesty and industry, you need not be afraid of any thing else that could
      be said of you."
"The truth is, sir," answered Holford, "I absented myself without leave, and remained away
      for two or three days: then, when I returned this morning at a very early hour I refused to
      give an account of my proceedings. That is the whole truth, sir; and if you will only give me
      a trial—"
"There is something very straightforward and ingenuous about you," said Markham: "perhaps
      you would have no objection to tell me how you were occupied during your absence."
"That, sir, is impossible! But I declare most solemnly that I did nothing for which I can
      reproach myself—unless," added Holford, "it was in leading a couple of villains to believe
      that I would do a certain thing which I never once intended to do."
"Really your answers are so strange," cried Richard, "that I know not what to say to you. It
      however appears from your last observation that two villains tempted you to do something
      wrong—that you lead them to believe you would fall into their plans—and that you never meant
      to fulfil your promise."
"It is all perfectly true, sir. They proposed a certain scheme in which I was to be an
      agent: I accepted the office they assigned to me, because it suited my disposition, and
      promised to gratify my curiosity in a way where it was deeply interested."
"And how did you explain your conduct to the two men whom you speak of?" inquired Richard,
      not knowing what to think of the young lad, but half inclining to believe that his bruin was
      affected.
"I invented certain excuses, sir," was Holford's reply, "which completely damped their
      ardour in the matter alluded to. And now, sir, will you give me a trial? I feel convinced you
      will: had I not thought so from the very beginning, I should not have spoken so freely as I
      have done."
"I am disposed to assist you—I am desirous to meet your wishes," said Markham. "Still, your
      representations are rather calculated to awaken fears than clear up doubts concerning you.
      What guarantee can you offer that you will never see those two villains again? what
      security—"
"Sir," said Holford, "your own manner is so frank and kind—so very condescending, indeed, to
      a poor lad like me—that I would not deceive you for the world. I had promised to meet
      those men to-night—for the last time—"
"To meet them again?"
"Yes, sir—to receive the reward promised for the service which I undertook—"
      
"Ah! young man," cried Markham, "this is most imprudent—if not actually criminal! and where
      was this precious interview to take place?"
"At the Dark-House, sir—"
"The Dark-House!" ejaculated Markham: "what—a low tavern in Brick Lane,
      Spitalfields?"
"The same, sir."
"And the names of the two men?" demanded Richard hastily.
"Their right names and those by which they are commonly known amongst their own set, are
      very different," said Holford.
"How are they known? what are they called in their own infamous sphere?" cried Markham, his
      impatience amounting almost to a fever: "speak!"
"I do not know whether I shall be doing right," said Holford, hesitating,—"perhaps I have
      already told you too much—"
"Speak, I say!" cried Richard, taking Holford by the collar of his jacket; "speak. You do
      not know—you cannot guess how necessary it is for me to have my present suspicions cleared up!
      Speak—I swear no harm shall happen to you: on the contrary—I will reward you, if it should
      turn out as I suppose. Once more, who are these villains?"
"They are called—"
"What? speak—speak!"
"The Resurrection Man—"
"Ah!"
"And the Cracksman."
"Then I am right—my suspicions are confirmed!" ejaculated Markham, relinquishing his hold
      upon Holford's jacket, and throwing himself upon a chair. "Sit down, my good lad—sit down: you
      and I have not done with each other yet."
The young man appeared alarmed by Richard's exclamations and manners, and seemed undecided
      whether to remain where he was or attempt to escape.
Richard divined what was passing in the lad's bosom, and hastened to reassure him.
"Sit down—and fear nothing. I swear most solemnly that no harm shall happen to you, be you
      who or what you may: for I cannot suppose that you are a participator in the crimes of these
      miscreants. You would not have come to me to tell me all this—Oh! no; Providence has sent you
      hither this day."
Holford took a seat, wondering how this extraordinary scene was to terminate.
"Are you aware of the pursuits of those two men whom you have named—I mean the full extent
      of the atrocity of their pursuits?" demanded Richard, after a few moments' pause.
"I know that they are body-snatchers and burglars, sir," answered Holford: "indeed it was a
      burglary of which they would have made me the instrument; but, oh! sir—believe me, I am
      incapable of such a crime; and the representations I have made to them have induced them to
      abandon all idea of it."
"And you are not aware, then," continued Richard, "that they are more than body-snatchers
      and burglars?"
"More, sir!" repeated Holford in a tone of unfeigned surprise: "Oh! no, sir—how can they be
      more than that?"
"They are more—far more," rejoined Markham, with a shudder: "they are murderers!"
"Murderers!" ejaculated Holford, starting from his chair with mingled emotions of horror and
      alarm.
"Yes—murderers of the most diabolical and cold-blooded description," said Markham. "But it
      is too long a tale to tell you now. Let it suffice for you to know that I was myself upon the
      point of becoming a victim to that most infernal of all miscreants, the Resurrection Man; and
      I should conceive that the other whom you named is in all respects as bad as he!"
"Murderers!" repeated Holford, his mental eyes fixed, by a horrible and snake-like
      fascination, upon the fearful idea now suddenly engendered in his imagination.
"Murderers," echoed Markham solemnly; "and through you must they be surrendered up to
      justice!"
"Through me!" cried Holford.
"Yes—through you. If you be really imbued with such honourable feelings as you ere now
      professed, you will not hesitate for one moment in discharging this duty towards society."
"But it would be an odious act of treachery on my part," said Holford, "let the men be what
      they may."
"If you manifest such a reluctance to rid the metropolis of two murderers," cried Markham
      angrily, "I shall conceive that you are more intimately connected with them than you choose to
      admit. But if you imagine that these villains are more innocent than I describe them—if you
      fancy that some motive prompts me to exaggerate their infamy, I will tell you that no language
      can enhance their guilt—no vengeance be too severe. Have you not heard that men have
      disappeared in a most strange and mysterious manner within the last year, at the eastern end
      of the metropolis,—disappeared without leaving a trace behind them,—men who were not in that
      situation which hurries the despairing wretch on to suicide? You must have heard of this! If
      not, learn the dismal fact now from my lips! But the assassins—the dark and secret assassins
      of these numerous victims, are the wretches whom we shall this night lodge in the grasp of
      justice!"
"As you will, sir," said Holford, awe-inspired by the solemnity of Markham's voice, and the
      impressiveness of his manner. "I was to meet them at the Dark-House at nine o'clock:
      do you take measures to secure them."
"Most assuredly I will," returned Markham emphatically. "And when I think of all that you
      have told me, my good lad," continued Richard, "I am inclined to believe that you yourself
      would have been a victim to those wretches."
"Me!" exclaimed Holford, horror-struck at the mere idea.
"Yes—such is now my conviction. They made an appointment with you at the
      Dark-House, to give you a sum of money you say?"
"Yes, sir."
"Foolish boy! Do such men pay their agents or accomplices who fail to fulfil their designs,
      or who deceive them? do such men part with their money so readily—that money which they
      encounter so many perils to obtain? And that Dark-House—the place of your
      appointment,—that Dark-House is in the immediate neighbourhood of the head-quarters
      of their crimes! Yes—there cannot be a doubt: you also were to be a victim!"
"My God! what a fearful danger have I incurred!" ejaculated Holford, shuddering from head to
      foot, as Markham thus addressed him; then, when he called to mind the ferocity with which the
      Cracksman menaced him with his knife, and the coaxing manner in which the Resurrection Man had
      engaged him to form the appointment for the evening, he felt convinced that the dread
      suspicion was a correct one.
"You say that the hour of meeting is fixed for nine?" cried Markham, after a few minutes'
      reflection.
      

"Yes, sir; and now let me thank you with the most unfeigned sincerity for having thus saved
      me from a dreadful death. Your kindness and condescension have led to a lengthy conversation
      between us; and accident has made me reveal to you those particulars which have led you to
      form that conclusion relative to the fate destined for myself. You must not imagine for a
      moment that I would league with such villains in any of their diabolical plans. No, sir—I
      would sooner be led forth to the place of execution this minute. Although I consented to do
      their bidding in one respect, I repeat that I had mine own curiosity to gratify—that is, my
      own inclinations to serve: but when they wished to make me their instrument and tool in
      forwarding their unholy motives, I shrank back in dismay. Oh! yes, sir—now I comprehend the
      entire infamy of those men's characters: I see from what a fearful abyss I have escaped."
There was again something so sincere and so natural in the manner and emphasis of this young
      lad, that Markham surveyed him with sentiments of mingled interest and surprise. Then all the
      thoughts of our hero were directed towards the one grand object he had in view—that of
      delivering a horde of ruffians over to justice.
"The gang may be more numerous than I imagine," said Markham; "indeed, I know that there are
      a third man and hideous woman connected with those two assassins whom you have already named.
      It will therefore be advisable to lay such a trap that will lead to the capture of them
      all."
"Oh! by all means, sir," exclaimed Holford, enthusiastically: "I do not wish to show them
      any mercy now!"
"We have no time to lose: it is now four o'clock," said Markham; "and we must arrange the
      plan of proceeding with the police. You will accompany me on this enterprise."
"Mr. Markham," returned Holford, respectfully but firmly, "I have no objection to aid you in
      any shape or way in capturing these miscreants, and rooting out their head quarters; but I
      must beg of you not to place me in a position where I shall be questioned how I came to make
      this appointment for to-night with those two wretches. It would compel me to make a revelation
      of the manner in which I employed my time during the last few days; and that—for
      certain reasons—I could not do!"
Markham appeared to reflect profoundly.
"I do not see how your presence can be dispensed with," he observed at the expiration of
      some minutes. "In order to discover the exact spot where the murderers dwell, it will be
      advisable for you to allow yourself to be inveigled thither, and myself and the police would
      be close behind you."
"Oh! never—never, sir!" cried Holford, turning deadly pale. "Were you to miss us only for a
      moment—or were you to force an entrance a single instant too late—my life would be sacrificed
      to those wretches."
"True—true," said Markham: "it would be too great a risk in a dark night—in narrow streets,
      and with such desperadoes as those. No—I must devise some other means to detect the den of
      this vile gang. But first of all I must communicate
       with the police. You can remain here until my return. To-morrow inquiry shall be
      made relative to your honesty and industry; and, those points satisfactorily ascertained, I
      will take you into my service, without asking any farther questions."
Holford expressed his gratitude for this kindness on the part of Markham, and was then
      handed over to the care of Whittingham.
Having partaken of some hasty refreshment, and armed himself with a brace of pistols, in
      preparation for his enterprise, Richard proceeded with all possible speed into London.
