
CHAPTER CXLVIII.   THE OLD HAG'S INTRIGUE.
On the morning after she had received the visit from the Reverend Reginald Tracy, the old
      hag rose early, muttering to herself, "I must lose no time—I must lose no time."
She then proceeded to dress herself in her holiday attire, each article of which was
      purchased with the wages of her infamous trade.
Female frailty—female shame had clothed the hag: female dishonour had produced her a warm
      gown, a fine shawl, and a new bonnet.
When she was young she had lived by the sale of herself: now that she was old she lived by
      the sale of others.
And she gloried in all the intrigues which she successfully worked out for those who
      employed her, as much as a sharp diplomatist triumphs in outwitting an astute antagonist.
It is said that when Perseus carried the hideous head of the Gorgon Medusa through the air,
      the gore which dripped from it as he passed over the desert of Libya turned into frightful
      serpents: so does the moral filth which the corruption of great cities distils, engender
      grovelling and venomous wretches like that old hag.
Well—she dressed herself in her best attire, and contemplated herself with satisfaction in a
      little mirror cracked all across.
Then, having partaken of a hearty breakfast, she sallied forth.
By means of a public conveyance she soon reached the vicinity of Markham Place.
She had never been in that neighbourhood before; and when she beheld the spacious mansion,
      with its heavy but imposing architecture, she muttered to herself, "She is well lodged—she is
      well lodged!"
The hag then strolled leisurely round Richard's miniature domain, debating within herself
      whether she should knock boldly at the front door and inquire for Miss Monroe, or wait in the
      neighbourhood to see if that young lady might chance to walk out alone.
The day was fine, though cold; and the hag accordingly resolved to abide by the latter
      alternative.
Perceiving a seat upon the summit of the hill, whereon stood the two trees, she opened the
      gate at the foot of the path which led to the top.
Then she toiled up the hill, and seated herself between the two ash trees—now denuded of
      their foliage.

Presently, as her eyes wandered hither and thither, they fell upon the
      inscriptions engraved on the stem of one of the trees. Thus they stood:— "Eugene. Dec.
       25, 1836. Eugene. May 17th, 1838."
     
The old woman marvelled what that name, twice inscribed, and those dates could mean.
But she did not trouble herself much with conjecture on that point: she had other business
      on hand, and was growing impatient because Ellen did not appear.
At length her penetrating eyes caught a glimpse of a female form approaching from the
      direction of the garden at the back of the mansion.
The hag watched that form attentively, and in a few moments exclaimed joyfully, "It is
      she!"
Ellen was indeed advancing up the hill. She had come forth for a short ramble; and the
      clearness of the day had prompted her to ascend the eminence which afforded so fine a view of
      the mighty metropolis at a little distance.
When she was near the top, she caught sight of a female seated upon the bench between the
      trees, and was about to retreat—fearful that her presence might be deemed a reproach for what
      was in fact an intrusion upon private property.
But, to her surprise, she observed the female beckoning familiarly to her; and she continued
      her way to the summit.
Then, with profound astonishment and no little annoyance, she recognised the old hag.
"What are you doing here?" demanded Ellen, hastily.
"Resting myself, as you see, miss," answered the harridan. "But how charming you look this
      morning! That black velvet bonnet sets off your beautiful complexion; and the fresh air has
      given a lovely glow to your cheeks."
"You have not uttered that compliment without a motive," said Ellen, vainly endeavouring to
      suppress a half-smile of satisfaction. "But you must not suppose that your flattery will make
      me forget the part which you played when Mr. Greenwood had me conveyed to his house somewhere
      in the country."
"My dear child, do not be angry with me on that account," said the old hag. "Mr. Greenwood
      thought that you would prefer me as your servant instead of a stranger."
"Or rather, he hired you to talk me over to his wishes—or, perhaps, because he knew that you
      would wink at any violence which he might use. But I outwitted you both," added Ellen,
      laughing.
"Ah! now I see that you have forgiven me, my child," cried the hag. "And when I behold your
      sweet lips, red as cherries—your lovely blue eyes, so soft and languishing—and that small
      round chin, with its charming dimple, I feel convinced——"
"Nay—you are determined to flatter me," interrupted Ellen; "but I shall not forgive you the
      more readily on that account."
"How well this pelisse becomes your beautiful figure, my child," said the hag, affecting not
      to notice Ellen's last observation.
"Cease this nonsense," cried Miss Monroe; "and tell me what brings you hither."
"To see you once more, my child."
"How did you discover my abode?"
"A pleasant question, forsooth!" ejaculated the hag. "Do you think that I am not well
      acquainted with all—yes, all that concerns you?" she added significantly.
"Alas! I am well aware that you know much—too much," said Ellen, with a profound sigh.
"Much!" repeated the hag. "I know all, I say,—even to the existence of the little
      one that will some day call you mother."
"Who told you that? Speak—who told you that?" demanded Ellen, greatly excited.
"It cannot matter—since I know it," returned the hag: "it cannot matter."
"One question," said Ellen,—"and I will ask you no more. Was Mr. Greenwood your
      informant?"
"He was not," answered the hag.
"And now tell me, without circumlocution, what business has brought you hither—for that you
      came to meet with me I have no doubt."
"Sit down by me, my child," said the hag, "and listen while I speak to you."
"Nay—I can attend to you as well here," returned Ellen, laughing, as she leant against one
      of the trees—an attitude which revealed her tiny feet and delicate ankles.
"You seem to have no confidence in me," observed the hag; "and yet I have ever been your
      friend."
"Yes—you have helped me to my ruin," said Ellen, mournfully. "And yet I scarcely blame you
      for all that, because you only aided me to discover what I sought at the time—and that was
       bread at any sacrifice. Well—go on, and delay not: I will listen to you, if only
      through motives of curiosity."
"My sweet child," said the harridan, endeavouring to twist her wrinkled face into as
      pleasing an expression as possible, "a strange thing has come to my knowledge. What would you
      think if I told you that a man of pure and stainless life, who is virgin of all sin,—a man who
      to a handsome exterior unites a brilliant intellect,—a man whose eloquence can excite the
      aristocracy as well as produce a profound impression upon the middle classes,—a man possessed
      of a fine fortune and a high position,—what would you think, I say, if I told you that such a
      man has become enamoured of you?"
"I should first wonder how such a phœnix of perfection came to select you as his
      intermediate," answered Ellen, with a smile, which displayed her brilliant teeth.
"A mere accident made me acquainted with his passion," said the hag. "But surely you would
      not scorn the advances of a man who would sacrifice every thing for you—who would consent to
      fall from his high place for one single hour of your love—who would lay his whole fortune at
      your feet as a proof of his sincerity."
"To cut short this conversation, I will answer you with sincerity," returned Ellen. "Mr.
      Greenwood is the only man who can boast of a favour which involves my shame: he is the father
      of my child. I do not love him—I have no reason to love him: nevertheless, he is—I repeat—the
      father of my child! That expresses every thing. Who knows but that, sooner or later, he may do
      me justice? And should
      such an idea ever enter his mind, must I not retain myself worthy of that
      repentant sentiment on his part?"

"You cherish a miserable delusion, my child," said the hag; "and I am surprised at your
      confidence in the good feelings of a man of whom you have already seen so much."
"Ah! there is a higher power that often sways the human heart," observed Ellen; and, as she
      spoke, her eyes were fixed upon the inscriptions on the tree, while her heart beat with
      emotions unintelligible to the old hag.
"You will then allow this man of whom I have spoken, and who has formed so enthusiastic an
      attachment towards you, to languish without a hope?" demanded the woman.
"Men do not die of love," said Ellen, with a smile.
"But he is rich—and he would enrich you," continued the old harridan: "he would place your
      father in so happy a position that the old man should not even experience a regret for the
      prosperity which he has lost."
"My father dwells with a friend, and is happy," observed Ellen.
"But he is dependant," exclaimed the old hag: "for you yourself once said to me, 'We are
       dependant upon one who cannot afford to maintain us in idleness.' How happy would you
      be—for I know your heart—to be enabled to place your father in a state of independence!"
"Would he be happy did he know that he owed the revival of his prosperity to his daughter's
      infamy?"
"Did he divine whence came the bread that was purchased by your services to the statuary,
      the artist, the sculptor, and the photographer? You yourself assured me that you kept your
      avocations a profound secret."
"Were I inclined to sell myself for gold, Greenwood would become a liberal purchaser," said
      Ellen. "All your sophistry is vain. You cannot seduce me from that state of tranquil seclusion
      in which I now dwell."
"At least grant your unknown lover an interview, and let him plead his own cause," exclaimed
      the hag, who did not calculate upon so much firmness on the part of the young
      lady.
"Ah! think not that he is unknown," cried Ellen, a light breaking in upon her mind: "a man
      of pure and stainless life, virgin of all sin,—a man endowed with a handsome person, and a
      brilliant intellect,—a man whose eloquence acts as a spell upon all classes,—a man possessed
      of a large fortune and enjoying a high position,—such is your description! And this man must
      have seen me to love me! Now think you I cannot divine the name of your phœnix?"
"You suspect then, my child——"
"Nay—I have something more than mere suspicion in my mind," interrupted Ellen. "Oh! now I
      comprehend the motive of that apparent earnestness with which he implored me to reveal the
      secret sorrow that oppressed me! In a word, old woman," added the young lady, in a tone of
      superb contempt, "your phœnix is the immaculate rector of St. David's!"
"And do you not triumph in your conquest, Miss?" demanded the hag, irritated by Ellen's
      manner.
"Oh! yes," exclaimed the young lady, with a sort of good-humoured irony; "so much so, that I
      will meet him when and where you will."
"Are you serious?" inquired the hag, doubtfully.
"Did I ever jest when I agreed to accept the fine offers which you made me on past
      occasions?" asked Ellen.
"No: and you cannot have an object in jesting now," observed the old woman. "But when and
      where will you meet him who is enamoured of you?"
"You say that he will make any sacrifice to please me?"
"He will—he will."
"Then he cannot refuse the appointment which I am about to propose to you. On Monday evening
      next there is to be a masked ball at Drury Lane Theatre. At ten o'clock precisely I will be
      there, dressed as a Circassian slave, with a thick veil over my face. Let him be attired as a
      monk, so that he may be enabled to shroud his features with his cowl. We shall not fail to
      recognise each other."
"Again I ask if you are in earnest?" demanded the old woman, surprised at this singular
      arrangement.
"I was never more so," answered Ellen.
"But why cannot the appointment take place at my abode?" said the hag.
"Oh! fie—the immaculate rector in your dirty court in Golden Lane!" ejaculated Ellen.
"That court was once good enough for you, my child," muttered the old woman.
"We will not dispute upon that point," said the young lady. "If I am worth having, I am
      worth humouring; and I must test the sincerity of the attachment which your phœnix experiences
      for me, by making him seek me at a masked ball."
"Oh! the caprices of you fair ones!" ejaculated the hag. "Well, my child, I will undertake
      that it shall be as you desire."
"Next Monday evening at ten o'clock," cried Ellen; and with these words she tripped lightly
      down the hill in the direction of the mansion.
The old hag then took her departure by the path on the opposite side; and, as she went
      along, she chuckled at the success of her intrigue.
