
CHAPTER CXCIV.   THE ROYAL BREAKFAST.
Holford did not immediately close his eyes in slumber.
Although his education had been miserably neglected, he possessed good natural abilities;
      and his reflections at times were of a far more philosophical nature than could have been
      anticipated.
The gorgeous scenes which he had just witnessed now led him to meditate upon the horrible
      contrasts which existed elsewhere, not only in the great metropolis, but throughout the United
      Kingdom,—and many, very many of which he himself had seen with his own eyes, and felt with his
      own experience.
At that moment when festivity was highest, and pleasure was most exciting in the regal
      halls, there were mothers in naked attics, dark cellars, or even houseless in the open
      streets,—mothers who pressed their famished little ones to their bosoms, and wondered whether
      a mouthful of food would ever pass their lips again.
While the royal table groaned beneath the weight of golden vessels and the choicest luxuries
      which earth's fruitfulness, heaven's bounty, or man's ingenuity could supply,—while the
      raciest produce of fertile vineyards sparkled in the crystal cups,—at that same period, how
      many thousands of that exalted lady's subjects moistened their sorry crust with tears wrung
      from them by the consciousness of ill-requited toil and the pinching gripe of bitter
      poverty!
Delicious music here, and the cries of starving children there;—silver candelabra pouring
      forth a flood of lustre in a gorgeous saloon, and a flickering rushlight making visible the
      naked and damp-stained walls of a wretched garret;—silks and satins, rags and
      nudity;—luxurious and pampered indolence; crushing and ill-paid labour;—homage and reverence,
      ill-treatment and oppression;—the gratification of every whim, the absence of every
      necessary;—not a care for to-morrow here, not a hope for to-morrow there;—a certainty of a
      renewal of this day's plenty, a total ignorance whence the next day's bread can come;—mirth
      and laughter, moans and sorrowing;—a palace for life on one hand, and an anxiety lest even the
      wretched hovel may not be changed for a workhouse to-morrow;—these are the appalling contrasts
      which our social sphere presents to view!
Of all this Holford thought as he lay concealed in the lumber-room of the royal
      dwelling.
But at length sleep overtook him.
It was still dark when he awoke. At first he thought that he must have slumbered for many
      hours—that a day had passed, and that another night had come;—but he felt too little refreshed
      to remain many instants in that opinion. Moreover, as he watched the window, he observed a
      faint, faint gleam of light—or rather a mitigation of the intenseness of the gloom
      without—slowly appearing; and he knew that the dawn was at hand.
He was nearly frozen in that cheerless room where he had slept: his teeth chattered—his
      limbs were benumbed. He longed for some new excitement to elevate his drooping spirits, and
      thus impart physical warmth to his frame.
Suddenly a thought struck him: he would penetrate into the royal breakfast-room! He knew
      that the Queen and Prince Albert frequently partook of the morning meal together; and he
      longed to listen to their conversation when thus tête-a-tête.
Scarcely had he conceived this project when he resolved to execute it. The interior of the
      palace—even to its most private apartments and chambers—was as we have before stated,
      perfectly familiar to him. Stealing from the place where he had slept, he proceeded with
      marvellous caution to the point of his present destination; and in about ten minutes he
      reached the breakfast-room in safety.
The twilight of morning had now penetrated through the windows of this apartment; for the
      heavy curtains were drawn aside, a cheerful fire burnt in the grate, and the table was already
      spread.
A friendly sofa became Holford's hiding-place.
Shortly after eight o'clock a domestic entered with the morning Ministerial paper, which he
      laid upon the table, and then withdrew.
Five minutes elapsed, when the door was thrown open, and the Queen entered, attended by two
      ladies. These were almost immediately dismissed; and Victoria seated herself near the fire, to
      read the journal. But scarcely had she opened it, ere Prince Albert made his appearance,
      followed by a gentleman in waiting, who humbly saluted her Majesty and retired.
Servants immediately afterwards entered, and
      placed upon the table the materials for a sumptuous breakfast, having performed
      which duty they immediately left the room.
The Queen and her consort were now alone—or at least, supposed themselves to be so; and
      their conversation soon flowed without restraint.
But such an empire—such a despotism does the habitual etiquette of Courts establish over the
      natural freedom of the human mind, that even the best and most tender feelings of the heart
      are to a certain extent subdued and oppressed by that chilling influence. The royal pair were
      affectionate to each other: still their tenderness was not of that lively, unembarrassed,
      free, and cordial nature which subsists at the domestic hearth elsewhere. There seemed to be a
      barrier between the frank and open interchange of their thoughts; and even though that barrier
      were no thicker than gauze, still it existed. Their words were to some degree
      measured—scarcely perceptibly so, it is true—nevertheless, the fact was apparent in
      the least, least degree; and the effect was also in the least, least degree unpleasant.
The Queen was authoritative in the enunciation of her opinion upon any subject; and if the
      Prince differed from her, he expressed himself with restraint. In fact, he did not feel
      himself his wife's equal. Could a listener, who did not see them as they spoke, have deadened
      his ear to those intonations of their voices which marked their respective sex, and have
      judged only by their words, he would have thought that the Queen was the husband, and
      the Prince the wife.
The Prince appeared to be very amiable, very intelligent; but totally inexperienced in the
      ways of the world. The Queen exhibited much natural ability and an elegant taste:
      nevertheless, she also seemed lamentably ignorant of the every-day incidents of life. We mean
      that the royal pair manifested a reluctance to believe in those melancholy occurrences which
      characterize the condition of the industrious millions. This was not the result of
      indifference, but of sheer ignorance. Indeed, it would necessarily seem difficult for those
      who were so surrounded by every luxury, to conceive that such a fearful contrast as literal
      starvation could possibly exist.
But let us hear that illustrious pair converse: their language will to some extent serve as
      an index to their minds.
"Melbourne informed me last evening," said the Queen, "that he trembles for the safety of
      his Cabinet during the approaching session. The Carlton Club is particularly active; and the
      Conservative party has acquired great strength during the recess."
"What would be the consequence of a Ministerial defeat?" inquired Prince Albert.
"A dissolution, of course," answered the Queen. "I must candidly confess that I should
      regret to see the Conservative party succeed to power. All the principal lords and ladies of
      our household would be immediately changed. The Whigs, however, have certainly grown
      unpopular; and there appears to be some distress in the country. The very first article on
      which my eyes rested when I took up this newspaper ere now, is headed 'Dreadful Suicide
       through Extreme Destitution.' Beneath, in the same column, is an article entitled
       'Infanticide, and Suicide of the Murderess, through Literal Starvation.' The next
      column contains a long narrative which I have not had time to read, but which is headed
       'Suicide through Dread of the Workhouse.' On this page," continued the Queen,
      turning the paper upon the table, "there is an article entitled 'Death from
       Starvation;' another headed 'Dreadful Condition of the Spitalfields' Weavers;'
      a third called 'Starving State of the Paisley Mechanics;' a fourth entitled
       'Awful Distress in the Manufacturing Districts;' and I perceive numerous short
      paragraphs all announcing similar calamities."
"The English papers are always full of such accounts," observed the Prince.
"And yet I would have you know that England is the richest, most prosperous, and happiest
      country on the face of the earth," returned the Queen, somewhat impatiently. "You must not
      take these accounts literally as you read them. My Ministers assure me that they are greatly
      exaggerated. It appears—as the matter has been explained to me—that the persons who furnish
      these narratives are remunerated according to quantity; and they therefore amplify the details
      as much as possible."
"Still those accounts must be, to a certain extent, based on truth?" said Prince Albert,
      half inquiringly.
"Not nearly so much as you imagine. My Ministers have satisfied me on that head; and they
      must know better than you. Take, for instance, the article headed 'Dreadful Condition of
       the Spitalfields' Weavers.' You may there read that the weavers are in an actual state
      of starvation. This is only newspaper metaphor: the writer means his readers to understand
      that the weavers are not so well off as they would wish to be. Perhaps they have not meat
      every day—perhaps only three or four times a week: but they assuredly have plenty of bread and
      potatoes—because bread and potatoes are so cheap!"
"I thought that you intended to discountenance the importation of foreign silks, by ordering
      all the ladies of the Court to wear dresses of English material?" observed Prince Albert,
      after a pause.
"Such was my intention," answered the Queen; "but the ladies about me dropped so many hints
      on the subject, that I was compelled to rescind the command. I must confess that I was not
      sorry to find an excuse for so doing; for I greatly prefer French silks and French
      dressmakers. But let me make an observation upon this article which is headed 'Suicide
       through Dread of the Workhouse.' I spoke to the Secretary of State a few days ago upon
      the subject of workhouses; and he assured me that they are very comfortable places. He
      declared that the people do not know when they are well off, and that they require to be
      managed like refractory children. He quite convinced me that all he said was perfectly
      correct; and I really begin to think that the people are very obstinate, dissatisfied, and
      insolent."
"They are most enthusiastic in their demonstrations towards their sovereign," remarked the
      Prince.
"And naturally so," exclaimed Victoria. "Am I not their Queen? are they not my subjects? do
      I not rule over them? All the happiness, prosperity, and enjoyments which they possess emanate
      from the throne. They would be very ungrateful if they did not reverence—nay, adore their
      sovereign."
"Oh, of course!" said Prince Albert. "In Germany, any individual who exhibits the least
      coldness towards his sovereign is immediately marked as a traitor."
"And in this country the Home Secretary keeps
      a list of disaffected persons," observed the Queen; "but, thank God! their number
      is very limited—at least, so I am assured. My Ministers are constantly informing me of the
      proofs of loyalty and devotion which the people manifest towards me. If this were a Roman
      Catholic nation, they would no doubt place my image next to the Virgin in their chapels; and
      if it were an idolatrous country, my effigy would assuredly stand amongst the gods and
      goddesses. It is very pleasant, Albert, to be so much loved by my subjects—to be positively
      worshipped by them."
The Prince replied with a compliment which it is not worth while to record.
The Queen smiled, and continued:—
"You remember the paragraph which the Secretary of State pointed out a few days ago: it was
      in the Morning Post, if you recollect. That journal—which, by the bye,
      circulates entirely amongst the upper servants of the aristocracy, and nowhere else—declared
       'that so great is the devotion of my loyal, subjects that, were such a sacrifice
       necessary, they would joyfully throw themselves beneath the wheels of my state-carriage, even
       as the Indians cast themselves under the car of Juggernaut.'[31] I never in my life saw but that one number of the Post: its
      circulation, I am told, is confined entirely to the servants of the aristocracy; still it
      seems in that instance to express the sentiments of the entire nation. You smile, Albert?"
"I was only thinking whether the paragraph to which you have alluded, was another specimen
      of newspaper metaphor," answered the Prince, with some degree of hesitation.
"Not at all," returned the Queen, quickly; "the Editor wrote precisely as he thought. He
      must know the real sentiments of the people, since he is a man of the people himself. I have
      been assured that he was once the head-butler in a nobleman's family: hence his success in
      conducting a daily newspaper exclusively devoted to the interests and capacities of
      upper-servants."
"I thought that English Editors were generally a better class of men?" observed the
      Prince.
"So they are for the most part," replied the Queen: "graduates at the
      Universities—barristers—and highly accomplished gentlemen. But in the case of the
       Morning Post there seems to be an exception. We were, however, conversing upon
      the distress in the country—for there certainly is some little distress here and there;
      although the idea of people actually dying of starvation in a Christian land is of course
      absurd. I am really bewildered, at times, with the reasons of, and the remedies proposed for,
      that distress. If I ask the Home Secretary, he declares that the people are too obstinate to
      understand what comfortable places the workhouses are;—if I ask the Colonial Secretary, he
      assures me that the people are most wilfully blind to the blessings of emigration: if I ask
      the Foreign Secretary, he labours to convince me that the distracted state of the East reacts
      upon this country; and if I ask the Bishop of London he expresses his conviction that the
      people require more churches."
"For my part, I do not like to interfere in these matters," said the Prince; "and therefore
      I never ask any questions concerning them."
"And you act rightly, Albert, for you certainly know nothing of English politics. I observe
      by the newspapers that the country praises your forbearance in this respect. You are a
      Field-Marshal, and Chief Judge of the Stannaries Court—and——"
"And a Knight of the Garter," added the Prince.
"Yes—and a Learned Doctor of Laws," continued the Queen: "any thing else?"
"Several things—but I really forget them all now," returned the Prince.
"Never mind," exclaimed the Queen. "I intend to obtain for you higher distinctions yet. I do
      not like the mere title of Prince, and the style of Royal Highness: you
      shall be King-Consort and Your Majesty. Then, when a vacancy occurs, you
      must be appointed Commander-in-Chief."
"I feel deeply grateful for your kind intentions," returned the Prince, with a smile; "but
      you are well aware that I am totally ignorant of every thing connected with the army."
"That is of no consequence in England," replied the Queen. "You will have subordinates to do
      your duty. I must speak to Melbourne about all this. And now, as I intend to take these steps
      in your behalf, pray be a little more cautious relative to your private amusements; and let me
      hear of no more burying of dogs with funeral honours. That little affair of the interment of
       Eos at Windsor has attracted the notice of the press, I understand. It was
      indiscreet."
"If I adapt my conduct entirely according to the English notions," returned the Prince, "I
      should be compelled to give up those battues to which I am so devotedly
      attached."
"We must consult Melbourne on that head," observed the Queen.
The royal pair then conversed upon a variety of topics which would afford little interest to
      the reader; and shortly after nine her Majesty withdrew.
Prince Albert remained in the room to read the newspaper.
Henry Holford had listened with almost breathless attention to the conversation which we
      have recorded.
The Prince had drawn his chair more closely to the fire, after the Queen left the room; and
      he was now sitting within a couple of yards of the sofa beneath which Holford lay
      concealed.
The pot-boy gently drew aside the drapery which hung from the framework of the sofa to the
      floor, and gazed long and intently on the Prince. His look was one in which envy, animosity,
      and admiration were strangely blended. He thought within himself, "Why are you so exalted, and
      I so abased? And yet your graceful person—your intelligent countenance—your handsome features,
      seem to fit you for such an elevated position. Nevertheless, if I had had your advantages of
      education——"
The meditations of the presumptuous youth were suddenly and most disagreeably checked:—the
      Prince abruptly threw aside the paper, and his eyes fell on the human countenance that was
      gazing up at him from beneath the sofa.
His Royal Highness uttered an exclamation of surprise—not altogether unmingled with alarm;
      and his first impulse was to stretch out his hand towards the bell-rope. But, yielding to a
      second thought, he advanced to the sofa, exclaiming, "Come forth—whoever you may be."

Then the miserable pot-boy dragged himself from his hiding-place, and in another
      moment stood, pale and trembling, in the presence of the Prince.
"Who are you?" demanded his Royal Highness in a stern tone: "what means this intrusion? how
      came you hither?"
Henry Holford fell at the feet of the Prince, and confessed that, urged by an invincible
      curiosity, he had entered the palace on the preceding evening; but he said nothing of his
      previous visits.
For a few moments Prince Albert seemed uncertain how to act: he was doubtless hesitating
      between the alternatives of handing the intruder over to the officers of justice, or of
      allowing him to depart unmolested.
After a pause, he questioned Holford more closely, and seemed satisfied by the youth's
      assurance that he had really entered the palace through motives of curiosity, and not for any
      dishonest purpose.
The Prince accordingly determined to be merciful.
"I am willing," he said, "to forgive the present offence; you shall be suffered to depart.
      But I warn you that a repetition of the act will lead to a severe punishment. Follow me."
The Prince led the way to an ante-room where a domestic was in waiting.
"Conduct this lad as privately as you can from the palace," said his Royal Highness. "Ask
      him no questions—and mention not the incident elsewhere."
The Prince withdrew; and the lacquey led Henry Holford through various turnings in the
      palace to the servants' door opening into Pimlico.
Thus was the pot-boy ignominiously expelled from the palace; and never—never in his life had
      he felt more thoroughly degraded—more profoundly abased—more contemptible in his own eyes,
      than on the present occasion!
