
CHAPTER CCLIX.   CONCLUSION.
Lafleur was captured, tried, and condemned to transportation for life, for the manslaughter
      of Eugene Markham.
Immediately after the trial the Prince and Princess of Montoni, with the infant Prince
      Alberto, and accompanied by Signor and Signora Bazzano, embarked for Castelcicala in the
       Torione steam-frigate which was sent to convey them thither. We need scarcely say
      that the faithful Whittingham was in our hero's suite.
Eliza Sydney continues to reside at her beautiful villa near Upper Clapton; and her
      charitable disposition, her amiable manners, and her exemplary mode of life render her the
      admiration and pride of the entire neighbourhood.
The Earl of Warrington and Diana dwell in comparative seclusion, but in perfect happiness,
      and have never once regretted the day when they accompanied each other to the altar.
King Zingary departed this life about six months ago; and Morcar is now the sovereign of the
      Gipsy tribe in these realms. He has already begun strenuously to exert himself in the
      improvement of the moral character of his people; and though he finds the materials on which
      he labours to make an impression somewhat stubborn, he has declared his intention of
      persevering in his good work. His wife Eva constantly wears round her neck the gold chain
      which Isabella sent her; and night and morning the son of these good people is taught to kneel
      down and pray for the continued prosperity and happiness of the Prince and Princess of
      Montoni.
Pocock has remained an honest, industrious, and worthy man. He has now a good establishment
      in one of the most business-streets of the City, employs many hands, and has purchased some
      nice little freehold property in the neighbourhood of Holloway—in order, as he says, that he
      may have an occasional excuse for taking a walk round the mansion which bears the name of him
      whom he extols as his saviour—his benefactor!
And that mansion—to whom does it now belong? It is the property of Mr. Monroe, and will
      become Ellen's at his death: but the old man is still strong and hearty; and every fine
      afternoon he may be seen walking through the grounds, leaning upon the arm of his daughter or
      of Eliza Sydney, who is a frequent visitor at the Place.
Ellen is beautiful as ever, and might doubtless marry well, did she choose to seek society:
      but she has vowed to remain single for the sake of her child, who is now a blooming boy, and
      whom she rears with the fond hope that he will prove worthy of the name that he bears—the name
      of his uncle, Richard Markham.
Skilligalee and the Rattlesnake, long since united in matrimonial bonds, are leading a
      comfortable and steady life in Hoxton, the business of their little shop producing them not
      only a sufficiency for the present, but also the wherewith to create a provision for their old
      age.
Crankey Jem called upon them on the evening following the death of the Resurrection Man, and
      acquainted them with the event. From that moment nothing positive has ever been heard of James
      Cuffin; but it is supposed that he embarked as a common sailor in some ship bound for a long
      voyage.
Henry Holford remains a prisoner in Bethlem Hospital. He is in the full and unimpaired
      possession of his intellects, but has often and bitterly cursed the day when he listened to
      the whispering voice of his morbid ambition.
Albert Egerton has already become a wealthy merchant, possessing an establishment at Montoni
      and one in London; and, when sojourning at the former, he receives frequent invitations to
      dine at the Palace.
Lord Dunstable has retrieved the errors of his earlier years by an unwearied course of
      honourable and upright conduct, steadfastly pursued from the moment when he declared himself
      to have been touched by the words of the Prince of Montoni on the occasion of the exposure in
      Stratton Street.
Colonel Cholmondeley, Sir Rupert Harborough, and Mr. Chichester are undergoing a sentence of
      ten years' condemnation to the galleys at Brest, for having attempted to pass forged Bank of
      England notes at a money-changer's shop in Paris.
Major Anderson continues to live honourably and comfortably upon a pension allowed him by
      the Prince.
Mrs. Chichester removed about two years ago to a pleasant cottage in Wales, where she dwells
      in the tranquil seclusion suitable to her taste.
Filippo Dorsenni has opened an extensive hotel for foreigners at the West End of the town,
      and is happy in the prosperity of his business.
Lady Bounce was compelled to sue for a separate maintenance about eighteen months ago, on
      the
      ground of cruelty and ill-treatment; and in this suit she succeeded.
Sir Cherry and Major Dapper continue as intimate as ever, and pursue pretty well the same
      unprofitable career as we have hitherto seen them following.
Mr. Banks, the undertaker of Globe Lane, carried his economic principles to such an extent
      that he fell into the habit of purchasing cloth to cover his coffins at a rate which certainly
      defied competition; but a quantity of that material having been missed from a warehouse in the
      City and traced to his establishment, he was compelled, although much against his inclination,
      to accompany an officer to Worship Street, where the porter belonging to the aforesaid
      warehouse was already in the dock on a charge of stealing the lost property. Vain was it that
      Mr. Banks endeavoured to impress upon the magistrate's mind the fact that he was as "pious and
      savoury a old wessel as ever made a coffin on economic principles:" the case was referred to
      the learned Recorder at the Old Bailey for farther investigation; and one fine morning Mr.
      Banks found himself sentenced to two years' imprisonment in the Compter for receiving goods
      knowing them to have been stolen.
Concerning Tomlinson and old Michael Martin, we have been unable to glean any tidings: but
      in respect to Robert Stephens, we have reason to believe that he manages to obtain a
      livelihood, under a feigned name, in a counting-house at New York.
John Smithers, better known to our readers as Gibbet, is the wealthiest inhabitant of a new
      town that has risen within these last three years in the valley of the Ohio; and in a recent
      letter to the Prince of Montoni he declares that he is happier than he ever thought he could
      become.
