<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER CXVI. THE RATTLESNAKE'S HISTORY. </head>
<p><ref target="#ENG18460_N082"/>"I was born in a coal-mine in Staffordshire. My father was a
      married man, with five or six children by his wife: my mother was a single woman, who worked
      for him in the pit. I was, therefore, illegitimate; but this circumstance was neither
      considered disgraceful to my mother nor to myself, morality being on so low a scale amongst
      the mining population generally, as almost to amount to promiscuous intercourse. My mother was
      only eighteen when I was born. She worked in the pit up to the very hour of my birth; and when
      she found the labour-pains coming on, she threw off the belt and chain with which she had been
      dragging a heavy corf (or wicker basket), full of coal, up a slanting road,—retired to a damp
      cave in a narrow passage leading to the foot of the shaft, and there gave birth to her child.
      That child was myself. She wrapped me up in her petticoat, which was all the clothing she had
      on at the time, and crawled with me, along the passage, which was about two feet and a half
      high, to the bottom of the shaft. There she got into the basket, and was drawn up a height of
      about two hundred and thirty feet—holding the rope with her right hand, and supporting me on
      her left arm. She often told me those particulars, and said how she thought she should faint
      as she was ascending in the rickety vehicle, and how difficult she found it to maintain her
      hold of the rope, weak and enfeebled as she was. She, however, reached the top in safety, and
      hastened home to her miserable hovel—for she was an orphan, and lived by herself. In a week
      she was up again, and back to her work in the pit; and she hired a bit of a girl, about seven
      or eight years old, to take care of me.</p>
<p>"How my infancy was passed I, of course, can only form an idea by the mode of treatment
      generally adopted towards babies in the mining districts, and under such circumstances as
      those connected
      <pb n="354"/> with my birth. My mother would, perhaps, come up from the pit once, in the
      middle of the day, to give me my natural nourishment; and when I screamed during her absence,
      the little girl, who acted as my nurse, most probably thrust a teaspoonful of some strong
      opiate down my throat to make me sleep and keep me quiet. Many children are killed by this
      treatment; but the reason of death, in such cases, is seldom known, because the Coroner's
      assistance is seldom required in the mining districts.</p>
<p>"When I was seven years old, my mother one day told me that it was now high time for me to
      go down with her into the pit, and earn some money by my own labour. My father, who now and
      then called to see me of a Sunday, and brought me a cake or a toy, also declared that I was
      old enough to help my mother. So it was decided that I should go down into the pit. I remember
      that I was very much frightened at the idea, and cried very bitterly when the dreaded day
      came. It was a cold winter's morning—I recollect that well; and the snow was very thick upon
      the ground. I shivered with chilliness and terror as my mother led me to the pit. She gave me
      a good scolding because I whimpered; and then a good beating because I cried lustily. But
      every thing combined to make me afraid. It was as early as five in that cold wintry morning
      that I was proceeding to a scene of labour which I knew to be far, far under the earth. The
      dense darkness of the hour was not even relieved by the white snow upon the ground; but over
      the country were seen blazing fires on every side,—fires which appeared to me to be issuing
      from the very bowels of the earth, but which were in reality burning upon the surface, for the
      purpose of converting coal into coke: there were also blazing fields of bituminous shale; and
      all the tall chimneys of the great towers of the iron furnaces vomited forth flames,—the whole
      scene thus forming a picture well calculated to appal and startle an infant mind.</p>
<p>"I remember at this moment what my feelings were then—as well as if the incident I am
      relating had only occurred yesterday. During the day-light I had seen the lofty chimneys
      giving vent to columns of dense smoke, the furnaces putting forth torrents of lurid flame, and
      the coke-fires burning upon the ground: but that was the first time I had ever beheld those
      meteors blazing amidst utter darkness; and I was afraid—I was afraid.</p>
<p>"The shaft was perfectly round, and not more than four feet in diameter. The mode of ascent
      and descent was precisely that of a well, with this difference—that, instead of a bucket there
      was a stout iron bar about three feet long attached in the middle, and suspended horizontally,
      to the end of the rope. From each end of this bar hung chains with hooks, to draw up the
      baskets of coal. This apparatus was called the <hi>clatch-harness</hi>. Two people ascended or
      descended at a time by these means. They had to sit cross-legged, as it were, upon the
      transverse bar, and cling to the rope. Thus, the person who got on first sate upon the bar,
      and the other person sate a-straddle on the first one's thighs. An old woman presided at the
      wheel which wound up or lowered the rope sustaining the clatch-harness; and as she was by no
      means averse to a dram, the lives of the persons employed in the mine were constantly at the
      mercy of that old drunken harridan. Moreover, there seemed to me to be great danger in the way
      in which the miners got on and off the clatch-harness. One moment's giddiness—a missing of the
      hold of the rope—and down to the bottom of the shaft headlong! When the clatch-harness was
      drawn up to the top, the old woman made the handle fast by a bolt drawn out from the upright
      post, and then, grasping a hand of both persons on the harness at the same time, brought them
      by main force to land. A false step on the part of that old woman,—the failure of the bolt
      which stopped the rotatory motion of the roller on which the rope was wound,—or the slipping
      of the hands which she grasped in hers,—and a terrible accident must have ensued!</p>
<p>"But to return to my first descent into the pit. My mother, who was dressed in a loose
      jacket, open in front, and trousers (which, besides her shoes, were the only articles of
      clothing on her, she wearing neither shift nor stockings), leapt upon the clatch-iron as
      nimbly as a sailor in the rigging of his ship. She then received me from the outstretched arm
      of the old woman, and made me sit in the easiest and safest posture she could imagine. But
      when I found myself being gradually lowered down into a depth as black as night, I felt too
      terror-struck even to cry out; and had not my mother held me tight with one hand, I should
      have fallen precipitately into that hideous dark profundity.</p>
<p>"At length we reached the bottom, where my mother lifted me, half dead with giddiness and
      fright, from the clatch-iron. I felt the soil cold, damp, and muddy, under my feet. A lamp was
      burning in a shade suspended in a little recess in the side of the shaft; and my mother
      lighted a bit of candle which she had brought with her, and which she stuck into a piece of
      clay to hold it by. Then I perceived a long dark passage, about two feet and a half high,
      branching off from the foot of the shaft. My mother went on her hands and knees, and told me
      to creep along with her. The passage was nearly six feet wide; and thus there was plenty of
      room for me to keep abreast of her. Had not this been the case, I am sure that I never should
      have had the courage either to precede, or follow her; for nothing could be more hideous to my
      infantine imagination than that low, yawning, black-mouthed cavern, running into the very
      bowels of the earth, and leading I knew not whither. Indeed, as I walked in a painfully
      stooping posture along by my mother's side, my fancy conjured up all kinds of horrors. I
      trembled lest some invisible hand should suddenly push forth from the side of the passage, and
      clutch me in its grasp: I dreaded lest every step I took might precipitate me into some
      tremendous abyss or deep well: I thought that the echoes which I heard afar off, and which
      were the sounds of the miner's pickaxe or the rolling corves on the rails, were terrific
      warnings that the earth was falling in, and would bury us alive: then, when the light of my
      mother's candle suddenly fell upon some human being groping his or her way along in darkness,
      I shuddered at the idea of encountering some ferocious monster or hideous spectre:—in a word,
      my feelings, as I toiled along that subterranean passage, were of so terrific a nature that
      they produced upon my memory an impression which never can be effaced, and which makes me turn
      cold all over as I contemplate those feelings now!</p>
<p>"You must remember that I had been reared in a complete state of mental darkness; and that
      no enlightened instruction had dispelled the clouds of superstition which naturally obscure
      the juvenile mind. I could not read: I had not even been taught my alphabet. I had not heard
      of such a name as <hi>Jesus Christ</hi>; and all the mention of <hi>God</hi> that had ever met
      my ears, was in the curses
      <pb n="355"/> and execrations which fell from the lips of my father, my mother, her
      acquaintances, and even the little girl who had nursed me. You cannot wonder, then, if I was
      so appalled, when I first found myself in that strange and terrific place.</p>
<p>"At length we reached the end of that passage, and struck into another, which echoed with
      the noise of pickaxes. In a few moments I saw the <hi>undergoers</hi> (or miners) lying on
      their sides, and with their pickaxes breaking away the coal. They did not work to a greater
      height than two feet, for fear, as I subsequently learnt, that they should endanger the
      security of the roof of the passage, the seam of coal not being a thick one. I well remember
      my infantine alarm and horror when I perceived that these men were naked—stark naked. But my
      mother did not seem to be the least abashed or dismayed: on the contrary, she laughed and
      exchanged a joke with each one as we passed. In fact, I afterwards discovered that Bet
      Flathers was a great favourite with the miners.</p>
<p>"Well, we went on, until we suddenly came upon a scene that astonished me not a little. The
      passage abruptly opened into a large room,—an immense cave, hollowed out of the coal in a seam
      that I since learnt to be twenty feet in thickness. This cave was lighted by a great number of
      candles; and at a table sate about twenty individuals—men, women, and children—all at
      breakfast. There they were, as black as negroes—eating, laughing, chattering, and drinking.
      But, to my surprise and disgust, I saw that the women and young girls were all naked from the
      waist upwards, and many of the men completely so. And yet there was no shame—no embarrassment!
      But the language that soon met my ears!—I could not comprehend half of it, but what I
       <hi>did</hi> understand, made me afraid!</p>
<p>"My mother caught me by the hand, and led me to the table, where I found my father. He gave
      us some breakfast; and in a short time, the party broke up—the men, women, and children
      separating to their respective places of labour. My mother and myself accompanied one of the
      men, for my mother had ceased to work for my father, since she had borne a child to him, as
      his wife had insisted upon their separation in respect to labour in the mine.</p>
<p>"The name of the man for whom my mother worked was Phil Blossom. He was married, but had no
      children. His wife was a cripple, having met with some accident in the mine, and could not
      work. He was therefore obliged to employ some one to carry his coal from the place where he
      worked, to the cart that conveyed it to the foot of the shaft. Until I went down into the
      mine, my mother had carried the coal for him, and also <hi>hurried</hi> (or dragged) the cart;
      but she now made me fill one cart while she hurried another. Thus, at seven years old, I had
      to carry about fifty-six pounds of coal in a wooden <hi>bucket</hi>. When the passage was high
      enough I carried it on my back; but when it was too low, I had to drag or push it along as
      best I could. Some parts of the passages were only twenty-two inches in height; this was where
      the workings were in very narrow seams; and the difficulty of dragging such a weight, at such
      an age, can be better understood than explained. I can well recollect that when I commenced
      that terrible labour, the perspiration, commingling with my tears, poured down my face.</p>
<p>"Phil Blossom worked in a complete state of nudity; and my mother stripped herself to the
      waist to perform her task. She had to drag a cart holding seven hundred weight, a distance of
      at least two hundred yards—for ours was a very extensive pit, and had numerous workings and
      cuttings running a considerable way underground. The person who does this duty is called a
       <hi>hurrier</hi>: the process itself is termed <hi>tramming</hi>; and the cart is denominated
      a <hi>skip</hi>. The work was certainly harder than that of slaves in the West Indies, or
      convicts in Norfolk Island. My mother had a girdle round her waist; and to that girdle was
      fastened a chain, which passed between her legs and was attached to the skip. She then had to
      go down on her hands and knees, with a candle fastened to a strap on her forehead, and drag
      the skip through the low passages, or else to maintain a carved or stooping posture in the
      high ones.</p>
<p>"Phil Blossom was what was called a <hi>getter</hi>. He first made a long straight cut with
      a pickaxe underneath the part of the seam where he was working: this was called
       <hi>holing</hi>: and as it was commenced low down, the getter was obliged to lie flat on his
      back or on his side, and work for a long time in that uneasy manner.</p>
<p>"I did as well as I could with the labour allotted to me; but it was dreadful work. I was
      constantly knocking my head against the low roofs of the passages or against the rough places
      of the sides: at other times I fell flat on my face, with the masses of coal upon me; or else
      I got knocked down by a cart, or by some collier in the dark, as I toiled along the passages,
      my eyes blinded with my tears or with the dust of the mine.</p>
<p>"Many—many weeks passed away; and at length I grew quite hardened in respect to those sights
      and that language which had at first disgusted me. I became familiar with the constant
      presence of naked men and half-naked women; and the most terrible oaths and filthy expressions
      ceased to startle me. I walked boldly into the great cavern which I have before described, and
      which served as a place of meeting for those who took their meals in the mine. I associated
      with the boys and girls that worked in the pit, and learnt to laugh at an obscene joke, or to
      practise petty thefts of candles, food, or even drink, which the colliers left in the cavern
      or at their places of work. The mere fact of the boys and girls in mines all meeting together,
      without any control,—without any one to look after them,—is calculated to corrupt all those
      who may be well disposed.</p>
<p>"I remained as a carrier of coal along the passages till I was ten years old. I was then
      ordered to convey my load, which by this time amounted to a hundred weight on each occasion,
      up a ladder to a passage over where I had hitherto worked. This load was strapped by a leather
      round my forehead; and, as the ladder was very rudely formed, and the steps were nearly two
      feet apart, it was with great difficulty that I could keep my balance. I have seen terrible
      accidents happen to young girls working in that way. Sometimes the strap, or tagg, round one
      person's forehead has broken, and the whole load has fallen on the girl climbing up behind.
      Then the latter has been precipitated to the bottom of the dyke, the great masses of coal
      falling on the top of her. On other occasions I have seen the girls lose their balance, and
      fall off the ladder—their burden of coals, as in the other case, showering upon them or their
      companions behind. The work was indeed most horrible: a slave-ship could not have been
      worse.</p>
<p>"If I did not do exactly as Phil Blossom told me, the treatment I received from him was
      horrible; and my mother did not dare interfere, or he would
      <pb n="356"/> serve her in the same manner. He thrashed me with his fist or with a stick,
      until I was bruised all over. My flesh was often marked with deep wales for weeks together.
      One day he nipped me with his nails until he actually cut quite through my ear. He often
      pulled my hair till it literally gave way in his hand; and sometimes he would pelt me with
      coals. He thought nothing of giving me a kick that would send me with great violence across
      the passage, or dash me against the opposite side. On one occasion he was in such a rage,
      because I accidentally put out the candle which he had to light him at his work, that he
      struck a random blow at me with his pickaxe in the dark, and cut a great gash in my head. All
      the miners in pits <hi>baste</hi> and <hi>bray</hi>—that is, beat and flog—their helpers.</p>
<p>"You would be surprised if I was to tell you how many people in the pit were either killed
      or severely injured, by accidents, every year. But there are so many dangers to which the poor
      miners are exposed! Falling down the shaft,—the rope sustaining the clatch-harness
      breaking,—being drawn over the roller,—the fall of coals out of the corves in their
      ascent,—drowning in the mines from the sudden breaking in of water from old
      workings,—explosion of gas,—choke-damp,<ref target="#ENG18460_N083">[83]</ref>—falling in of
      the roofs of passages,—the breaking of ladders or well-staircases,—being run over by the
      tram-waggons, or carts dragged by horses,—the explosion of gunpowder used in breaking away
      huge masses of coal,—and several other minor accidents, are all perpetually menacing the life
      or limbs of those poor creatures who supply the mineral that cheers so many thousands of
      fire-sides!</p>
<p>"Deaths from accidents of this nature were seldom, if ever, brought under the notice of the
      coroner: indeed, to save time, it was usual to bury the poor victims within twenty-four or
      thirty-six hours after their decease.</p>
<p>"I earned three shillings a-week when I was ten years old, and my mother eleven. You may
      imagine, then, that we ought to have been pretty comfortable; but our household was just as
      wretched as any other in the mining districts. Filth and poverty are the characteristics of
      the collier population. Nothing can be more wretched—nothing more miserable than their
      dwellings. The huts in which they live are generally from ten to twelve feet square, each
      consisting only of one room. I have seen a man and his wife and eight or ten children all
      huddling together in that one room; and yet they might have earned, by their joint labour,
      thirty-shillings or more a week. Perhaps a pig, a jackass, or fowls form part of the family.
      And then the furniture!—not a comfort—scarcely a necessary! And yet this absence of even such
      articles as bedsteads, is upon principle: the colliers do not like to be encumbered with
      household goods, because they are often obliged to <hi>flit</hi>—that is, to leave one place
      of work and seek for another. Such a thing as drainage is almost completely unknown in these
      districts; and all the filth is permitted to accumulate before the door. The colliers are a
      dirty set of people; but, poor creatures! how can they well be otherwise? They descend into
      the mines at a very early hour in the morning: they return home at a very late hour in the
      evening, and they are then too tired to attend to habits of cleanliness. Besides, it is so
      natural for them to say, '<hi>Why should we wash ourselves to-night, since to-morrow we must
       become black and dirty again?</hi>' or '<hi>Why should we wash ourselves for the sake of
       sleeping with a clean skin?</hi>' As for the boys and girls, they are often so worn out—so
      thoroughly exhausted, that they go to rest without their suppers. They cannot keep themselves
      awake when they get home. I know that this was often and often my case; and I have
      preferred—indeed, I have been compelled by sheer fatigue, to go to bed before my mother could
      prepare any thing to eat.</p>
<p>"Again, how can the collier's home possibly be comfortable? He makes his wife and children
      toil with him in the mine: he married a woman from the mine; and neither she nor her daughters
      know any thing of housekeeping? How can disorder be prevented from creeping into the collier's
      dwelling, when no one is there in the day-time to attend to it? Then all the money which they
      can save from the <hi>Tommy-shop</hi>, (of which I shall speak presently) goes for whiskey.
      Husband and wife, sons and daughters all look after the whiskey. The habits of the colliers
      are hereditarily depraved: they are perpetuated from father to son, from mother to daughter;
      none is better nor worse than his parents were before him. Rags and filth—squalor and
      dissipation—crushing toil and hideous want—ignorance and immorality; these are the features of
      the collier's home, and the characteristics of the collier's life.</p>
<p>"Our home was not a whit better than that of any of our fellow-labourers; nor was my mother
      less attached to whiskey than her neighbours.</p>
<p>"But the chief source of poverty and frequent want—amounting at times almost to
      starvation—amongst persons earning a sufficiency of wages, is the <hi>truck system</hi>. This
      atrociously oppressive method consists of paying the colliers' wages in goods, or partly in
      goods, through the medium of the tommy-shop. The proprietor of a tommy-shop has an
      understanding with the owners of the mines in his district; and the owners agree to pay the
      persons in their employment once a month, or once a fortnight. The consequence is that the
      miners require credit during the interval; and they are compelled to go to the tommy-shop,
      where they can obtain their bread, bacon, cheese, meat, groceries, potatoes, chandlery, and
      even clothes. The proprietor of the tommy-shop sends his book to the clerk of the owner of the
      mine the day before the wages are paid; and thus the clerk knows how much to stop from the
      wages of each individual, for the benefit of the shopkeeper. If the miners and their wives do
      not go to the tommy-shop for their domestic articles, they instantly lose their employment in
      the mine, in consequence of the understanding between their employer and the shopkeeper.
      Perhaps this would not be so bad if the tommy-shops were honest; because it is very handy for
      the collier to go to a store which contains every article that he may require. But the
      tommy-shop charges twenty-five or thirty per cent. dearer than any other tradesman; so that if
      a collier and his family can earn between them thirty shillings a week, he loses seven or
      eight shillings out of that amount. In the course of a year about twenty pounds out of his
      seventy-five go to the tommy-shop for nothing but interest on the credit afforded! That
      interest is divided between the tommy-shop-keeper and the coal-mine proprietor.</p>
<p>"In the district where my mother and I lived,
      <pb n="357"/> there was no such thing at all as payment of wages in the current money of the
      kingdom. The tommy-shop-keeper paid the wages for the proprietors once a month: and how do you
      think he settled them? In ticket-money! This coinage consisted of pewter medals, or markers,
      with the sum that they represented, and the name of the tommy-shop on them. Thus, there were
      half-crowns, shillings, sixpences, and half-pence. But this money could only be passed at the
      tommy-shop from which it was issued; and there it must be taken out in goods. So, you see,
      that what with the truck-system and the tommy-shop, the poor miners are regularly swindled out
      of at least one fourth part of their fair earnings.</p>
<p>"The wages, in my time, were subject to great changes: I have known men earn twenty-five
      shillings a week at one time, and twelve or fifteen at another. And out of that they were
      obliged to supply their own candles and grease for the wheels of the carts or <hi>trams</hi>.
      The cost of this was about three-pence a day. Then, again, the fines were frequent and
      vexatious: it was calculated that they amounted to a penny a day per head. These sums all went
      into the coffers of the coal-owners.</p>
<p>"Such was the state of superstitious ignorance which prevailed in the mines, that every one
      believed in ghosts and spirits. Even old men were often afraid to work in isolated places; and
      the spots where deaths from accidents arose were particularly avoided. It was stated that the
      spectres of the deceased haunted the scenes of their violent departures from this world.</p>
<p>"By the time I was twelve years old I was as wild a young she-devil as any in the mines.
      Like the other females, I worked with only a pair of trousers on. But I would not consent to
      hurry the trams and skips. I saw that my mother had got a great bald place on her head, where
      she pushed the tram forward up sloping passages; and as I was told that even amidst the black
      and filth with which I was encrusted, I was a good-looking wench, I determined not to injure
      my hair. I may as well observe that a stranger visiting a mine, and seeing the boys and girls
      all huddling together, half-naked, in the caves or obscure nooks, could not possibly tell one
      sex from the other. I must say that I think, with regard to bad language and licentious
      conduct, the girls were far—far worse than the boys. It is true that in the neighbourhood of
      the pits Sunday-schools were established; but very few parents availed themselves of these
      means of obtaining a gratuitous education for their children. When I was twelve years old, I
      did not know how to read or write: I was unaware that there was such a book as the Bible; and
      all I knew of God and Jesus Christ was through the oaths and imprecations of the miners.</p>
<p>"It was at that period—I mean when I was twelve years old—that I determined to abandon the
      horrible life to which my mother had devoted me. I had up to that point preserved my health,
      and had escaped those maladies and cutaneous eruptions to which miners are liable; but I knew
      that my turn must come, sooner or later, to undergo all those afflictions. I saw nine out of
      ten of my fellow-labourers pining away. Some were covered with disgusting boils, caused by the
      constant dripping of the water upon their naked flesh in the pits. I saw young persons of my
      own age literally growing old in their early youth,—stooping, asthmatic, consumptive, and
      enfeebled. When they were washed on Sundays, they were the pictures of ill-health and
      premature decay. Many actually grew deformed in stature; and all were of stunted growth. It is
      true that their muscles were singularly developed; but they were otherwise skin and bone.<ref target="#ENG18460_N084">[84]</ref> The young children were for the most part of contracted
      features, which, added to their wasted forms, gave them a strange appearance of ghastliness,
      when cleansed from the filth of the mine. The holers, or excavators, were bow-legged and
      crooked; the burriers and trammers knock-kneed and high-shouldered. Many—very many of the
      miners were affected with diseases of the heart. Then, who ever saw a person, employed in the
      pits, live to an advanced age? A miner of fifty-five was a curiosity: the poor creatures
      generally drooped at five-and-thirty, and died off by forty. They invariably seemed oppressed
      with care and anxiety: jollity was unknown amongst them. I have seen jolly-looking butchers,
      blacksmiths, carpenters, ploughmen, porters, and so on; but I never beheld a jolly-looking
      miner. The entire population that labours in the pits appears to belong to a race that is
      accursed!</p>
<p>"I pondered seriously upon all this; and every circumstance that occurred, and every scene
      around me, tended to strengthen my resolution to quit an employment worse than that of a
      galley-slave. I saw my mother wasting all her best energies in that terrible labour, and yet
      remaining poor—beggared! Scarcely enough for the present—not a hope for the future! Sometimes
      I wept when I contemplated her, although she had but little claims on my sympathy or
      affection; nevertheless, when I saw her bald head—her scalp thickened, inflamed, and sometimes
      so swollen, that it was like a bulb filled with spongy matter, and so painful that she could
      not bear to touch it,—when I heard her complain of the dreadful labour of pushing the heavy
      corves and trams with her sore head,—when I perceived her spine actually distorted with severe
      work; her stomach growing so weak that she frequently vomited her food almost as soon as it
      was eaten; her heart so seriously affected that the intervals of violent palpitation
      frequently made her faint; her lungs performing their functions with difficulty; her chest
      torn with a sharp hacking cough, accompanied by the expectoration of a large quantity of
      matter of a deep black colour, called by colliers the <hi>black-spit</hi>;—when I saw her thus
      overwhelmed with a complication of maladies—dying before my eyes, at the age of
      thirty-three!—when I looked around, and beheld nine out of ten of all the persons employed in
      the pits, whether male or female, similarly affected,—I shuddered at the bare idea of devoting
      my youth to that horrible toil, and then passing to the grave while yet in the prime of
      life!</p>
<p>"I thought of running away, and seeking my fortune elsewhere. I knew that it was no use to
      acquaint my mother with my distaste for the life to which she had devoted me: she would only
      have answered my objections by means of blows. But while I was still wavering what course to
      pursue, a circumstance occurred which I must not forget to relate.</p>
<p>"One morning my candle had accidentally gone out, and I was creeping along the dark passage
      to the spot where Phil Blossom was working, to obtain a light from his candle, when I heard
      him and my mother conversing together in a low tone, but with
      <pb n="358"/> great earnestness of manner. Curiosity prompted me to stop and listen. 'Are you
      sure that is the case?' said Phil.—'Certain,' replied my mother. 'I shall be confined in about
      five months.'—'Well,' observed Phil, 'I don't know what's to be done. My old woman will kick
      up the devil's delight when she hears of it. I wish she was out of the way: I would marry you
      if she was.'—Then there was a profound silence for some minutes. It was broken by the man, who
      said, 'Yes, if the old woman was out of the way you and I might get married, and then we
      should live so comfortable together. I'm sure no man can be cursed with a wife of worse temper
      than mine.'—'Yes,' returned my mother, 'she is horrible for that.'—'Do you think there would
      be much harm in pushing her down a shaft, or shoving her head under the wheel of your tram,
      Bet?' asked Phil, after another pause.—'There would be no harm,' said my mother, 'if so be we
      wern't found out.'—'That's exactly what I mean,' observed Phil.—'But then,' continued my
      mother, 'if she didn't happen to <hi>die</hi> at once, she might peach, and get us both into a
      scrape.'—'So she might,' said Phil.—'I'll tell you what we might do,' exclaimed my mother, in
      a joyful tone: 'doesn't your wife come down at one to bring you your dinner?'—'Yes,' replied
      Phil Blossom: 'that's all the old cripple is good for.'—'Well, then,' pursued my mother, 'I'll
      tell you how we can manage this business.'—Then they began to whisper, and I could not gather
      another word that fell from their lips.</p>
<p>"I was so frightened at what I had heard that I crept quickly but cautiously back again to
      my place of labour, and sate down on the lower steps of the ladder, in the dark—determined to
      wait till some one should come, rather than go and ask Phil Blossom for a light. I had
      suddenly acquired a perfect horror of that man. I had understood that my mother was with child
      by him; and I had heard them coolly plotting the death of the woman who was an obstacle to
      their marriage. At my age, such an idea was calculated to inspire me with terror. I think I
      sate for nearly an hour in the dark, my mind filled with thoughts of a nature which may be
      well understood. At length a young woman, bearing a corf, came with a light; and I was no
      longer left in obscurity. I then plucked up my courage, took my basket, and went to Phil
      Blossom for a load of coal. My mother was not there; and he was working with his pickaxe as
      coolly as possible. He asked me what had made me so long in returning for a load; and I told
      him I had fallen down a few steps of the ladder and hurt myself. He said no more on the
      subject; and I was delighted to escape without a braying or basting. While I was loading my
      corf, he asked me if I should like to have him for a father-in-law. I said 'Yes' through fear,
      for I was always afraid of his <hi>nieves</hi>, as the colliers call their clenched fists. He
      seemed pleased; and, after a pause, said that if ever he was my father-in-law, I should always
      take my <hi>bait</hi> (or meals) with him in the cavern. I thanked him, and went on with my
      work; but I pretty well comprehended that the removal of Phil's wife by some means or another
      had been resolved on.</p>
<p>"Shortly before one o'clock that same day my mother came to the place where I was carrying
      the coals, and gave me a <hi>butter-cake</hi> (as we called bread and butter), telling me that
      she was going up out of the mine, as she must pay a visit to the tommy-shop for some candles
      and grease for herself, and some tobacco for Phil Blossom. I did not dare utter a word
      expressive of the suspicions which I entertained; but I felt convinced that this proceeding
      was in some way connected with the subject of the conversation which I had overheard. A
      strange presentiment induced me to leave my place of work, and creep along the passage to the
      foot of the shaft, in order to see whether Phil's wife would come down at the usual time with
      his bait. Several <hi>half-marrows</hi> and <hi>foals</hi> (as we called the young lads who
      pushed the trams) were at the end of the passage just at the foot of the shaft; and we got
      into conversation. It is a very curious thing to look up a shaft from the very bottom; the top
      seems no bigger than a sugar-basin. Well, the boys and I were chattering together about
      different things, when the click of the clatch-harness at the top of the shaft fell upon my
      ears. I peeped up and saw some one get on the clatch: then the creaking of the wheel and
      roller was heard. 'Here comes some one's bait, I dare say,' observed one of the
      half-marrows.—I wish it was mine,' said another; 'but I never get any thing to eat from
      breakfast-time till I go home at night.'—Scarcely were these words spoken when a piercing
      scream alarmed us: there was a rushing sound—the chains of the harness clanked fearfully—and
      down came a woman with tremendous violence to the bottom of the pit, the clatch rattling down
      immediately after her. A cry of horror burst from us all; the poor creature had fallen at our
      very feet. We rushed forward; but she never moved. The back part of her head was smashed
      against a piece of hard mineral at the bottom of the shaft. But her countenance had escaped
      injury; and as I cast a hasty glance upon it, I recognised the well-known face of Phil
      Blossom's crippled wife!</p>
<p>"One of the boys instantly hastened to acquaint him with the accident. He came to the spot
      when his wife lay a mangled heap, stone dead; and he began to bewail his loss in terms which
      would have been moving had I not been aware of their hypocrisy. The half-marrows were,
      however, deceived by that well-feigned grief, and did all they could to console him. I said
      nothing: I was confounded!</p>
<p>"In due time the cause of the <hi>accident</hi> was ascertained. It appeared that my mother
      had gone up the shaft, but when she got to the top she struck her foot so forcibly against the
      upright post of the machinery, that she lamed herself for the time. The old woman who presided
      over the machinery (as I have before said) very kindly offered to go to the tommy-shop for
      her, on condition that she would remain there to work the handle for people coming up or going
      down. This was agreed to. The very first person who wanted to go down was Mrs. Blossom; and my
      mother alleged that the handle unfortunately slipped out of her hand as she was unwinding the
      rope. This explanation satisfied the overseer of the mine: the intervention of the coroner was
      not deemed necessary;—my mother appeared much afflicted at the <hi>accident</hi>: Phil Blossom
      mourned the death of his wife with admirable hypocrisy;—the corpse was interred within
      forty-eight hours;—and thus was Phil's wife removed without a suspicion being excited!</p>
<p>"I was now more than ever determined to leave the mine. I saw that my mother was capable of
      any thing; and I trembled lest she should take it into her head to rid herself of me. One day
      she told me that she was going to be married to Phil Blossom: I made a remark upon the
      singularity of her being united to the very man whose wife had died by her means;—she darted
      at me a look of dark suspicion and terrible ferocity; and, in the next moment,
      <pb n="359"/> struck me to the ground. From that instant I felt convinced that I was not safe.
      Accordingly, one Sunday, when I was washed quite clean, and had on a tolerably decent frock, I
      left the hovel which my mother occupied, and set out on my wanderings.</p>
<p>"I had not a penny in my pocket, nor a friend on the face of the earth to whom I could apply
      for advice, protection, or assistance. All that stood between me and starvation, that I could
      see, was a piece of bread and some cheese, which I had taken with me when I left home. I
      walked as far as I could without stopping, and must have been about six miles from the pit
      where I had worked, when evening came on. It was November, and the weather was very chilly. I
      looked round me, almost in despair, to see if I could discover an asylum for the night. Far
      behind me the tremendous chimneys and furnaces vomited forth flames and volumes of smoke; and
      the horizon shone as if a whole city was on fire: but in the spot where I then found myself,
      all was drear, dark, and lonely. I walked a little farther, and, to my joy, espied a light. I
      advanced towards it, and soon perceived that it emanated from a fire burning in a species of
      cave overhung by a high and rugged embankment of earth belonging to a pit that had most
      probably ceased to be worked. Crouching over this fire was a lad of about fifteen, clothed in
      rags, dirty, emaciated, and with starvation written upon his countenance. I advanced towards
      him, and begged to be allowed to warm myself by his fire. He answered me in a kind and
      touching manner; and we soon made confidants of each other. I told him my history, only
      suppressing my knowledge that the death of Phil Blossom's wife arose from premeditation,
      instead of accident, as I did not wish to get my mother into a scrape, although I had no
      reason to have any regard for her. The lad then acquainted me with his sad tale. He was an
      orphan; and his earliest remembrance was experienced in a workhouse, of which, it appeared, he
      had become an inmate shortly after his birth, his parents having been killed at the same time
      by the explosion of a fire-damp in the pit in which they had worked. When the lad was eight
      years old, the parish authorities apprenticed him to a miner, who gave him the name of
       <hi>Skilligalee</hi>, in consequence of his excessive leanness. This man treated him very
      badly; but the poor boy endured all for a period of seven years, because he had no other
      asylum than that afforded him by his master. 'At length,' said the boy, 'a few weeks ago,
      master got hurt upon the head by the falling in of some coal where he was working; and from
      that moment he acted more like a madman than a human being. He used to seize me by the hair,
      and dash me against the side of the pit: sometimes he flogged me with a strap till my flesh
      was all raw. I could stand it no longer; so, about three weeks ago, I ran away. Ever since
      then I have been living, I can scarcely tell how. I have slept in the deserted cabins on the
      pits' bank, or in the old pits that have done working: I have got what I could to eat, and
      have even been glad to devour the bits of candles that the colliers had left in the pits. All
      this is as true as I am here.<ref target="#ENG18460_N085">[85]</ref> Yesterday I found some
      matches in a pit; and that is how I have this good fire here now. But I am starving!'</p>
<p>"The poor fellow then began to cry. I divided with him my bread and cheese; and, when we had
      eaten our morsel, we began to converse upon our miserable condition. He had as much abhorrence
      of the mine as I had; he declared that he would sooner kill himself at once than return to
      labour in a pit; and I shared in his resolution. In less than an hour Skilligalee and myself
      became intimate friends. Varied and many were the plans which we proposed to earn a
      livelihood; but all proved hopeless when we remembered our penniless condition, and
      Skilligalee pointed to his rags. At length he exclaimed in despair, '<hi>There is nothing left
       to do but to rob!</hi>'—'<hi>I am afraid that this is our only resource</hi>,' was my
       reply.—'<hi>Do you mean it?</hi>' he demanded.—'<hi>Yes!</hi>' I said boldly; and we
      exchanged glances full of meaning.</p>
<p>"'<hi>Come with me,</hi>' said Skilligalee. I did not ask any questions, but followed him.
      He led the way in silence for upwards of half an hour, and at length lights suddenly shone
      between a grove of trees. Skilligalee leapt over a low fence, and then helped me to climb it.
      We were then in a meadow planted with trees—a sort of park, which we traversed, guided by the
      lights, towards a large house. We next came to a garden; and, having passed through this
      enclosure, we reached the back part of the premises. Skilligalee went straight up to a
      particular window, which he opened. He then crept through, and told me to wait outside. In a
      few minutes he returned to the window, and handed me out a large bundle, wrapped up in a
      table-cloth. He then crept forth, and closed the window. We beat a retreat from the scene of
      our plunder; and returned to the cave. The fire was still blazing, and Skilligalee fed it with
      more fuel, which he obtained by breaking away the wood from an old ruined cabin close by.</p>
<p>"We next proceeded to open the bundle, which I found to contain a quantity of food, six
      silver forks, and six spoons. Skilligalee then told me that the mansion which we had just
      robbed was the dwelling of the owner of the mine wherein he had worked for seven years, and
      where he had been so cruelly treated by the pit-man to whom he had been apprenticed. He said
      that he had sometimes been sent with messages to the proprietor, from the overseer in the
      mine, and that the servants on those occasions had taken him into the kitchen and given him
      some food. He had thus obtained a knowledge of the premises. 'Last night,' he added, 'I was
      reduced by hunger to desperation, and I went with the intention of breaking into the pantry.
      To my surprise I found the window open, the spring-bolt being broken. My courage, however,
      failed me; and I returned to this cave to suffer all the pangs of hunger. To-night you came:
      companionship gave me resolution; and we have got wherewith to obtain the means of doing
      something for an honest livelihood.</p>
<p>"We then partook of some of the cold meat and fine white bread which the pantry had
      furnished; and, while we thus regaled ourselves, we debated what we should do with the silver
      forks and spoons. I said before that I was decently dressed; but my companion was in rags. It
      was accordingly agreed that I should go to the nearest town in the morning, dispose of the
      plate, purchase some clothes for Skilligalee, and then rejoin him at the cave. This matter
      being decided upon, we laid down and went to sleep.</p>
<p>"Next morning I washed myself at a neighbouring stream, made myself look as decent as I
      could, and set off. Skilligalee had told me how to proceed. In an hour I reached the town, and
      went to a pawnbroker's shop. I said that I was servant to a lady who was in a temporary
      difficulty and required
      <pb n="360"/> a loan. The pawnbroker questioned me so closely that I began to prevaricate: he
      called in a constable, and gave me into custody. I was taken before the magistrate; but I
      refused to answer a single question, being determined not to betray my accomplice. The
      magistrate remanded me for a week; and I was sent to prison. There I herded with juvenile
      thieves and prostitutes; and I cared little for my incarceration, because I was tolerably,
      and, at all events, regularly fed. When I was had up again, the owner of the mansion which I
      had helped to rob, was there to identify his property. I, however, still persisted in my
      refusal to answer any questions: I was resolved not to criminate Skilligalee; and I also felt
      desirous of being sent back to gaol, as I was certain of there obtaining a bed and a meal. In
      vain did the magistrate impress upon me the necessity of giving an explanation of the manner
      in which the plate came into my possession, for both he and the owner of the property were
      inclined to believe that I was only a tool, and not the original thief;—I remained dumb, and
      was remanded for another week.</p>
<p>"At the expiration of that period, I was again placed before the magistrate; and, to my
      surprise, I found Skilligalee in the court. He was still clothed in his rags, and looked more
      wretched and famished than when I first saw him. I gave him a look, and made a sign to assure
      him that I would not betray him; but the moment the case was called, he stood forward and
      declared that he alone was guilty,—that he had robbed the house, and that I was merely an
      instrument of whom he had made use to dispose of the proceeds of the burglary. I was overcome
      by this generosity on his part; and both the magistrate and the owner of the property were
      struck by the avowal. The latter declared that he did not wish to prosecute: the former
      accordingly inflicted a summary sentence of imprisonment for a few weeks upon Skilligalee. He
      then questioned me about my own condition; and I told him that I had worked in a mine, but
      that I had been compelled to run away from home in consequence of the ill treatment I received
      at the hands of my mother. I expressed my determination to put an end to my life sooner than
      return to her; and the gentleman, whose house had been robbed, offered to provide for me at
      his own expense, if the magistrate would release me. This he agreed to do; and the gentleman
      placed me as a boarder in a school kept in the town by two elderly widows.</p>
<p>"This school was founded for the purpose of furnishing education to the children of pit-men
      who were prudent and well disposed enough to pay a small stipend for that purpose, that
      stipend being fixed at a very low rate, as the deficiency in the amount required to maintain
      the establishment was supplied by voluntary contribution. There were only a few boarders—and
      they were all girls: the great majority of the pupils consisted of day-scholars. At this
      school I stayed until I was sixteen, when the gentleman who had placed me there took me into
      his service as housemaid.</p>
<p>"During the whole of that period I had never heard of my mother, or Phil Blossom. I now felt
      some curiosity to discover what had become of them; so, one day, having obtained a holiday for
      the purpose, I went over to the pit where I had myself passed so many miserable years. The
      same old woman, who had presided at the handle of the roller that raised or lowered the
      clatch-harness, during the period of my never-to-be-forgotten apprenticeship, was there still.
      She did not recognise me—I was so altered for the better. Clean, neatly dressed, stout, and
      tall, I could not possibly be identified with the dirty, ragged, thin, and miserable-looking
      creature who had once toiled in that subterranean hell. I accosted the old woman, and asked
      her if a woman named Betsy Flathers or Blossom worked in the mine. "Bet Blossom!" ejaculated
      the old woman: 'why, she's been dead a year!'—'Dead!' I echoed. 'And how did she die?'—'By
      falling down the shaft, to be sure,' answered the old woman.—Although I entertained little
      affection for my mother, absence and a knowledge of her character having destroyed all
      feelings of that kind, I could not hear this intelligence without experiencing a severe
      shock.—'Yes,' continued the old woman, 'it was a sort of judgment on her, I suppose, for she
      herself let a poor creature fall down some four or five years ago, when she took my place at
      the handle here for a few minutes while I went to the tommy-shop for her. She married the
      husband of the woman who was killed by the fall; and every body knew well enough afterwards
      that there wasn't quite so much neglect in the affair as she had pretended at the time, but a
      something more serious still. However, there was no proof; and so the thing was soon forgot.
      Well, one day, about a year ago, as I said just now, Phil Blossom came up to me and asked me
      to run to the tommy-shop to fetch him some candles. I told him to mind the wheel, and he said
      he would. It seems that a few minutes after I had left on his errand, his wife came up the
      clatch; and, according to what a lad, who looked up the shaft at the time, says, she had just
      reached the top, when she fell, harness and all, the whole pit echoing with her horrible
      screams. She died the moment she touched the bottom. Phil Blossom was very much cut up about
      it; but he swore that the handle slipped out of his hand, and then went whirling round and
      round with such force that he couldn't catch it again. I own people <hi>did</hi> say that Phil
      and his second wife led a precious dog-and-cat kind of a life; but the overseer thought there
      was no reason to make a stir about it, and there the matter ended.'—'And what has become of
      Phil Blossom?' I inquired.—The old woman pointed down the shaft, as much as to say that he was
      still working in the mine.—'Did they have any children?' I asked.—'Bet had one, I believe,'
      said the old woman; 'but it died a few days after it was born, through having too large a dose
      of Godfrey's Cordial administered to make it sleep.'—I gave the old woman a shilling, and
      turned away from the place, by no means anxious to encounter Phil Blossom, who, I clearly
      perceived, had rid himself of my mother by the same means which she had adopted to dispose of
      his first wife.</p>
<p>"As I was returning to my master's house, I had to cross a narrow bridge over a little
      stream. I was so occupied with the news I had just heard, I did not perceive that there was
      another person advancing from the opposite side, until I was suddenly caught in the arms of a
      young man in the very middle of the bridge. I gave a dreadful scream; but he burst out into a
      loud laugh, and exclaimed, 'Well, you needn't be so frightened at a mere joke.' I knew that
      voice directly; and glancing at the young man, who was tolerably well dressed, I immediately
      recognised my old friend Skilligalee. It was then my turn to laugh, which I did very heartily,
      because he had not the least notion who I was. I, however, soon told him; and he was quite
      delighted to meet me. We walked together to the very identical cave where we had first met
      when boy
      <pb n="361"/> and girl. Now he was a tall young man, and had improved wonderfully. He told me
      that he had become acquainted with some excellent fellows when he was in prison, and that he
      had profited so well by their advice and example, that he led a jovial life, did no work, and
      always had plenty of money. I asked him how he managed; and he told me, after some hesitation,
      that he had turned house-breaker. There was scarcely a gentleman's house, within twelve miles
      round, that he had not visited in that quality. He then proposed that I should meet him on the
      following Sunday evening, and take a walk together. I agreed, and we separated.</p>
<gap unit="graphic"/>
<p>"I did not neglect my appointment. Skilligalee was delighted to see me again; and he
      proposed that I should leave service, and live with him. I consented; and——"</p>
</div>