
CHAPTER CLXXV.   MONTONI.
It was nine o'clock at night when the post-chaise entered the capital of Castelcicala.
In spite of his unfortunate position,—a prisoner, defeated in his grand aims, and with all
      his hopes apparently blasted,—Richard could not help feeling a glow of pleasure when he thus
      found himself in the sovereign city which was the birth place of his well-beloved
      Isabella.
But, oh! in what a state did he now enter its walls!
Instead of accompanying a victorious army to proclaim Alberto Grand Duke of
      Castelcicala,—instead of the society of the patriotic Grachia and the heroic Morosino,—instead
      of hearing the welcome voices of a liberated people echoing around,—the young man was in the
      custody of a subaltern, and, for aught he knew, on his way to a dungeon!
Then—Grachia, Morosino, and the other chiefs of the enterprise—where were they?
Numbered with the dead—or captives in the hands of a savage conqueror!
Oh! how were Markham's fondest hopes blasted! how were his elysian dreams dissipated by the
      mocking reality of disaster and defeat!
Now, too, how much farther than ever was he removed from the sole object of his toils,—the
      only hope of his existence,—the hand of Isabella!
Her father, who had all along discountenanced the projects of the Constitutionalists, but
      who would naturally have pardoned them had they succeeded, could not for a moment be expected
      to forgive the survivors of that terrible defeat!
All these gloomy ideas annihilated in a moment the temporary glow of pleasure which our hero
      had experienced on entering Montoni.
The chaise traversed the southern part of the metropolis, crossed the Ferretti by a noble
      bridge,
      and entered the most fashionable and imposing quarter of that portion of the city
      which stands on the northern side of the river.
At length it stopped at an hotel.
"We shall alight here," said Mario Bazzano.
"But this is not a prison!" exclaimed Richard.
"I never told you that you were on your way to such a place," returned the
       aide-de-camp, laughing.
"Did you not hint at imprisonment, signor?" said our hero, surprised at the kind forbearance
      shown towards him—captured, as he had been, with arms in his hand against the reigning
      Prince.
"That may, or may not happen," replied Bazzano. "At all events, here we will alight: and,
      remember, while in my charge, you are on your parole. It is not necessary to let the gossips
      of this tavern know who you are, or why you are here with me."
"My honour is pledged, and the vow will be punctually fulfilled," said Markham.
They then descended from the vehicle, and were conducted to a private apartment in the
      hotel.
Bazzano ordered refreshments: then, as soon as he himself had drunk a glass of wine and
      eaten a mouthful of food, he left the room, simply observing, "I may be absent nearly an hour;
      but I will thank you not to retire to rest until my return."
Markham bowed an acquiescence with this request; and, as soon as the door had closed behind
      the aide-de-camp, he exclaimed, "If Signor Bazzano be a fair specimen of
      the Castelcicalans generally, they are a glorious race!"
"Some kind power seems to protect you in this country, Mr. Markham," observed Morcar.
"I candidly confess that I am at a loss to interpret these occurrences," returned our hero.
      "At the moment when the cord is round my neck, the mention of my name saves my life, and
      converts an enemy into a stanch friend. Even the ferocious Captain-General of Abrantani
      relaxes all his natural severity in my behalf. Then, instead of being chained, I am scarcely
      guarded: instead of being placed between two soldiers with loaded muskets, I am allowed to
      remain upon parole. He who has charge of me, leaves me for an hour, with a simple request not
      to retire to rest until his return! Yes—some secret power protects me. It is true that a few
      years ago I once met her who now occupies a seat on the Grand-ducal throne," he continued,
      rather musing to himself, than addressing his words to Morcar; "but she can scarcely
      remember—or, even if she do—could not be supposed to interest herself in one so obscure, so
      humble as I!"
Then he paced the room—lost in conjecture, and giving way to the immense variety of
      reflections which his position was calculated to engender.
In an hour the young aide-de-camp returned.
"Signor Markham," he said, "you will have the kindness to accompany me whither I shall
      conduct you. You," he added, addressing himself to Morcar, "must await our return here."
Richard signified his readiness to follow Bazzano; and they left the hotel together.
It was now past eleven o'clock; and, though the shops were all closed, the streets of
      Montoni were resplendent with the lustre which streamed from the windows of the
       cafés, restaurants, and club-houses.
Markham could not help observing to his companion that there appeared to be numerous patrols
      of military moving about in the capital, and that the sentinels were posted along the streets
      at very short intervals.
"The news of this morning's invasion reached Montoni several hours ago," answered the
       aide-de-camp; "and I do not disguise from you the fact that until this
      strong military demonstration was made, the city was in an extraordinary ferment. This I heard
      just now, previous to my return to the hotel."
"The reigning Grand Duke seems very unpopular," observed Markham.
Bazzano made no reply: it was evident that he could not contradict the assertion; and, being
      in his sovereign's service, he could not with propriety corroborate it.
A quarter of an hour's rapid walking brought our hero and the young officer to an immense
      square; and the magnificent buildings on two sides thereof shed a brilliant light from their
      ample casements.
"This is the ducal palace," said Mario.
Crossing the square, the officer led the way towards a small door in one of the angles of
      the immense edifice.
Mario knocked gently; and the door was immediately opened by a tall servant in a gorgeous
      livery.
Markham followed his companion into a small vestibule, brilliantly lighted, and at the end
      of which was a narrow staircase carpetted all over.
Not a word was spoken: the domestic bowed as the two young men passed him; and Bazzano led
      the way up the staircase, which was lighted by lamps held in the hands of marble statues
      placed in recesses.
On the landing which the visitors speedily reached, an usher, dressed in black, and wearing
      a massive gold chain, advanced to receive them; and, opening a door, conducted them into an
      ante-room, where he requested them to be seated.
He then opened another door on the opposite side from which they had entered the room, and
      disappeared for a few minutes.
On his return, he desired Markham to follow him.
Our hero obeyed, and was led through several magnificent apartments, all brilliantly
      lighted, but unoccupied at the moment.
At length the usher paused in a room smaller, but more elegantly furnished, than any of the
      preceding ones; and, having requested our hero to take a seat, he retired by the same door by
      which they had entered that room.
For a few minutes Richard remained alone with his reflections.
He was now in the Castelcicalan palace. But wherefore had he been brought thither? Was it to
      undergo an examination before the Grand Duke, relative to the invasion of the morning? was it
      to be overwhelmed with reproaches by that sovereign against whom, and without provocation, he
      had borne arms? Could treachery be meditated? No—that idea was absurd. He was so completely in
      the power of the Grand Duke, that there had been no need to exercise treachery towards him, if
      punishment were intended.
Then our hero thought of the Grand Duchess. Had she learnt that he was engaged in the
      expedition? had she remembered his name? was it through her he had received that treatment
      from Mario Bazzano which had so astonished him? could
      it be possible that she would interest herself in him?
He was in the midst of his reverie, when a door opposite to where he was sitting, suddenly
      opened; and a lady, elegantly attired, with a tiara of diamonds upon her brow, entered the
      apartment.
One glance was sufficient for Richard Markham!
He immediately recognised the beautiful woman whom he had seen five years previously,
      disguised in male attire, at Mrs. Arlington's lodgings, and whose singular history had
      subsequently reached his ears when he was imprisoned at the same time as herself, though of
      course not in the same department, in Newgate.
Yes—he recognised her who was once Eliza Sidney; and he now bent his head to the
      grand Duchess of Castelcicala.
Although somewhat pale, and showing a slightly deeper shade of that melancholy expression
      which her countenance had acquired during her captivity of two years, Eliza was still
      eminently lovely.
Her form had expanded into those proportions which indicated the maturity of her charms, but
      which gave to her beauty a voluptuousness that was only attempered by the chaste glances of
      her melting hazel eyes, and the halo of purity which dwelt on her lofty and spotless brow.
And well fitted was that pure and open forehead to be crowned with the glittering tiara
      which denoted her sovereign rank, and which set off to such exquisite advantage the large
      bands of her light, luxuriant, shining, chesnut hair!
Her walk was a dignified and yet harmonious motion;—her gesture expressed no particle of
      hauteur, but still denoted a consciousness of the respect which she felt to be due to her
      position as a Princess, and to her character as a woman.
"Resume your seat, Mr. Markham," she said in a sweet tone, and with a manner full of grace:
      then, placing herself on a sofa at a short distance, she added, "I have had the pleasure of
      seeing you before; but little did I then suppose that the next time we met, it would
      be under such circumstances as these."
"I comprehend your Serene Highness," answered Markham, firmly, but respectfully. "We
      meet—your Highness as a sovereign Princess, and I as a prisoner at the disposal of those who
      have power to command in this State."
"Such is indeed the fact, Mr. Markham," returned the Grand Duchess, with a half smile. "But
      I did not send for you hither to reproach you. Doubtless you considered yourself justified in
      the proceedings which you have adopted, and in joining the cause of those mistaken men who
      this morning set hostile feet upon these shores;—for I have received from an agent of mine in
      England assurances of your honourable nature and estimable character; and I did not fail some
      time since to issue those secret instructions to the various authorities, which saved your
      life this morning, and ensured you good treatment at the hands of those into whose power you
      were doomed to fall. Moreover, I learn that you behaved most gallantly in the conflict between
      your party and the ducal troops; and I can respect bravery, Mr. Markham, even in an
      enemy."
"Your Serene Highness will give me credit for the sincerity with which I express my
      gratitude for the kindness that I have received at your hands," said Markham; "especially
      under circumstances, which—whatever opinion I may entertain of them—could not have served me
      as a very favourable passport to the notice of your Highness."
"Mr. Markham," returned the Grand Duchess, "you are an Englishman—and that is one reason to
      induce me to exercise some leniency in your case; for however profoundly my interests may be
      identified with this country, it is impossible that I can forget my own. Secondly, I am better
      acquainted with your history than you imagine. Do you remember an anonymous letter which your
      late father received—some years ago,—yes—it was in 1831, I believe,—warning him of a
      burglarious attempt which was contemplated in respect to his abode?"
"I remember well the letter to which your Highness alludes," answered Markham, surprised at
      this mention of an incident which had occurred only a short time previously to the separation
      of himself and his brother on the hill-top.
"That letter was written by myself," said the Grand Duchess, with a smile.
"Written by your Highness!" ejaculated Markham, more and more amazed at what he heard.
"Yes, Mr. Markham," continued Eliza: "it was I who sent that warning. Circumstances enabled
      me to overhear the discourse of two miscreants in whose den I accidentally took refuge during
      a storm, and whence I narrowly escaped with my life. But enough of that: I merely mentioned
      the circumstance to show you that your name has long been familiar to me. Then, about four
      years after that event, I met you at the abode of a lady from whom I have since received
      signal kindnesses, and who is now the Countess of Warrington."
"I remember that evening well, your Highness," observed Richard.
"Afterwards," resumed the Grand Duchess, sinking her voice, "you and I were the inmates of a
      tenement whose severity you deserved perhaps much less than I—though heaven knows the artifice
      that was used to involve me in that desperate venture!"
"Your Serene Highness has heard, then, that I too was innocent of the crime laid to my
      charge?" said Markham.
"I imagined so when I first learnt the particulars of your case at the time of its
      occurrence," answered the Grand Duchess; "and my agent in England has lately confirmed me in
      that belief. Then, again," she added, with an arch smile, "I am not ignorant of the motives
      which induced you to embark, like a gallant cavalier, in the enterprise whose results have led
      to this interview."
"Your Serene Highness will not wrong, by injurious suspicions, an exiled family!" said
      Markham, well knowing to what Eliza alluded.
"No!" exclaimed the Grand Duchess, solemnly: "I am aware that Prince Alberto did not
      countenance the expedition; and I can scarcely believe that his charming daughter," she
      continued, archly smiling again, "could have been very ready to permit you to embark on so mad
      an enterprise. You see, Mr. Markham, that I am acquainted with more than you would have
      supposed me to know. And now, perhaps, you will be surprised, when I assure you that I
      entertain the most profound respect and esteem for Prince Alberto and his family—although I
      have never seen them. But, oh!" exclaimed Eliza, wiping away a tear, "how great was my grief
      when I learnt, this afternoon, that my friend General Grachia had fallen in the conflict of
      the morning!"

"General Grachia invariably spoke to me in the most pleasing terms of your Serene
      Highness," observed Richard.
"Do not think, Mr. Markham," said the Grand Duchess, after a pause, during which she seemed
      a prey to deep thought,—"do not think that I have been a party to all the instances of
      severity and sentences of exile which have lately characterised the political history of
      Castelcicala. No, Mr. Markham—I would not have you think unworthily of your
      fellow-countrywoman. But, enough of that! You can well imagine that I am not all-powerful
      here:—otherwise," she added, with a sigh, "it would be different! Time is, however, pressing;
      and I have not yet spoken to you on the matter which ought to form the principal topic of our
      conversation;—I mean your own position. You have heard enough from my lips to show you that
      you are not unknown to me, and that there are consequently reasons which have induced me to
      interest myself in your behalf. But, as I ere now observed, my power is not unlimited; and
      although my secret wishes are commands in the eyes of Count Santa-Croce and his officers,
      still my influence is not sufficient to protect you from the vengeance of the Grand Duke, did
      he know that one of the invaders was at large and unpunished in his dominions. It is
      true that I can soften his rigour—as I shall do in respect to those unhappy prisoners——"
"God be thanked that their condition excites the compassion of your Serene Highness!"
      exclaimed Markham fervently. "A weight is removed from my mind by this assurance!"
"Rest satisfied on that head," said Eliza. "I can promise you that imprisonment is the worst
      punishment which shall overtake any of them."
When Eliza had first entered the room, Richard had bowed his head low to the Grand Duchess;
      but now he sank on his bended knee in presence of the humane and tender-hearted woman.
Eliza felt the full force of this expression of feeling:—it rewarded her for her
      goodness!
She extended her hand towards him; and he respectfully touched it with his lips.
Then he rose, and resumed his seat.
Oh! at that moment, how sweet—how sweet to the amiable and noble-minded woman,—noble in
      nature, as well as in name,—was the possession of power;—and how amply recompensed was she for
      its humane use, by that spontaneous tribute of respect which she had just received from her
      fellow-countryman!
"Mr. Markham," she said, after a pause, "you must escape from Castelcicala: but that is not
      so easy a matter as you may haply imagine. The Castelcicalan steam-frigates will rigorously
      guard the coast by sea, and the custom-house officers by land; and not a ship will leave one
      of our ports without being searched. Orders to that effect have already been issued by the
      Minister of Marine; and I dare not interfere to prevent their full operation. Are you bold
      enough to strike far into the country, traverse its length, and obtain refuge in the
      Neapolitan kingdom?"
"And wherefore not in the Roman States, my lady?" asked Richard. "Their frontier is but a
      day's distance from Montoni."
"Because the Grand Duke has concluded a league, offensive and defensive, with the Pope; and
      you would assuredly be detected in the dominions of his Holiness, and sent ignominiously back
      to Montoni—in which case, Mr. Markham, I could not save you."
"And what chance of safety do I possess by following the plan suggested by your Serene
      Highness?"
"Every chance," was the decided reply. "In the first place, Signor Mario Bazzano will
      procure for you a passport: his uncle is Under-Secretary for the Interior. This passport, made
      out for you in a fictitious name, will be dated from Montoni; and the various authorities will
      never suspect that one of the invaders could possibly have obtained such a document from the
      capital itself. Secondly, you can purchase a portfolio with drawing materials, and pass
      yourself off for an English artist, sent to Castelcicala to design some of the most striking
      features of Italian scenery. By these means there will be an ostensible reason for avoiding
      the great cities and towns; and no suspicion will be excited by your keeping as much as
      possible to the open country. Does my plan please you?"
"How can I ever sufficiently express my gratitude to your Serene Highness for all this kind
      consideration—this unlooked-for generosity?" cried Markham.
"By abstaining from plans of invasion or insurrection in future," answered Eliza.
"Ah! how can I pledge myself to such a condition?" exclaimed Richard. "Should circumstances
      induce or compel Prince Alberto to strike a blow——"
"I fully comprehend you," interrupted the Grand Duchess. "In that case, I impose no
      conditions whatsoever upon you. Go, Mr. Markham—adopt the plan which I have suggested—and you
      will soon be beyond the reach of danger. And excuse me," she added, after a moment's pause,
      "if I act as your banker, as well as your adviser. Use this purse; and, on your arrival in
      England, you can liquidate the debt by affording succour to any needy Castelcicalan whom
      chance may throw in your way."
"Before I receive this new proof of your goodness—before I take my leave,—your Serene
      Highness must permit me, on my bended knee,"—and our hero sank to that posture as he
      spoke,—"to declare that, while I shall henceforth consider myself indebted to your Highness in
      an obligation which I can never repay,—while I shall ever hold myself ready to serve your
      Highness by day and night, and to dare every earthly danger in so doing—in order to evince my
      gratitude for all that your Highness has this day done for me,—still I would rather be
      delivered up to the hands of justice,—I would rather die on the scaffold to-morrow, or take my
      stand in front of a platoon,—than renounce—Englishman—foreigner though I be—the cause of
      Castelcicalan liberty!"
"Rise, headstrong—foolish young man," exclaimed the Grand Duchess, smiling. "I seek to
      impose no conditions upon you. Go; and when once you are beyond the Castelcicalan territory,
      use your own free will—let no shackle of any kind curb the ardour of your soul. At the same
      time, beware! On another occasion, I may seek to protect you in vain!"
"Never—never again, your Highness, will I wantonly aid in provoking civil strife in
      Castelcicala!" ejaculated Richard. "Two motives shall alone henceforth be powerful enough to
      induce me to unsheath the hostile weapon in this clime."

"And which are they?" asked Eliza, still half smiling as she spoke.
"In obedience to the command of Prince Alberto—and then only if his cause be just;
      or in order to relieve Castelcicala from some foreign invader."
"And may God grant that neither of those alternatives shall ever occur!" said the Grand
      Duchess. "But our interview has already lasted a long time; and delay is dangerous to
      you."
Eliza once more extended her hand towards our hero, who pressed it respectfully, but with
      fervour, to his lips.
He then withdrew.
In the adjoining apartment he found the usher waiting for him.
They retraced their steps to the ante-room, where Signor Mario Bazzano was seated, expecting
      their return.
In a few minutes our hero and the young aide-de-camp were on their way
      back to the hotel.
During the walk, Bazzano said, "I presume you have assented to the plan which her Highness
      has devised for your safe retreat into the Neapolitan territory?"
Markham replied in the affirmative.
"In that case I will procure passports for yourself and attendant, to-morrow morning,"
      observed the young officer. "But, for the present, we all three stand in need of rest."
