
CHAPTER CLIV.   REFLECTIONS.—THE NEW PRISON.
Richard Markham passed an uneasy night.
His thoughts wandered from topic to topic until the variety seemed infinite.
He pondered upon his brother, and again reflected for the thousandth time what connexion
      could possibly exist between him and the Resurrection Man. The fatal letter, desiring this
      terrible individual to call upon him, was too decidedly in Eugene's handwriting to be doubted.
      The other contents of the pocket-book, which Richard had found in the Gipsies' Palace, threw
      no light upon the subject; indeed, they only consisted of a few papers of no consequence to
      any one.
Then Richard's thoughts travelled to the Resurrection Man himself. Was this individual
      really no more? Had the truth been told relative to his death at the Gipsies' encampment near
      Pentonville prison?
Next our hero's imagination wandered to the death-bed of the innocent girl who had
      entertained so unfortunate a passion for him. What fervent love was that! what disinterested
      affection! And then to perish in such a manner,—with the darkness of the tomb upon her eyes,
      long ere death itself made its dread appearance!
But with what inspiration had she prophesied the most exalted destinies for him she loved!
      With her sybilline finger she had pointed to a throne!
And then how speedily were those predictions followed by the communication of events which
      portended grand political changes in Castelcicala,—changes which threatened the reigning
      sovereign with overthrow, and the inevitable result of which must be the elevation of Prince
      Alberto to the ducal throne!
And Isabella—how many proofs of her unvaried love for our hero had she not given? She had
      confessed her attachment to the deceased maiden—she had avowed it to that deceased maiden's
      father. Then, when Mary-Anne had prophesied the exalted rank which Isabella would be destined
      to confer, by the fact of marriage, upon Richard, the lovely Italian had ratified the premise
      by the gentle pressure of her hand!
Next our hero pondered upon the awful deed which had been ascribed to Katherine Wilmot; and
      here he was lost in a labyrinth of amaze, distrust, and doubt. Could it be possible that the
      blackest heart was concealed in so fair a shrine? or had circumstantial evidence accumulated
      with fearful effect to enthral an innocent girl in the meshes of the criminal law? Richard
      remembered how he himself had suffered through the overwhelming weight of circumstantial
      evidence; and this thought rendered him slow to put faith in the guilt of others.
Then, amidst other topics, Richard meditated upon the mysterious instructions which were
      conveyed to him in the document left behind by Armstrong, and which seemed to promise much by
      the solemn earnestness that characterised the directions relative to the circumstances or the
      time that would justify him in opening the sealed packet.
Thus, if some of our hero's thoughts were calculated to produce uneasiness, others were
      associated with secret hopes of successful love and dazzling visions of prosperity.
In three years and a half the appointment with his brother was to be kept. How would they
      meet? and would Eugene appear on the day named, and upon the hill where the two trees stood?
      Why had he not written in the meantime? Was he progressing so well that he wished to surprise
      his brother with his great prosperity? or was he so wretched that his proud heart prevented
      him from seeking the assistance of one of whom he had taken leave with a species of challenge
      to a race in the paths which lead to fortune? That Eugene was alive, Richard felt convinced,
      because the inscriptions on the tree—Eugene's own tree—and the letter to the
      Resurrection Man, proved this fact. The same circumstances also showed that Eugene had been
      several times in London (even if he did not dwell in the metropolis altogether) since he
      parted with Richard upon the hill.
Then Richard reflected that if he himself were eventually prosperous, his success would be
      owing to fair and honourable means; and he sincerely hoped that his brother might be pursuing
      an equally harmless career. Such an idea, however, seemed to be contradicted by the mysterious
      note to the Resurrection Man. But our hero remembered that bad men often enjoyed immense
      success; and then he thought of Mr. Greenwood—the man who had robbed him of his property, but
      whom, so far as he knew, he had never seen. That Greenwood was rising rapidly, Richard was
      well aware; the newspapers conveyed that information. So well had he played his cards, that a
      baronetcy, if not even a junior post in the administration, would be his the moment his party
      should come to power. All this Richard knew: the Tory journals were strenuous in their praise
      of Mr. Greenwood, and lauded to the skies his devotion to the statesmen who were aspiring to
      office. Then the great wealth of Mr. Greenwood had become proverbial: not a grand enterprise
      of the day could be started without his name. He
      was a director in no end of Railway Companies; a shareholder in all the principal
      Life Insurance Offices; a speculator in every kind of stock; chairman of several commercial
      associations; a ship-owner; a landowner; a subscriber to all charitable institutions which
      published a list of its supporters; President of a Bible Society which held periodical
      meetings at Exeter Hall; one of the stanchest friends to the Society for the Suppression of
      Vice; a great man at the parochial vestry; a patron of Sunday Schools; a part-proprietor of an
      influential newspaper; an advocate for the suppression of Sunday trading and Sunday
      travelling; a member of half a dozen clubs; a great favourite at Tattersall's; a regular
      church-goer; a decided enemy to mendicity; an intimate friend of the Poor Law Commissioners;
      and an out-and-out foe to all Reform. All this Richard knew; for he took some interest in
      watching the career of a person who had risen from nothing to be so great a man as Mr.
      Greenwood was. Then, while he reflected upon these facts, our hero was compelled to admit that
      his brother Eugene might appear, upon the appointed day, the emblem of infinite prosperity,
      and yet a being from whom the truly honest would shrink back with dismay.
But we will not follow Richard Markham any further in his reflections during that sleepless
      night.
He rose at an early hour, and anxiously awaited the arrival of the morning's newspaper.
From that vehicle of information he learnt that Katherine Wilmot had been examined, on the
      previous day, before the magistrate at the Marylebone Police Court, and had been remanded for
      one week, in order that the depositions might be made out previous to her committal to Newgate
      to take her trial for the murder of Matilda Kenrick.
We need not now dwell upon the evidence adduced on the occasion of that preliminary
      investigation, inasmuch as we shall be hereafter compelled to detail it at some length.
We must, however, observe that when Richard Markham perused all the testimony adduced
      against the girl before the magistrate, he was staggered; for it seemed crushing, connected,
      and overwhelming indeed.
Nevertheless, he remembered his own unhappy case; and he determined not to desert her.
He called upon Mr. Tracy, and found that gentleman unwilling to believe that so young and
      seemingly innocent a girl could be capable of so enormous a crime; yet the reverend gentleman
      was compelled to admit not only that the evidence weighed strongly against her, but that it
      was difficult to conceive how the housekeeper had come by her death unless by Katherine's
      hands.
Richard took his leave of the rector, in whom he saw only a most compassionate man—ready to
      allow justice to take its course, but very unwilling to utter a word prejudicial to the
      accused.
From Mr. Tracy's house our hero proceeded to the New Prison, Clerkenwell, to see
      Katherine.
The New Prison is situate in the midst of the most densely populated part of Clerkenwell. It
      was originally established in the reign of James I.; but in 1816 it was considerably improved
      and enlarged, at the enormous cost of £40,000. It is now destined to be levelled with the
      ground, and a new prison is to be built upon the same site, but upon a plan adapted for the
      application of the atrocious solitary system.
The infamy of the English plan of gaol discipline is nowhere more strikingly illustrated
      than in the New Prison, Clerkenwell. Between five and six thousand prisoners pass annually
      through this gaol; and not the slightest attempt at classification, save in respect to sex, is
      made. The beds are filthy in the extreme, and often full of vermin from the last occupant:
      thus prisoners who arrive at the prison in a cleanly state, find themselves covered with
      loathsome animalculæ after one night's rest in that disgusting place. A miserable attempt at
      cleanliness is made by bathing the prisoners; but the generality of them dislike it, and bribe
      the wardsmen to allow them to escape the ordeal. And no wonder—for the gaol authorities compel
      every six individuals to bathe one after the other in the same water, and it frequently
      happens that a cleanly person is forced into a bath containing the filth and vermin washed
      from the person of a beggar. The reader must remember, that highly respectable persons—even
      gentlemen and ladies—may become prisoners in this establishment, for breaches of the peace,
      assaults, or menaces, until they be released by bail; and yet the gentlemen are compelled to
      herd with felons, beggars, and misdemeanants—and the ladies with the lowest grade of
      prostitutes and the filthiest vagrants!
The prisoners pilfer from each other; and the entire establishment is a scene of
      quarrelling, swearing, fighting, obscenity, and gambling. The male prisoners write notes of
      the most disgusting description, and throw them over with a coal into the female yard. Riots
      and disturbances are common in the sleeping wards; and ardent spirits are procured with
      tolerable facility.
The degradation of mingling with the obscene and filthy inmates of the female Reception Ward
      was, however, avoided by poor Katherine Wilmot. The Keeper took compassion upon her youth and
      the deep distress of mind into which she was plunged, and sent her to the Female
      Infirmary.
When Richard Markham called at the New Prison, he was permitted to have an interview with
      Katherine in the Keeper's office.
The hapless girl flew towards our hero, as if to a brother, and clasping her hands fervently
      together, exclaimed, "Mr. Markham, I am innocent—I am innocent!"
"So I choose to believe you—unless a jury should pronounce you to be guilty," replied
      Richard; "and even then," he added, in a musing tone, "it is possible—I mean that juries are
      not infallible."
"Oh! Mr. Markham, I am most unfortunate—and very, very unhappy!" said Katherine, the tears
      rolling down her cheeks. "I have never injured a human being—and yet, see where I am! see how
      I am treated!"
At that moment Richard recalled to mind all that the policeman had told him relative to the
      unpretending charity of the poor girl,—her goodness even to the very neighbours who despised
      her,—her amiability towards her unfortunate cousin,—the pious resignation with which she had
      supported the ill-treatment of her uncle,—and her constant anxiety to earn her own bread in a
      respectable manner.
All this Richard remembered; and he felt an invincible belief in the complete innocence of
      the poor
      creature with respect to the awful deed now laid to her charge.

"It is not death that I fear, Mr. Markham," said Katherine, after a pause; "but it is
      hard—very hard to be accused of a crime which I abhor! No—I do not fear death: perhaps it
      would be better for me to die even at my age—than dwell in a world which has no charms for me.
      For I have been unhappy from my birth, Mr. Markham: I was left an orphan when I was young—so
      very young—oh! too young to lose both parents! Since then my existence has not been blest; and
      at the very moment when a brighter destiny seemed opened to me, through the goodness of
      yourself and Mr. Tracy, I am suddenly snatched away to a prison, and overwhelmed with this
      terrible accusation!"
"Katherine," said Richard, deeply affected by the young girl's tone and words, "I believe
      you to be innocent—as God is my judge, I believe you to be innocent!"
"And may that same Almighty Power bless you for this assurance!" exclaimed Katherine,
      pressing our hero's hands with the most grateful warmth.
"Although in asserting my conviction of your innocence, Katherine," continued Richard, "I
      leave the deed itself enveloped in the darkest mystery, still I do believe that you
      are innocent—and I will not desert you."
Richard remembered how grateful to his ears had once sounded those words, "I
      believe that you are innocent,"—when Thomas Armstrong uttered them in the prison of
      Newgate.
"Yes, Katherine—you are, you must be innocent," he continued; "and I will
      labour unceasingly to make your innocence apparent. I will provide the ablest counsel to
      assist in your defence; and all that human agency can effect in your behalf shall be ensured
      at any cost."
The poor girl could not find words to express her deep gratitude to this young man who so
      generously constituted himself her champion, and on whom she had not the slightest claim;—but
      her looks and her tears conveyed to our hero all she felt.
"Has your uncle been to see you?" he inquired.
"No, sir—nor my cousin," replied Katherine, with melancholy emphasis upon the latter
      words.

"Perhaps they are unaware of your situation. I will call and communicate to them
      the sad tidings. As your relatives, it is right that they should know the truth."
He then took leave of the young creature, who now felt less forlorn since she knew that she
      possessed at least one friend who would not only exert himself in her behalf, but who also
      believed in her innocence.
From the New Prison Richard proceeded to Saint Giles's, and knocked at the door of the
      Public Executioner's abode.
But his summons remained unanswered.
He repeated it again: all was silent within.
At length a neighbour,—a man who kept a coal and potato shed,—emerged from his shop, and
      volunteered some information concerning the hangman and his son.
"It's no use knocking and knocking there, sir," said the man: "Smithers and his lad left
      London early yesterday morning for some place in the north of Ireland—I don't know the
      name—but where there's some work in his partickler line. The postman brought Smithers a
      letter, asking him to start off without delay; and he did so. He took Gibbet with him to give
      him another chance, he said, of trying his hand. Smithers told me all this before he went
      away, and asked me to take in any letters that might come for him, or answer any one that
      called. That's how I came to know all this."
"Do you happen to be aware when he will return?" asked Richard.
"I've no more idea than that there tater," answered the man, indicating with his foot a
      specimen of the vegetable alluded to.
Richard thanked the man for the information which he had been enabled to give, and then
      pursued his way towards the chief police station in the neighbourhood.
Arrived at that establishment, he inquired for Morris Benstead.
The officer happened to be on the premises at the moment.
Markham led him to a short distance, and then addressed him as follows:—
"You have doubtless heard of the extraordinary position in which poor Katherine Wilmot is
      placed. I, for one, firmly believe her to be innocent."
"So do I, sir," exclaimed the officer, emphatically.
"Then you will prove the more useful to my purposes in consequence of that impression," said
      Richard. "When I saw you on a former occasion, you offered me your services if ever I should
      require them. Little did I then suppose that I should so soon need your aid. Are you willing
      to assist me in investigating this most mysterious affair?"
"With pleasure, sir—with the sincerest pleasure," answered Benstead. "You know the respect I
      entertain for Miss Kate."
"And I know your goodness of heart," said our hero. "You must then aid me in collecting
      proofs of her innocence. Spare no expense in your task: hesitate not to apply to me for any
      money that you may need. Here are ten pounds for immediate purposes. To-morrow I will let you
      know whom I shall decide upon employing to conduct the poor girl's defence; and you can then
      communicate direct with the solicitor and barrister retained. Are you willing to undertake
      this task?"
"Need you ask me, sir?" cried the policeman. "I would do any thing to serve Miss Kate."
"Prudence renders it necessary for me to keep myself in the back-ground in this affair,"
      said Richard; "for fear lest scandal should attach an unworthy motive to my exertions in her
      behalf, and thus prejudice her cause by injuring her character. Upon you, then, I throw the
      weight of the investigation."
"And I accept it cheerfully," returned Benstead.
Markham then took leave of the officer, and having paid a visit to Mr. Gregory, returned
      home.
