
CHAPTER CXXIX. THE FALL.
REGINALD Tracy returned to his own abode, his breast agitated with a variety of conflicting
      feelings.
He pushed his old housekeeper, who announced to him that dinner was ready, rudely aside, and
      hurried up to his own chamber.
There he threw himself upon his knees, and endeavoured to pray to be released from
      temptation.
For he now comprehended all the dangers which beset him, although he suspected not the
      perfidy and artifice of the tempter.
But not a word of supplication could he utter from the mouth which still burned with the
      thrilling kisses of the beautiful Cecilia.
He rose from his knees, and paced the room wildly,—at one moment vowing never to see that
      syren more,—at another longing to rush back to her arms.
The animal passions of that man were strong by nature and threatened to be insatiable
      whenever let loose; but they had slumbered from his birth, beneath the lethargic influence of
      high principle and asceticism.
Moreover, they had never been tempted until the present time; and now that temptation came
      so suddenly, and in so sweet a guise,—came with such irresistible blandishments,—came, in a
      word, so accompanied with all that could flatter his vanity or minister unto his pride,—that
      he knew not how to resist its influence.
And at one moment that man of unblemished character and lofty principle fell upon his knees,
      grovelling as it were at the foot-stool of Him whom he served,—anxious, yearning to crave for
      courage to escape from the peril that awaited him,—and yet unable to breathe a syllable of
      prayer. Then he walked in a wild and excited manner up and down, murmuring the name of
      Cecilia,—pondering upon her charms,—plunging into voluptuous reveries and dreams of vaguely
      comprehended bliss,—until his desires became of that fiery, hot, and unruly nature, which
      triumphed over all other considerations.
It was an interesting—and yet an awful spectacle, to behold that man, who could look back
      over a life of spotless and unblemished purity, now engaged in a terrific warfare with the
      demons of passion that were raging to cast off their chains, and were struggling furiously for
      dominion over the proud being who had hitherto held them in silence and in bondage.
But those demons had acquired strength during their long repose; and now that the day of
      rebellion had arrived, they maintained an avenging and desperate conflict with him who had
      long been their master. They were like a people goaded to desperation by the atrocities of a
      blood-thirsty tyrant: they fought a battle in which there was to be no quarter, but wherein
      one side or the other must succumb.
Hour after hour passed; and still he sustained the conflict with the new feelings which had
      been excited within him, and which were rapidly crushing all the better sentiments of his
      soul. At length he retired to bed, a prey to a mental uneasiness which amounted to a
      torture.
His sleep was agitated and filled with visions by no means calculated to calm the fever of
      his blood. He awoke in the morning excited, unsettled, and with a desperate longing after
      pleasures which were as yet vague and undefined to him.
But still a sense of the awful danger which menaced him stole into his mind from time to
      time; and he shuddered as if he were about to commit a crime.
He left the table, where the morning's meal was untasted, and repaired to his study. But his
      books had no longer any charm for him: he could not settle his mind to read or write.
He went out, and rambled in all directions, reckless whither he went—but anxious to throw
      off the spell which had fallen upon him.
Vain was this attempt.
The air was piercing and cold; but his brow was burning. He felt that his cheeks were
      flushed; and his eyes seemed to shoot forth fire.
"My God! what is the matter with me?" he exclaimed, in his anguish, as he entered Hyde Park,
      the comparative loneliness of which at that season he thought calculated to soothe his
      troubled thoughts. "I have tried to pray—and last night, for the first time in my life, I
      sought my pillow, unable to implore the blessings of my Maker. Oh! what spell has overtaken
      me? what influence is upon me? Cecilia—Cecilia—is it indeed thou that hast thus changed
      me?"
He went on,—now musing upon all that had passed within the few preceding days—now breaking
      forth into wild and passionate exclamations.
He left the Park, and walked rapidly through the streets of the West End.
"No," he said within himself, "I will never see her more. I will conquer these horrible
      feelings—I will triumph over the mad desires, the fiery cravings which have converted the
      heaven of my heart into a raging hell! Oh! why is she so beautiful? why did she say that she
      loved me? Was it to disturb me in my peaceful career—to wean me from my God? No—no: she
      yielded to an impulse which she could not control;—she loves me—she loves me—she loves
      me!"
There was a species of insanity in his manner as he thus addressed himself,—not speaking
      with the lips, but with the heart,—unheard by those who passed him by, but with a voice which
      vibrated like thunder in his own ears.
"Yes—she loves me," he continued; "but I
       must fly from her—I must avoid her as if she were a venomous serpent. I dare not
      trust myself again in her presence: and not for worlds—not for worlds would I be with her
      alone once more. No,—I must forget her—I must tear her image from my heart—I must trample it
      under foot!"
He paused as he spoke: he stood still—for he was exhausted.
But how was it that the demon of mischief had, with an under-current of irresistible
      influence, carried him on, in spite of the forceful flow of the above reflections, to the very
      goal of destruction!
He was in Tavistock Square.
He was at the door of Lady Cecilia Harborough's house.
And now for one minute a terrific conflict again raged within him. It seemed as if he
      collected all his remaining courage to struggle with the demons in his heart; but he was weak
      with the protracted contest—and they were more powerful than ever.
"I will see her once more," he said, yielding to the influence of his passions: "I will tell
      her that I stand upon an abyss—I will implore her to have mercy upon me, and permit me to
      retreat ere yet it be too late!"
His good genius held him faintly back; but his passions goaded him on: he obeyed the latter
      impulse; he rushed up the steps and knocked at the door.
"Even now I might retreat," he said to himself: "there is still time! I will—I will!"
He turned, and was already half-way down the steps, when the door was opened.
His good resolutions vanished, and he entered the house.
In a few moments more he was in the presence of Lady Cecilia,—Lady Cecilia—looking more
      bewitching, more captivating than ever!
She had expected him, and had resolved that this visit, on his part, should crown her
      triumph.
It was in a small parlour adjoining her own boudoir that she received him.
The luxurious sofa was placed near the cheerful fire: the heavy curtains were drawn over the
      windows in such a manner as to darken the room.
Cecilia was attired in a black silk dress, that she had purposely chosen to enhance the
      transparent brilliancy of her complexion, and to display the dazzling whiteness of a bust,
      which, though of small proportions, was of perfect contour.
She was reclining languidly upon the cushions which were piled on one end of the sofa, and
      her little feet peeped from beneath the skirts of her dress.
She did not rise when Reginald entered the room, but invited him to take a seat near her
      upon the sofa.
So bewitchingly beautiful did she appear, as the strong glare of the fire played upon her
      countenance, amidst the semi-obscurity of the room, that he could not resist the signal.
He accordingly sate down by her side.
"Your visit to-day," said Cecilia, "proves to me that you have forgiven the indiscreet
      confession into which I was yesterday led in a moment of weakness."
"I am come as a friend—as a true and sincere friend," returned Reginald, with
      considerable emphasis upon the last word. "But I know not whether my occupations, my duties,
      in a word—will permit me to visit you again for some time——"
"Oh! do not deprive me of the pleasure of your society from time to time," interrupted
      Cecilia, divining all that was passing in the rector's soul, and well aware, by the tremulous
      tone in which he spoke, that his good resolutions were but unequal opponents to the fury of
      his newly awakened passions.
"Listen, Lady Cecilia," answered Reginald; "and I will tell you frankly the real motives
      which most compel me to forego the pleasure of your society in future. I tremble for
      myself!"
"You tremble for yourself!" repeated Cecilia, with ill-concealed joy. "Do you think me,
      then, so very formidable?"
"Formidable—oh! no," ejaculated Reginald, darting an impassioned glance upon his ravishing
      companion. "But I consider that you are very beautiful—too beautiful for me thus to seek your
      presence with impunity."
"Then would you sever that bond of friendship which you yourself proposed so generously, so
      kindly?" asked Lady Cecilia, placing her hand upon that of the rector, and approaching her
      countenance towards his as if to read the answer in his eyes.
"It must be so—it must be so—for my peace of mind, Cecilia!" cried Reginald, thrilled by
      that electric touch, and receiving into his own soul no small portion of that same
      voluptuousness which animated the fair patrician at that moment.
"It must be so,—oh! cruel resolve!" said Cecilia, pressing his hand between both of hers.
      "But let me not advance my selfish feelings as a barrier to your interest. Oh! no, Reginald—I
      would sacrifice every thing to give you pleasure! You shall go—you shall leave me; but you
      will sometimes think of me—you will occasionally devote a thought to her who has dared to love
      you!"
"Dared to love me!" exclaimed the rector;—"and what if I—— but no—it is madness!"
"Speak—tell me what you were about to say," murmured Cecilia, in a melting tone.
"I was on the point of asking what you would think—what opinion you would form of me, if I
      were to confess that I also dared to love you?"
"I should reply that such happiness never could descend upon me," said Cecilia.
"And yet it is true—it is true! I cannot conceal it from myself," exclaimed Reginald, giving
      way to the influence of his emotions: "it is true that I love you!"
"Oh! am I indeed so blest?" faltered Cecilia. "Tell me once more that you love me!"
"Love you!" cried the rector, unable to wrestle longer with his mad desires: "I worship—I
      adore you—I will die for you!"
He caught her in his arms, and covered her with burning and impassioned kisses.

Oh, Reginald! and hast thou at length fallen? Have a few short days sufficed to undo and
      render as naught the purity—the chastity of years?
Where was thy guardian angel in that hour?
Whither had fled that proud virtue which raised thee so high above thy fellow-men, and which
      gave to thine eloquence the galvanic effect of the most sublime truth?
Look back—look back, with bitterness and sorrow, upon the brilliant career through which
      thou hast run up to this hour, and curse the madness that prompted thee to darken so bright a
      destiny!
For thou hast plucked thine own crown of integrity from thy brow, and hast trampled it under
      foot.
      
Henceforth, in thine own heart, wilt thou know thyself as a hypocrite and a deceiver!

It was past eleven o'clock when Reginald Tracy issued from the abode of Lady Cecilia
      Harborough.
The night was dark; but from time to time the moon shone for a short interval, as the clouds
      were swept away from its face.
Reginald paused for a moment upon the steps of the door, and gazed upwards.
The tempestuous aspect of the heavens alarmed him; and a superstitious dread crept, like a
      death-shudder, over his entire frame; for it seemed to him as if the mansion of the Almighty
      had put on its sable garb in mourning for a soul that was lost unto the blessings of
      eternity.
Deeply imbued as he was with a sense of the grand truths of the gospel, this sudden and
      awful idea speedily assumed so dread a shape in his mind, that he felt alarmed, as if a
      tremendous gulph were about to open beneath his feet.
He hurried on, hoping to outstrip his thoughts; but that idea pursued him,—haunted
      him,—every moment increasing in terrific solemnity, until it wore the appearance of a mighty
      truth instead of a phantom of the imagination.
Again he looked upwards; and the dense sombre clouds, which rolled rapidly like huge black
      billows over each other, imparted fresh terrors to his guilty soul.
Then his feverish and excited imagination began to invest those clouds with fantastic
      shapes; and he traced in the midst of the heavens a mighty black hand, the fore-finger of
      which pointed menacingly downwards.
The more he gazed—the more palpable to his mind that apparition became. Half sinking with
      terror—oppressed with an astounding, a crushing consciousness of his adulterous guilt—the
      wretched man went wildly on, reckless of the way which he pursued, and every minute casting
      horror-stricken glances up to the colossal black hand which seemed suspended over his
      head.
Suddenly a deafening peal of thunder burst above him: he looked frantically up—the hand
      appeared to wave in a convulsive manner—then the clouds parted, rolling pell-mell over each
      other,—and the terrific sign was broken into a hundred moving masses.
Never did erring mortal so acutely feel his guilt as Reginald Tracy on this fearful
      night.
The storm burst forth; and he ran madly on, without aim—a prey to the most appalling
      reflections.
It was not of this world that he now thought,—it was not on its reproaches, its blame, or
      its punishment, that his mental looks were fixed;—but it was of eternity that he was
      afraid.
He trembled when he thought of that Maker whose praise he had so lately sung with pride, and
      hope, and joy,—and whose name he dared not now invoke!
Oh! his punishment had already begun.
*   *  *  *  *
*   *  *  *  *
Weak, wearied, subdued,—drenched with the rain that had accompanied the storm; and in state
      of mind bordering upon madness and despair, the wretched man reached his home at four o'clock
      in the morning.
But whither he had wandered, and which way he had taken,—whether he had continued running
      on, or had rested once or often during that terrific night, he never remembered.
He retired to bed, and slept during several hours. When he awoke, the sun was shining
      gloriously through his casement; but the horrors and the congenial reflections of darkness had
      left too fearful an impression upon his mind to be readily effaced; for he was not so inured
      to vice as to treat with levity the events of the past night,—events which to his
      superstitious imagination had assumed the aspect of celestial warning and divine menace.
