
CHAPTER CCXLVII.   THE STRANGER WHO DISCOVERED THE CORPSE.
Perhaps there is no other cry in the world, save that of "Fire!" more calculated to spread
      terror and dismay, when falling suddenly and unexpectedly upon the ears of a party of
      revellers, than that of "A corpse! a corpse!"
Before a single question can be put, or a word of explanation be given, each one who hears
      that ominous announcement revolves a thousand dread conjectures in his mind: for although that
      cry might in reality herald nothing more appalling than a case of sudden death from natural
      causes, yet the imagination instinctively associates it with the foulest deed of treachery and
      murder.
Such was the case in the present instance.
The entire party started from their seats; and the smiles that were a moment before upon
      their countenances gave place to looks of profound horror and intense curiosity.
The feelings thus denoted did not experience any mitigation from the inquiring glances that
      were cast towards the gardener; for the entire appearance of the old man was far more
      calculated to augment than diminish the alarm which his strange cry had originated. His eyes
      rolled wildly in their sockets—his quivering lips were livid—his frame seemed to be influenced
      by one continuous shudder, and his breath came with difficulty.
In fact, the mysterious sounds of footsteps in the passage had worked up his feelings,
      already greatly moved by the discovery and exhumation of the rotting carcass of a female, to a
      degree of excitement doubly painful to behold in one so bowed with the weight of years as he;
      and he sank into a seat, as we have before said, in a state of almost complete exhaustion.
The wine that Egerton compelled him to swallow partially restored him; and in the course of
      a few minutes he was enabled to relate the particulars which we have succinctly placed before
      the reader.
The ladies were cruelly shocked by the narrative that thus met their ears; and they one and
      all declared that nothing should ever again induce them to visit a place into possession of
      which their relative seemed to have entered under the most inauspicious circumstances. They
      also requested to be taken back to London with the least possible delay; and Sir Rupert
      Harborough, with his friend Chichester, hastened to give the servants orders to get the
      vehicles ready.
Mrs. Bustard and her daughters retired into an ante-room to put on their bonnets and shawls:
      Egerton, Dunstable, Cholmondeley, and Tedworth Jones remained standing round the chair on
      which the old gardener was still seated.
"This is a most extraordinary thing," said Dunstable, after a pause, during which he had
      reflected profoundly: then, addressing himself to his friend the Colonel, he asked in a
      serious tone, "Does not the strange discovery just made remind you of something that I
      mentioned to you nearly two years ago?"
"I recollect!" cried the Colonel: "you allude to the mysterious disappearance of Lydia
      Hutchinson."
"I do," answered the nobleman. "That event occurred while I was lying wounded in this
      house."
"Ah! I heerd of it, to be sure!" said the gardener. "But I was down in the country when all
      them things took place—I was there for some months. Do you think——"
"No—it could not be!" interrupted Dunstable: "for it was well known at the time that Lydia
      decamped with Lady Ravensworth's jewel-box."
Colonel Cholmondeley turned away, and said nothing: he remembered the evidences of desperate
      enmity between Adeline and Lydia, which had come within his own cognisance; and a vague—a very
      vague, distant, and undefined suspicion that the corpse just discovered might indeed be that
      of Lydia Hutchinson, entered his mind. But he speedily banished it: for the idea that Lady
      Ravensworth could have had any thing to do with the murder of Lydia did not seem tenable for a
      moment.
"As your lordship says," observed the old gardener, after a long pause, and now addressing
      himself to Dunstable, "it can't have any thing to do with that young o'oman who was here a few
      weeks as my lady's maid—'cos it's well knowed that she bolted off with the jewel-casket, as
      your lordship says."
Here Cholmondeley advanced towards Dunstable, took him by the arm, and, leading him aside,
      said in a hasty whisper, "Let us leave this matter where it is. Should the body just
      discovered be really that of Lydia Hutchinson, who disappeared so strangely, it would be very
      annoying for us to have to explain to a Coroner's jury all we know about her and Lady
      Ravensworth."
"Truly so," answered Dunstable. "And, after all, it is no affair of ours."
This understanding being arrived at, the nobleman and his friend returned to the table,
      where they helped themselves to some champagne to allay, as they said, the disagreeable
      sensations produced by the sudden interruption which their mirth had experienced.
The day seemed to be marked out by destiny as one on which various adventures were to occur
      in respect to the excursion party to Ravensworth Hall.
It will be remembered that Sir Rupert Harborough and Chichester had left the drawing-room
      for the purpose of seeing the vehicles got ready with the least possible delay.
The two friends—whom the associated roguery of many years had rendered as intimate as even
      brothers could be—proceeded down stairs, and, after some little trouble, found their way to
      the servants' offices. Guided by a sound of voices, they threaded a passage, and at length
      found themselves on the threshold of the room where the gardener's wife, the stranger who had
      first discovered the body, the seedy coachman, the lacquey, and the groom, were still
      discussing the incident that had so recently occurred.
But the moment that the two gentlemen appeared
      at the door, the stranger started from his seat, exclaiming in a loud tone, "Well
      met, I declare! You're the very identical men I've long been wanting to see!"
And, putting his arms akimbo, he advanced towards them in a manner which appeared extremely
      free and independent in the eyes of the lacqueys.
"Ah! my good friend Talbot!" cried the baronet, for a moment thrown off his guard, but
      speedily recovering himself: "upon my honour I am delighted to see you!"
"So am I—quite charmed to find you looking so well!" exclaimed Chichester.
"No thanks to either of you, howsomever," said the individual thus addressed, and without
      appearing to notice the hands that were extended to him. "But you know as well as I do that my
      name isn't Talbot at all; it's Bill Pocock—and, I may add, too, without telling a lie, that
      it's now honest Bill Pocock."
"Well, my dear Pocock," exclaimed Chichester, with a glance that implored his forbearance,
      "I am really quite happy to see you. But we will step out into the garden, and just talk over
      a few little matters——"
"Oh! gentlemen," said the gardener's wife, coming forward, "you're quite welcome to step
      into our little parlour t'other side of the passage—if so be you have any thing private to
      talk about."
"Thank you—that will exactly suit us," returned Chichester, hastily: and, taking Pocock's
      arm, he drew him into the room thus offered for their privacy.
The baronet remained behind for a few moments, to give the necessary instructions to the
      servants relative to preparing the vehicles; and, this being done, he rejoined Chichester and
      Pocock.
When the trio were thus assembled in the gardener's little parlour, Pocock said, "So I find
      you two chaps still pursuing the old game. Got in with a young cit named Egerton—and all his
      relations—eh? Pretty goings on, I've no doubt."
"Only just in a friendly way, my dear fellow," exclaimed Chichester. "But you stated that
      you had been looking for me and Harborough for a long time?"
"Yes—I was anxious enough to see you both," returned Pocock: "and I'll tell you the reason
      why. You remember that night—some few years ago—when you two got such a precious walloping at
      the Dark House in Brick Lane, Spitalfields?"
"Well—well," said the baronet: "go on."
"Oh! I see you haven't forgot it! You also know that on that same night the very young man
      whom we all ruined, was present—I mean Richard Markham."
"Yes—to be sure. But what of that?" demanded Chichester.
"Why—I gave him a paper, drawed up and signed by myself,—plain William Pocock, and none of
      your aristocratic Talbots."
"And that paper?" said the baronet, anxiously.
"Contained a complete confession of the whole business that brought him into trouble,"
      continued Pocock. "But he pledged himself not to use it to my prejudice; and that's the reason
      why you never heard of it in a legal way. On that same occasion he put a fifty-pound note into
      my hand, saying, 'Accept this as a token of my gratitude and a proof of my forgiveness;
       and endeavour to enter an honest path. Should you ever require a friend, do not hesitate to
       apply to me.'—Those was his words; and they made a deep impression on me. Yes—gentlemen,
      and I did enter an honest path," continued Pocock, proudly: "and that money prospered
      me. I returned to my old business as an engraver—I left off going to public-houses—I worked
      hard, and redeemed my character with my old employers. Since that night at the Dark
       House all has gone well with me. I have never applied to my benefactor—because I have
      never required a friend. But I have prayed for him morning and evening—yes, gentlemen, prayed!
      I know that this may sound strange in your ears: it is nevertheless true—and I am not ashamed
      to own it. And while that faultless young man was pursuing his glorious career in a foreign
      land, there was an obscure but grateful individual in London who wept over his first reverses,
      but who laughed, and sang, and danced for joy when the newspapers brought the tidings of his
      great battles. And that individual was myself: for he was my saviour—my guardian angel—my
      benefactor! Instead of heaping curses upon me, he had spoken kind words of forgiveness and
      encouragement: instead of spurning me from his presence, he had given me money, and told me to
      look upon him as my friend! My God! such a man as that can save more souls and redeem more
      sinners than all the Bishops that ever wore lawn sleeves! I adore his very name—I worship
      him—I am as proud of his greatness as if he was my own son; and all Prince though he now is,
      did it depend upon me, he should wear a crown."
And as he spoke, the grateful man's voice became tremulous with emotions; and the big tears
      rolled down his cheeks.
There was at that moment something so commanding—something so superior about even this
      vulgar individual, that Chichester and Harborough found themselves unable to reply to him in
      that strain of levity with which they would have gladly sought to sneer away his eulogies of
      one whom they hated and feared.
"Yes," continued Pocock: "all I possess in the world I owe to the Prince of Montoni. I am
      now at my ease—I live in my own house, bought with my own hard-earned money:—I can even afford
      to take a little pleasure, or an occasional ramble, as I was doing just now when accident
      brought me here. And, what is more, I always have a five-pound note to assist a friend. You
      cannot wonder, then, if I worship the very name of that man who from a comparatively humble
      rank has raised himself to such a proud height by his valour and his virtues."
"But what has all this to do with your anxiety to see the baronet and me?" inquired
      Chichester, in a tone displaying little of its wonted assurance.
"A great deal," answered Pocock. "I only want an opportunity to show the Prince how grateful
      I am to him; and for that reason have I looked out for you. Great, powerful, and rich as he
      now is, the memory of the past cannot oppress him; but still it would be satisfactory to his
      noble mind to receive from both of you the same confession of his innocence that he has had
      from me."
"What?" cried the baronet and Chichester together, as they exchanged troubled glances.
"Yes—you know what I mean," said Pocock; "and you dare not refuse me. Although it is my
      duty, perhaps, to step up stairs and quietly explain
      to the people there what kind of acquaintances they have got in you, yet the
      honour of the Prince is uppermost with me; and I will not expose you, if you at once write out
      and sign a paper saying that he was innocent and you was the guilty cause of
      his misfortunes."
"Impossible!" cried Harborough.
"He would transport us!" ejaculated Chichester, turning deadly pale.
"And no great harm if he did," said the engraver, drily. "But consideration for me
      will prevent his punishing you. So if you value the friendship of your chums up
      stairs——"
"It would never do to be shown up before them!" whispered the baronet with
      desperate emphasis to Chichester, whom he drew partially aside for a moment.
"You will pledge yourself not to show to any one, save the Prince, the paper you require of
      us?" asked Chichester of the engraver.
"When once you've given me that paper, I want to know nothing more of you or your pursuits,"
      replied Pocock.
The two gentlemen exchanged a few hurried whispers, and then signified their assent to the
      arrangement proposed; for they found Egerton's purse too useful a means to have recourse to at
      pleasure, to allow them to risk the loss of their influence over him.
There were writing-materials in the room where the above conversation took place; and the
      document was speedily drawn up. Chichester wrote it, under the supervision of Pocock, who
      would not allow him to abate one single tittle of all the infamy which characterised the
      proceedings that had engendered the misfortunes of Richard Markham.
The paper was then duly signed, and delivered into the hands of the engraver.
"Now that this little business is settled," said he, "perhaps you two gentlemen will just
      allow me to observe that I have found an honest way of life much happier than a dishonest one,
      and quite as easy to pursue, if you only have the will; but whether you'll profit by this
      advice or not, is more than I can say—and certainly much more than I should like to answer
      for."
With these words Pocock took his departure, the dog following close at his heels.
Chichester and Harborough exchanged looks expressive of mingled vexation and contempt, and
      then returned to the drawing-room.
The vehicles were almost immediately afterwards driven round to the principal entrance; and
      the company were on the point of leaving the apartment where the festivities had been so
      unpleasantly interrupted, when an ejaculation which escaped the lips of Colonel Cholmondeley,
      who was gazing from the window, caused them all to hasten to the casements.
A travelling barouche was rapidly approaching the mansion!
