
CHAPTER XXXII. THE OLD BAILEY.
THE sessions of the Central Criminal Court commenced.
The street of the Old Bailey was covered with straw; and the pavement in the neighbourhood
      of the doors of the court on one side, and of the public-houses on the other, was crowded with
      policemen, the touters of the barristers and attornies practising criminal law, and the
      friends of the prisoners whose trials were expected to come on that day.
The press-yard, which is situate between the solid granite wall of Newgate and the
      Court-house, was also flooded with living waves, which rolled onwards from the street to the
      flight of steps leading into the gallery of the Old Court. In former times, prisoners who
      refused to plead, were pressed beneath immense weights, until they would consent to declare
      themselves guilty or not guilty. This odious punishment was inflicted in that enclosure: hence
      its name of the press-yard.
It cannot be necessary to describe the court-house, with its dark sombre walls, and its huge
      ventilator at the top. Alas! the golden bowl of hope has been broken within those walls, and
      the knell of many a miserable wretch has been rung upon its tribunals from the lips of the
      judge!
The street of the Old Bailey presents quite an animated appearance during the sessions;—but
      it is horrible to reflect that numbers of the policemen who throng in that thoroughfare upon
      those occasions, have trumped up the charges for which prisoners have been committed for
      trial, in order to obtain a holiday, and extort from the county the expenses of attending as
      witnesses.
At the time of which our tale treats, the sheriffs were accustomed to provide two dinners
      for the judges every day; one at three, and the other at five o'clock, so that those who could
      not attend the first, were enabled to take their seats at the second. Marrow puddings,
      beef-steaks, and boiled rounds of beef, invariably formed the staple commodities of these
      repasts; and it was the duty of the ordinary chaplains of Newgate to act as vice-presidents at
      both meals. This ceremony was always performed by those reverend gentlemen: the ecclesiastical
      gourmands contrived, during sessions, to eat two dinners every day, and wash each down with a
      very tolerable allowance of wine.
We said that the Sessions commenced. On the Monday and Tuesday, the Recorder in the Old
      Court, and the Common Sergeant in the New, tried those prisoners who were charged with minor
      offences: on the Wednesday the Judges upon the rota took their seats on the bench of
      the Old Court.
Richard Markham's name stood first for trial upon the list on that day. He was conducted
      from Newgate by means of a subterraneous passage, running under the Press-yard, into the dock
      of the Court.
The Hall was crowded to excess, for the case had produced a profound sensation. The moment
      Markham appeared in the dock, every eye was fixed upon him. His countenance was very pale; but
      his demeanour was firm. He cast one glance around, and then looked only towards the twelve men
      who were to decide upon his fate. Close by the dock stood Mr. Monroe: Whittingham was in the
      gallery;—the Baronet, Chichester, and Talbot lounged together near the reporters' box.
The Jury were sworn, and the counsel for the prosecution stated the case. He observed that
      the prisoner at the bar was a young man who, upon his
       majority, would become possessed of a considerable fortune; but that in the mean
      time he had no doubt fallen into bad company, for it would be proved that he was arrested by
      the police at a common gambling house in the evening of the very same day on which he had
      committed the offence with which he was now charged. It was but natural to presume that this
      young man had imbibed the habit of gaming, and, having thereby involved himself in pecuniary
      embarrassments, had adopted the desperate and fatal expedient of obtaining money by means of
      forged Bank-notes, rather than communicate his situation to his guardian. Where he procured
      these forged notes, it was impossible to say: it would, however, be satisfactorily proved to
      the jury that he passed a forged note for five hundred pounds at the banking-house of Messrs.
      ——, and that when he was arrested a second note for fifty pounds was found upon his person.
      Several concurrent circumstances established the guilt of the prisoner. On the evening
      previous to his arrest, the prisoner dined with Sir Rupert Harborough, Mr. Chichester, and Mr.
      Talbot; and when these gentlemen proposed a walk after dessert, the prisoner requested them to
      accompany him to a common gaming-house in the Quadrant. They refused; but finding him
      determined to visit that den, they agreed to go with him, with the friendly intention of
      taking care that he was not plundered of his money, he being considerably excited by the wine
      he had been drinking. Ere he set out, the prisoner enquired if either of his companions could
      change him a fifty pound note; but neither gentleman had sufficient gold to afford the
      accommodation required. Now was it not fair to presume that the prisoner intended to pass off
      upon one of his friends the very forged fifty-pound note subsequently found upon him? On the
      following day, the prisoner—the moment he was released from custody on the charge of being
      found in a common gaming-house—hurried home, and ordered his servants to prepare for his
      immediate departure for the continent. He moreover wrote two letters, which would be read to
      the jury,—one to a lady, and the other to his guardian,—and both containing unequivocal
      admission of his guilt. The learned counsel then read the letters, and commented upon their
      contents at some length. There were several expressions (he said) which clearly tended to
       self-crimination.—"Circumstances of a very peculiar nature, and which I cannot at present
       explain, compel me to quit London thus abruptly." "I could not have remained in
       London another minute with safely to myself." "I conceive it to be my duty—in
       consequence of rumours which may shortly reach you concerning me—to inform you that I have
       this moment only awoke to the fearful perils of the career in which I have for some weeks
       past been blindly hurrying along, till at length yesterday——." "I am penitent,
       deeply penitent: let this statement induce you to defend and protect my reputation." The
      last paragraph but one, which concluded so abruptly with the words, "till at length
       yesterday—— " clearly pointed to the crime with which the prisoner was now charged; and
      the last paragraph of all undeniably implored Mr. Monroe, the young man's guardian, to hush up
      the matter the moment it should reach his ears.
The clerk at the banking-house, who changed the five hundred pound note for the prisoner,
      then gave his evidence.
At length Sir Rupert Harborough was called into the witness-box; and he deposed that the
      prisoner had dined with him on the evening previous to his arrest; that he very pressingly
      solicited him (Sir Rupert), and Mr. Chichester, and Mr. Talbot, to accompany him to the
      gambling-house; and that he moreover, enquired if either of them could accommodate him with
      change for a fifty pound note.
Mr. Chichester was called next. He stated the line of defence adopted by the prisoner at
      Bow-street, and positively denied having ever given the prisoner any notes to change for
      him.
Markham's counsel cross-examined this witness with great severity.
"What are you, sir?"
"A private gentleman."
"What are your means of subsistence?"
"I receive an allowance from my father."
"Who is your father? Now, take care, sir, how you answer that question."
"He is a commercial man, sir."
"Is he not a tradesman?"
"Well,—he is a tradesman, then—if you like it."
"Yes,—I do like it. Now—upon your oath—is he not a pawnbroker in Brick-lane, Bethnal
      Green?"
"He is a goldsmith in a large way of business, and lends money occasionally——"
"Ha!" complacently observed the counsel for the defence. "Go on, sir: lends money
       occasionally—"
"Upon real security, I suppose," added Chichester, taken considerably aback by these
      questions.
"Upon deposits; let us give things their proper names. He lends money upon flannel
      petticoat—watches—flat-irons, etc.," observed the barrister, with withering sarcasm. "But I
      have not done with you yet, sir. Was your father—this very respectable pawnbroker—ever
      elevated to the peerage?"
"He was not, sir."
"Then how come you by the distinction of Honourable prefixed to your name?"
Mr. Chichester hung down his head, and made no reply. The counsel for the prisoner repeated
      the question in a deliberate and emphatic matter. At length, Mr. Chichester was fairly bullied
      into a humble acknowledgment "that he had no right to the distinction, but that he had assumed
      it as a convenient West-End appendage." The cross examination then proceeded.
"Did you not travel under the name of Winchester?"
"I did—in Germany."
"With what motive did you assume a false name?"
"I had no particular motive."
"Did you not leave England in debt? and were you not afraid of your bills of exchange
      following you abroad?"
"There is some truth in that; but the most honourable men are frequently involved in
      pecuniary difficulties."
"Answer my questions, sir, and make no observations. You will leave me to do that, if you
      please. Now sir—tell the jury whether you were not accompanied by a valet or coachman in your
      German trip?"
"I am always accustomed to travel with a domestic."
"A man who runs away from his creditors, should have more delicacy than to waste his money
      in such a manner. When you were at Baden-baden, were you not involved in some gambling
      transactions which compelled you to quit the Grand-Duchy abruptly?"
      
"I certainly had a dispute with a gentleman at cards: and I left the town next morning."
"Yes—and you left your clothes and your servant behind you—and your bill unpaid at the
      hotel?"
"But I have since met my servant, and paid him more than double the wages then due."
"You may stand down, sir," said the counsel for the defence—a permission of which the
      witness availed himself with surprising alacrity.
The counsel for the prosecution now called Mr. Whittingham. The poor butler ascended the
      witness-box with a rueful countenance; and, after an immense amount of badgering and baiting,
      admitted that his young master had meditated a sudden and abrupt departure from England, the
      very day upon which he was arrested. In his cross-examination he declared that the motives of
      the journey were founded upon certain regrets which Richard entertained at having permitted
      himself to be led away by Messrs. Chichester and Talbot, and Sir Rupert Harborough.
"And, my Lords," ejaculated the old domestic, elevating his voice, "Master Richard is no
      more guilty of this here circumwention than either one of your Lordships; but the man that did
      it all is that there Chichester, which bilked his wally-de-shamble, and that wulgar fellow,
      Talbot, which called me a tulip."
This piece of eloquence was delivered with much feeling; and the Judges smiled—for, they
      appreciated the motives of the honest old domestic.
The officer who arrested Markham, proved that he found upon his person, when he searched him
      at Bow Street, a pocket-book, containing between thirty and forty pounds, in notes and gold,
      together with a note for fifty pounds.
A clerk from the Bank of England proved that both the note for five hundred pounds changed
      at the bankers, and the one for fifty just alluded to, were forgeries.
The case for the prosecution here closed; and the Judges retired to partake of some
      refreshment.
Markham had leisure to think over the proceedings of the morning. He was literally astounded
      when he contemplated the diabolical perjury committed by Sir Rupert Harborough and Mr.
      Chichester; but he entertained the most sanguine hope that the discredit thrown upon the
      character of the latter would render his testimony worthless. He shuddered when he reflected
      how ingeniously the counsel for the prosecution had grouped together those circumstances which
      told against him; and then again a ray of satisfaction animated his countenance, when he
      remembered that his counsel would speedily show those circumstances in a new light.
The Judges returned: silence prevailed throughout the hall; and the prisoner's counsel rose
      for the defence. Richard seated himself in the dock, and prepared to listen with the greatest
      attention to the speech of his advocate; and Whittingham placed his hand in a curved position
      behind his ear, in order to assist that organ on the present important occasion.
The counsel for the defence began by giving some account of the family and social position
      of the prisoner, who was born of parents accustomed to move in the first rank of life, and who
      was the heir to a fortune of no inconsiderable amount. During his minority, his guardian, who
      was then present, had promised to allow the prisoner six hundred pounds a-year. With these
      pecuniary advantages, it was absurd to suppose that a young man of education—a young man whose
      noble and honourable feelings had been the object of remark on the part of all his friends,
      and who had only to express a want to his guardian, in order to receive its immediate
      gratification—it was absurd to imagine that such an individual would either enter into a
      conspiracy with others, or plan by himself, for the purpose of raising money upon forged
      notes. No—this young man was one of a most generous and confiding disposition; and, as he had
      seen but little of the world, he was totally unacquainted with its wiles and artifices. Thus
      was he made the dupe of some designing villains, at his very outset upon life. The whole
      history of the present transaction was to be summed up in a few words. A gang of conspirators
      had hit upon the desperate mode of passing forged notes, in order to retrieve their ruined
      fortunes. Not as magnanimous as the highwayman who perils his own existence while he
      perpetrates a crime, these men required a tool of whom they might make use, and who could be
      at any time sacrificed to save them. This instrument—this scapegoat, was the prisoner at the
      bar. The witness, whose real name was Chichester, but who, by his own confession, had
      travelled on the Continent under another denomination, was not a person on whom the Jury could
      place any reliance. He had assumed a distinction to which he was by no means entitled—he had
      affected all the arrogance and importance of a man of rank and fashion,—whereas he was the son
      of a pawnbroker in the refined locality of Brick-Lane, Bethnal Green! Endowed with much
      impudence, clever in imitating the manners of his superiors, and well versed in all the
      intricacies and subtleties of the world, this possessor of assumed distinctions—this
      swaggering imitator of a class far above him—this adventurer, with fascinating conversation,
      ready wit, amusing anecdote, and fashionable attire,—this roué of the present day,
      with jewellery about his person, and gold in his pocket—allowing ever an engaging smile to
      play upon his lips, and professing unmitigated disgust at the slightest appearance of
      vulgarity in another,—this individual—this Mr. Chichester was the principal witness whom the
      counsel for the prosecution had brought forward. But no English Jury would condemn a fellow
      creature upon such testimony—the testimony of one who was compelled to fly ignominiously and
      precipitately from Baden, on account of some rascality at cards, and who left his domestic in
      a strange land, pennyless, ignorant of the language, and surrounded by the odium which also
      attached itself to the name of his master. The prisoner had no motive in passing forged notes,
      because he was wealthy;—but Mr. Chichester had a motive, because he evidently lived far beyond
      the means which his father could allow him.
The learned counsel here related the manner in which Richard had been induced to change the
      larger note, and had become possessed of the smaller.

He then proceeded to observe, that the letters addressed to Mrs. Arlington and Mr. Monroe
      related to the fact that the prisoner's eyes had been suddenly opened to the characters of his
      associates, and to the career of dissipation in which they were leading him. The phrase upon
      which so much stress had been laid—"till at length yesterday——" alluded to the
      suicide of a young officer, which had taken place while the prisoner was at the
      gambling-house, whither he had been inveigled instead of inveigling others. "He could not
       have remained in London another minute with safety to himself." And why? because these
      associates whom he had
       accidently picked up, would not leave him quiet. They regularly beset him.
       "He was penitent;" and he hoped that Mr. Monroe would "defend and protect his
       reputation." Yes—when the newspaper reports conveyed to the knowledge of that gentleman
      the fact that his ward had been arrested in a common gambling-house, and fined for being
      there. The letters were written hurriedly, and were ambiguous: thus they were susceptible of
      more than one interpretation. Let the jury interpret them in favour of the prisoner. It was
      better to send a dozen guilty men back again into society, terrible as that evil would be,
      than to condemn one innocent person. Then, with regard to the precipitate departure:
      the witness Whittingham had shown, in his cross-examination, that the prisoner's object was to
      escape from the three men whose characters were suddenly unveiled to him. It was said, that
      the prisoner had requested those three individuals to accompany him to the gaming-house, and
      that they at first refused. Oh! amazing fastidiousness—especially on the part of Chichester,
      who had been
       compelled to decamp from Baden, for cheating at cards! Then it was stated that
      the prisoner asked for change for a fifty-pound note; and it was said, that he would have
      availed himself of that accommodation to pass a forged note. Why—he (the learned counsel) had
      already explained how that fifty-pound note came into the prisoner's possession—his own gold
      having been transferred by Mr. Chichester to Sir Rupert Harborough's writing-desk! The learned
      counsel concluded, by asking how it happened that no other forged Bank of England notes—no
      copper-plates to print them with—no materials for such a fraud, were found at the prisoner's
      house? Could it be supposed that a young man with his prospects would risk his reputation and
      his safety for a few hundreds of pounds? The idea was preposterous. The prisoner's counsel
      entered into a few minute points of the evidence which told in favour of his client, and wound
      up with a powerful appeal to the jury in his behalf.
Richard followed, with absorbing interest, the able defence made for him by his counsel; and
      his soul was filled with hope as each fact and argument in his favour was divested of all
      mystery, and lucidly exhibited to the consideration of the court.
Mr. Monroe was summoned to the witness box, and he proved the statements made by the
      prisoner's counsel relative to the pecuniary position of his ward. Snoggles, the ostler,
      followed, and very freely stated all the particulars of his late master's precipitate
      decampment from Baden.
Thus terminated the case for the defence.
The counsel of the prosecution—according to that odious right which gives the accusing party
      the last word in those instances where the defendant has called witnesses—rose to reply. He
      stated that neither the wealth nor the social position of an individual afforded a certain
      guarantee against crime. Besides, the law must not always be swayed by the apparent absence of
      motives; because some of the most extraordinary deeds of turpitude upon record had never been
      traced to a source which could satisfactorily account for their origin. The
       perpetration was the object which the jury had to keep in view; and the use of
      evidence was to prove or deny that perpetration by some particular individual. A forgery had
      been committed, and money obtained by the prisoner at the bar through the agency of that
      forgery. The defence had not attempted to deny that the prisoner was the individual who had
      thus obtained the money. The point to be considered was, whether the prisoner knew the note to
      be a forged one; and he (the learned counsel) considered that an assemblage of circumstances
      of a most unequivocal nature stamped the prisoner with that guilt. Mr. Chichester's evidence
      went to show that he himself never gave any notes to the prisoner. Even if Chichester were
      proved to be a disreputable person, there was nothing beyond the prisoner's mere assertion
      (made through his counsel) to prove that he had received the two notes from Chichester. Mr.
      Chichester had certainly assumed another name during his German tour, but it was for the
      purpose of avoiding arrest in a foreign land upon bills of exchange which might have been sent
      from England after him. He had, moreover, assumed the distinction of Honourable—a
      foolish vanity, but by no means a crime; for half the Englishmen who were called
       Captain, were no more captains than he (the learned counsel) was.
The senior judge now summoned up the evidence to the jury; and the most profound interest
      was still manifested by all present in the proceedings. The learned judge occupied nearly two
      hours in his charge to the jury, whom he put in possession of all the points of the case which
      it was necessary to consider.
The jury retired, and debated for a considerable time upon their verdict.
This was the dread interval of suspense. Richard's countenance was deadly pale; and his lips
      were firmly compressed in order to prevent any sudden ebullition of feeling—a weakness to
      which he seemed for a moment inclined to yield. Mr. Monroe did not entertain much hope; the
      summing up of the judge had been unfavourable to Markham. As for Whittingham, he shook his
      head dolefully from time to time, and murmured, loud enough to be heard by those near him,
      "Oh! Master Richard, Master Richard! who would ever have propulgated an opinion that you would
      have been brought into such a fixture as this? It's all along of them fellers which call
      butlers tulips!"
How singularly reckless is the mind of man with regard to the destinies of those to whom he
      is not connected by any ties of blood or friendship! While the jury were absent, discussing
      their verdict, the various barristers, assembled round the table, began chattering together,
      and laughing, and telling pleasant anecdotes, as if the fate of a fellow-creature was by no
      means compromised at that moment. The counsel for the prosecution, who had done his duty by
      exerting all his talents, all his energies, and all his eloquence, to obtain the conviction of
      a youth who had never injured him, and whom he had never seen before, coolly took up a
      newspaper and perused it with evident gratification; while, at a little distance from him,
      stood the individual whom he had so zealously and earnestly sought to render miserable for
      life!
How strange!—how horribly depraved and vitiated must be that state of society in which
      hundreds of talented men are constantly employed, with large recompense, in procuring the
      condemnation of their fellow-creatures to the scaffold, the hulks, or eternal banishment! And
      what an idea must we entertain of our vaunted condition of consummate civilization, when we
      behold these learned men calling to their aid every miserable chicanery, every artificial
      technicality, and every possible exaggeration, to pursue the accused prisoner either to the
      platform of the gibbet, to loathsome dungeons, or to the horrors of Norfolk Island. Does
      society avenge?—or does it merely make examples of the wicked to warn others from sin? If the
      enquirer who asks himself or us these questions, would only attend the Central Criminal Court,
      he would hear the barristers for the prosecution imploring, coaxing, and commanding the jury
      to return such a verdict as will either condemn a human being to the scaffold, or separate him
      for ever from home, wife, children, kindred, and friends! He would find men straining every
      nerve, availing themselves of every miserable legal quirk and quibble, torturing their
      imaginations to find arguments, calling subtlety and mystification to their aid, shamefully
      exaggerating trivial incidents into important facts, dealing in misrepresentation and false
      deduction, substituting and dovetailing facts to suit their purposes, omitting others which
      tell against their own case, almost falling upon their knees to the jury, and staking their
      very reputation on the results,—and all these dishonourable, disgraceful, vile, and inhuman
      means and efforts exerted and called into action for the sake of sending a fellow-creature to
      the scaffold, or separating him for ever from the family that is
       dependant upon him, and that will starve without him!
O God! is it possible that man can have been made for such sad purposes? is it possible that
      the being whom thou hast created after thine own image, should be so demon-like in
      heart?
Oh! if the prisoner standing in the dock had inflicted some terrible injury upon the honour
      or the family of the barrister who holds a brief against him, then were it easy to comprehend
      that profound anxiety on the part of this barrister, to send the trembling criminal to the
      gallows! But, no—that barrister has no revenge to gratify—no hatred to assuage—no malignity to
      appease; he toils to take away that man's life, with all his strength, with all his talent,
      and with all his energy, because he has received gold to do his best to obtain a
      conviction!
Ah! what a hideous traffic in flesh and blood!
And if any one were to say to that barrister, "Thou art a blood-thirsty and merciless
      wretch," he would answer coolly and confidently, "No: on the other hand, I subscribe to
      philanthropic institutions!"
The jury returned; and the feeling uppermost in their minds was satisfaction at the prospect
      of being so speedily dismissed, to their respective homes, where they would pursue their
      efforts after wealth, and speedily forget the youth whom they had condemned to punishment, and
      whose prospects they had blasted.
For their verdict was Guilty!
And the judges hastened to terminate the proceedings.
Richard was commanded to rise, and receive the sentence of the court. He obeyed with a kind
      of mechanical precision—for his mental energies were entirely prostrated. The voice of the
      judge addressing him rang like the chimes of distant bells in his ears;—the numerous persons
      whom he beheld around, appeared to be all moving and agitating like an immense crowd assembled
      to witness an execution.
He stood up as he was commanded; and the Judge proceeded to pass sentence upon him. He said
      that the court took his youth into consideration, and that there were circumstances which
      would render a very lenient sentence satisfactory to that society which had been outraged. The
      court accordingly condemned him to two years' imprisonment in the Giltspur Street Compter,
      without hard labour.
"That's all!" said the spectators to each other; and they appeared disappointed!
The audience then separated.
