
CHAPTER LXII. THE RESURRECTION MAN'S HISTORY.
"I was born thirty-eight years ago, near the village of Walmer, in Kent. My father and
      mother occupied a small cottage—or rather hovel, made of the wreck of a ship, upon the
      sea-coast. Their ostensible employment was that of fishing: but it would appear that smuggling
      and body-snatching also formed a portion of my father's avocations. The rich inhabitants of
      Walmer and Deal encouraged him in his contraband pursuits, by purchasing French silks, gloves,
      and scents of him: the gentlemen, moreover, were excellent customers for French brandy, and
      the ladies for dresses and perfumes. The clergyman of Walmer and his wife were our best
      patrons in this way; and in consequence of the frequent visits they paid our cottage, they
      took a sort of liking to me. The parson made me attend the national school regularly every
      Sunday; and when I was nine years old he took me into his service to clean the boots and
      knives, brush the clothes, and so forth. I was then very fond of reading, and used to pass all
      my leisure time in studying books which he allowed me to take out of his library. This lasted
      till I was twelve years old, when my father was one morning arrested on a charge of smuggling,
      and taken to Dover Castle. The whole neighbourhood expressed their surprise that a man who
      appeared to be so respectable, should turn out such a villain. The gentlemen who used to buy
      brandy of him talked loudly of the necessity of making an example of him: the ladies, who were
      accustomed to purchase gloves, silks, and eau-de-cologne, wondered that such a
      desperate ruffian should have allowed them to sleep safe in their beds; and of course the
      clergyman and his wife kicked me ignominiously out of doors. As all things of this nature
      create a sensation in a small community, the parson preached a sermon upon the subject on the
      following Sunday, choosing for his text 'Render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar's,
       and unto God the things that are God's,' and earnestly enjoining all his congregation to
      unite in deprecating the conduct of a man who had brought disgrace upon a neighbourhood till
      then famed for its loyalty, its morality, and its devotion to the laws of the country.
"My father was acquitted for want of evidence, and returned home after having been in prison
      six months waiting for his trial. In the mean time my mother and myself were compelled to
      receive parish relief: not one of the fine ladies and gentlemen who had been the indirect
      means of getting my father into a scrape by encouraging him in his illegal pursuits, would
      notice us. My mother called upon several; but their doors were banged in her face. When I
      appeared at the Sunday School, the parson expelled me, declaring that I was only calculated to
      pollute honest and good boys; and the beadle thrashed me soundly for daring to attempt to
      enter the church. All this gave me a very strange idea of human nature, and set me a-thinking
      upon the state
       of society. Just at that period a baronet in the neighbourhood was proved to be
      the owner of a smuggling vessel, and to be pretty deep in the contraband business himself. He
      was compelled to run away: an Exchequer process, I think they call it, issued against his
      property; and every thing he possessed was swept away. It appeared that he had been smuggling
      for years, and had defrauded the revenue to an immense amount. He was a widower: but he had
      three children—two boys and a girl, at school in the neighbourhood. Oh! then what sympathy was
      created for these 'poor dear bereaved little ones,' as the parson called them in a
      charity sermon which he preached for their benefit. And there they were, marshalled into the
      parson's own pew, by the beadle; and the parson's wife wept over them. Subscriptions were got
      up for them;—the mayor of Deal took one boy, the banker another, and the clergyman's wife took
      charge of the girl; and never was seen so much weeping, and consoling, and compassion
      before!
"Well, at that time my mother had got so thin, and weak, and ill, through want and
      affliction, that her neighbours gave her the name of the Mummy, which she has kept
      ever since. My father came home, and was shunned by every body. The baronet's uncle happened
      to die at that period, and left his nephew an immense fortune:—the baronet paid all the fines,
      settled the Exchequer matters, and returned to Walmer. A triumphal reception awaited him:
      balls, parties, concerts, and routs took place in honour of the event;—and the mayor, the
      banker and the clergyman and his wife were held up as the patterns of philanthropy and
      humanity. Of course the baronet rewarded them liberally for having taken care of his children
      in the hour of need.
"This business again set me a-thinking; and I began to comprehend that birth and station
      made an immense difference in the views that the world adopted of men's actions. My father,
      who had only higgled and fiddled with smuggling affairs upon a miserably small scale, was set
      down as the most atrocious monster unhung, because he was one of the common herd; but the
      baronet, who had carried on a systematic contraband trade to an immense amount, was looked
      upon as a martyr to tyrannical laws, because he was one of the upper classes and possessed a
      title. So my disposition was soured by these proofs of human injustice, at my very entrance
      upon life.
"Up to this period, in spite of the contemplation of the lawless trade carried on by my
      father, I had been a regular attendant at church and at the Sunday-school; and I declare most
      solemnly that I never went to sleep at night, nor commenced my morning's avocations, without
      saying my prayers. But when my father got into trouble, the beadle kicked me out of church,
      and the parson drove me out of the school; and so I began to think that if my religion was
      only serviceable and available as long as my father remained unharmed by the law, it could not
      be worth much. From that moment I never said another prayer, and never opened a bible or
      prayer-book. Still I was inclined to labour to obtain an honest livelihood; and I implored my
      father, upon my knees, not to force me to assist in his proceedings of smuggling and
      body-snatching, to both which he was compelled by dire necessity to return the moment he was
      released from gaol. He told me I was a fool to think of living honestly, as the world would
      not let me; but he added that I might make the trial.
"Pleased with this permission, and sincerely hoping that I might obtain some occupation,
      however menial, which would enable me to eat the bread of honest toil, I went round to all the
      farmers in the neighbourhood, and offered to enter their service as a plough-boy or a
      stable-boy. The moment they found out who I was, they one and all turned me away from their
      doors. One said, 'Like father, like son;'—another asked if I was mad, to think that I
      could thus thrust myself into an honest family;—a third laughed in my face;—a fourth
      threatened to have me taken up for wanting to get into his house to commit a felony;—a fifth
      swore that there was gallows written upon my countenance;—a sixth ordered his men to loosen
      the bulldog at me;—and a seventh would have had me ducked in his horse-pond, if I had not run
      away.
"Dispirited, but not altogether despairing, I returned home. On the following day, I walked
      into Deal, (which almost joins Walmer) and called at several tradesmen's shops to inquire if
      they wanted an errand-boy. My reception by these individuals was worse than that which I had
      met with at the hands of the farmers. One asked me if I thought he would run the risk of
      having his house indicted as the receptacle for thieves and vagabonds;—a second pointed to his
      children, and said, 'Do you suppose I want to bring them up in the road to the
       gallows?'—a third locked up his till in affright, and threatened to call a
      constable;—and a fourth lashed me severely with a horse-whip.
"Still I was not totally disheartened. I determined to call upon some of those ladies and
      gentlemen who had been my father's best customers for his contraband articles. One lady upon
      hearing my business, seized hold of the poker with one hand and her salts-bottle with the
      other;—a second was also nearly fainting, and rang the bell for her maid to bring her some
       eau-de-cologne—the very eau-de-cologne which my father had smuggled for
      her;—a third begged me with tears in her eyes to retire, or my very suspicions appearance
      would frighten her lap-dog into fits;—and a fourth (an old lady, who was my father's best
      customer for French brandy), held up her hands to heaven, and implored the Lord to protect her
      from all sabbath-breakers, profane swearers, and drunkards.
"Finding that I had nothing to expect from the ladies, I tried the gentlemen who had been
      accustomed to patronise my father previous to his misfortune. The first swore at me
      like a trooper, and assured me that he had always prophesied I should go wrong:—the second
      spoke civilly, and regretted that his excellent advice had been all thrown away upon my
      father, whom he had vainly endeavered to avert from his wicked courses (it was for smuggling
      things for this gentleman that my father had been arrested);—and the third made no direct
      answer, but shook his head solemnly, and wondered what the world was coming to.
"I was now really reduced to despair. I, however, resolved to try some of the very poorest
      tradesmen in the town. By these miserable creatures I was received with compassionate
      interest; and my case was fully comprehended by them. Some even gave me a few halfpence; and
      one made me sit down and dine with him, his wife, and his children. They, however, one and all
      declared that they could not take me into their service, for, if they did, they would be
       sure to offend all their customers. Thus was it that the overbearing conduct and
      atrocious tyranny of the more wealthy part of the community, compelled the poorer portion to
      smother all sympathy in my behalf.
      

"A sudden thought now struck me. I resolved to call next day upon the very baronet who had
      himself suffered so much in consequence of the customs-laws. Exhilarated by the new hope
      awakened within me, I repaired on the following morning to the splendid mansion which he now
      inhabited. I was shown into a magnificent room, where he received me, lounging before a
      cheerful fire. He listened very patiently to my tale, and then spoke, as nearly as I can
      recollect, as follows:—'My good lad, I have not the slightest doubt that you are anxious to
      eat the bread of honesty, as you very properly express it. But that bread is not within the
      reach of every body; and if we were all to pick and choose in this world, my God! what would
      become of us? My dear young man, I occupy a prominent position amidst the gentry of these
      parts, and I have also a duty to fulfil towards society. Society has condemned you—unheard, I
      grant you: nevertheless, society has condemned you. Under these circumstances I have
      no alternative, but to decline taking you into my service; and I must moreover request you to
      remember that if you are ever found loitering upon my grounds, I shall have you put in the
      stocks. I regret that my duty to society compels me thus to act.'
"You may conceive with what feelings I heard this long tirade. I was literally confounded,
      and retired without venturing upon a remonstrance. I knew not what course to adopt. To return
      home and inform my parents that I could obtain no work, was to lay myself under the necessity
      of becoming a smuggler and a body-snatcher at once. As a desperate resource I thought of
      calling upon the clergyman, and explaining all my sentiments to him. I hoped to be able to
      convince him that although my father was bad, or supposed to be bad, yet I abhorred vice in
      all its shapes, and was anxious only to pursue honest courses. As a Christian minister, he
      could not, I imagined, be so uncharitable as to infer my guilt in consequence of that of my
      parent; and, accordingly, to him did I repair. He had just returned to his own house from a
      funeral, and was in a hurry to be off on a shooting excursion, for he had on his sporting-garb
      beneath his surplice. He listened to me with great impatience, and asked if my father still
      pursued his contraband trade. Seeing that I hesitated how to reply, he exclaimed, turning his
      eyes up to heaven, 'Speak the truth, young man, and shame the devil!' I answered in
      the affirmative; and he then said carelessly, 'Well, go and
       speak to my wife; she will act in the matter as she chooses.' Rejoiced at this
      hopeful turn in the proceeding, I sought his lady, as I was desired. She heard all that I had
      to say, and then observed, 'Not for worlds could I receive you into my house again; but if
      your father has any silks and gloves, very cheap and very good, I do not mind purchasing them.
      And remember,' she added, as I was about to depart, 'I do not want these things; I only offer
      to take them for the purpose of doing you a service. My motive is purely a Christian one.'
"I returned home. 'Well,' said my father, 'what luck this morning?'—'None,' I replied.—'And
      what do you mean to do, lad?'—'To become a smuggler, a body-snatcher, or any thing else that
      you choose,' was my reply; 'and the sooner we begin, the better, for I am sick and tired of
      being good.'
"So I became a smuggler and a resurrection man.
"You have heard, perhaps, that Deal is famous for its boatmen and pilots. It is also
      renowned for the beauty of the sailors' daughters. One of those lovely creatures captivated my
      heart—for I can even talk sentimentally when I think of those times; and she seemed to like me
      in return. Her name was Katharine Price—Kate Price, as she was called by her acquaintance; and
      a prettier creature the sun never shone upon. She was good and virtuous, too—and she alone
      understood my real disposition, which, even now that I had embarked in lawless pursuits, still
      panted to be good and virtuous also. At this time I was nineteen, and she was one year
      younger. We loved in secret—and we met in secret; for her parents would not for one moment
      have listened to the idea of our union. My hope was to obtain a good sum of money by one
      desperate venture in the contraband line, and run away with Kate to some distant part of the
      country, where we could enter upon some way of business that would produce us an honest
      livelihood. This hope sustained us!
"At this time there were a great many sick sailors in Deal Hospital, and numerous funerals
      took place in the burial-ground of that establishment. My father and I determined to have up a
      few of the corpses, for we always knew where to dispose of as many subjects as we
      could obtain. By these means I proposed to raise enough money to purchase in France the
      articles that I meant to smuggle into England and thereby obtain the necessary funds for
      carrying out the plans upon which Kate and myself were resolved.
"Good luck attended upon my father and myself in respect to the body-snatching business. We
      raised thirty pounds; and with that we set sail for France in the boat which we always hired
      for our smuggling expeditions. We landed at Calais, and made our purchases. We bought an
      immense quantity of brandy at tenpence a quart; gloves at eightpence a pair; three watches at
      two pound ten each; and some eau-de-cologne, proportionately cheap. Our thirty pounds
      we calculated would produce us a hundred and twenty. We put out to sea again at about ten
      o'clock at night. The wind was blowing stiff from the nor'-east; and by the time we had been
      an hour at sea it increased to a perfect hurricane. Never shall I forget that awful night. The
      entire ocean was white with foam; but the sky above was as black as pitch. We weathered the
      tempest until we reached the shore about a mile to the south'ard of Walmer, at a place called
      Kingsdown. We touched the beach—I thought every thing was safe. A huge billow broke over the
      stem of the lugger; and in a moment the boat was a complete wreck. My father leapt on shore
      from the bow at the instant this catastrophe took place: I was swallowed up along with the
      ill-fated bark. I was, however, an excellent swimmer; and I combated, and fought, and
      struggled with the ocean, as a man would wrestle with a savage animal that held him in his
      grasp. I succeeded in gaining the beach; but so weak and enfeebled was I that my father was
      compelled to carry me to our hovel, close by.
"I was put to bed: a violent fever seized upon me—I became delirious—and for six weeks I lay
      tossing upon a bed of sickness.
"At length I got well. But what hope remained for me? We were totally ruined—so was the poor
      fisherman whose boat was wrecked upon that eventful night. I wrote a note to Kate to tell her
      all that had happened, and to make an appointment for the following Sunday evening, that we
      might meet and talk over the altered aspect of affairs. Scarcely had I despatched this letter
      to the care of Kate's sister-in-law, who was in our secret, and managed our little
      correspondence, when my father came in and asked me if I felt myself well enough to accompany
      him on a little expedition that evening. I replied in the affirmative. He then told me that a
      certain surgeon for whom we did business, and who resided in Deal, required a particular
      subject which had been buried that morning in Walmer Churchyard. I did not ask my father any
      more questions; but that night I accompanied him to the burial-ground between eleven and
      twelve o'clock. The surgeon had shown my father the grave in the afternoon; and we had a cart
      waiting in a lane close by. The church is in a secluded part, surrounded by trees, and at some
      little distance from any habitations. There was no danger of being meddled with:—moreover, we
      had often operated in the same ground before.
"To work we went in the usual manner. We shovelled out the soil, broke open the coffin,
      thrust the corpse into a sack, filled up the grave once more, and carried our prize safe off
      to the cart. We then set off at a round pace towards Deal, and arrived at the back door of the
      surgeon's house by two o'clock. He was up and waiting for us. We carried the corpse into the
      surgery, and laid it upon a table. 'You are sure it is the right one?' said the surgeon.—'It
      is the body from the grave that you pointed out,' answered my father.—'The fact is,' resumed
      the surgeon, 'that this is a very peculiar case. Six days ago, a young female rose in the
      morning in perfect health; that evening she was a corpse. I opened her, and found no traces of
      poison; but her family would not permit me to carry the examination any further. They did not
      wish her to be hacked about. Since her death some love-letters have been found in her drawer;
      but there is no name attached to any of them.'—I began to feel interested, I scarcely knew
      why; but this was the manner in which I was accustomed to write to Kate. The surgeon
      continued: 'I am therefore anxious to make another and more searching investigation than on
      the former occasion, into the cause of death. But I will soon satisfy myself that this is
      indeed the corpse I mean.'—With these words the surgeon tore away the shroud from the face of
      the corpse. I cast an anxious glance upon the pale, cold, marble countenance. My blood ran
      cold—my legs trembled—my strength seemed to have failed me. Was I mistaken? could it be the
      beloved of my heart?—'Yes; that is Miss Price,' said the surgeon, coolly. All doubt on my part
      was now removed. I had exhumed the
       body of her whom a thousand times I had pressed to my sorrowful breast—whom I
      had clasped to my aching heart. I felt as if I had committed some horrible crime—a murder, or
      other deadly deed!
"The surgeon and my father did not notice my emotions, but settled their accounts. The
      medical man then offered us each a glass of brandy. I drank mine with avidity, and then
      accompanied my father from the spot—uncertain whether to rush back and claim the body, or not.
      But I did not do so.
"For some days I wandered about scarcely knowing what I did—and certainly not caring what
      became of me. One morning I was roving amidst the fields, when I heard a loud voice exclaim,
      'I say, you fellow there, open the gate, will you?' I turned round, and recognised the baronet
      on horseback. He had a large hunting whip in his hand.—'Open the gate!' said I; 'and whom
      for?' 'Whom for!' repeated the baronet; 'why, for me, to be sure, fellow.'—'Then open it
      yourself,' said I. The baronet was near enough to me to reach me with his whip; and he dealt
      me a stinging blow across the face. Maddened with pain, and soured with vexation, I leapt over
      the gate and attacked the baronet with a stout ash stick which I carried in my hand. I dragged
      him from his horse, and thrashed him without mercy. When I was tired, I walked quietly away,
      he roaring after me that he would be revenged upon me as sure as I was born.
"Next day I was arrested and taken before a magistrate. The baronet appeared against me,
      and—to my surprise—swore that I had assaulted him with a view to rob him, and that he had the
      greatest difficulty in protecting his purse and watch. I told my story and showed the mark of
      the baronet's whip across my face. The justice asked me if I could bring forward my witnesses
      to character. The baronet exclaimed, 'How can he? he has been in Dover Castle for
      smuggling.'—'Never!' I cried emphatically.—'Well, your father has, then,' said the baronet.
      This I could not deny.—'Oh! that's just the same thing!' cried the magistrate; and I was
      committed to gaol for trial at the next Maidstone assizes.
"For three months I lay in prison. I was not, however, completely hardened yet; nor did I
      associate with those who drank, and sang, and swore. I detested vice in all its shapes; and I
      longed for an opportunity to be good. It may seem strange to you, who know me now, to
      hear me speak thus;—but you are not aware what I was then!
"I was tried, and found guilty. The next two years of my life I passed at the hulks at
      Woolwich, dressed in dark grey, and wearing a chain round my leg. Even there I did not grow so
      corrupted, but that I sought for work the moment I was set at liberty again. I resolved not to
      return home to my parents, for I detested the ways into which they had led me. Turned away
      from the hulks one fine morning at ten o'clock, without a farthing in my pocket nor the means
      of obtaining a morsel of bread, my prospects were miserable enough. I could not obtain any
      employment in Woolwich: evening was coming on—and I was hungry. Suddenly I thought of
      enlisting. Pleased with this idea, I went to the barracks, and offered myself as a recruit.
      The regiment stationed there was about to embark for the East Indies in a few days and wanted
      men. Although certain of being banished, as it were, to a most unhealthy climate for
      twenty-one years, I preferred that to the life of a vagabond or a criminal in England. The
      sergeant was delighted with me, because I could read and write well; but the surgeon would not
      pass me. He said to me, 'You have either been half-starved for a length of time, or you have
      undergone a long imprisonment, for your flesh is as flabby as possible.' Thus was this hope
      destroyed.
"Now what pains had the law taken to make me good—even supposing, that I was really bad at
      the time of my condemnation? The law locked me up for two years, half-starved me, and yet
      exacted from me as much labour as a strong, healthy, man could have performed: then the law
      turned me out into the wide world, so weak, reduced, and feeble, that even the last resource
      of the most wretched—namely, enlisting in a regiment bound for India—was closed against
      me!
"Well—that night I wandered into the country and slept under a hedge. On the following
      morning I was compelled to satisfy the ravenous cravings of my hunger with Swedish turnips
      plucked from the fields. This food lay so cold upon my stomach that I felt ready to drop with
      illness, misery, and fatigue. And yet, in this Christian land, even that morsel, against which
      my heart literally heaved, was begrudged me. I was not permitted to satisfy my hunger with the
      food of beasts. A constable came up and took me into custody for robbing the turnip field. I
      was conducted before a neighbouring justice of the peace. He asked me what I meant by stealing
      the turnips? I told him that I had fasted for twenty-four hours, and was hungry. 'Nonsense,
      hungry!' he exclaimed; 'I'd give five pounds to know what hunger is! you kind of fellows eat
      turnips by way of luxury, you do—and not because you're hungry.' I assured him that I spoke
      the truth.—'Well, why don't you go to work?' he demanded.—'So I will, sir, with pleasure, if
      you will give me employment,' I replied.—'Me give you employment,' he shouted; 'I wouldn't
      have such a fellow about me, if he'd work for nothing. Where did you sleep last night?'—'Under
      a hedge, sir,' was my answer.—'Ah! I thought so,' he exclaimed: 'a rogue and vagabond
      evidently.' And this excellent specimen of the 'Great unpaid' committed me forthwith to the
      treadmill for one month as a rogue and vagabond.
"The treadmill is a horrible punishment: it is too bad even for those that are really rogues
      and vagabonds. The weak and the strong take the same turn, without any distinction; and I have
      seen men fall down fainting upon the platform, with the risk of having their legs or arms
      smashed by the wheel, through sheer exhaustion. Then the miserable fare that one receives in
      prison renders him more fit for an hospital than for the violent labour of the treadmill.
"I had been two years at the hulks, and was not hardened: I had been a smuggler and a
      body-snatcher, and was not hardened:—but this one month's imprisonment and spell at the
      treadmill did harden me—and hardened me completely! I could not see any advantage in
      being good. I could not find out any inducement to be honest. As for a desire to lead an
      honourable life, that was absurd. I now laughed the idea to scorn; and I swore within myself
      that whenever I did commence a course of crime, I would be an unsparing demon at my
      work. Oh! how I then detested the very name of virtue. 'The rich look upon the poor as
      degraded reptiles that are born in infamy and that cannot possibly possess a good instinct,' I
      reasoned within myself. 'Let a rich man accuse a poor man before a justice, a jury, or a
      judge, and see how quick the poor wretch is condemned! The aristocracy hold the lower classes
      in horror and abhorrence. The legislature thinks that if it does not make the most grinding
      laws to keep down the poor, the poor will rise up and commit the
       most unheard-of atrocities. In fact the rich are prepared to believe any infamy
      which is imputed to the poor.' It was thus that I reasoned; and I looked forward to the day of
      my release with a burning—maddening—drunken joy!
"That day came. I was turned adrift, as before, without a shilling and without a crust. That
      alone was as bad as branding the words rogue and vagabond upon my forehead. How could
      I remain honest, even if I had any longer been inclined to do so, when I could not get work
      and had no money—no bread—no lodging? The legislature does not think of all this. It fancies
      that all its duty consists in punishing men for crimes, and never dreams of adopting measures
      to prevent them from committing crimes at all. But I now no more thought of honesty: I went
      out of prison a confirmed ruffian. I had no money—no conscience—no fear—no hope—no love—no
      friendship—no sympathy—no kindly feeling of any sort. My soul had turned to the blackness of
      hell!
"The very first thing I did was to cut myself a good tough ash stick with a heavy knob at
      one end. The next thing I did was to break into the house of the very justice who had
      sentenced me to the treadmill for eating a raw turnip; and I feasted jovially upon the cold
      fowl and ham which I found in his larder. I also drank success to my new career in a bumper of
      his fine old wine. This compliment was due to him: he had made me what I was!
"I carried off a small quantity of plate—all that I could find, you may be sure—and took my
      departure from the house of the justice. As I was hurrying away from this scene of my first
      exploit, I passed by a fine large barn, also belonging to my friend the magistrate. I did not
      hesitate a moment what to do. I owed him a recompense for my month at the treadmill; and I
      thought I might as well add Incendiary to my other titles of Rogue and
       Vagabond. Besides, I longed for mischief—the world had persecuted me quite long
      enough, the hour of retaliation had arrived. I fired the barn and scampered away as hard as I
      could. I halted at a distance of about half a mile, and turned to look. A bright column of
      flame was shooting up to heaven! Oh! how happy did I feel at that moment. Happy! this is not
      the word! I was mad—intoxicated—delirious with joy. I literally danced as I saw the barn
      burning. I was avenged on the man who would not allow me to eat a cold turnip to save me from
      starving:—that one cold turnip cost him dear! The fire spread, and communicated with his
      dwelling-house; and there was no adequate supply of water. The barn—the stacks—the
      out-houses—the mansion were all destroyed. But that was not all. The only daughter of the
      justice—a lovely girl of nineteen—was burnt to death. I read the entire account in the
      newspapers a few days afterwards!
"And the upper classes wonder that there are so many incendiary fires: my only surprise is,
      that there are so few! Ah! the Lucifer-match is a fearful weapon in the hands of the man whom
      the laws, the aristocracy, and the present state of society have ground down to the very dust.
      I felt all my power—I knew all my strength—I was aware of all my importance as a man, when I
      read of the awful extent of misery and desolation which I had thus caused. Oh! I was signally
      avenged!
"I now bethought me of punishing the baronet in the same manner. He had been the means of
      sending me for two years to the hulks at Woolwich. Pleased with this idea, I jogged merrily on
      towards Walmer. It was late at night when I reached home. I found my mother watching by my
      father's death-bed, and arrived just in time to behold him breathe his last. My mother spoke
      to me about a decent interment for him. I laughed in her face. Had he ever allowed any one to
      sleep quietly in his grave? No. How could he then hope for repose in the tomb? My
      mother remonstrated: I threatened to dash out her brains with my stout ash stick; and on the
      following night I sold my father's body to the surgeon who had anatomised poor Kate Price!
      This was another vengeance on my part.
"Not many hours elapsed before I set fire to the largest barn upon the baronet's estate. I
      waited in the neighbourhood and glutted myself with a view of the conflagration. The damage
      was immense. The next day I composed a song upon the subject, which I have never since
      forgotten. You may laugh at the idea of me becoming a poet; but you know well enough that I
      received some trifle of education—that I was not a fool by nature—and that in early life I was
      food of reading. The lines were these:—

"THE INCENDIARY'S SONG.

"The Lucifer-match! the Lucifer-match!
'Tis the weapon for us to wield.
How bonnily burns up rick and thatch,
And the crop just housed from the field!
The proud may oppress and the rich distress,
And drive us from their door;—
But they cannot snatch the Lucifer-match
From the hand of the desperate poor!
"The purse-proud squire and the tyrant peer
May keep their Game Laws still;
And the very glance of the overseer
May continue to freeze and kill.
The wealthy and great, and the chiefs of the state,
May tyrannise more and more;—
But they cannot snatch the Lucifer-match
From the hand of the desperate poor!
"'Oh! give us bread!' is the piteous wail
That is murmured far and wide;
And echo takes up and repeats the tale—
But the rich man turns aside.
The Justice of Peace may send his Police
To scour the country o'er;
But they cannot snatch the Lucifer-match
From the hand of the desperate poor!
"Then, hurrah! hurrah! for the Lucifer-match;
'Tis the weapon of despair:—
How bonnily blaze up barn and thatch—
The poor man's revenge is there!
For the worm will turn on the feet that spurn—
And surely a man is more?—
Oh! none can e'er snatch the Lucifer-match
From the hand of the desperate poor!

"The baronet suspected that I was the cause of the fire, as I had just returned to the
      neighbourhood; and he had me arrested and taken before a justice; but there was not a shadow
      of proof against me, nor a pretence to keep me in custody. I was accordingly discharged, with
      an admonition 'to take care of myself'—which was as much as to say, 'If I can
       find an opportunity of sending you to prison, I will.'
"Walmer and its neighbourhood grew loathsome to me. The image of Kate Price constantly
      haunted me; and I was moreover shunned by every one who knew that I had been at the hulks. I
      accordingly sold off all the fishing tackle, and other traps, and came up to London with the
      old Mummy.
"I need say no more."
"And there's enough in your history to set a man a-thinking," exclaimed the waiter of the
      boozing-ken; "there is indeed."
"Ah! I b'lieve you, there is," observed the Cracksman, draining the pot which had contained
      the egg-flip.
      
The clock struck mid-day when Holford entered the parlour of the boozing-ken.
