
CHAPTER CLXXIV.   CASTELCICALA.
The Grand-Duchy of Castelcicala is bounded on the north by the Roman States, on the south by
      the kingdom of Naples, on the east by the Apennine Mountains, and on the west by the
      Mediterranean Sea.
It is the most beautiful, the best cultivated, and the finest portion of the Italian
      Peninsula. The inhabitants are brave, enlightened, and industrious.
Castelcicala is divided into seven districts, or provinces, the capitals of which are
      Montoni (which is also the metropolis of the Grand Duchy), Abrantani, Veronezzi, Pinalla,
      Estella, Terano, and Montecuculi. Each province is governed by a Captain-General (the chief
      military authority), and a Political Prefect, (the chief civil authority).
The principal city, Montoni, stands at the mouth of the Ferretti, and contains a hundred
      thousand inhabitants. It is built on both sides of the river, has a fine harbour, spacious
      dockyards, and extensive arsenals, and is one of the principal trading-ports of Italy. It is
      strongly fortified on the system of Vauban.
The entire population of the Grand-Duchy of Castelcicala is two millions. Its revenues are
      three millions sterling; and the annual income of the sovereign is two hundred thousand
      pounds.
From these details the reader will perceive that Castelcicala is by no means an unimportant
      country in the map of Europe.

We shall now continue our narrative.
It was the middle of November, 1840, and at an early hour in the morning, before sunrise,
      when three vessels (two large brigs and a schooner) ran in as close as the depth of water
      would permit them with safety, on the Castelcicalan coast a few miles below Ossore.
The boats of these vessels were immediately lowered; and by the time the sun dawned on the
      scene, nearly twelve hundred armed men were landed without molestation.
This force was divided into two columns: one of seven hundred strong was commanded by
      General Grachia; the other of five hundred was led by Colonel Morosino. Richard Markham, as
      Secretary-General of the Constitutional Chiefs, and attended by Morcar, accompanied General
      Grachia. The chiefs and their staff were all provided with horses.
The army presented a somewhat motley aspect, the officers alone appearing in uniforms. The
      entire force was, however, well provided with weapons;
      and every heart beat high with hope and patriotism.
The banners were unfurled; an excellent brass band struck up an enlivening national air; and
      the two columns marched in the direction of Ossore.
It was deemed most important to possess this sea-port without delay; as its harbour would
      afford a safe refuge for the three ships to which the Constitutionalists (as the invaders
      termed themselves) could alone look for the means of retreat, in case of the failure of their
      enterprise.
But of such a result they entertained not the slightest apprehension.
And now the peasants in the farm-houses and hamlets near which they passed, were suddenly
      alarmed by the sounds of martial music: but the rumour of the real object of the invaders
      spread like wild-fire; and they had not marched three or four miles, before they were already
      joined by nearly a hundred volunteer-recruits.
The hearts of the Constitutionalists were enlivened by this success; for while the male
      inhabitants of the district through which they passed hastened to join them, the women put up
      audible prayers to heaven to prosper their glorious enterprise.
Ossore was in the province of Abrantani, which had for nearly a year groaned under the
      tyranny of the Captain-General, who governed his district by martial law, the jurisdiction of
      the civil tribunals having been superseded by the odious despotism of military courts. The
      Constitutionalists, therefore, entertained the strongest hopes that Ossore would pronounce in
      their favour the moment they appeared beneath its walls.
The Constitutionalists were now only three miles from Ossore, which was hidden from their
      view by a high hill, up the acclivity of which the two columns were marching, when the quick
      ear of General Grachia suddenly caught the sound of horses' feet on the opposite side of the
      eminence.
Turning to one of his aides-de-camp, he said, "Hasten to Colonel
      Morosino—tell him to take that road to the left and possess himself of yonder grove. Our
      landing is known—a body of cavalry is approaching."
These words were delivered in a rapid but firm tone. The aide-de-camp
      galloped away to execute the order; and General Grachia proceeded to address a few brief but
      impressive words to the patriots of his division, telling them that the moment to strike a
      blow was now at hand.
"Markham," said the General, when he had concluded his harangue, "we shall have hot work in
      a few minutes."
Scarcely were these words uttered, when a large body of cavalry made its appearance on the
      summit of the hill. A general officer, surrounded by a brilliant staff, was at their head.
"That is Count Santa-Croce, the Captain-General of Abrantani!" exclaimed Grachia, drawing
      his sword. "Parley with him were vain—he is devoted to the Grand Duke. My friends, before us
      lies death or victory!"
The Constitutionalists gave a deafening cheer in answer to the words of their commander.
Then, like an avalanche bursting from its rest on the Alpine height, and rolling with dread
      and deafening din in its precipitate path, the ducal cavalry thundered down the hill.
But they were well received; and a terrific contest ensued.
The ear was deafened with the report of musketry and the clang of weapons. Bullets whistled
      through the air; and as the serried ranks on either side poured forth volumes of smoke,—the
      Constitutionalists with their muskets, and the cavalry with their carbines,—the shouts of the
      combatants and the groans of the dying announced the desperate nature of the conflict.
But, alas! the Constitutionalists were doomed to experience a sad blow!
General Grachia,—a patriot whose memory demands our admiration and respect,—was slain at the
      commencement of the battle. He died, fighting gallantly at the head of his troops; and not
      before the enemy had felt the weight of his valiant arm.
Almost at the same moment the ensign who bore the Constitutional banner was struck to the
      earth; and an officer of the ducal cavalry seized the standard.
But scarcely had he grasped it, when Richard Markham, who had vainly endeavoured to protect
      his chief and friend from the weapons of the enemy, spurred his steed with irresistible fury
      against the officer, hurled him from his seat, and snatched the banner from his grasp.
Then, waving the flag above his head with his left hand, and wielding his sword in the
      right, Richard plunged into the thickest of the fight, exclaiming, "Vengeance for the death of
      our general!"
The moment that Grachia fell, a sudden panic seized upon the Constitutionalists of his
      division; and they were already retreating, when that gallant exploit on the part of Markham
      rallied them with galvanic effect.
"Vengeance for the death of our general!" was the cry; and our hero was instantly backed by
      his faithful Morcar and a whole host of Constitutionalists.
The conflict was desperate—both sides fighting as if all idea of quarter were out of the
      question, and victory or death were the only alternatives.
Fired by the loss of General Grachia,—conscious of the desperate position in which defeat
      would place the invaders,—and inspired by the image of Isabella, Richard fought with the fury
      of the Destroying Angel.
He who had only been looked upon as possessing an able head in administrative matters, now
      suddenly appeared in a new light,—a gallant warrior, who by his bravery had succeeded in
      rallying a panic-struck army.
Already were the ducal cavalry retreating;—already had the Captain-General, who surveyed the
      conflict from the summit of the hill, disappeared with his staff-officers on the opposite
      side;—already were the Constitutionalists of Richard's division shouting "Victory,"—when
      Colonel Morosino's corps, which had been engaged by another body of cavalry, was observed to
      be in full retreat—dispersing in disorder—flying before its triumphant foes.
The rumour that Colonel Morosino himself was slain, and that a strong body of infantry,
      provided with cannon, was already advancing from the opposite side of the hill, now spread
      like wild-fire through the ranks of Richard's division.
Vainly did Markham endeavour by his example to inspire the troops with courage. A panic
      seized upon them: they exclaimed that some villain had betrayed them; and the disorder became
      general.

The ducal cavalry which were so lately in full retreat, rallied again: their charge was
      irresistible; they literally swept the slope of the hill down which they rushed.
Backed by a small but gallant band that scorned to retreat, and well seconded by Morcar,
      Richard fought with a desperation which was truly marvellous in one who had never wielded a
      hostile brand until that day. But a pistol-bullet disabled his right arm; and he was taken
      prisoner, together with Morcar and several others.
The Constitutionalists were completely defeated; five hundred fell upon the field of battle;
      the remainder were dispersed or captured. But scarcely three hundred succeeded in saving
      themselves by flight.
And almost at the same moment when this unfortunate expedition was thus overwhelmed with
      ruin, a Castelcicalan frigate, which had put out from Ossore harbour, shortly after the
      landing of the Constitutionalists, captured the three vessels which were the last hope of
      those patriots who had escaped from captivity or carnage.
From the summit of the hill, whither he was conducted into the presence of the
      Captain-General of Abrantani, Richard beheld the three vessels strike their colours to the
      Castelcicalan man-of-war.
"Treachery has been at work here," he said within himself; "or else how arose these
      preparations to receive us?"
He was not, however, permitted much time for reflection—either in respect to his own
      desperate condition, or that of the unfortunate fugitives whose last hope was thus cut off by
      the seizure of the ships; for the Captain-General—an old man, with white hair, but a stern and
      forbidding countenance,—addressed him in a haughty and savage tone.
"Know you the penalty that awaits your crime, young man?" he exclaimed; "for in you I
      doubtless behold one of the chiefs of this monstrous invasion."
"I know how to die," answered Richard, fearlessly.
"Ah!" ejaculated the Captain-General. "What traitor have we here? Some foreign mercenary
      perhaps. He is not a Castelcicalan, by the accent with which he speaks our native
      tongue."
"I am an Englishman, my lord," said Markham, returning the proud glance of defiance and
      scorn which Count Santa-Croce threw upon him.
"An Englishman!" thundered the Captain-General. "Then is a military death too good for you!
      What brings a wretched foreigner like you amongst us with a hostile sword? You have not even
      the miserable subterfuge of patriotism as a palliation for your crime. Away with him! Hang him
      to yonder tree!"
"I have one favour to implore of your lordship," said Markham, his voice faltering not,
      although his cheek grew somewhat pale: "I am prepared for death—but let me not perish like a
      dog. Plant your soldiers at a distance of a dozen paces—let them level their muskets at me—and
      I promise you I shall not die a coward."
"No—you are a foreigner!" returned the Captain-General ferociously. "Away with him!"
Markham was instantly surrounded by soldiers, and dragged to the foot of a tree at a little
      distance.
An aide-de-camp of the Count was ordered to superintend the sad
      ceremony.
"Have you any thing which you desire to be communicated to your friends in your native
      country?" asked the officer, who was a generous-minded young man, and who, having beheld
      Richard's bravery in the conflict, could not help respecting him.
"I thank you sincerely for the kindness which prompts this question," replied our hero; "and
      all I have now to hope is that those who know me—in my native land—may not think that
      cowardice or dishonour closed the career of Richard Markham."
"Richard Markham!" ejaculated the officer. "Tell me—is that your name?"
"It is," answered our hero.
"Then there is hope for you yet, brave Englishman!" cried the officer; and without
      uttering another word, he hastened back to the spot where the Captain-General of Abrantani was
      standing.
Were we to say that Richard was now otherwise than a prey to the most profound suspense, we
      should be exaggerating the moral strength of human nature.
We have no wish to make of our hero a demigod: we allow him to be nothing more than mortal
      after all!
It was, therefore, with no little anxiety that Markham saw the officer approach the
      Captain-General of Abrantani, and discourse with him for some moments in a low tone. The
       aide-de-camp appeared to urge some point which he was anxious to carry:
      Count Santa-Croce shook his head ominously.
"Beloved Isabella," murmured Richard to himself: "shall I never see thee more?"
His eyes were still fixed upon those two men who appeared to be arguing his life or
      death.
At length the Captain-General took a paper from the breast of his profusely-laced blue
      uniform coat, and cast his eyes over it.
Richard watched him with breathless anxiety.
This state of suspense did not last long. Count Santa-Croce folded the paper, replaced it
      where he had taken it from, and then gave a brief command to the officer.
The latter hurried back to the spot where Markham was hovering as it were between life and
      death.
"You are saved, sir!" cried the Castelcicalan his countenance expressing the most unfeigned
      joy.
"Generous friend!" exclaimed Richard: "by what strange influence have you worked this
      miracle?"
"That must remain a secret," answered the aide-de-camp. "At the same time
      I can take but little merit to myself in the transaction—beyond a mere effort of memory. You
      have powerful friends, sir, in Castelcicala: otherwise his lordship the Captain-General," he
      added in a whisper, "was not the man to spare you."
"To you I proffer my most heart-felt thanks, generous Italian!" cried Richard; "for to you I
      am clearly indebted for my life. Let me know the name of my saviour?"
"Mario Bazzano—junior aide-de-camp to Count Santa-Croce, the
      Captain-General of Abrantani," was the answer. "But we have no time to parley," he continued
      rapidly: "the good news which I have already imparted to you in respect to your life, must be
      somewhat counterbalanced by the commands which I have received regarding your liberty."
"Speak, Signor Bazzano," said Markham. "You saw that I did not flinch from death: it is
      scarcely probable that I shall tremble at any less severe sentence which may have been passed
      upon me."
"My orders are to conduct you to Montoni, where you will be placed at the disposal of a
      higher authority than even the Captain-General of Abrantani," returned the
       aide-de-camp. "But, in the first place, my lord's surgeon shall look to
      your wound."
Then once more did the generous-hearted Castelcicalan hasten away; and in a few minutes he
      returned, accompanied by the Count's own medical attendant.
Richard's arm was examined; and it was discovered that a bullet had passed through the
      fleshy part between the elbow and the shoulder. The wound was painful, though by no means
      dangerous; and the surgeon bandaged it with care and skill.
"Now, Signor Markham," said Bazzano, "it is my duty to conduct you to Montoni. I do not wish
      to drag you thither like a felon—because you are a brave man: at the same time I am answerable
      to the Count and to another who is higher than the Count, for your person. Gallant
      warriors are usually honourable men: pledge me your honour that you will not attempt to
      escape; and we will proceed to Montoni alone together."
"I pledge you my honour," answered Richard, "that so long as I am in your custody, I will
      not attempt to escape. But the moment you are released from your charge of my person, my vow
      ceases."
"Agreed, signor," said Bazzano.
The aide-de-camp then ordered his own and another horse (for Richard's
      steed had been sorely wounded in the conflict) to be brought to the spot where this
      conversation took place.
"Signor Bazzano," said Richard, "you have behaved to me in so noble and generous a manner
      that I am emboldened to ask another favour of you. A young man accompanied me as my attendant
      in this unfortunate enterprise: he has a wife and child in his native land; his parents are
      also living. Should
      aught happen to him, four others would thereby be plunged into the depths of
      misery."
"Where is this person to whom you allude?" inquired Bazzano.
"He is a prisoner yonder. There—he is seated on the ground, with his face buried in his
      hands!"
And Richard pointed in the direction where the poor gipsy was plunged into a painful and
      profound reverie at a little distance.
For the third time the aide-de-camp,—who was a tall, active, handsome,
      dark-eyed young man,—hurried away. Count Santa-Croce had mounted his horse and repaired, with
      his staff, to view more closely the spot where the conflict had taken place, and to issue
      orders relative to the interment of the killed and the disposal of the prisoners. Mario
      Bazzano did not therefore dread the eagle glance of his superior, as he hastened to perform
      another generous deed and confer another favour on Richard Markham.
"Young man," he said, addressing himself to Morcar, "rise and follow me. You are to
      accompany your master. My good friend," he added, speaking to the sentinel who stood near, "I
      will be answerable for my conduct in this instance to his lordship the Captain-General."
The sentinel was satisfied; and Morcar followed the officer to the spot where Richard and
      the Castelcicalan soldiers who had charge of him, were standing.
A third horse was procured; and in a few minutes the aide-de-camp, our
      hero, and Morcar rode rapidly away from the scene of carnage, towards Ossore.
It were a vain task to attempt to describe the joy which succeeded Morcar's grief and
      apprehension, when he discovered that his own and his master's lives were beyond danger, and
      that Mario Bazzano was evidently so well inclined to befriend them.
"As I do not wish to keep you in an unpleasant state of suspense, signor," said the
       aide-de-camp to Richard, "I must inform you that you have little to dread
      at Montoni. You have powerful friends there. A short imprisonment—or some punishment of a
      slight nature, will be all the penalty you will both have to pay for your mad freak—or else I
      am much mistaken. But more I dare not—cannot say."
"Whatever be our fate," exclaimed Richard, "my heart will cherish until death the
      remembrance—the grateful remembrance of your noble conduct. But tell me, my generous
      friend—what will become of those unfortunate prisoners?"
"The chiefs of the enterprise have fallen in the conflict," answered Mario; "else the fate
      of traitors would have been in store for them. As for the mistaken men whom they have led to
      these shores, imprisonment—a long imprisonment in the citadels of Abrantani, Pinalla, and
      Estella, will doubtless be the penalty of their treason."
The severe terms in which the young aide-de-camp, who was evidently
      devoted to the Grand Duke's cause, spoke of the Constitutionalists, pierced like a dagger to
      the heart of our hero; but delicacy and gratitude towards one from whom he had received such
      signal obligations, prevented him from making any comment.
In a short time the little party reached Ossore, at which town they proceeded to an hotel,
      where they obtained refreshments. There, also, plain clothes were procured for Markham, in
      order that his uniform (which was different from that of the Castelcicalan officer) might not
      create unpleasant notice on his arrival at Montoni. Morcar had no uniform to change.
When the repast was terminated, Lieutenant Bazzano ordered a post-chaise and four; and in a
      short time the little party was whirling rapidly along the high road to the capital.
During the journey Richard and the aide-de-camp rose higher in each
      other's esteem, the more they conversed together; and by the time they reached their
      destination, a sort of friendship, which circumstances had tended to invest with unusual
      interest, already existed between them.
Bazzano assured our hero that the contemplated invasion of the Constitutionalists had been
      communicated some time previously to the Captain-General of Abrantani; but whence that
      information had emanated the young officer was unable to state. Preparations had, however,
      been in existence for at least a fortnight to receive the invaders when they set foot on the
      Castelcicalan territory. These assurances confirmed Richard in the opinion which he had
      already formed, that treachery had existed somewhere on the side of the patriots.
