<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Farringdons, by Ellen
      Thorneycroft Fowler.</title><author>Fowler, Ellen Thorneycroft (1860-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
FELICIA FINDS HAPPINESS

Give me that peak of cloud which fills
The sunset with its gorgeous form,
Instead of these familiar hills
That shield me from the storm.

After having been weighed in Elisabeth's balance and found wanting, Alan Tremaine went abroad
     for a season, and Sedgehill knew him no more until the following spring. During that time
     Elisabeth possessed her soul and grew into a true woman—a woman with no smallness or meanness
     in her nature, but with certain feminine weaknesses which made her all the more lovable to
     those people who understood her, and all the more incongruous and irritating to those who did
     not. Christopher, too, rested in an oasis of happiness just then. He was an adept in the study
     of Elisabeth, and he knew perfectly well what had passed between her and Alan, although she
     flattered herself that she had kept him completely in the dark on the subject. But Christopher
     was always ready to dance to Elisabeth's piping, except when it happened to be on red-hot iron;
     even then he tried to obey her bidding, and it was hardly his fault if he failed.
Christopher Thornley was one of those people
      whose temperament and surroundings are at war with each other. Such people are
     not few in this world, though they themselves are frequently quite unaware of the fact;
     nevertheless, there is always an element of tragedy in their lot. By nature he was romantic and
     passionate and chivalrous, endowed with an enthusiastic admiration for beauty and an ardent
     longing for all forms of joyousness; and he had been trained in a school of thought where all
     merely human joys and attractions are counted as unimportant if not sinful, and where wisdom
     and righteousness are held to be the two only ends of life. Perhaps in a former existence—or in
     the person of some remote ancestor—Christopher had been a knightly and devoted cavalier, ready
     to lay down his life for Church and king, and in the meantime spending his days in writing odes
     to his mistress's eyebrow; and now he had been born into a strict Puritan atmosphere, where
     principles rather than persons commanded men's loyalty, and where romance was held to be a
     temptation of the flesh if not a snare of the devil. He possessed a great capacity for
     happiness, and for enjoyment of all kinds; consequently the dull routine of business was more
     distasteful to him than to a man of coarser fibre and less fastidious tastes. Christopher was
     one of the people who are specially fitted by nature to appreciate to the full all the
     refinements and accessories of wealth and culture; therefore his position at the Osierfield was
     more trying to him than it would have been to nine men out of every ten.
When spring came back again, Alan Tremaine came with it to the Moat House; and at the same
     time Felicia Herbert arrived on a visit to the Willows. Alan had enough of the woman in his
     nature to decide that—Elisabeth not being meant for
      him—Elisabeth was not worth the having; but, although she had not filled his life
     so completely as to make it unendurable without her, she had occupied his thoughts sufficiently
     to make feminine society and sympathy thenceforth a necessity of his being. So it came to pass
     that when he met Felicia and saw that she was fair, he straightway elected her to the office
     which Elisabeth had created and then declined to fill; and because human nature—and especially
     young human nature—is stronger even than early training or old associations, Felicia fell in
     love with him in return, in spite of (possibly because of) her former violent prejudice against
     him. To expect a person to be a monster and then to find he is a man, has very much the same
     effect as expecting a person to be a man and finding him a fairy prince; we accord him our
     admiration for being so much better than our fancy painted him, and we crave his forgiveness
     for having allowed it to paint him in such false colours. Then we long to make some reparation
     to him for our unjust judgment; and—if we happen to be women—this reparation frequently takes
     the form of ordering his dinner for the rest of his dining days, and of giving him the right to
     pay our dressmakers' bills until such time as we cease to be troubled with them.
Consequently that particular year the spring seemed to have come specially for the benefit of
     Alan and Felicia. For them the woods were carpeted with daffodils, and the meadows were decked
     in living green; for them the mountains and hills broke forth into singing, and the trees of
     the field clapped their hands. Most men and women have known one spring-time such as this in
     their lives, whereof all the other spring-times were but images and types;
      and, maybe, even that one spring-time was but an image and a type of the great
     New Year's Day which shall be Time's to-morrow.
But while these two were wandering together in fairyland, Elisabeth felt distinctly left out
     in the cold. Felicia was her friend—Alan had been her lover; and now they had drifted off into
     a strange new country, and had shut the door in her face. There was no place for her in this
     fairyland of theirs; they did not want her any longer; and although she was too large-hearted
     for petty jealousies, she could not stifle that pang of soreness with which most of us are
     acquainted, when our fellow-travellers slip off by pairs into Eden, and leave us to walk alone
     upon the dusty highway.
Elisabeth could no more help flirting than some people can help stammering. It was a pity, no
     doubt; but it would have been absurd to blame her for it. She had not the slightest intention
     of breaking anybody's heart; she did not take herself seriously enough to imagine such a
     contingency possible; but the desire to charm was so strong within her that she could not
     resist it; and she took as much trouble to win the admiration of women as of men. Therefore,
     Alan and Felicia having done with her, for the time being, she turned her attention to
     Christopher; and although he fully comprehended the cause, he none the less enjoyed the effect.
     He cherished no illusions concerning Elisabeth, for the which he was perhaps to be pitied;
     since from love which is founded upon an illusion, there may be an awakening; but for love
     which sees its objects as they are, and still goes on loving them, there is no conceivable cure
     either in this world or the world to come.
"I'm not jealous by nature, and I think it is
     horrid to be dog-in-the-mangerish," she remarked to him one sunny afternoon, when
     Alan and Felicia had gone off together to Badgering Woods and left her all alone, until
     Christopher happened to drop in about tea-time. He had a way of appearing upon the scene when
     Elisabeth needed him, and of effacing himself when she did not. He also had a way of smoothing
     down all the little faults and trials and difficulties which beset her path, and of making for
     her the rough places plain. "But I can't help feeling it is rather dull when a man who has been
     in love with you suddenly begins to be in love with another girl."
"I can imagine that the situation has its drawbacks."
"Not that there is any reason why he shouldn't, when you haven't been in love with him
     yourself."
"Not the slightest. Even I, whom you consider an epitome of all that is stiff-necked and
     strait-laced, can see no harm in that. It seems to me a thing that a man might do on a Sunday
     afternoon without in any way jeopardizing his claim to universal respect."
"Still it is dull for the woman; you must see that."
"I saw it the moment I came in; nevertheless I am not prepared to state that the dulness of
     the woman is a consummation so devoutly to be prayed against. And, besides, it isn't at all
     dull for the other woman—the new woman—you know."
"And of course the other woman has to be considered."
"I suppose she has," Christopher replied; "but I can't for the life of me see why," he added
     under his breath.
"Let's go into the garden," Elisabeth said, rising from her chair; "nobody is in but me, and
     it is so
      stuffy to stay in the house now we have finished tea. Cousin Maria is busy
     succouring the poor, and——"
"And Miss Herbert is equally busy consoling the rich. Is that it?"
"That is about what it comes to."
So they went into the garden where they had played as children, and sat down upon the rustic
     seat where they had sat together scores of times; and Elisabeth thought about the great mystery
     of love, and Christopher thought about the length of Elisabeth's eyelashes.
"Do you think that Alan is in love with Felicia?" the girl asked at last.
"Appearances favour the supposition," replied Christopher.
"You once said he wasn't capable of loving any woman."
"I know I did; but that didn't in the least mean that he wasn't capable of loving Miss
     Herbert."
"She is very attractive; even you like her better than you like me," Elisabeth remarked,
     looking at him through the very eyelashes about which he was thinking. "I wonder at it, but
     nevertheless you do."
"One never can explain these things. At least I never can, though you seem to possess strange
     gifts of divination. I remember that you once expounded to me that either affinity or infinity
     was at the root of these matters—I forget which."
"She is certainly good-looking," Elisabeth went on.
"She is; her dearest friend couldn't deny that."
"And she has sweet manners."
"Distinctly sweet. She is the sort of girl that people call restful."
"And a lovely temper."
     
Christopher still refused to be drawn. "So I conclude. I have never ruffled it—nor tried to
     ruffle it—nor even desired to ruffle it."
"Do you like ruffling people's tempers?"
"Some people's tempers, extremely."
"What sort of people's?"
"I don't know. I never schedule people into 'sorts,' as you do. The people I care about can
     not be counted by 'sorts': there is one made of each, and then the mould is broken."
"You do like Felicia better than me, don't you?" Elisabeth asked, after a moment's
     silence.
"So you say, and as you are a specialist in these matters I think it wise to take your
     statements on faith without attempting to dispute them."
"Chris, you are a goose!"
"I know that—far better than you do." And Christopher sighed.
"But I like you all the same."
"That is highly satisfactory."
"I believe I always liked you better than Alan," Elisabeth continued, "only his way of
     talking about things dazzled me somehow. But after a time I found out that he always said more
     than he meant, while you always mean more than you say."
"Oh! Tremaine isn't half a bad fellow: his talk is, as you say, a little high-flown; but he
     takes himself in more than he takes in other people, and he really means well." Christopher
     could afford to be magnanimous toward Alan, now that Elisabeth was the reverse.
"I remember that day at Pembruge Castle, while he was talking to me about the troubles of the
     poor you were rowing Johnnie Stubbs about on the mere. That was just the difference between you
     and him."
     
"Oh! there wasn't much in that," replied Christopher; "if you had been kind to me that day,
     and had let me talk to you, I am afraid that poor Johnnie Stubbs would have had to remain on
     dry land. I merely took the advice of the great man who said, 'If you can not do what you like,
     do good.' But I'd rather have done what I liked, all the same."
"That is just like you, Chris! You never own up to your good points."
"Yes, I do; but I don't own up to my good points that exist solely in your imagination."
"You reckon up your virtues just as Cousin Maria reckons up her luggage on a journey; she
     always says she has so many packages, and so many that don't count. And your virtues seem to be
     added up in the same style."
Christopher was too shy to enjoy talking about himself; nevertheless, he was immensely
     pleased when Elisabeth was pleased with him. "Let us wander back to our muttons," he said,
     "which, being interpreted, means Miss Herbert and Tremaine. What sort of people are the
     Herberts, by the way? Is Mrs. Herbert a lady?"
Elisabeth thought for a moment. "She is the sort of person who pronounces the 't' in
     often."
"I know exactly; I believe 'genteel' is the most correct adjective for that type. Is she
     good-looking?"
"Very; she was the pencil sketch for Felicia."
"About how old?"
"It is difficult to tell. She is one of the women who are sixty in the sun and thirty in the
     shade, like the thermometer in spring. I should think she is really an easy five-and-forty,
     accelerated by limited means and an exacting conscience. She is always
      bothering about sins and draughts and things of that kind. I believe she thinks
     that everything you do will either make your soul too hot or your body too cold."
"You are severe on the excellent lady."
"I try not to be, because I think she is really good in her way; but her religion is such a
     dreadfully fussy kind of religion it makes me angry. It seems to caricature the whole thing.
     She appears to think that Christianity is a sort of menu of moral fancy-dishes, which one is
     bound to swallow in a certain prescribed order."
"Poor dear woman!"
"When people like Mrs. Herbert talk about religion," Elisabeth went on, "it is as bad as
     reducing the number of the fixed stars to pounds, shillings, and pence; just as it is when
     people talk about love who know nothing at all about it."
Christopher manfully repressed a smile. "Still, I have known quite intelligent persons do
     that. They make mistakes, I admit, but they don't know that they do; and so their ignorance is
     of the brand which the poet describes as bliss."
"People who have never been in love should never talk about it," Elisabeth sagely
     remarked.
"But, on the other hand, those who have been, as a rule, can't; so who is to conduct
     authorized conversations on this most interesting and instructive subject?"
"The people who have been through it, and so know all about it," replied Elisabeth.
"Allow me to point out that your wisdom for once is at fault. In the first place, I doubt if
     the man who is suffering from a specific disease is the suitable person to read a paper on the
     same before the
      College of Surgeons; and, in the second, I should say—for the sake of
     argument—that the man who has been through eternity and come out whole at the other end, knows
     as much about what eternity really means as—well, as you do. But tell me more about Mrs.
     Herbert and her peculiarities."
"She is always bothering about what she calls the 'correct thing.' She has no peace in her
     life on account of her anxiety as to the etiquette of this world and the next—first to know it
     and then to be guided by it. I am sure that she wishes that the Bible had been written on the
     principle of that dreadful little book called Don't, which gives you a list of the solecisms
     you should avoid; she would have understood it so much better than the present system."
"But you would call Miss Herbert a lady, wouldn't you?" Christopher asked.
"Oh, yes; a perfect lady. She is even well-bred when she talks about her love affairs; and if
     a woman is a lady when she talks about her love affairs, she will be a lady in any
     circumstances. It is the most crucial test out."
"Yes; I should have called Miss Herbert a perfect lady myself."'
"That is the effect of Fox How; it always turned out ladies, whatever else it failed in."
"But I thought you maintained that it failed in nothing!"
"No more it did; but I threw that in as a sop to what's-his-name, because you are so horribly
     argumentative."
Christopher was amused. Elisabeth was a perfect chef in the preparing of such sops,
     as he was well aware; and although he laughed at himself for doing it (knowing that her present
     graciousness to him
      merely meant that she was dull, and wanted somebody to play with, and he was
     better than nobody), he made these sops the principal articles of his heart's diet, and cared
     for no other fare.
"What is Mr. Herbert like?" he inquired.
"Oh! he is a good man in his way, but a back-boneless, sweet-syrupy kind of a Christian; one
     of the sort that seems to regard the Almighty as a blindly indulgent and easily-hoodwinked
     Father, and Satan himself as nothing worse than a rather crusty old bachelor uncle. You know
     the type."
"Perfectly; they always drawl, and use the adjective 'dear' in and out of season. I quite
     think that among themselves they talk of 'the dear devil.' And yet 'dear' is really quite a
     nice word, if only people like that hadn't spoiled it."
"You shouldn't let people spoil things for you in that way. That is one of your greatest
     faults, Christopher; whenever you have seen a funny side to anything you never see any other.
     You have too much humour and too little tenderness; that's what's the matter with you."
"Permit me to tender you a sincere vote of thanks for your exhaustive and gratuitous
     spiritual diagnosis. To cure my faults is my duty—to discover them, your delight."
"Well, I'm right; and you'll find it out some day, although you make fun of me now."
"I say, how will Mrs. Herbert fit in Tremaine's religious views—or rather absence of
     religious views—with her code of the next world's etiquette?" asked Christopher, wisely
     changing the subject.
"Oh! she'll simply decline to see them. Although, as I told you, she is driven about entirely
     by her conscience, it is a well-harnessed conscience and always
      wears blinkers. It shies a good deal at gnats, I own; but it can run in
     double-harness with a camel, if worldly considerations render such a course desirable. It is
     like a horse we once had, which always shied violently at every puddle, but went past a
     steamroller without turning a hair."
"'By my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy
     tongue,'" quoted Christopher.
"I don't want to be too severe, but Mrs. Herbert does make me so mad. When people put
     religious things in a horrid light, it makes you feel as if they were telling unkind and untrue
     tales about your dearest friends."
"What does the good woman say that makes 'my lady Tongue' so furious?"
"Well, she is always saying one must give up this and give up that, and deny one's self here
     and deny one's self there, for the sake of religion; and I don't believe that religion means
     that sort of giving up at all. Of course, God is pleased when we do what He wishes us to do,
     because He knows it is the best for us; but I don't believe He wants us to do things when we
     hate doing them, just to please Him."
"Perhaps not. Still, if one does a thing one doesn't like doing, to please another person,
     one often ends by enjoying the doing of the thing. And even if one never enjoys it, the thing
     has still to be done."
"Well, if you were awfully fond of anybody, should you want them to spend their time with
     you, and do what you were doing, when you knew all the time that they didn't like being with
     you, but were dying to be with some one else?"
"Certainly not." Christopher might not know much about theology, but he knew exactly how
     people felt when they were, as Elisabeth said, "awfully fond of anybody."
"Of course you wouldn't," the girl went on; "you would wish the person you loved to be happy
     with you, and to want to be with you as much as you wanted to be with them; and if they didn't
     really care to be with you, you wouldn't thank them for unselfishness in the matter. So if an
     ordinary man like you doesn't care for mere unselfishness from the people you are really fond
     of, do you think that what isn't good enough for you is good enough for God?"
"No. But I still might want the people I was fond of to be unselfish, not for my own sake but
     for theirs. The more one loves a person, the more one wishes that person to be worthy of love;
     and though we don't love people because they are perfect, we want them to be perfect because we
     love them, don't you see?"
"You aren't a very good instance, Chris, because, you see, you are rather a reserved,
     cold-hearted person, and not at all affectionate; but still you are fond of people in your own
     way."
"Yes; I am fond of one or two people—but in my own way, as you say," Christopher replied
     quietly.
"And even you understand that forced and artificial devotion isn't worth having."
"Yes; even I understand as much as that."
"So you will see that unselfishness and renunciation and things of that sort are only
     second-best things after all, and that there is nothing of the kind between people who really
     love each other, because their two wills are merged in one, and each finds his own happiness in
     the happiness of the other. And I don't believe that God wants us to give up our wills to His
     in a 'Thy way not mine' kind of way; I
     believe He wants the same mind to be in us that was in Christ Jesus, so that He
     and we shall be wishing for the same things."
"Wise Elisabeth, I believe that you are right."
"And you'll see how right I am, when you really care very much for somebody yourself. I don't
     mean in the jolly, comfortable way in which you care for Mr. Smallwood and Cousin Maria and me.
     That's a very nice friendly sort of caring, I admit, and keeps the world warm and homelike,
     just as having a fire in the room keeps the room warm and homelike; but it doesn't teach one
     much."
Christopher smiled sadly. "Doesn't it? I should have thought that it taught one a good
     deal."
"Oh! but not as much as a lovely romantic attachment would teach one—not as much as Alan and
     Felicia are teaching each other now."
"Don't you think so?"
"Of course I don't. Why, you've never taught me anything, Chris, though we've always been
     fond of each other in the comfortable, easy fashion."
"Then the fault has been in me, for you have taught me a great many things, Elisabeth."
"Because I've taken the trouble to do so. But the worst of it is that by the time I've taught
     you anything, I have changed my mind about it myself, and find I've been teaching you all
     wrong. And it is a bother to begin to unteach you."
"I wonder why. I don't think I should find it at all a bother to unteach you certain
     things."
"And it is a greater bother still to teach you all over again, and teach you different."
     Elisabeth added, without attending to the last remark.
"Thank you, I think I won't trespass on your forbearance to that extent. Some lessons are so
      hard to master that life would be unbearable if one had to learn them twice
     over." Christopher spoke somewhat bitterly.
Elisabeth attended then. "What a funny thing to say! But I know what it is—you've got a
     headache; I can see it in your face, and that makes you take things so contrariwise."
"Possibly."
"Poor old boy! Does it hurt?"
"Pretty considerably."
"And have you had it long?"
"Yes," replied Christopher with truth, and he added to himself, "ever since I can remember,
     and it isn't in my head at all."
Elisabeth stroked his sleeve affectionately. "I am so sorry."
Christopher winced; it was when Elisabeth was affectionate that he found his enforced silence
     most hard to bear. How he could have made her love him if he had tried, he thought; and how
     could he find the heart to make her love him as long as he and she were alike dependent upon
     Miss Farringdon's bounty, and they had neither anything of their own? He rejoiced that Alan
     Tremaine had failed to win her love; but he scorned him as a fool for not having succeeded in
     doing so when he had the chance. Had Christopher been master of the Moat House he felt he would
     have managed things differently; for the most modest of men cherish a profound contempt for the
     man who can not succeed in making a woman love him when he sets about it.
"By Jove!" he said to himself, looking into the gray eyes that were so full of sympathy just
     then, "what an ass the man was to talk to such a woman as this about art and philosophy and
     high-falutin' of
      that sort! If I had only the means to make her happy, I would talk to her about
     herself and me until she was tired of the subject—and that wouldn't be this side Doomsday. And
     she thinks that I am cold-hearted!" But what he said to Elisabeth was, "There isn't much the
     matter with my head—nothing for you to worry about, I can assure you. Let us talk about
     something more interesting than my unworthy self—Tremaine, for instance."
"I used to believe in Alan," Elisabeth confessed; "but I don't so much now. I wonder if that
     is because he has left off making love to me, or because I have seen that his ideas are so much
     in advance of his actions."
"He never did make love to me, so I always had an inkling of the truth that his sentiments
     were a little over his own head. As a matter of fact, I believe I mentioned this conviction to
     you more than once; but you invariably treated it with the scorn that it doubtless
     deserved."
"And yet you were right. It seems to me that you are always right, Chris."
"No—not always; but more often than you are, perhaps," replied Christopher, in rather a husky
     voice, but with a very kindly smile. "I am older, you see, for one thing; and I have had a
     harder time of it for another, and some of the idealism has been knocked out of me."
"But the nice thing about you is that though you always know when I am wrong or foolish, you
     never seem to despise me for it."
Despise her? Christopher laughed at the word; and yet women were supposed to have such keen
     perceptions.
"I don't care whether you are wise or foolish,"
      he said, "as long as you are you. That is all that matters to me."
"And you really think I am nice?"
"I don't see how you could well be nicer."
"Oh! you don't know what I could do if I tried. You underrate my powers; you always did. But
     you are a very restful person, Chris; when my mind gets tired with worrying over things and
     trying to understand them, I find it a perfect holiday to talk to you. You seem to take things
     as they are."
"Well, I have to, you see; and what must be must."
"Simple natures like yours are very soothing to complex natures like mine. When I've lived my
     life and worn myself out with trying to get the utmost I can out of everything, I shall spend
     the first three thousand years of eternity sitting quite still upon a fixed star without
     speaking, with my legs dangling into space, and looking at you. It will be such a nice rest,
     before beginning life over again."
"Say two thousand years; you'd never be able to sit still without speaking for more than two
     thousand years at the outside. By that time you'd have pulled yourself together, and be wanting
     to set about teaching the angels a thing or two. I know your ways."
"I should enjoy that," laughed Elisabeth.
"So would the angels, if they were anything like me."
Elisabeth laughed again, and looked through the trees to the fields beyond. Friends were much
     more comfortable than lovers, she said to herself; Alan in his palmiest days had never been
     half so soothing to her as Christopher was now. She wondered why poets and people of that kind
     made so much of love and so little of friendship, since the latter was
     obviously the more lasting and satisfactory of the two. Somehow the mere presence
     of Christopher had quite cured the sore feeling that Alan and Felicia had left behind them when
     they started for their walk without even asking her to go with them; and she was once more sure
     of the fact that she was necessary to somebody—a certainty without which Elisabeth could not
     live. So her imagination took heart of grace again, and began drawing plans for extensive
     castles in Spain, and arranging social campaigns wherein she herself should be crowned with
     triumph. She decided that half the delight of winning life's prizes and meeting its fairy
     princes would be the telling Christopher all about them afterward; for her belief in his
     exhaustless sympathy was boundless.
"A penny for your thoughts," he said, after she had been silent for some moments.
"I was looking at Mrs. Bateson feeding her fowls," said Elisabeth evasively; "and, I say,
     have you ever noticed that hens are just like tea-pots, and cocks like coffee-pots? Look at
     them now! It seems as if an army of breakfast services had suddenly come to life à la
     Galatea, and were pouring libations at Mrs. Bateson's feet."
"It does look rather like that, I admit. But here are Miss Herbert and Tremaine returning
     from their walk; let's go and meet them."
And Elisabeth went to meet the lovers with no longer any little cobwebs of jealousy hiding in
     the dark corners of her heart, Christopher's hand having swept them all away; he had a
     wonderful power of exterminating the little foxes which would otherwise have spoiled
     Elisabeth's vines; and again she said to herself how much better a thing was friendship than
     love, since Alan had always expected her to be
     interested in his concerns, while Christopher, on the contrary, was always
     interested in hers.
It was not long after this that Elisabeth was told by Felicia of the latter's engagement to
     Alan Tremaine; and Elisabeth was amazed at the rapidity with which Felicia had assimilated her
     lover's views on all subjects. Elisabeth had expected that her friend would finally sacrifice
     her opinions on the altar of her feelings; she was already old enough to be prepared for that;
     but she had anticipated a fierce warfare in the soul of Felicia between the directly opposing
     principles of this young lady's mother and lover. To Elisabeth's surprise, this civil war never
     took place. Felicia accepted Alan's doubts as unquestioningly as she had formerly accepted Mrs.
     Herbert's beliefs; and as she loved the former more devotedly than she had ever loved the
     latter, she was more devout and fervid in her agnosticism than she had ever been in her faith.
     She had believed, because her mother ordered her to believe; she doubted, because Alan desired
     her to doubt; her belief and unbelief being equally the outcome of her affections rather than
     of her convictions.
Mrs. Herbert likewise looked leniently upon Alan's want of orthodoxy, and at this Elisabeth
     was not surprised. Possibly there are not many of us who do not—in the private and confidential
     depths of our evil hearts—regard earth in the hand as worth more than heaven in the bush, so to
     speak; at any rate, Felicia's mother was not one of the bright exceptions; and—from a purely
     commercial point of view—a saving faith does not go so far as a spending income, and it is no
     use pretending that it does. So Mrs. Herbert smiled upon her daughter's engagement; but
     compromised with that accommodating
      conscience of hers by always speaking of her prospective son-in-law as "poor
     Alan," just as if she really believed, as she professed she did, that the death of the body and
     the death of the soul are conditions equally to be deplored.
"You see, my dear," she said to Elisabeth, who came to stay at Wood Glen for Felicia's
     marriage, which took place in the early summer, "it is such a comfort to Mr. Herbert and myself
     to know that our dear child is so comfortably provided for. And then—although I can not
     altogether countenance his opinions—poor Alan has such a good heart."
Elisabeth, remembering that she had once been fascinated by the master of the Moat House, was
     merciful. "He is an extremely interesting man to talk to," she said; "he has thought out so
     many things."
"He has, my love. And if we are tempted to rebuke him too severely for his non-acceptance of
     revealed truth, we must remember that he was deprived comparatively early in life of both his
     parents, and so ought rather to be pitied than blamed," agreed Mrs. Herbert, who would
     cheerfully have poured out all the vials of the Book of Revelation upon any impecunious doubter
     who had dared to add the mortal sin of poverty to the venial one of unbelief.
"And he is really very philanthropic," Elisabeth continued; "he has done no end of things for
     the work-people at the Osierfield. It is a pity that his faith is second-rate, considering that
     his works are first-class."
"Ah! my dear, we must judge not, lest in turn we too should be judged. Who are we, that we
     should say who is or who is not of the elect? It is
      often those who seem to be the farthest from the kingdom that are in truth the
     nearest to it." Mrs. Herbert had dismissed a kitchen-maid, only the week before, for declining
     to attend her Bible-class, and walking out with a young man instead.
"Still, I am sorry that Alan has all those queer views," Elisabeth persisted; "he really
     would be a splendid sort of person if he were only a Christian; and it seems such a pity
     that—with all his learning—he hasn't learned the one thing that really matters."
"My love, I am ashamed to find you so censorious; it is a sad fault, especially in the young.
     I would advise you to turn to the thirteenth of First Corinthians, and see for yourself how
     excellent a gift is charity—the greatest of all, according to our dear Saint Paul."
Elisabeth sighed. She had long ago become acquainted with Mrs. Herbert's custom of keeping
     religion as a thing apart, and of treating it from an "in-another-department-if-you-please"
     point of view; and she felt that Tremaine's open agnosticism was almost better—and certainly
     more sincere—than this.
But Mrs. Herbert was utterly unconscious of any secret fault on her own part, and continued
     to purr contentedly to herself. "Felicia, dear child! will certainly take an excellent
     position. She will be in county society, the very thing which I have always desired for her;
     and she will enter it, not on sufferance, but as one of themselves. I can not tell you what a
     pleasure it is to Mr. Herbert and myself to think of our beloved daughter as a regular county
     lady; it quite makes up for all the little self-denials that we suffered in order to give her a
     good education and to render her fit to take her place in society.
      I shouldn't be surprised if she were even presented at Court." And the mother's
     cup of happiness ran over at the mere thought of such honour and glory.
Felicia, too, was radiantly happy. In the first place, she was very much in love; in the
     second, her world was praising her for doing well to herself. "I can not think how a clever man
     like Alan ever fell in love with such a stupid creature as me," she said to Elisabeth, not long
     before the wedding.
"Can't you? Well, I can. I don't wonder at any man's falling in love with you, darling, you
     are so dear and pretty and altogether adorable."
"But then Alan is so different from other men."
Elisabeth was too well-mannered to smile at this; but she made a note of it to report to
     Christopher afterward. She knew that he would understand how funny it was.
"I am simply amazed at my own happiness," Felicia continued; "and I am so dreadfully afraid
     that he will be disappointed in me when he gets to know me better, and will find out that I am
     not half good enough for him—which I am not."
"What nonsense! Why, there isn't a man living that would really be good enough for you,
     Felicia."
"Elisabeth! When I hear Alan talking, I wonder how he can put up with silly little me at all.
     You see, I never was clever—not even as clever as you are; and you, of course, aren't a
     millionth part as clever as Alan. And then he has such grand thoughts, too; he is always
     wanting to help other people, and to make them happier. I feel that as long as I live I never
     can be half grateful enough to him for the honour he has done me in wanting me for his
     wife."
Elisabeth shrugged her shoulders; the honours
      that have been within our reach are never quite so wonderful as those that have
     not.
So Alan and Felicia were married with much rejoicing and ringing of bells; and Elisabeth
     found it very pleasant to have her old schoolfellow settled at the Moat House. In fact so
     thoroughly did she throw herself into the interests of Felicia's new home, that she ceased to
     feel her need of Christopher, and consequently neglected him somewhat. It was only when others
     failed her that he was at a premium; when she found she could do without him, she did. As for
     him, he loyally refrained from blaming Elisabeth, even in his heart, and cursed Fate instead;
     which really was unfair of him, considering that in this matter Elisabeth, and not Fate, was
     entirely to blame. But Christopher was always ready to find excuses for Elisabeth, whatever she
     might do; and this, it must be confessed, required no mean order of ingenuity just then.
     Elisabeth was as yet young enough to think lightly of the gifts that were bestowed upon her
     freely and with no trouble on her part, such as bread and air and sunshine and the like; it was
     reserved for her to learn later that the things one takes for granted are the best thing life
     has to offer.
It must also be remembered, for her justification, that Christopher had never told her that
     he loved her "more than reason"; and it is difficult for women to believe that any man loves
     them until he has told them so, just as it is difficult for them to believe that a train is
     going direct to the place appointed to it in Bradshaw, until they have been verbally assured
     upon the point by two guards, six porters, and a newspaper boy. Nevertheless, Elisabeth's
     ignorance—though perhaps excusable, considering her sex—was anything
      but bliss to poor Christopher, and her good-natured carelessness hurt him none
     the less for her not knowing that it hurt him.
When Felicia had been married about three months her mother came to stay with her at the Moat
     House; and Elisabeth smiled to herself—and to Christopher—as she pictured the worthy woman's
     delight in her daughter's new surroundings.
"She'll extol all Felicia's belongings as exhaustively as if she were the Benedicite,"
     Elisabeth said, "and she'll enumerate them as carefully as if she were sending them to the
     wash. You'll find there won't be a single one omitted—not even the second footman or the
     soft-water cistern. Mrs. Herbert is one who battens on details, and she never spares her
     hearers a single item."
"It is distinctly naughty of you," Christopher replied, with the smile that was always ready
     for Elisabeth's feeblest sallies, "to draw the good soul out for the express purpose of
     laughing at her. I am ashamed of you, Miss Farringdon."
"Draw her out, my dear boy! You don't know what you are talking about. The most elementary
     knowledge of Mrs. Herbert would teach you that she requires nothing in the shape of drawing
     out. You have but to mention the word 'dinner,' and the secret sins of her cook are retailed to
     you in chronological order; you have but to whisper the word 'clothes,' and the iniquities of
     her dressmaker's bill are laid bare before your eyes. Should the conversation glance upon Mr.
     Herbert, his complete biography becomes your own possession; and should the passing thought of
     childhood appear above her mental horizon, she tells you all about her own children as
     graphically as if she were editing a new edition
      of The Pillars of the House. And yet you talk of drawing her out! I am afraid you
     have no perceptions, Christopher."
"Possibly not; everybody doesn't have perceptions. I am frequently struck with clever
     people's lack of them."
"Well, I'm off," replied Elisabeth, whipping up her pony, "to hear Mrs. Herbert's outpourings
     on Felicia's happiness; when I come back I expect I shall be able to write another poem on 'How
     does the water come down at Lodore'—with a difference."
And Christopher—who had met her in the High Street—smiled after the retreating figure in
     sheer delight at her. How fresh and bright and spontaneous she was, he thought, and how
     charmingly ignorant of the things which she prided herself upon understanding so profoundly! He
     laughed aloud as he recalled how very wise Elisabeth considered herself. And then he wondered
     if life would teach her to be less sure of her own buoyant strength, and less certain of her
     ultimate success in everything she undertook; and, if it did, he felt that he should have an
     ugly account to settle with life. He was willing for Fate to knock him about as much and as
     hardly as she pleased, provided she would let Elisabeth alone, and allow the girl to go on
     believing in herself and enjoying herself as she was so abundantly capable of doing. By this
     time Christopher was enough of a philosopher to think that it did not really matter much in the
     long run whether he were happy or unhappy; but he was not yet able to regard the thought of
     Elisabeth's unhappiness as anything but a catastrophe of the most insupportable magnitude;
     which showed that he had not yet sufficient philosophy to go round.
     
When Elisabeth arrived at the Moat House she found Mrs. Herbert alone, Felicia having gone
     out driving with her husband; and, to Elisabeth's surprise, there was no sign of the jubilation
     which she had anticipated. On the contrary, Mrs. Herbert was subdued and tired-looking.
"I am so glad to see you, my dear," she said, kissing Elisabeth; "it is lonely in this big
     house all by myself."
"It is always rather lonely to be in state," Elisabeth replied, returning her salute. "I
     wonder if kings find it lonely all by themselves in pleasures and palaces. I expect they do,
     but they put up with the loneliness for the sake of the stateliness; and you could hardly find
     a statelier house than this to be lonely in, if you tried."
"Yes; it is a beautiful place," agreed Mrs. Herbert listlessly.
Elisabeth wondered what was wrong, but she did not ask; she knew that Mrs. Herbert would
     confide in her very soon. People very rarely were reserved with Elisabeth; she was often amazed
     at the rapidity with which they opened their inmost hearts to her. Probably this accounted in
     some measure for her slowness in understanding Christopher, who had made it a point of honour
     not to open his inmost heart to her.
"Don't the woods look lovely?" she said cheerfully, pretending not to notice anything. "I
     can't help seeing that the trees are beautiful with their gilt leaves, but it goes against my
     principles to own it, because I do so hate the autumn. I wish we could change our four seasons
     for two springs and two summers. I am so happy in the summer, and still happier in the spring
     looking forward to it; but I am
      wretched in the winter because I am cold, and still wretcheder in the autumn
     thinking that I'm going to be even colder."
"Yes; the woods are pretty—very pretty indeed."
"I am so glad you have come while the leaves are still on. I wanted you to see Felicia's home
     at its very best; and, at its best, it is a home that any woman might be proud of."
Mrs. Herbert's lip trembled. "It is indeed a most beautiful home, and I am sure Felicia has
     everything to make her happy."
"And she is happy, Mrs. Herbert; I don't think I ever saw anybody so perfectly happy as
     Felicia is now. I'm afraid I could never be quite as satisfied with any impossible ideal of a
     husband as she is with Alan; I should want to quarrel with him just for the fun of the thing,
     and to find out his faults for the pleasure of correcting them. A man as faultless as Alan—I
     mean as faultless as Felicia considers Alan—would bore me; but he suits her down to the
     ground."
But even then Mrs. Herbert did not smile; instead of that her light blue eyes filled with
     tears. "Oh! my dear," she said, with a sob in her voice, "Felicia is ashamed of me."
For all her high spirits, Elisabeth generally recognised tragedy when she met it face to
     face; and she knew that she was meeting it now. So she spoke very gently—
"My dear Mrs. Herbert, whatever do you mean? I am sure you are not very strong, and so your
     nerves are out of joint, and make you imagine things."
"No, my love; it is no imagination on my part. I only wish it were. Who can know Felicia as
     well as her mother knows her—her mother who has
     worshipped her and toiled for her ever since she was a little baby? And I, who can
     read her through and through, feel that she is ashamed of me." And the tears overflowed, and
     rolled down Mrs. Herbert's faded cheeks.
Elisabeth's heart swelled with an immense pity, for her quick insight told her that Mrs.
     Herbert was not mistaken; but all she said was—
"I think you are making mountains out of molehills. Lots of girls lose their heads a bit when
     first they are married, and seem to regard marriage as a special invention and prerogative of
     their own, which entitles them to give themselves air ad libitum; but they soon grow
     out of it."
Mrs. Herbert shook her head sorrowfully; her tongue was loosed and she spake plain. "Oh! it
     isn't like that with Felicia; I should think nothing of that. I remember when first I was
     married I thought that no unmarried woman knew anything, and that no married woman knew
     anything but myself; but, as you say, I soon grew out of that. Why, I was quite ready, after I
     had been married a couple of months, to teach my dear mother all about housekeeping; and finely
     she laughed at me for it. But Felicia doesn't trouble to teach me anything; she thinks it isn't
     worth while."
"Oh! I can not believe that Felicia is like that. You must be mistaken."
"Mistaken in my own child, whom I carried in my arms as a little baby? No, my dear; there are
     some things about which mothers can never be mistaken, God help them! Do you think I did not
     understand when the carriage came round to-day to take her and Alan to return Lady
     Patchingham's visit, and Felicia said, 'Mamma won't go with us to-day,
      Alan dear, because the wind is in the east, and it always gives her a cold to
     drive in an open carriage when the wind is in the east'? Oh! I saw plain enough that she didn't
     want me to go with them to Lady Patchingham's; but I only thanked her and said I would rather
     stay indoors, as it would be safer for me. When they had started I went out and looked at the
     weather-cock for myself; it pointed southwest." And the big tears rolled down faster than
     ever.
Elisabeth did not know what to say; so she wisely said nothing, but took Mrs. Herbert's hand
     in hers and stroked it.
"Perhaps, my dear, I did wrong in allowing Felicia to marry a man who is not a true believer,
     and this is my punishment."
"Oh! no, no, Mrs. Herbert; I don't believe that God ever punishes for the sake of punishing.
     He has to train us, and the training hurts sometimes; but when it does, I think He minds even
     more than we do."
"Well, my love, I can not say; it is not for us to inquire into the counsels of the Almighty.
     But I did it for the best; I did, indeed. I did so want Felicia to be happy."
"I am sure you did."
"You see, all my life I had taken an inferior position socially, and the iron of it had
     entered into my soul. I daresay it was sinful of me, but I used to mind so dreadfully when my
     husband and I were always asked to second-rate parties, and introduced to second-rate people;
     and I longed and prayed that my darling Felicia should be spared the misery and the humiliation
     which I had had to undergo. You won't understand it, Elisabeth. People in a good position never
     do; but to be alternately snubbed and
      patronized all one's life, as I have been, makes social intercourse one
     long-drawn-out agony to a sensitive woman. So I prayed—how I prayed!—that my beautiful daughter
     should never suffer as I have done."
Elisabeth's eyes filled with tears; and Mrs. Herbert, encouraged by her unspoken sympathy,
     proceeded—
"Grand people are so cruel, my dear. I daresay they don't mean to be; but they are. And
     though I had borne it for myself, I felt I could not bear it for Felicia. I thought it would
     kill me to see fine ladies overlook her as they had so often overlooked me. So when Alan wanted
     to marry her, and make her into a fine lady herself, I was overwhelmed with joy; and I felt I
     no longer minded what I had gone through, now that I knew no one would ever dare to be rude to
     my beautiful daughter. Now I see I was wrong to set earthly blessings before spiritual ones;
     but I think you understand how I felt, Elisabeth."
"Yes, I understand; and God understands too."
"Then don't you think He is punishing me, my dear?"
"No; I think He is training Felicia—and perhaps you too, dear Mrs. Herbert."
"Oh! I wish I could think so. But you don't know what Felicia has been to her father and me.
     She was such a beautiful baby that the people in the street used to stop the nurse to ask whose
     child she was; and when she grew older she never gave us a moment's trouble or anxiety. Then we
     pinched and pared in order to be able to afford to send her to Fox How; and when her education
     was finished there wasn't a more perfect lady in the land than our Felicia. Oh! I was proud of
     her, I can tell you. And
      now she is ashamed of me, her own mother! I can not help seeing that this is
     God's punishment to me for letting her marry an unbeliever." And Mrs. Herbert covered her face
     with her hands and burst out into bitter sobs.
Elisabeth took the weeping form into her strong young arms. "My poor dear, you are doing Him
     an injustice, you are, indeed. I am sure He minds even more than you do that Felicia is still
     so ignorant and foolish, and He is training her in His own way. But He isn't doing it to punish
     you, dear; believe me, He isn't. Why, even the ordinary human beings who are fond of us want to
     cure our faults and not to punish them," she continued, as the memory of Christopher's
     unfailing patience with her suddenly came into her mind, and she recalled how often she had
     hurt him, and how readily he had always forgiven her; "they are sorry when we do wrong, but
     they are even sorrier when we suffer for it. And do you think God loves us less than they do,
     and is quicker to punish and slower to forgive?"
So does the love of the brother whom we have seen help us in some measure to understand the
     love of the God Whom we have not seen; for which we owe the brother eternal thanks.
     
</div></body></text></TEI>