<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Farringdons, by Ellen
      Thorneycroft Fowler.</title><author>Fowler, Ellen Thorneycroft (1860-1929).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1900</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
SCHOOL-DAYS

Up to eighteen we fight with fears,
And deal with problems grave and weighty,
And smile our smiles and weep our tears,
Just as we do in after years
From eighteen up to eighty.

When Elisabeth was sixteen her noonday was turned into night by the death of her beloved
     Cousin Anne. For some time the younger Miss Farringdon had been in failing health; but it was
     her rôle to be delicate, and so nobody felt anxious about her until it was too late for anxiety
     to be of any use. She glided out of life as gracefully as she had glided through it, trusting
     that the sternness of her principles would expiate the leniency of her practice; and was
     probably surprised at the discovery that it was the leniency of her practice which finally
     expiated the sternness of her principles.
She left a blank, which was never quite filled up, in the lives of her sister Maria and her
     small cousin Elisabeth. The former bore her sorrow better, on the whole, than did the latter,
     because she had acquired the habit of bearing sorrow; but Elisabeth mourned with all the
     hopeless misery of youth.
"It is no use trying to make me interested in
      things," she sobbed in response to Christopher's clumsy though well-meant attempts
     to divert her. "I shall never be interested in anything again—never. Everything is different
     now that Cousin Anne is gone away."
"Not quite everything," said Christopher gently.
"Yes; everything. Why, the very trees don't look the same as they used to look, and the view
     isn't a bit what it used to be when she was here. All the ordinary things seem queer and
     altered, just as they do when you see them in a dream."
"Poor little girl!"
"And now it doesn't seem worth while for anything to look pretty. I used to love the sunsets,
     but now I hate them. What is the good of their being so beautiful and filling the sky with red
     and gold, if she isn't here to see them? And what is the good of trying to be good and
     clever if she isn't here to be pleased with me? Oh dear! oh dear! Nothing will ever be any good
     any more."
Christopher laid an awkward hand upon Elisabeth's dark hair, and began stroking it the wrong
     way. "I say, I wish you wouldn't fret so; it's more than I can stand to see you so wretched.
     Isn't there anything that I can do to make it up to you, somehow?"
"No; nothing. Nothing will ever comfort me any more; and how could a great, stupid boy like
     you make up to me for having lost her?" moaned poor little Elisabeth, with the selfishness of
     absorbing grief.
"Well, anyway, I am as fond of you as she was, for nobody could be fonder of anybody than I
     am of you."
"That doesn't help. I don't miss her so because
      she loved me, but because I loved her; and I shall never, never love any one else
     as much as long as I live."
"Oh yes, you will, I expect," replied Christopher, who even then knew Elisabeth better than
     she knew herself.
"No—I shan't; and I should hate myself if I did."
Elisabeth fretted so terribly after her Cousin Anne that she grew paler and thinner than
     ever; and Miss Farringdon was afraid that the girl would make herself really ill, in spite of
     her wiry constitution. After much consultation with many friends, she decided to send Elisabeth
     to school, for it was plain that she was losing her vitality through lack of an interest in
     life; and school—whatever it may or may not supply—invariably affords an unfailing amount of
     new interests. So Elisabeth went to Fox How—a well-known girls' school not a hundred miles from
     London—so called in memory of Dr. Arnold, according to whose principles the school was founded
     and carried on.
It would be futile to attempt to relate the history of Elisabeth Farringdon without telling
     in some measure what her school-days did for her; and it would be equally futile to endeavour
     to convey to the uninitiated any idea of what that particular school meant—and still means—to
     all its daughters.
When Elisabeth had left her girlhood far behind her, the mere mention of the name, Fox How,
     never failed to send thrills all through her, as God save the Queen, and Home, sweet Home have
     a knack of doing; and for any one to have ever been a pupil at Fox How, was always a sure and
     certain passport to Elisabeth's interest and friendliness. The school was
      an old, square, white house, standing in a walled garden; and those walls enclosed
     all the multifarious interests and pleasures and loves and rivalries and heart-searchings and
     soul-awakenings which go to make up the feminine life from twelve to eighteen, and which are
     very much the same in their essence, if not in their form, as those which go to make up the
     feminine life from eighteen to eighty. In addition to these, the walls enclosed two lawns and
     an archery-ground, a field and a pond overgrown with water-lilies, a high mound covered with
     grass and trees, and a kitchen-garden filled with all manner of herbs and pleasant fruits—in
     short, it was a wonderful and extensive garden, such as one sees now and then in some
     old-fashioned suburb, but which people have neither the time nor the space to lay out nowadays.
     It also contained a long, straight walk, running its whole length and shaded by impenetrable
     greenery, where Elisabeth used to walk up and down, pretending that she was a nun; and some
     delightful swings and see-saws, much patronized by the said Elisabeth, which gave her a similar
     physical thrill to that produced in later years by the mention of her old school.
The gracious personality which ruled over Fox How in the days of Elisabeth had mastered the
     rarely acquired fact that the word educate is derived from educo, to draw
      out, and not (as is generally supposed) from addo, to give to; so the
     pupils there were trained to train themselves, and learned how to learn—a far better equipment
     for life and its lessons than any ready-made cloak of superficial knowledge, which covers all
     individualities and fits none. There was no cramming or forcing at Fox How; the object of the
     school was not to teach girls how to be scholars,
      but rather how to be themselves—that is to say, the best selves which they were
     capable of becoming. High character rather than high scholarship was the end of education
     there; and good breeding counted for more than correct knowledge. Not that learning was
     neglected, for Elisabeth and her schoolfellows worked at their books for eight good hours every
     day; but it did not form the first item on the programme of life.
And who can deny that the system of Fox How was the correct system of education, at any rate,
     as far as girls are concerned? Unless a woman has to earn her living by teaching, what does it
     matter to her how much hydrogen there is in a drop of rain-water, or in what year Hannibal
     crossed the Alps? But it will matter to her infinitely, for the remainder of her mortal
     existence, whether she is one of those graceful, sympathetic beings, whose pathway is paved by
     the love of Man and the friendship of Woman; or one of that much-to-be-blamed, if
     somewhat-to-be-pitied, sisterhood, who are unloved because they are unlovely, and unlovely
     because they are unloved.
It is not good for man, woman, or child to be alone; and the companionship of girls of her
     own age did much toward deepening and broadening Elisabeth's character. The easy give-and-take
     of perfect equality was beneficial to her, as it is to everybody She did not forget her Cousin
     Anne—the art of forgetting was never properly acquired by Elisabeth; but new friendships and
     new interests sprang up out of the grave of the old one, and changed its resting-place from a
     cemetery into a garden. Elisabeth Farringdon could not be happy—could not exist, in
     fact—without some absorbing affection and interest in life. There are certain women to whom
     "the trivial
      round" and "the common task" are all-sufficing who ask nothing more of life than
     that they shall always have a dinner to order or a drawing-room to dust, and to whom the
     delinquencies of the cook supply a drama of never-failing attraction and a subject of
     never-ending conversation; but Elisabeth was made of other material; vital interests and strong
     attachments were indispensable to her well-being. The death of Anne Farringdon had left a cruel
     blank in the young life which was none too full of human interest to begin with; but this blank
     was to a great measure filled up by Elisabeth's adoration for the beloved personage who ruled
     over Fox How, and by her devoted friendship for Felicia Herbert.
In after years she often smiled tenderly when she recalled the absolute worship which the
     girls at Fox How offered to their "Dear Lady," as they called her, and of which the "Dear Lady"
     herself was supremely unconscious. It was a feeling of loyalty stronger than any ever excited
     by crowned heads (unless, perhaps, by the Pope himself), as she represented to their girlish
     minds the embodiment of all that was right, as well as of all that was mighty—and represented
     it so perfectly that through all their lives her pupils never dissociated herself from the
     righteousness which she taught and upheld and practised. And this attitude was wholly good for
     girls born in a century when it was the fashion to sneer at hero-worship and to scoff at
     authority when the word obedience in the Marriage Service was accused of redundancy, and the
     custom of speaking evil of dignities was mistaken for self-respect.
As for Felicia Herbert, she became for a time the very mainspring of Elisabeth's life. She
     was a beautiful girl, with fair hair and clear-cut features; and
      Elisabeth adored her with the adoration that is freely given, as a rule, to the
     girl who has beauty by the girl who has not. She was, moreover, gifted with a sweet and calm
     placidity, which was very restful to Elisabeth's volatile spirit; and the latter consequently
     greeted her with that passionate and thrilling friendship which is so satisfying to the
     immature female soul, but which is never again experienced by the woman who has once been
     taught by a man the nature of real love. Felicia was much more religious than Elisabeth, and
     much more prone to take serious views of life. The training of Fox How made for seriousness,
     and in that respect Felicia entered into the spirit of the place more profoundly than Elisabeth
     was capable of doing; for Elisabeth was always tender rather than serious, and broad rather
     than deep.
"I shall never go to balls when I leave school," said Felicia to her friend one day of their
     last term at Fox How, as the two were sitting in the arbour at the end of the long walk. "I
     don't think it is right to go to balls."
"Why not? There can be no harm in enjoying oneself, and I don't believe that God ever thinks
     there is."
"Not in enjoying oneself in a certain way; but the line between religious people and worldly
     people ought to be clearly marked. I think that dancing is a regular worldly amusement, and
     that good people should openly show their disapproval of it by not joining in it."
"But God wants us to enjoy ourselves," Elisabeth persisted. "And He wouldn't really love us
     if He didn't."
"God wants us to do what is right, and it doesn't matter whether we enjoy ourselves or not."
     
"But it does; it matters awfully. We can't really be good unless we are happy."
Felicia shook her head. "We can't really be happy unless we are good; and if we are good we
     shall 'love not the world,' but shall stand apart from it."
"But I must love the world; I can't help loving the world, it is so grand and beautiful and
     funny. I love the whole of it: all the trees and the fields, and the towns and the cities, and
     the prim old people and the dear little children. I love the places—the old places because I
     have known them so long, and the new places because I have never seen them before; and I love
     the people best of all. I adore people, Felicia; don't you?"
"No; I don't think that I do. Of course I like the people that I like; but the others seem to
     me dreadfully uninteresting."
"But they are not; they are all frightfully interesting when once you get to know them, and
     see what they really are made of inside. Outsides may seem dull; but insides are always
     engrossing. That's why I always love people when once I've seen them cry, because when they cry
     they are themselves, and not any make-ups."
"How queer to like people because you have seen them cry!"
"Well, I do. I'd do anything for a person that I had seen cry; I would really."
Felicia opened her large hazel eyes still wider. "What a strange idea! It seems to me that
     you think too much about feelings and not enough about principles."
"But thinking about feelings makes you think about principles; feelings are the only things
     that ever make me think about principles at all."
     
After a few minutes' silence Elisabeth asked suddenly:
"What do you mean to do with your life when you leave here and take it up?"
"I don't know. I suppose I shall fall in love and get married. Most girls do. And I hope it
     will be with a clergyman, for I do so love parish work."
"I don't think I want to get married," said Elisabeth slowly, "not even to a clergyman."
"How queer of you! Why not?"
"Because I want to paint pictures and to become a great artist. I feel there is such a lot in
     me that I want to say, and that I must say; and I can only say it by means of pictures. It
     would be dreadful to die before you had delivered the message that you had been sent into the
     world to deliver, don't you think?"
"It would be more dreadful to die before you had found one man to whom you would be
     everything, and who would be everything to you," replied Felicia.
"Oh! I mean to fall in love, because everybody does, and I hate to be behindhand with things;
     but I shall do it just as an experience, to make me paint better pictures. I read in a book the
     other day that you must fall in love before you can become a true artist; so I mean to do so.
     But it won't be as important to me as my art," said Elisabeth, who was as yet young enough to
     be extremely wise.
"Still, it must be lovely to know there is one person in the world to whom you can tell all
     your thoughts, and who will understand them, and be interested in them."
"It must be far lovelier to know that you have the power to tell all your thoughts to the
     whole world, and that the world will understand them and be interested in them," Elisabeth
     persisted.
     
"I don't think so. I should like to fall in love with a man who was so much better than I,
     that I could lean on him and learn from him in everything; and I should like to feel that
     whatever goodness or cleverness there was in me was all owing to him, and that I was nothing by
     myself, but everything with him."
"I shouldn't. I should like to feel that I was so good and clever that I was helping the man
     to be better and cleverer even than he was before."
"I should like all my happiness and all my interest to centre in that one particular man,"
     said Felicia; "and to feel that he was a fairy prince, and that I was a poor beggar-maid, who
     possessed nothing but his love."
"Oh! I shouldn't. I would rather feel that I was a young princess, and that he was a warrior,
     worn-out and wounded in the battle of life; but that my love would comfort and cheer him after
     all the tiresome wars that he'd gone through. And as for whether he'd lost or won in the wars,
     I shouldn't care a rap, as long as I was sure that he couldn't be happy without me."
"You and I never think alike about things," said Felicia sadly.
"You old darling! What does it matter, as long as we agree in being fond of each other?"
At eighteen Elisabeth said farewell to Fox How with many tears, and came back to live at the
     Willows with Miss Farringdon. While she had been at school, Christopher had been first in
     Germany and then in America, learning how to make iron, so that they had never met during
     Elisabeth's holidays; therefore, when he beheld her transformed from a little girl into a
     full-blown young lady, he straightway
      fell in love with her. He was, however, sensible enough not to mention the
     circumstance, even to Elisabeth herself, as he realized, as well as anybody, that the nephew of
     Richard Smallwood would not be considered a fitting mate for a daughter of the house of
     Farringdon; but the fact that he did not mention the circumstance in no way prevented him from
     dwelling upon it in his own mind, and deriving much pleasurable pain and much painful pleasure
     therefrom. In short, he dwelt upon it so exclusively and so persistently that it went near to
     breaking his heart; but that was not until his heart was older, and therefore more capable of
     being broken past mending again.
Miss Farringdon and the people of Sedgehill were alike delighted to have Elisabeth among them
     once more; she was a girl with a strong personality; and people with strong personalities have
     a knack of making themselves missed when they go away.
"It's nice, and so it is, to have Miss Elisabeth back again," remarked Mrs. Bateson to Mrs.
     Hankey; "and it makes it so much cheerfuller for Miss Farringdon, too."
"Maybe it'll only make it the harder for Miss Farringdon when the time comes for Miss
     Elisabeth to be removed by death or by marriage; and which'll be the best for her—poor young
     lady!—the Lord must decide, for I'm sure I couldn't pass an opinion, only having tried one, and
     that nothing to boast of."
"I wonder if Miss Farringdon will leave her her fortune," said Mrs. Bateson, who, in common
     with the rest of her class, was consumed with an absorbing curiosity as to all testamentary
     dispositions.
"She may, and she may not; there's no prophesying about wills. I'm pleased to say I can
     generally
      foretell when folks is going to die, having done a good bit of sick-nursing in my
     time afore I married Hankey; but as to foretelling how they're going to leave their money, I
     can no more do it than the babe unborn; nor nobody can, as ever I heard tell on."
"That's so, Mrs. Hankey. Wills seem to me to have been invented by the devil for the special
     upsetting of the corpse's memory. Why, some of the peaceablest folks as I've ever known—folks
     as wouldn't have scared a lady-cow in their lifetime—have left wills as have sent all their
     relations to the right-about, ready to bite one another's noses off. Bateson often says to me,
     'Kezia,' he says, 'call no man honest till his will's read.' And I'll be bound he's in the
     right. Still, it would be hard to see Miss Elisabeth begging her bread after the way she's been
     brought up, and Miss Farringdon would never have the conscience to let her do it."
"Folks leave their consciences behind with their bodies," said Mrs. Hankey; "and I've lived
     long enough to be surprised at nothing where wills are concerned."
"That is quite true," replied Mrs. Bateson. "Now take Miss Anne, for instance: she seemed so
     set on Miss Elisabeth that you'd have thought she'd have left her a trifle; but not she! All
     she had went to her sister, Miss Maria, who'd got quite enough already. Miss Anne was as sweet
     and gentle a lady as you'd wish to see; but her will was as hard as the nether millstone."
"There's nothing like a death for showing up what a family is made of."
"There isn't. Now Mr. William Farringdon's will was a very cruel one, according to my ideas,
      leaving everything to his niece and nothing to his son. True, Mr. George was but a
     barber's block with no work in him, and I'm the last to defend that; and then he didn't want to
     marry his cousin, Miss Maria, for which I shouldn't blame him so much; if a man can't choose
     his own wife and his own newspaper, what can he choose?—certainly not his own victuals, for he
     isn't fit. But if folks only leave their money to them that have followed their advice in
     everything, most wills would be nothing but a blank sheet of paper."
"And if they were, it wouldn't be a bad thing, Mrs. Bateson; there would be less sorrow on
     some sides, and less crape on others, and far less unpleasantness all round. For my part, I
     doubt if Miss Farringdon will leave her fortune to Miss Elisabeth, and her only a cousin's
     child; for when all is said and done, cousins are but elastic relations, as you may say. The
     well-to-do ones are like sisters and brothers, and the poor ones don't seem to be no connection
     at all."
"Well, let's hope that Miss Elisabeth will marry, and have a husband to work for her when
     Miss Farringdon is dead and gone."
"Husbands are as uncertain as wills, Mrs. Bateson, and more sure to give offence to them that
     trust in them; besides, I doubt if Miss Elisabeth is handsome enough to get a husband. The
     gentry think a powerful lot of looks in choosing a wife."
Mrs. Bateson took up the cudgels on Elisabeth's behalf. "She mayn't be exactly handsome—I
     don't pretend as she is; but she has a wonderful way of dressing herself, and looking for all
     the world like a fashion-plate; and some men have a keen eye for clothes."
     
"I think nothing of fine clothes myself. Saint Peter warns us against braiding of hair and
     putting on of apparel; and when all's said and done it don't go as far as a good complexion,
     and we don't need any apostle to tell us that—we can see it for ourselves."
"And as for cleverness, there ain't her like in all Mershire," continued Mrs. Bateson.
"Bless you! cleverness never yet helped a woman in getting a husband, and never will; though
     if she's got enough of it, it may keep her from ever having one. I don't hold with cleverness
     in a woman myself; it has always ended in mischief, from the time when the woman ate a bit of
     the Tree of Knowledge, and there was such a to-do about it."
"I wish she'd marry Mr. Christopher; he worships the very ground she walks on, and she
     couldn't find a better man if she swept out all the corners of the earth looking for one."
"Well, at any rate, she knows all about him; that is something. I always say that men are the
     same as kittens—you should take 'em straight from their mothers, or else not take 'em at all;
     for, if you don't, you never know what bad habits they may have formed or what queer tricks
     they will be up to."
"Maybe the manager's nephew ain't altogether the sort of husband you'd expect for a
     Farringdon," said Mrs. Bateson thoughtfully; "I don't deny that. But he's wonderful fond of
     her, Mr. Christopher is; and there's nothing like love for smoothing things over when the oven
     ain't properly heated, and the meat is done to a cinder on one side and all raw on the other.
     You find that out when you're married."
"You find a good many things out when you're married, Mrs. Bateson, and one is that this
     world is
      a wilderness of care. But as for love, I don't rightly know much about it, since
     Hankey would always rather have had my sister Sarah than me, and only put up with me when she
     gave him the pass-by, being set on marrying one of the family. I'm sure, for my part, I wish
     Sarah had had him; though I've no call to say so, her always having been a good sister to
     me."
"Well, love's a fine thing; take my word for it. It keeps the men from grumbling when nothing
     else will; except, of course, the grace of God," added Mrs. Bateson piously, "though even that
     don't always seem to have much effect, when things go wrong with their dinners."
"That's because they haven't enough of it; they haven't much grace in their hearts, as a
     rule, haven't men, even the best of them; and the best of them don't often come my way. But as
     for Miss Elisabeth, she isn't a regular Farringdon, as you may say—not the real daughter of the
     works; and so she shouldn't take too much upon herself, expecting dukes and ironmasters and the
     like to come begging to her on their bended knees. She is only Miss Farringdon's adopted
     daughter, at best; and I don't hold with adopted children, I don't; I think it is better and
     more natural to be born of your own parents, like most folk are."
"So do I," agreed Mrs. Bateson; "I'd never have adopted a child myself. I should always have
     been expecting to see its parents' faults coming out in it—so different from the peace you have
     with your own flesh and blood."
Mrs. Hankey groaned. "Your own flesh and blood may take after their father; you never can
     tell."
     
"So they may, Mrs. Hankey—so they may; but, as the Scripture says, it is our duty to whip the
     old man out of them."
"Just so. And that's another thing against adopted children—you'd hesitate about punishing
     them enough; I don't fancy as you'd ever feel the same pleasure in whipping 'em as you do in
     whipping your own. You'd feel you ought to be polite-like, as if they was sort of
     visitors."
"My children always took after my side of the house, I'm thankful to say," said Mrs. Bateson;
     "so I hadn't much trouble with them."
"I wish I could say as much; I do, indeed. But the Lord saw fit to try me by making my son
     Peter the very moral of his father; as like as two peas they are. And when you find one poor
     woman with such a double portion, you are tempted to doubt the workings of Providence."
Mrs. Bateson looked sympathetic. "That's bad for you, Mrs. Hankey!"
"It is so; but I take up my cross and don't complain. You know what a feeble creature Hankey
     is—never doing the right thing; and, when he does, doing it at the wrong time; well, Peter is
     just such another. Only the other day he was travelling by rail, and what must he do but get an
     attack of the toothache? Those helpless sort of folks are always having the toothache, if you
     notice."
"So they are."
"Peter's toothache was so bad that he must needs take a dose of some sleeping-stuff or
     other—I forget the name—and fell so sound asleep that he never woke at the station, but was put
     away with the carriage into a siding. Fast asleep he was, with his handkerchief over his face
     to keep the
      sun off, and never heard the train shunted, nor nothing."
"Well, to be sure! Them sleeping-draughts are wonderful soothing, as I've heard tell, but I
     never took one on 'em. The Lord giveth His beloved sleep, and His givings are enough for them
     as are in health; but them as are in pain want something a bit stronger, doubtless."
"So it appears," agreed Mrs. Hankey. "Well, there lay Peter fast asleep in the siding, with
     his handkerchief over his face. And one of the porters happens to come by, and sees him, and
     jumps to the conclusion that there's been a murder in the train, and that our Peter is the
     corpse. So off he goes to the station-master and tells him as there's a murdered body in one of
     the carriages in the siding; and the station-master's as put out as never was."
Mrs. Bateson's eyes and mouth opened wide in amazement and interest. "What a tale, to be
     sure!"
"And then," added Peter's mother, growing more dramatic as the story proceeded, "the
     station-master sends for the police, and the police sends for the crowner, so as everything
     shall be decent and in order; and they walks in a solemn procession—with two porters carrying a
     shutter—to the carriage where Peter lies, all as grand and nice as if it was a funeral."
"I never heard tell of such a thing in my life—never!"
"Then the station-master opens the door with one of them state keys which always take such a
     long time to open a door which you could open with your own hands in a trice—you know 'em by
     sight."
Mrs. Bateson nodded. Of course she knew them by sight; who does not?
     
"And then the crowner steps forward to take the handkerchief off the face of the body, it
     being the perquisite of a crowner so to do," Mrs. Hankey continued, with the maternal regret of
     a mother whose son has been within an inch of fame, and missed it; "and just picture to
     yourself the vexation of them all, when it was no murdered corpse they found, but only our
     Peter with an attack of the toothache!"
"Well, I never! They must have been put about; as you would have been yourself, Mrs. Hankey,
     if you'd found so little after expecting so much."
"In course I should; it wasn't in flesh and blood not to be, and station-master and crowner
     are but mortal, like the rest of us. I assure you, when I first heard the story, I pitied them
     from the bottom of my heart."
"And what became of Peter in the midst of it all, Mrs. Hankey?"
"Oh! it woke him up with a vengeance; and, of course, it flustered him a good deal, when he
     rightly saw how matters stood, to have to make his excuses to all them grand gentlemen for not
     being a murdered corpse. But as I says to him afterward, he'd no one but himself to blame;
     first for being so troublesome as to have the toothache, and then for being so presumptuous as
     to try and cure it. And his father is just the same; if you take your eye off him for a minute
     he is bound to be in some mischief or another."
"There's no denying that husbands is troublesome, Mrs. Hankey, and sons is worse; but all the
     same I stand up for 'em both, and I wish Miss Elisabeth had got one of the one and half a dozen
     of the
      other. Mark my words, she'll never do better, taking him all round, than Master
     Christopher."
Mrs. Hankey sighed. "I only hope she'll find it out before it is too late, and he is either
     laid in an early grave or else married to a handsomer woman, as the case may be, and both ways
     out of her reach. But I doubt it. She was a dark baby, if you remember, was Miss Elisabeth; and
     I never trust them as has been dark babies, and never shall."
"And how is Peter's toothache now?" inquired Mrs. Bateson, who was a more tender-hearted
     matron than Peter's mother.
"Oh! it's no better; and I know no one more aggravating than folks who keep sayin' they are
     no better when you ask 'em how they are. It always seems so ungrateful. Only this morning I
     asked our Peter how his tooth was, and he says, 'No better, mother; it was so bad in the night
     that I fairly wished I was dead.' 'Don't go wishing that,' says I; 'for if you was dead you'd
     have far worse pain, and it 'ud last for ever and ever.' I really spoke quite sharp to him, I
     was that sick of his grumbling; but it didn't seem to do him no good."
"Speaking sharp seldom does do much good," Mrs. Bateson remarked sapiently, "except to them
     as speaks."
     
</div></body></text></TEI>