
CHAPTER V.
THE DISAGREEABLE MAN.
ROBERT ALLITSEN told Bernardine that she was not likely to be on friendly terms with the
      English people in the Kurhaus.
"They will not care about you, and you will not care about the foreigners. So you will thus
      be thrown on your own resources, just as I was when I came."
"I cannot say that I have any resources," Bernardine answered. "I don't feel well enough to
      try to do any writing, or else it would be delightful to have the uninterrupted leisure."
So she had probably told him a little about her life and occupation; although it was not
      likely that she would have given him any serious confidences. Still, people are often
      surprisingly frank about themselves, even those who pride themselves upon being the most
      reticent mortals in the world.
"But now, having the leisure," she continued, "I have not the brains!"
"I never knew any writer who had," said the Disagreeable Man grimly.
"Perhaps your experience has been limited," she suggested.
"Why don't you read?" he said. "There is a good library here. It contains all the books we
      don't want to read."
"I am tired of reading," Bernardine said. "I seem to have been reading all my life. My
      uncle, with whom I live, keeps, a second-hand book-shop, and ever since I can remember, I have
      been surrounded by books. They have not done me much good, nor any one else either."
"No, probably not," he said. "But now that you have left off reading, you will have a chance
      of learning something, if you live long enough. It is wonderful how much one does learn when
      one does not read. It is almost awful. If you don't care about reading now, why do you not
      occupy yourself with cheese-mites?"
"I do not feel drawn towards cheese-mites."
"Perhaps not, at first; but all the same they form a subject which is very engaging. Or any
      branch of bacteriology."
"Well, if you were to lend me your microscope, perhaps I might begin."
"I could not do that," he answered quickly. "I never lend my things."
"No, I did not suppose you would," she said. "I knew I was safe in making the
      suggestion."
"You are rather quick of perception in spite of all your book reading," he said. "Yes, you
      are quite right. I am selfish. I dislike lending my things, and I dislike spending my money
      except on myself. If you have the misfortune to linger on as I do you will know that it is
      perfectly legitimate to be selfish in small things, if one has made the one great
       sacrifice."
"And what may that be?"
She asked so eagerly that he looked at her, and then saw how worn and tired her face was;
      and the words which he was intending to speak, died on his lips.
"Look at those asses of people on toboggans," he said brusquely. "Could you manage to enjoy
      yourself in that way? That might do you good."
"Yes," she said; "but it would not be any pleasure to me."
She stopped to watch the toboggans flying down the road. And the Disagreeable Man went his
      own solitary way, a forlorn figure, with a face almost expressionless, and a manner wholly
      impenetrable.
He had lived nearly seven years at Petershof, and, like many others was obliged to continue
      staying there if he wished to continue staying in this planet. It was not probable that he had
      any wish to prolong his frail existence, but he did his duty to his mother by conserving his
      life; and this feeble flame of duty and affection was the only lingering bit of warmth in a
      heart frozen almost by ill health and disappointed ambitions. The moralists tell us that
      suffering ennobles, and that a right acceptation of hindrances goes towards forming a
      beautiful character. But this result must largely depend on the original character: certainly,
      in the case of Robert Allitsen, suffering had not ennobled his mind, nor disappointment
      sweetened his disposition. His title of "Disagreeable Man" had been fairly earned, and he
      hugged it to himself with a triumphant secret satisfaction.
There were some people in Petershof who were inclined to believe certain absurd rumours
      about his alleged kindness. It was said that on more than one occasion he had nursed the
      suffering and the dying in sad Petershof, and, with all the sorrowful tenderness worthy of a
      loving mother, had helped them to take their leave of life. But these were only rumours, and
      there was nothing in Robert Allitsen's ordinary bearing to justify such talk. So the foolish
      people who, for the sake of making themselves peculiar, revived these unlikely fictions, were
      speedily ridiculed and reduced to silence. And the Disagreeable Man remained the Disagreeable
      Man, with a clean record for unamiability.
He lived a life apart from others. Most of his time was occupied in photography, or in the
      use and study of the microscope, or in chemistry. His photographs were considered to be most
      beautiful. Not that he showed them specially to any one; but he generally sent a specimen of
      his work to the Monthly Photograph Portfolio, and hence it was that people learned to know of
      his skill. He might be seen any fine day trudging along in company with his photographic
      apparatus, and a desolate dog, who looked almost as cheerless as his chosen comrade. Neither
      the one took any notice of the other; Allitsen was no more genial to the dog than he was to
      the Kurhaus guests; the dog was no more demonstrative to Robert Allitsen than he was to any
      one in Petershof.
Still, they were "something" to each other, that unexplainable "something" which has to
      explain almost every kind of attachment.
He had no friends in Petershof, and apparently had no friends anywhere. No one wrote to him,
      except his old mother; the papers which were sent to him came from a stationer's.
He read all during meal-time. But now and again he spoke a few words with Bernardine Holme,
      whose place was next to him. It never occurred to him to say good morning, nor to give a
      greeting of any kind, nor to show a courtesy. One day during lunch, however, he did take the
      trouble to stoop and pick up Bernardine Holme's shawl, which had fallen for the third time to
      the ground.
"I never saw a female wear a shawl more carelessly than you," he said. "You don't seem to
      know anything about it."
His manner was always gruff. Every one complained of him. Every one always had complained of
      him. He had never been heard to laugh. Once or twice he had been seen to smile on occasions
      when people talked confidently of recovering their health. It was a beautiful smile worthy of
      a better cause. It was a smile which made one pause to wonder what could have been the
      original disposition of the Disagreeable Man before ill-health had cut him off from the
      affairs of active life. Was he happy or unhappy? It was not known. He gave no sign of either
      the one state or the other. He always looked very ill, but he did not seem to get worse. He
      had never been known to make the faintest allusion to his own health. He never "smoked" his
      thermometer in public; and this was the more remarkable in an hotel where people would even
      leave off a conversation and say: "Excuse me, Sir or Madam, I must now take my temperature. We
      will resume the topic in a few minutes."
He never lent any papers or books, and he never borrowed any.
He had a room at the top of the hotel, and he lived his life, amongst his chemistry bottles,
      his scientific books, his microscope, and his camera. He never sat in any of the hotel
      drawing-rooms. There was nothing striking nor eccentric about his appearance. He was neither
      ugly nor good-looking, neither tall nor short, neither fair nor dark. He was thin and frail,
      and rather bent. But that might be the description of any one in Petershof. There was nothing
      pathetic about him, no suggestion even of poetry, which gives a reverence to suffering,
      whether mental or physical. As there was no expression on his face, so also there was no
      expression in his eyes: no distant longing, no far-off fixedness; nothing, indeed, to awaken
      sad sympathy.
The only positive thing about him was his rudeness. Was it natural or cultivated? No one in
      Petershof could say. He had always been as he was; and there was no reason to suppose that he
      would ever be different.
He was, in fact, like the glacier of which he had such a fine view from his room; like the
      glacier, an unchanging feature of the neighbourhood.
No one loved it better than the Disagreeable Man did; he watched the sunlight on it, now
      pale golden, now fiery red. He loved the sky, the dull grey, or the bright blue. He loved the
      snow forests, and the snow-girt streams, and the ice cathedrals, and the great firs patient
      beneath their snow-burden. He loved the frozen waterfalls, and the costly diamonds in the
      snow. He knew, too, where the flowers nestled in their white nursery. He was, indeed, an
      authority on Alpine botany. The same tender hands which plucked the flowers in the
      spring-time, dissected them and laid them bare beneath the microscope. But he did not love
      them the less for that.
Were these pursuits a comfort to him? Did they help him to forget that there was a time when
      he, too, was burning with ambition to distinguish himself, and be one of the marked men of the
      age?
Who could say?
