<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Good Comrade, by Una L.
      Silberrad</title><author>Silberrad, Una Lucy (1872-1955). </author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="20">
CHAPTER XIX
CAPTAIN POLKINGTON
Captain Polkington was watching a pan of jam. It was the middle of the day and warm; too warm
     to be at work out of doors, as Johnny was, at least so the Captain thought. He also thought it
     too warm to watch jam in the back kitchen and that occupation, though it was the cooler of the
     two, had the further disadvantage of being beneath his dignity. The dignity was suffering a
     good deal; was it right, he asked himself, that he, the man of the house, should have the
     menial task of watching jam while Julia talked business with some one in the parlour? He did
     not know what business this person had come on; he had seen him arrive a few minutes back, had
     even heard his name—Mr. Alexander Cross—but that was all he knew about him; Julia had taken him
     into the parlour and shut the door. Naturally her father felt it and was annoyed.
There was a door leading into the parlour from the front kitchen. It was fast closed but the
     Captain, leaving the jam to attend to itself, went and looked at it. While he was standing
     there he heard three words spoken on the other side by the visitor; they were—"your new
     daffodil."
So that was the business this man had come on! He was trying to buy Julia's ugly streaked
     flower. The Captain's weak mouth set straight; he felt very strongly about
      the daffodil and his daughter's refusal to sell it. He knew she might have done
     so; she had had a good many letters about it since it was exhibited in London. She said little
     about the offers they contained, but he knew she refused them all; he had taxed her with it and
     argued the question to no purpose. Now, to-day, it seemed there was a man so anxious to buy the
     thing that he had actually come to see her; and she, of course, would refuse again. The Captain
     sat down in the easy-chair; he was overcome by the thought of Julia's contrary stupidity.
The chair was near the door, but he would have scouted the idea that he was listening; he was
     a man of honour, and why should he wish to hear Julia refuse good money? Also it was impossible
     to hear all that was said unless the speakers were close to the door. Apparently they must have
     been near for no sooner had he sat down than he heard the man say, "Haven't I had the pleasure
     of seeing you somewhere before, Miss Snooks? Your face seems familiar though I can't exactly
     locate it."
"We met at Marbridge," Julia answered; "at a dance, a year and a half ago."
"At Marbridge? Oh, of course! Funny I shouldn't have remembered when I heard your name the
     other day!"
Captain Polkington did not think it at all funny; he did not know who Mr. Cross might be,
     nobody important he judged by his voice and manner—hostesses at Marbridge often had to import
     extra nondescript men for their dances. But whoever he was, if he had been there once he might
     go there again and carry with him the tale of Julia's doings and home and other things
     detrimental to the Polkington pride. The Captain listened to hear one of the two in the other
     room refer to the change of name which had prevented an earlier recognition. But
      neither did; she saw no reason for it, and he had forgotten her original name if
     he ever knew it.
"I remember all about you now," he was saying; "you danced with me several times and asked me
     about the Van Heigens' blue daffodil"—he paused as if a new idea had occurred to him. "You were
     not in the line then, I suppose?" he asked.
"No, I knew nothing about flower growing or selling," she answered. "What you told me of the
     value of the blue daffodil was a revelation to me."
He laughed a little. "But one you'll try to profit by," he said.
The Captain moved in his chair. He could have groaned aloud at the words, which represented
     precisely what Julia would not do. Unfortunately his movement had much the same effect as his
     groan would have done, some one on the other side of the door moved too, and in the opposite
     direction. It must have been Julia, her father was sure of it; it was like her to do it; she
     must have gone almost to the window; he could not make out what was said. The man was no doubt
     trying to buy the bulb; a stray word here and there indicated that, but it was impossible to
     hear what offer was made. It was equally impossible to hear what Julia said; her father only
     caught the inflection of her voice, but he was sure she was refusing.
In disgust and anger he rose and, having pulled the jam to the side of the fire, went into
     the garden. There he took the hoe and started irritably to work on a bed near the front door;
     it was some relief to his feelings to scratch the ground since he could not scratch anything
     else.
In a little while Cross came out. "Well, if you won't, you won't," he was saying as Julia
     opened the door. "I
      think you are making a mistake; in fact, if you weren't a lady I should say you
     were acting rather like a fool; but, of course, you must please yourself. If you think better
     of it you can always write to me. Just name the price, a reasonable price, that's all you need
     do. We understand one another, and we can do business without any fuss—you have my
     address?"
He gave her a card as he spoke, although she assured him she should not want it; then he took
     his leave.
She watched him go, tearing up the card when he had set off down the road. Captain Polkington
     watched her.
"What did he want?" he asked, remembering that he was not supposed to know.
"The bulb," she answered.
"And you would not sell it?"
"No."
She had come from the doorstep now to pull up some weeds he had overlooked.
"I can't understand you, Julia," he said resting on his hoe, and speaking as much in sorrow
     as in anger. "You seem to have so little sense of honour—women so seldom have—but I should have
     thought that you would have had a lesson on the necessity, the obligation of paying debts. When
     you come to think of the efforts we are making to pay those debts, how I am straining every
     nerve, giving almost the whole of my income, doing without everything but the barest
     necessaries, without some things that are necessaries in my state of health, what your mother
     is doing, how she has given up her home, her husband, to live almost on charity in her
     son-in-law's house. When you think of all that, I say, and of what your sisters have done, it
     does seem strange that you should grudge this bulb, simply and solely because it was given you
     by some people for whom you care nothing."
     
Julia agreed; she never saw the purpose of contradicting when conviction was out of the
     question. "It does seem strange," she said; "but there is one comfort, the worst of the debts
     will be cleared off by the end of the year. Uncle William knows that and has arranged for it in
     his own mind; I really think it would be almost a pity to disturb the business plans of any one
     so exact."
"Are we," the Captain returned scornfully, "to pinch and save to the end of the year? Am I to
     do without the few comforts that might make life tolerable? Am I to work like a farm labourer
     and live like one till then, because you choose to keep this bulb?"
Julia thought it was very probable things would go on as they were for some time, but she did
     not say so; she only said, "I am sorry you find it so trying."
"Trying!" her father said, and stopped, as if he found the word and most others very
     inadequate. "After all, it does not much matter," he remarked in a tone of gloomy resignation.
     "I shan't be here, in any one's way, much longer; there is not the least chance that I shall
     live till the end of the year, and when I am gone you can do what you please, what you must,
     with your bulb. I own I should like to see you a little more comfortable and better off now. I
     hate to have you doing servant's work and going shabby as you have to. I should like you to be
     decently dressed, taking your proper place in society, but if you think it right to go on as
     you are and to keep your bulb, of course I have nothing to say."
It was as well he had nothing, for Julia remembered the jam and went indoors, so he would
     have had no one to say it to. She went into the back kitchen, thinking, but not of the jam.
     Once again the temptation to sell the daffodil beset her; not to Cross, he was the last man to
     whom she would have sold it, but to some collector who
      would care for it as the Van Heigens would. She could easily find such a one with
     or without assistance from Cross; little harm would be done to the Van Heigens by it; indeed
     Joost had expected her to do no less, and if she did it she could pay—not the debts her father
     had mentioned—but the one he had not. She had thought this all out before, seen the arguments
     on both sides, and arrived at her conclusion; but there are some things that are not content
     with this treatment once, nor even twice, but demand it a good many more times than that. So
     she thought it out again and came again to the old conclusion. Joost had given her the bulb
     because he loved her; he had made no conditions because he believed in her; he had even
     professed himself content that she should sell it because, in his humbleness and generosity, he
     wanted only that she should get what ease she could. He was content to make what was to him a
     great sacrifice for no other reason than that she should have a little more money on mere
     caprice, the very nature of which he did not know. And so she could not do it, that was the end
     of the whole matter. She could not take the gift of the man who loved her to pay a debt to the
     man she loved.
She went to fetch jam pots, without calling herself to order for the last admission. It was
     the one luxury she had at that time; daily and nightly she could admit to herself that she
     loved him and he loved her. Not exactly passionately—they were not passionate people, she told
     herself—but in an odd companionable equal sort of way which was the best in the world. Nothing
     would ever come of it, even in the remote future when her father was dead and the debt paid. By
     that time both of them would have grown old and set in their far separate ways, and even if he
     ever heard that she was free he would
      have become wiser and changed his mind. So there was no end to this thing, no
     awakening and disillusioning, none of the disappointment and dreariness which is likely to
     attend the translating of a dream into work-a-day life. For that reason it should have been
     possible to be content, even with the thing which stood between her and realisation—sometimes
     it almost was, at least she persuaded herself so. At others there were things harder to
     control; brief moments when crushing down all opposition and obliterating other thoughts, came
     the memory of how she had crouched behind the chopping-block, how hidden her tears in his coat.
     There was no reason or common-sense in that, no friendship or good-fellowship in the clasp of
     his arms; it was the natural man and the natural woman, and absence could not change it, nor
     time take it away; it had been, it might be again, it obeyed no law and answered to no argument
     in the world. It was something which made her ashamed and afraid and yet glad with a rare
     incommunical gladness that was pointed with pain.
Just then the jam boiled over, and she had to leave her pots to run and save it.
It is a great thing to have your mind under fair control; the Polkington training, wherein
     the advisable and advantageous were compelled to rank high even in matter of emotion, is not
     without use in bringing this about. But it is also a great thing, almost, perhaps, a more
     important one for some people, to have plenty to do even if it is only making jam.
While Julia made her jam Captain Polkington hoed; at least he did for a little while, then he
     gradually ceased and stood leaning upon his hoe, lost in unhappy thought. At last he moved,
     and, gathering the withering weeds that lay beside the path, carried them to an old basket
      which he had left beside the garden wall. With the weeds he picked up the torn
     fragments of card which Julia had dropped beside the doorstep; he let them fall into the basket
     with the other rubbish, but when he saw them gleaming white among the green they arrested his
     attention. For a moment he looked at them, then he carefully picked them out; he had some
     thought of appealing to Julia once more, or telling her that he had saved the man's address for
     her and she had one last chance. He sat down on the wall; would it be any good to appeal? he
     asked himself despondently. Would anything be any good? Was not everything a failure? No one
     regarded him; Cross, the man whose card he held, had not even glanced in his direction when he
     went down the path. A miserable bargain-driving tradesman had passed him and paid no more
     attention to him than if he had been a gardener! Gillat, his own friend, did not regard him,
     thought nothing of his comforts; he was all for Julia; thought of nothing and no one else. As
     for Julia herself, she had not the slightest regard for him, no consideration, not even filial
     respect and obedience.
He looked gloomily before him for a little, then his eye fell on the white fragments he held,
     the address of the man who was anxious to buy the daffodil which Julia in her obstinate folly
     and selfish unreasonableness, would not sell. If it only were sold! He thought over all the
     good things that could then be done; they were the same as those excellent reasons that he had
     himself given a little while back. Some people might have said they were rather diverse and not
     all mutually inclusive, but no such idea troubled him; he was sure all could easily have been
     done if the daffodil were sold. He felt that he could have done it all quite well, he did not
     stop to think how—if he had had the handling of the money he could have been a
      benefactor to his whole family, especially Julia. It was hard that he should be
     prevented, bitterly hard; it had so often happened in his life that he had been prevented from
     doing what was good and useful by want of means and opportunity or the stupid obstinacy of
     other people. He grew more and more depressed as he sat on the wall thinking of these things
     and wondering if there were many men so useless, so unfortunate and misunderstood as he.
This depression lasted all that day and on into the next; indeed, for some time longer. It
     lifted a little once in the course of a week, but not much, and soon settled down again, making
     the Captain very miserable, disinclined for work, and decidedly bad company. Johnny thought he
     was not well, but Julia fancied his trouble had something to do with annoyance and the
     daffodil. He did not confide in either of them, maintaining a proud and gloomy silence and
     nursing his grievance so that it grew. For days he cherished his sense of injury and wrong,
     until it became large and took a good hold upon him. Then, all at once, for no reason that one
     can give, a change came, and his mind, as if smitten by a gust of wind, began to veer about, to
     stir and lighten. Why, he suddenly asked himself, was it that Julia would not sell the bulb?
     Because—the answer was so absurdly simple he wondered it had not occurred to him before—because
     it was the Van Heigens' present, and one cannot sell presents. He perfectly understood the
     scruple, honoured it even; but he also saw quite plainly that, though it prevented her from
     selling the daffodil, it did not stand in the way of its being sold. She could not, of course,
     authorise the sale, any more than she could conduct it; but that was no reason why she should
     not be very pleased to have it sold. Indeed, not only was this a probability,
      practically a certainty, but more than likely she had had some such idea in her
     mind when she spoke of the matter to her father—in all likelihood she was wondering now why he
     had not taken the hint.
Thus Captain Polkington reasoned, seeing light at last in the dimness of the depression which
     had possessed him. Quite how much he really believed, or even if he were capable of real
     reasonable belief at this stage of his career, it is not easy to say. It is possible he may
     have thought he was right for the time being; his conscience was capable of remarkable
     gymnastic feats at times. It is also possible that he, like some others of the human race, was
     not really able to think at all. Anyhow the depression that weighed upon him lifted, and he
     remembered with satisfaction that he had kept the torn fragments of Cross' card.
In the early part of the summer the hyacinths, tulips, and finer narcissus had been taken out
     of the ground and put to dry. Julia hoped by this means to get more and better flowers from
     them next year than is the case when they are left in the earth. They took some time to dry and
     were not really ready till the summer was far advanced; but that did not matter to her, however
     it may have inconvenienced her father; she was too busy to attend to them earlier. By the
     middle of August they were ready, and she set to cleaning them in her spare time with Johnny to
     help her. He was proud and pleased to do so, and did not in the least mind the extreme
     irritation of the skin which befalls those who rub off the old loose husks. A place was
     prepared for the bulbs in one of the sheds, the wide shelf cleared and partitions made in it by
     Mr. Gillat, who also spent some time in writing labels for each of the divisions. Julia told
     him this was unnecessary as she knew by the shape which were hya
     cinths and which tulips; still he did it. Captain Polkington did not offer any
     assistance; he merely looked on with indifferent interest; the matter did not seem to concern
     him.
But one day, towards the end of the month, but before the bulbs were all done, Julia went
     into the town.
Captain Polkington saw her start; then he wandered to the shed where Johnny was at work. For
     a little he stood watching, then he walked leisurely round the place looking at this and
     that.
"You will never be able to tell which is which of these things," he remarked at last.
Johnny looked at his somewhat conspicuous labels. "I've named them, don't you see
     'Tulips?'"
"But you don't say what sort of tulips, which are red and which yellow. Nor what sort of
     narcissus, which are daffodils and which the bunchy things."
"No," Mr. Gillat admitted; "no, they got mixed in the digging up; I forgot, and put them all
     in the barrow together; that's how it happened."
"What? The whole lot?" the Captain inquired. "The streaked daffodil and all? What did Julia
     say?"
"She said it did not matter," Johnny told him; "they'll be all the more surprise to us when
     they come up next year."
"She didn't mind, not even about the streaked daffodil?"
"Oh, that was not there," Mr. Gillat said, serenely unconscious that the fate of that bulb
     was the only interest. "We have got that by itself."
He showed a little piece of shelf penned off from the rest and carefully covered with wire
     netting for fear of rats. Three different shaped bulbs were there in a row.
"That's it," Johnny said, pointing to one of the three.
      "And that end one is the red tulip with the black middle; it is supposed to be
     very good; and that other is the double blue hyacinth from down by the gate; we are going to
     try it in a pot in the house next year and have it bloom early."
Captain Polkington nodded, but did not show much interest. "Did you put these here, or did
     she?" he asked.
"She did," Johnny answered. "She cleans them much better than I do, and we knew they were
     choice ones, the best one of each kind, so she cleaned them; but I made the wire cover."
The Captain did not praise the ingenuity of this contrivance, which he did not admire at all,
     and soon afterwards he sauntered back to the house. He was dozing in the easy-chair in the
     front kitchen when Johnny came in to change his coat before setting out to meet Julia. He did
     not seem to have moved much when Mr. Gillat came down-stairs ready to start.
"What?" he roused himself to say when Johnny announced his destination. "Oh, all right, you
     need not have waked me to tell me that, it really is of no importance to me if you like to walk
     in the blazing sun." He settled himself afresh in the chair, muttering something about the
     heat, and Johnny went out, quietly closing the door after him.
It was an hour later when Julia and the faithful Johnny came back, the latter decidedly hot
     although he was carrying one of the lightest of the parcels. Captain Polkington was still in
     his chair; he woke up as they entered.
"Why," he said, "I must have dropped asleep!" He rose and went to take Julia's parcels. "Let
     me put these away for you," he said solicitiously; "it is a great deal too hot for you to be
     walking in the sun and carrying all these things."
     
"Thank you," Julia answered; "that's all right. Perhaps you would not mind getting the tea,
     though; if you would do that I should be glad."
He did mind, but he set about it, and it was perhaps well for him that he did, as otherwise
     he might have paid a suspicious number of fidgety attentions to Julia. As it was, doing the
     menial work which he always considered beneath his dignity, while Johnny sat still and rested,
     restored him to his usual manner.
But the Captain, though he was safely past the initial difficulty, did not find the working
     out of his scheme altogether easy. He had the bulb, it is true, and he was safe from detection
     for there was still under the wire cover a smooth yellow-brown narcissus root very like the
     first one; but he had got to get rid of it. It was not very easy to get a letter to the post
     here without remark from Mr. Gillat. That, in the circumstances, would be undesirable for it
     was likely to arouse Julia's suspicions, and if they were roused she might think it her duty to
     interfere—even though, of course, she did wish the bulb sold. Her father recognised that and,
     determining not to give her the opportunity, got his letter written betimes and waited for a
     chance to give it to the postman unobserved. In writing he had been faced by one very great
     difficulty, he had not the least idea how much to ask. Cross had said "name a reasonable
     price," and he must name one, or else it would appear that he were writing on his own behalf
     not Julia's; but he did not know what was reasonable and he had no chance of finding out. A new
     orchid, he had vaguely heard, was sometimes worth a hundred pounds; but it was impossible any
     one should pay so much for a daffodil, an ordinary garden flower. Julia, whatever her motive,
     would not have refused to sell it if it would have fetched so much; he could not con
     ceive of a Polkington, especially a poor one, turning her back on a hundred
     pounds. For hours he thought about this and at last decided to ask twenty pounds. It seemed
     more to him now than it would have done a year ago, by reason of the small sums he had handled
     lately; but it was a good deal less than his golden dreams had painted the bulb to be worth in
     the time when it seemed unattainable, and he was paying debts and providing for Julia out of
     the proceeds of the imaginary sale. Still, he finally decided to ask it and wrote to that
     effect, and after some waiting for the opportunity got the letter posted.
After that there followed an unpleasant time or suspense, made the more unpleasant by the
     fact that he had to look out for the postman as he did not want the return letter to fall into
     Julia's hands. At last, after a longer time than he expected, the reply came safely to hand.
     This was it—

"Sir,
"I am obliged to decline your offer of the streaked daffodil bulb, the price you name being
      absurd. To tell the plain truth, I would rather not do business with you in the matter; I
      prefer to deal with principals, else in these cases there is little guarantee of good
      faith.

"Yours faithfully,
"Alexander Cross."

"P. S.—If you should fail to dispose of your bulb elsewhere and it would be a convenience to
      you, I will give you a five pound note for it, that is, if you can guarantee it genuine. It is
      not, under the circumstances, worth more to me.

"A. C."
So the Captain read and then re-read; anger, mortification and disappointment preventing him
     from grasping
      the full meaning at first. Five pounds, only five pounds! No wonder Julia would
     not sell her bulb; no wonder she preferred to keep a present that would only fetch five pounds!
     What was such a trifle? The Captain glared at the letter as he asked himself the question
     proudly. His pride was badly wounded. Cross had not set him right in his mistaken idea of the
     daffodil's value too politely; at least he thought not. Why should he, this tradesman, say he
     preferred to deal with principals? Did he imagine that a gentleman would attempt to sell him a
     spurious bulb? The Captain's honour was not of that sort and he felt outraged. He felt
     outraged, too, almost insulted, at being told that the price was absurd. The absurd thing was
     that he should be expected to know anything about trade or trade prices. "The man can have no
     idea of my position," he thought.
But there he was not quite correct; it was precisely because he had a suspicion of the
     position that Cross had written thus. No one with any right to it would offer the true bulb for
     twenty pounds; either, so he argued, it was stolen or not genuine; which, he did not know, the
     odds were about even. After making a few inquiries at Marbridge into Captain Polkington's
     history he came to the conclusion that the chance in favour of the true bulb was worth five
     pounds to him. Accordingly he offered it, indifferent as to the result, but rather anticipating
     its acceptance.
It was accepted. The Captain was mortified and disappointed, but five pounds is five pounds.
     It even seems a good deal more when your income is very small and the part of it which you
     handle yourself so much smaller as to amount to nothing worth mentioning. It was September now,
     and already the mornings and evenings were cold, foretaste of the winter which was coming, which
      would hold the exposed land in its grip for months. Five pounds would buy things
     which would make the winter more tolerable; small comforts and luxuries meant a great deal to
     real poverty in cold weather and feeble health. Of course to Johnny and Julia too; they were
     all going to benefit. Captain Polkington packed the bulb in a small box and posted it when he
     went to Halgrave to have his hair cut.
By return he received a five pound note—a convenient handy form of money, easy to send, easy
     to change. Halgrave might not perhaps be able to give change for it without inconvenience, but
     Julia could get it changed next time she went into town. That would not be just yet, but a note
     will keep; it would perhaps be better to keep it for the present. The Captain folded it in his
     pocket-book and kept it.


</div></body></text></TEI>