<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Good Comrade, by Una L.
      Silberrad</title><author>Silberrad, Una Lucy (1872-1955). </author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER II
THE DEBT
Violet's engagement was an accepted fact. Mr. Frazer came to see the Captain, who received
     him in the dining-room—the combined ingenuity of the family could not make the down-stairs room
     presentable. The interview was short, but satisfactory; so also was the one with Mrs.
     Polkington which followed; with Violet it was longer, but, no doubt, equally satisfactory.
     Lunch, too, was all that could be desired. Mrs. Polkington's manners were always gracious, and
     to-day she had a charming air of taking Richard into the family—after having shut all the
     doors, actual and metaphorical, which led to anything real and personal. The Captain was rather
     twittery at lunch, at times inclined to talk too much, at times heavily silent and always
     obviously submissive to his wife. Yesterday's excitement was not enough to account for this in
     Julia's opinion. "He has been doing something," she decided, and wondered what.
Mrs. Polkington and her daughters all went out that afternoon; Julia, however, returned at
     about dusk. As the others had no intention of coming back so soon, there was no drawing-room
     tea; a much simpler meal was spread in the dining-room. Julia and her father had only just sat
     down to it when they heard Johnny Gillat's knock at the front door, followed a minute
     afterwards by Mr. Gillat himself; but when he saw that the Captain was
      not alone, he stopped on the threshold; Julia's presence, contrary to custom,
     seemed to discompose him. He, then, was in her father's secret, whatever it might be; she
     guessed as much when she saw his perturbed pink face. However, she did not say anything, only
     invited Mr. Gillat to have some tea.
Johnny sat down, and put a small and rather badly tied parcel beside him; next minute he
     picked it up again, and began surreptitiously to put it into first one pocket and then another.
     It was rather a tight fit, and in his efforts to do it unobtrusively, he made some disturbance,
     but no one remarked on it; Captain Polkington because he was too despondent, Julia because it
     did not seem worth while. Conversation languished; Julia did what she could, but her father
     answered in monosyllables, and Mr. Gillat said, "Very true," or "Ah, yes, yes," eating slice
     after slice of thick bread and butter, and filling his mouth very full as if to cork it up and
     so prevent his having to answer awkward questions.
At last Captain Polkington rose; "Gillat," he said, "if you have finished, we may as well go
     down-stairs."
Johnny set down his half-finished cup of tea with alacrity, and with alacrity followed the
     Captain. But Julia followed too; Johnny turned uneasily as he heard her step behind him on the
     dark stairs; doubtless, so he told himself, she was going to the kitchen. She was not, however;
     on the contrary, she showed every sign of accompanying them to the little room behind.
"Do you want anything, Julia?" her father asked, turning about in the doorway; "I'm busy
     to-night—I wish you would go away."
The sentence began with dignity, but ended with querulousness. But Julia was not affected;
     she came into the
     room. "I want to talk to you," she said, closing the door. "You had much better
     tell me about it, you will be found out, you know; mother would have guessed there was
     something wrong to-day if she had not been so busy with Mr. Frazer."
"Found out in what?" the Captain demanded; "I should like to know of what you accuse me—you,
     my own daughter—this is much, indeed."
He paced the hearthrug with outraged dignity, but Julia only drew one of the horse-hair
     chairs to the table. "You would do better to tell me," she said; "I might be able to help
     you—Johnny, won't you sit down?"
Johnny took the cane deck-chair, sitting down nervously and so near the edge that the old
     chair creaked ominously. Captain Polkington paced the rug once or twice more, then he sat down
     opposite, giving up all pretence of dignity.
"It is money, of course," Julia went on; "I suppose you lost at the races yesterday—how
     much?"
The Captain did not answer, he seemed overwhelmed by his troubles. "How much?" Julia
     repeated, turning to Mr. Gillat.
"It was rather much," that gentleman answered apologetically.
Julia looked puzzled. "How could he have much to lose?" she asked. "You couldn't, you know,"
     bending her brows as she looked at her father—"unless you borrowed—did you borrow?"
"Yes, yes," he said, rather eagerly; "I borrowed—that was it; of course I was going to pay
     back—I am going to pay back."
"From whom did you borrow?" Another pause, and the question again, then the Captain explained
     confusedly: "The cheque—it came a day early—I merely meant to make use of it for the day—"
     
"The cheque!" Julia repeated, with dawning comprehension. "The cheque from Slade & Slade
     that mother was speaking of this morning. Our cheque, the money we have to live on for the next
     three months?"
"My cheque," her father said, with one last effort at dignity; "made out to me—my income that
     I have a perfect right to spend as I like; I used my own money for my own purposes."
He forgot that a moment back he had excused the act as a borrowing; Julia did not remind him,
     she was too much concerned with the facts to trouble about mere turns of speech. They, like
     words and motives, had not heretofore entered much into her considerations; consequences were
     what was really important to her—how the bad might be averted, how the good drawn that way, and
     all used to the best advantage. This point of view, though it leaves a great deal to be
     desired, has one advantage—those who take it waste no time in lamentation or reproof. For that
     reason they are perhaps some of the least unpleasant people to confess to.
Julia wasted no words now; she sat for a brief minute, stunned by the magnitude of the
     calamity which had deprived them of the largest part of their income for the next three months;
     then she began to look round in her mind to see what might be done. Captain Polkington offered
     a few not very coherent explanations and excuses, to which she did not listen, and then
     relapsed into silence. Johnny sat opposite, rubbing his hands in nervous sympathy, and looking
     from father to daughter; he took the silence of the one to be as hopeless as that of the
     other.
"We thought," he ventured at last, tugging at the parcel now firmly wedged in his pocket. "We
     hoped, that is, we thought perhaps we might raise a trifle, it wouldn't be much help—"
     
But neither of the others were listening to him, and Captain Polkington interrupted with his
     own remedy, "We shall have to manage on credit," he said; "we can get credit for this three
     months."
"We can't," Julia assured him; "the greater part of that money was to have paid outstanding
     bills; we can't live on credit, because we haven't got any to live on."
"That's nonsense," her father said; "it can be done with care and economy, and
     retrenchments."
Julia did not answer, so Johnny took up the words. "Yes, yes," he said, "one can always
     retrench; it is really marvellous how little one can do with, in fact one is better for it; I
     feel a different man for having to retrench. Your mother's a wonderful woman"—he stopped, then
     added doubtfully as he thought of the lost apple tart—"I suppose, though, she would want to
     make a good appearance just now, with the engagement, Mr. Frazer in and out. It is very
     unfortunate, very."
By this time he had untied his parcel, and flattening the paper on his knees began to put the
     contents on the table. There were some field-glasses, a breast pin, and a few other such
     things; when he had put them all out he felt in his waistcoat-pocket for his watch.
"They would fetch a trifle," he said, regarding the row a little proudly.
"Those?" Julia asked, puzzled.
"Yes," Mr. Gillat said; "not a great deal, of course, but it would be a help—it might pay the
     butcher's bill. It's a great thing to have the butcher's bill paid; I've heard my landlady say
     so; it gives a standing with the other tradespeople, and that's what you want—she often says
     so."
"You mean you think of selling them for us?" Julia asked, fixing her keen eyes on Johnny, so
     that he felt
      very guilty, and as if he ought to excuse himself. But before he could do it she
     had swept his belongings together. "You won't do anything of the kind," she said.
"Why not?"
"Because we won't have it. Pack them up."
"Oh, but," Johnny protested, "it would be a little help, it would indeed; they would fetch
     something, the glasses are good ones, though a bit old-fashioned, and the watch—"
"I don't care, I won't have it," and Julia took the matter into her own hands, and began with
     a flushed face to re-pack the things herself.
"Is it that you think I can't spare them?" Gillat asked, still bewildered. "I can—what an
     idea," he laughed. "What do I want with field-glasses, now? And as to a watch, my time's
     nothing to me!"
"No, I dare say not," Julia said, but she tied the parcel firmly, then she gave it to him.
     "Take it away," she said, "and don't try to sell a thing."
She opened the door as she spoke, and he, accepting it as a hint of dismissal, meekly
     followed her from the room. When they had reached the hall above he ventured on a last protest.
     "Why may I not sell anything?" he asked.
"Because we have not quite come to that," she said, with a ring of bitterness in her voice:
     "We have come pretty low, I know, with our dodges and our shifts, but we haven't quite come to
     depriving you. Johnny"—and she stretched out a hand to him, a thing which was rare, for no one
     thought it necessary to shake hands with Mr. Gillat—"it's very good of you to offer; I'm
     grateful to you; I'm awfully glad you did it; you made me ashamed."
Johnny looked at her perplexed; the note of bitterness
      in her voice had deepened to something more he was altogether at a loss to
     understand. But she gave him no opportunity for inquiry, for she opened the street door.
"Good-bye," she said, her usual self again, "and don't you let me catch you selling those
     things."
"Oh, I say! But how will you manage?" he protested.
"Somehow; I have got several ideas already; I'm better at this sort of game than you are, you
     know."
And she shut the door upon him; then she went back to Captain Polkington.
"Father," he said, "would you mind telling me if you have borrowed any other money? It would
     be much simpler if we knew just how we stood."
The Captain seemed to have a painfully clear idea of how he stood. "Your mother," he
     remarked, with apparent irrelevance, "is such an unreasonable woman; if she were like you—if
     she saw things sensibly. But she won't, she'll make a fuss; she will entirely overlook the fact
     that it is my own money that I have lost."
"I am afraid she will," Julia agreed. "Will you tell me if you lost any one else's money as
     well?"
"Oh, a trifle," the Captain said; "nothing to speak of yesterday; I have borrowed a little
     now and again, at cards and so on; a trifling accommodation."
"From whom?"
"Rawson-Clew."
Julia nodded; this was bad, but it might have been worse. Mr. Rawson-Clew was not a personal
     friend of the Polkingtons, and he was not a man in an inferior position who might presume upon
     his loan to the Captain to establish a friendly footing. On the contrary, he was in a superior
     position, so much so that for a moment Julia was at a loss to understand how he came to
     accommodate
     her father. Then she recalled his face—he had been pointed out to her—he looked a
     good-natured fool; probably he had met the Captain somewhere and been sorry for him, or perhaps
     he did not like to say "no." In any case he had lent the money and, so Julia fancied, would
     have to wait a very long time before he saw it again. She dismissed the young man from her mind
     and fell to working out plans to meet the more pressing difficulties.
The relations would have to help; not with money; they would not do that to a useful extent,
     but with invitations. Chèrie was easily provided for; Aunt Louise had before offered to take
     her abroad for the winter; Chèrie did not in the least want to go; it was likely to be nothing
     nicer than acting as unpaid companion to a fidgety old lady; but under the present
     circumstances she would have to go. For Violet it was not quite so easy; it would look rather
     odd for her to go visiting among obliging relatives, seeing that she was only just engaged—how
     things looked was a point the Polkingtons always considered. But it would have to be managed;
     Julia fancied something might be arranged at Bath, a place which was a cheap fare from
     Marbridge. Mrs. Polkington would probably go somewhere for part of the time, then there could
     be some real retrenchments not otherwise possible. Mary might be dismissed; Mr. Gillat even
     might come to board with them for a little; the outside world need not know he was a guest that
     paid.
Julia was not satisfied with these plans; they would barely meet the difficulty she knew,
     even with credit stretched to the uttermost and the household crippled for some time; but she
     could think of nothing better, and determined to suggest them to Mrs. Polkington. With these
     thoughts in her mind, she went up-stairs; as she passed the drawing-room, she noticed that the
     blinds had
      not been pulled down; she went to the window to remedy the omission, and so saw in
     the street below the young man who, with the debt owing to him, she had lately dismissed from
     her mind. There was a street lamp directly below the window, and she stood a moment by the
     curtain looking down. Mr. Rawson-Clew was riding past, but slowly; it was quite possible to see
     his face, which did not contradict her former opinion—good-natured but foolish, and possibly
     weak. He turned in his saddle just below the window to speak to his companion, and she noticed
     that it was a stranger with him, a man wearing a single eyeglass, ten years older than the
     other, and of a totally different stamp. Indeed, of a stamp differing from any she had seen at
     Marbridge, so much so that she wondered how he came to be here, and what he was doing. But this
     was rather a waste of time, for the next day she knew.
The next day he came down the street again, but this time alone and on foot. He stopped at
     No. 27, and there asked for Captain Polkington. Julia, hearing the knock, and the visitor
     subsequently being ushered into the dining-room, guessed it must be Mr. Gillat, perhaps come
     with his parcel again; when she saw Mary she asked her.
"No, miss," was the answer; "it's another gentleman to see the master."
"Who?" Julia's mind was alert for fresh difficulties.
"Mr. Rawson-Clew."
"I don't know who he is," Mary went on; "I've never set eyes on him before, but he's a grand
     sort of gentleman; I hardly liked to put him in the dining-room, only missis's orders was 'Mr.
     Gillat or any gentleman to see the master there.'"
Which was true enough, and might reasonably have
      been reckoned a safe order, for no one but Mr. Gillat ever did come to see the
     Captain.
"I hope I've done right," Mary said.
"Quite right," Julia answered, though she did not feel so sure of it. The name and the vague
     description of the visitor somehow suggested to her mind the stranger who had ridden past with
     young Mr. Rawson-Clew. She went up-stairs, uneasy as much from intuition as from experience. In
     the hall she stood a minute. The dining-room door did not shut too well, the lock was old and
     worn, and unless it was fastened carefully, it came open; the Captain never managed to fasten
     it, and now it stood ajar; Julia could hear something of what was said within almost as soon as
     she reached the top of the kitchen stairs. The visitor spoke quietly, his words were not
     audible, but the Captain's voice was raised with excitement.
"The money, sir, the money that your cousin lent—accommodation between gentlemen—"
So Julia heard incompletely, and then another disjointed sentence.
"Do you take me for an adventurer, a sharper? I am a soldier, sir, a soldier and a
     gentleman—at least, I was—I mean I was a soldier, I am a gentleman—"
Julia came swiftly up the hall, the instinct of the female to spread frail wings and protect
     her helpless belongings (old equally as much as young) was strong upon her. The pushed open the
     dining-room door and walked in.
"Father," she said, "is anything the matter?"
Both men turned, the stranger clearly surprised and annoyed by the interruption, the Captain
     for a moment thinking of pulling himself together and dismissing his daughter with a lie. But
     he did not do it; he was too shaken to think quickly, also there was a sense of re
     inforcement in her presence; this he did not realise; indeed, he realised nothing
     except that she spoke again before he had collected himself.
"Is it about the money Mr. Rawson-Clew lent you?" she asked.
He nodded, and she turned to the other man, who had risen on her entrance, and now stood with
     his back to the evil-smelling stove which Mary had lighted as usual in honour of Captain
     Polkington's visitors. She measured him swiftly, and no detail escaped her; the well-bred
     impassive face, where the annoyance caused by her entrance showed only in the rather hard eyes;
     the straight figure, even the perfection of his tailoring and the style of his boots—she summed
     it all up with the rapidity of one who has had to depend on her wits before. And her wits were
     to be depended on, for, in spite of the warmth of her protective anger, she felt his
     superiority of person, position and ability, and, only too probably, of cause also. She could
     have laughed at the contrast he presented to her father and herself and the surroundings. It
     was perhaps for this reason that she asked him maliciously, "Have you come to collect the
     debt?"
The question went home. "Certainly not," he answered haughtily; "the money—"
But the Captain prevented whatever he was going to say. "He thinks I am an adventurer, a
     sharper," he bleated, now thoroughly throwing himself on his daughter's protection; "his
     intention seems to be a warning not to try to get anything more out of his cousin—something of
     that sort."
Julia paid little attention to her father. "You were going to say," she inquired serenely of
     Rawson-Clew, "something about the money, I think?"


"No," he answered, with cold politeness. "I only meant to suggest that this is perhaps rather
     an unpleasant subject for a lady."
He moved as if he would open the door for her, but she stood her ground. "It is unpleasant,"
     she said; "for that reason had we not better get it over quickly? You have not come to collect
     the debt, you have come, then, for what?"
"To make one or two things plain to Captain Polkington. I believe I have succeeded; if so, he
     will no doubt tell you anything you wish to know. Good afternoon," and he moved to the door on
     his own account, whereupon Julia's calmness gave way.
"You do think my father an adventurer, then?" she said. "You think him a sharper and your
     cousin a gull, and you came to warn him that if he tried to get anything more in future it was
     you with whom he would have to deal. And the money—you were going to say the money was not what
     you came for because you never expected to see it again? But you are wrong there; you shall see
     it; it will be repaid, every penny of it."
Rawson-Clew paused till she had finished; then, "I am sorry for any misunderstanding there
     may have been," he said. "I trust you will trouble yourself no farther in the matter," and he
     opened the door.
It was not a denial; it was not, so Julia considered, even an apology; to her it seemed more
     like a polite request to mind her own business, and she went up to her room after he had gone
     almost unjustly angry, too angry for the time being to think about the rashness of her promise
     that the debt should be paid.
"He thought us dirt," she said, sitting on the end of her narrow iron bed. Then she smiled
     rather grimly. "And we are pretty much what he thought us! Father sponged the money, and I
     decided to myself that the re
     paying did not much matter. We are, as we looked to him, two grubby little people
     of doubtful honesty, in a grubby room with Bouquet," and she laughed outright, although she was
     alone, and the faculty for seeing and deriding herself as others might, had a somewhat bitter
     flavour. Nevertheless, she was very angry and quite determined to pay the money somehow, so
     that at least it should appear to this man that he was mistaken.
An hour later she carried Captain Polkington's tea down to him; when tea was in the
     drawing-room his was always sent to him thus. She found him not depressed at all, on the
     contrary quite cheerful, and even dignified. He was reading something when she came in, and
     seeing that she was alone, he handed it to her. It was from Mr. Rawson-Clew she found, a sort
     of recognition of the discharge of the debt, or at least a formal cancelling of it. It was
     carefully and conclusively worded, certainly not the unaided work of the young man who had
     ridden past last night. It was dictated by the other, she was sure of it; possibly even he had
     himself discharged the debt so as to end the matter. Her eyes blazed as she read; he would not
     even allow her the satisfaction of giving him the lie—and the misery of straining and pinching
     to do the impossible. From pride, or from pity, or from both, he had finished the thing there
     and then, or he thought he had. She tore the paper across and then across again.
"What are you doing?" Captain Polkington cried, seizing her hands as she would have torn it
     again. "Don't you know it is valuable? I must keep it; he can't go back on it if he wants to."
     He took it from her, and began to piece it together. "I can look the world in the face again,"
     he said, admiring the fragments. "I am free, free and cleared; that debt would have hung like a
      millstone around my neck, but I am free of it; it is cancelled."
"Free!" Julia said with scorn. There are disadvantages in reducing a man to a subordinate
     position and allowing him no use for his self-respect; it is a virtue that has a tendency to
     atrophy. Julia recognised this with something like personal shame. "Your debt is discharged,"
     she said gently, "but mine is not; it has been shifted, not cancelled; it lies with me and Mr.
     Rawson-Clew now, and it shall be paid somehow."
Captain Polkington hardly heeded what she said; he was still smoothing the pieces of paper.
     "What?" he asked, as he put them away in an envelope, but he did not wait for her answer. "It
     was very heedless of you to tear it," he said; "but fortunately there is no damage done; it is
     perfectly valid, all that can be required."


</div></body></text></TEI>