<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Good Comrade, by Una L.
      Silberrad</title><author>Silberrad, Una Lucy (1872-1955). </author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="9">
CHAPTER VIII
POOFERCHJES AND JEALOUSY
The Polkingtons were launching out; not ostentatiously with expensive entertainments or
     anything striking, but in all small ways, scarcely noticeable except in general effect, but
     none the less expensive. They could not afford it; the past nine months had been very
     difficult, first the Captain's unfortunate misuse of the cheque, then Violet's engagement and
     the necessary entertainment that it involved, and then her wedding. Financially they were in a
     very bad way, but that did not prevent them spending—or owing—in a rather lordly fashion. Mrs.
     Polkington with one daughter married, and another safely out of the way, seemed determined to
     take the field well with the remaining one. Chèrie was quite ready to second the effort,
     indeed, she was the instigator; she was not only the prettiest of the sisters, but also the
     most ease loving, and though ambitious, less clever than the others, and a great deal more
     short-sighted. She had for some time ceased to be content with the position at Marbridge and
     the society there; she wanted to be recognised by the "county." This desire had been growing of
     late, for there had been a very eligible and attractive bachelor addition to that charmed
     circle, and he had more than once looked admiration her way. She and her mother went to work
     well and spared neither time nor trouble; not much result could be expected during the summer
     months, little done
      then except get ready—an expensive proceeding. It was when September brought
     people home for the partridge shooting and October's pheasants kept them there till hunting
     began, that they expected their success and the return for their outlay, and they were quite
     content to wait for it.
Their plans and doings were naturally not confided to any one, not even Julia; she heard
     seldom from Marbridge; the family feelings were of a somewhat utilitarian order, based largely
     on mutual benefit. She wrote now and then; she happened to do so on the day after the one on
     which she did not take the blue daffodil; and she mentioned in this letter that it was possible
     she should be home again soon. Seeing that she had decided the daffodil was unobtainable she
     saw little reason for staying longer; this of course she did not mention when she wrote.
     Somewhat to her surprise she got an almost immediate reply to her letter.
It would not suit Mrs. Polkington and Chèrie to have Julia back soon at all; it is always
     easier to swim socially with one daughter than two, especially if the second is not
     good-looking. Also, Julia, cautious, long-headed and capable, was certain to criticise their
     proceedings and do her best to interfere with them. She would be wrong in her judgments, of
     course, and they right; they were sure of that, but they did not want the trouble of attempting
     to convert her, and anyhow, they felt they could do much better without her, and Mrs.
     Polkington wrote and intimated as much politely. She gave several excellent reasons, all of
     which were perfectly transparent to Julia, though that did not matter, seeing that she was
     sufficiently hurt in her feelings, or her pride, to at once determine to fulfil her mother's
     wishes and do anything rather than go where she was not wanted.
     
There was not much said of the plans and doings in Mrs. Polkington's letter, but a little
     crept in almost without the writer's knowledge, enough to rouse Julia's suspicions. Why, she
     asked herself, was her mother suddenly enamoured with the beauty of Chippendale furniture? How
     did she know that Sturt's (the tailor's) prices were lower for costumes this season? And in
     what way had she become aware what the Ashton's last parlour-maid thought, if she had not
     engaged that young woman for her own service? Julia was at once uneasy and disgusted; the last
     alike with the proceedings themselves and the attempt to deceive her about them. And another
     letter she received at the same time did not make her any more satisfied; it was from Johnny
     Gillat, about as silly and uninforming a letter as ever man wrote, but it contained one piece
     of information. Mr. Gillat was going to have a great excitement in the early autumn—Captain
     Polkington was coming to London, perhaps for as long as three months. Johnny did not know why;
     he thought perhaps to have some treatment for his rheumatism; Mrs. Polkington had arranged it.
     Julia did know why, and the short-sightedness of the policy roused her contempt. To thus put
     the family drawback out of the way, and leave him to his own devices and Mr. Gillat's care,
     seemed to her as unwise towards him as it was unkind to Johnny. She would have written that
     minute to expostulate with her mother if she had not just then been called away.
These two disturbing letters arrived on the day that Joost came home from Germany, after the
     English mail for the day had gone. Julia comforted herself with this last fact when she was
     called before she had time to write to her mother; she could write when she went to bed that
     night; the letter would go just as soon as if it was written now; so she went to answer
     Mevrouw's summons to
      admire the carved crochet hook her son had brought her as a present from Germany.
     Joost had brought several small presents besides the crochet hook, a pipe for his father, and
     two other trifles—a small vase and a photograph of a plant which was the pride of the Berlin
     gardens that year—an aloe, no yucca, but one of the true rare blooming sort, in full flower.
     Julia was asked to take her choice of these two; she chose the photograph because it seemed to
     her much more characteristic of the giver, and also because it was easier to put away. She had
     no idea of pleasing Joost by so doing; to tell the truth she hardly felt desirous of pleasing
     him, for though she had refrained from taking his blue daffodil and was in a way satisfied that
     she had done so, she did not feel exactly grateful to him for unconsciously standing between
     her and it, from which some may conclude that virtue was not an indigenous plant with
     Julia.
When Denah arrived after dinner she was given the vase. Before Joost went away she had
     expressed in his hearing a wish that she had something from Berlin; she had said it rather
     pronouncedly as one might express a desire for a bear from the Rocky Mountains, or a ruby from
     Burmah; she could hardly have received one of those with more enthusiasm than she did the vase.
     She admired it from every point of view and thanked Joost delightedly; the delight, however,
     was a little modified when Mijnheer let slip the fact that Julia also had a present from
     Berlin.
"Have you?" she asked suspiciously. "What is it? Show me."
Julia fetched the photograph and exhibited it with as little elation as possible. Denah did
     not admire it greatly, she said she much preferred her own present.
At this Joost smiled a little; it was only what he ex
     pected, and Julia began tactfully to talk about the beauties of the vase; but
     Denah was not to be put off her main point.
"Do you not prefer mine; really and truly, would you not rather it had been yours?" she
     asked.
Julia could have slipped out of the answer quite easily; the Polkingtons were all good at
     saying things to be interpreted according to taste; but Joost, with signal idiocy, stepped in
     and prevented.
"No," he said, "she preferred the photograph; she chose it of the two."
At this intelligence Denah's face was a study; Julia could not but be amused by it although
     she was sorry. She did not want to make the girl jealous, it was absurd that she should be; but
     absurdity never prevents such things, and would not now, nor would it make her pleasanter if
     she were once fairly roused. Julia smoothed matters over as well as she could, which was very
     well considering, though she failed to entirely allay Denah's suspicions.
As soon after as she could she set out for the village, leaving the field to the Dutch girl,
     and carrying with her enough unpleasant thoughts on other things to prevent her from giving any
     more consideration to the silly spasm of jealousy. She had thrust her two letters from England
     into her pocket, and as she went she kept turning and turning their news in her mind though
     without much result. There seemed very little she could do except prevent the banishing of her
     father to London. She would write to her mother about that, and, what might be rather more
     effective, to Mr. Gillat. She could tell him it must not happen, and instruct him how to place
     obstacles in the way; he would do his best to fulfil her requests, she was sure, even to going
     down to Marbridge and establish
     ing himself there about the time of her father's intended departure. But with
     regard to the rest of her mother's plans, or Chèrie's, whichever it might be, there seemed
     nothing to be done. To write would be useless; to go home, even if she swallowed her pride and
     did so, very little better; of course she had not anything very definite to go upon, only a
     hint here and there, yet she guessed pretty well what they were doing, what spending, and what
     they thought to get by it. The old, long-headed Julia feared for the result; Mrs. Polkington,
     clever though she undoubtedly was, had never succeeded in big ventures; she had not the sort of
     mind for it; she had never made a wholly successful big stride; her real climbing had been done
     very slowly, so the old Julia feared for her. And the new one, who had grown up during the past
     months, revolted against the whole thing, finding it sordid, despicable, dishonourable even,
     somehow all wrong. And perhaps because the old cautious Julia could do nothing to avert the
     consequences, the newer nature was in the ascendant that evening, and consequences were in time
     forgotten, and disgust and weariness and shame—which included self and all things connected
     with it—took possession of the girl.
By and by she heard a step behind her—Rawson-Clew. She had forgotten his existence; she was
     almost sorry to be reminded of it; she felt so ashamed of herself and her people, so conscious
     of the gulf between them and him. So very conscious of this last that she suddenly felt
     disinclined for the effort of struggling to hide or bridge it.
He caught up with her. "How has the crochet progressed this week under your care?" he asked
     her lightly.
"It has not progressed," she answered; "there are
      enough mistakes in it now to occupy Denah for a long time."
He took her basket from her, and she looked at him thoughtfully. He was just the same as
     usual, quiet, drawling voice, eyeglass, everything—she wondered if he were ever different; how
     he would act, say, in her circumstances. If they could change bodies, now, and he be Julia
     Polkington, with her relations, needs and opportunities, what would he do? Would he still be
     impassive, deliberate, equal to all occasions? Would he find it easy to keep his inviolable
     laws of good-breeding and honour, and so forth?
"There is something I should like to ask you," she said suddenly.
"Yes?" he inquired.
"Is it much trouble to you to be honest?"
He was a little surprised, though not so much as he would have been earlier in their
     acquaintance. "That," he said, "I expect rather depends on what you mean by honest. I imagine
     you don't refer to lying and stealing, and that sort of thing, since nobody finds it difficult
     to avoid them."
"They are not gentlemanly?" she suggested.
"I don't know that I ever looked at it in that way," he said; "or, indeed, any way. One does
     not think about those sort of things; one does not do them, that's all."
She nodded. The careless change of pronoun, which in a way included her with himself, was not
     lost upon her.
"In the matter of half-truths," she inquired; "how about them?"
"I don't think I have given that subject consideration either," he answered, rather amused;
     "there does not
      seem any need at my age. One does things, or one does not; abstractions don't
     appeal to most men after thirty."
Again Julia nodded. "It looks to me," she said, "as if you take your morality, like your
     dinner, as a matter of course; it's always there; you don't have to bother after it; you don't
     really know how it comes, or what it is worth."
Now and then Rawson-Clew had observed in his acquaintance with Julia, she said things which
     had a way of lighting him up to himself; this was one of the occasions. "Possibly you are
     right," he said, with faint amusement. "How do you take yours? Let us consider yours; I am sure
     it would be a great deal more interesting."
"There would be more variety in it," she said significantly.
"What is your opinion about half-truths?" he inquired, with grave mimicry of her.

"'
      Half a truth, however small, 
Is better than no truth at all,'"

she quoted. "That is so; it is better, safer to deal with—to explain away if it is found out,
     to deceive with if it is not. But it is not half so easy as the whole truth; that is the
     easiest thing in the world; it takes no ingenuity, no brains, no courage, no acting, no feeling
     the pulse of your people, no bolstering up or watching or remembering. If I wanted to teach the
     beauty of truth, I would set my pupils to do a little artistic white lying on their own
     account, to make things look four times as good as they really were, and not to forget to make
     them square together, that would teach them the advantage of truth."
     
"Do you think so?" Rawson-Clew said. "It is not the usual opinion; fools and cowards are
     generally supposed to be the great dealers in deceit and subterfuge."
"May be," Julia allowed; "but I don't happen to have come across that sort much; the other I
     have, and I am just about sick of it—I am sick of pretending and shamming and double-dealing,
     of saying one thing and implying another, and meaning another still—you don't know what it
     feels like, you have never had to do it; you wouldn't, of course; very likely you couldn't,
     even. I am weary of it; I am weary of the whole thing."
Rawson-Clew screwed the glass into his eye carefully but did not look at her; he had an idea
     she would rather not. "What is it?" he asked kindly. "What has gone wrong to-night? Too much
     pudding again?"
"No," she answered, with a quick, if partial, recovery; "too much humbug, too much self. I
     have seen a great deal of myself lately, and it's hateful."
"I cannot agree with you."
"Do you like having a lot of yourself?"
"No; I like yourself."
She laughed a little; in her heart she was pleased, but she only said, "I don't; I know what
     it really is."
"And I do not?"
"No," she answered; then, with a sudden determination to tell him the worst, and to deal in
     this newly admired honesty, she said, "I will tell you, though. You remember my father? You may
     have politely forgotten him, or smoothed out your recollections of him—remember him now; he is
     just about what you thought him."
"Indeed?" the tone was that one of polite interest, which she had come to know so well. "Your
     shoe is unfastened; may I tie it for you? The question is," he went on, as he stooped to her
     shoe, "what did I think of
      your father? I'm sure I don't know, and I hardly think you are in a position to,
     either."
She moved impatiently, so that the shoelace slipped out of his hand, and he had to begin all
     over again. It was a very shabby shoe; at another time she might have minded about it, and even
     refused to have it fastened on that account; to-night she did not care, which was perhaps as
     well, for Rawson-Clew knew long ago all about the shabbiness—the only thing he did not know
     before was the good shape of the foot inside.
"I know perfectly well what you thought my father," she said; "if you have forgotten, I will
     remind you. You did not think him an adventurer, I know; of course, you saw he had not brains
     enough."
But here the shoe tying was finished, and Rawson-Clew intimated politely that he was not
     anxious to be reminded of things he had forgotten. "You began by saying you would tell me about
     yourself," he said; "will you not go on?"
"I have more brains than my father," she said, "and no more principles."
"Ergo—you succeed where he falls short; in fact, you are an adventuress—is that it?
     My dear child, you neither are, nor ever could be; believe me, I really do know, though, as you
     have indicated, my morality is rather mechanical and my experience much as other men's. You
     see, I, too, have graduated in the study of humanity in the university of cosmopolis; I don't
     think my degree is as high as yours, and I certainly did not take it so young, but I believe I
     know an adventuress when I see one. You will never do in that walk of life; I don't mean to
     insinuate that you haven't brains enough, or that you would ever lose your head; it isn't that
     you would lose, it's your heart."
     
"I haven't;" Julia cried hotly. "I have not lost my heart; that has nothing to do with
     it."
"I did not say that you had," Rawson-Clew reminded her; "of course not, you have not lost it,
     and could not easily. I did not mean that; I only meant that it would interfere with your
     success as an adventuress."
"It would not," Julia persisted; "I don't care about people a bit; it isn't that, it is
     simply that I am sick of deception, that is why I am telling you the truth. And as for the
     other thing—the daffodil"—she forgot that he did not know about it—"I couldn't take it from any
     one so silly, so childish, so trusting."
"Of course not," Rawson-Clew said. "I don't know what the daffodil thing is, nor from whom
     you could not take it—please don't tell me; I never take the slightest interest in other
     people's business, it bores me. But, you see, you bear out what I say; you are of those strong
     who are merciful; you would make no success as an adventuress. Besides, your tastes are too
     simple; I have some recollections of your mentioning corduroy—er—trousers and a diet of onions
     as the height of your ambition."
Julia laughed in spite of herself. "That is only when I retire," she said. "I haven't retired
     yet; until I do I am—"
"The incarnation of the seven deadly sins?" Rawson-Clew finished for her, with a smile in his
     eyes. "No doubt of it; I expect that is what makes you good company."
So, after all, it came about that she did not get her confession made in full. But, then,
     there hardly seemed need for it; it appeared that Rawson-Clew already knew a great deal about
     her, and did not think the worse of her for it. Rather it seemed he thought better than she had
     even believed; he, himself, too, was rather different
     —there had crept a note of warmth and personality into their acquaintance which
     had not been there before. Julia had pleasant thoughts for company on her homeward walk, in
     spite of the worry of the letters she carried with her; she even for a moment had an idea of
     putting the matter they contained before Rawson-Clew and asking his advice; that is, if the
     friendship which had begun to dawn on their acquaintance that evening grew yet further. It did
     grow, but she did not ask him, loyalty to her family prevented; there were, however, plenty of
     other things to talk about, and the friendship got on well until the end came.
The end came about the time of the annual fair. This fair was a great event in the little
     town; it only lasted three days, and only the middle one of the three was important, or in the
     least provocative of disorder; but—so Mijnheer said—it upset business very much. After inquiry
     as to how this came about, Julia learnt that it was found necessary to give the workmen a
     holiday on the principal day. They got so drunk the night before, that most of them were unfit
     for work, and a few even had the hardihood to stop away entirely, so as to devote the whole day
     to getting drunk again. Under these circumstances, Mijnheer made a virtue of necessity, and
     gave a whole holiday to the entire staff.
"Does the office have a holiday too?" Julia asked.
Mijnheer nodded. "These young fellows," he said, "are all for holidays; they are not like
     their fathers. Now it is always 'I must ride on my wheel; I must row in my boat; I must play my
     piano; let us put the work away as soon as we can, and forget it.' It was not so in my young
     days; then we worked, or we slept; playing was for children. There were some great men of
     business in those days."
     
Julia was not in a position to contradict this; she only said, "It is a real holiday, then,
     like a bank holiday in England?"
"A real holiday, yes," he answered her; "a holiday for you too, if you like. Would you like a
     real English bank holiday?" He called to his wife: "See here," he said, "here is an English
     miss who would like an English holiday; when the workmen have theirs she shall have hers too,
     is it not so?"
Mevrouw nodded, laughing. "But what will you do with it?" she asked.
"I should go out," Julia answered; "if it is fine I should go out all day."
"To the fair?" Mijnheer asked. "You would not like that alone; it would be very rough."
"I should go out into the country," Julia said. "I should make an excursion all by
     myself."
They seemed a good deal amused by her taste, but the idea suggested in fun was really
     determined upon; Julia, so Mijnheer promised, should have a holiday when every one else did,
     and do just what she pleased.
"You shall do as you like," he said; "even though it is not to go to the fair and eat
      pooferchjes. It is only once in a year one can eat pooferchjes, or three
     times rather; they are to be had on each of the three days."
"What are they?" Julia asked. "I have never heard of them."
"Never heard of them," the old man exclaimed. "They do not have them, I suppose, on an
     English bank holiday? Then certainly you must have them here; we will go and eat them on the
     first day of the fair, when everything is nice and clean, and there are not too many people
     about. I will find a nice quiet place, and we will go and eat them together, after tea, before
     there are great crowds.
      Will you come with me? I shall be taking my young lady to the fair like a gay
     dog."
He chuckled at the idea, and Julia readily agreed. "I shall be delighted," she said.
When Denah came, a little later, it seemed she would be delighted too, although she was not
     specially asked. But when she heard of the plan, she announced that her father had promised to
     take Anna and herself, and what could be better than that the parties should join? Mijnheer
     quite approved of this, so did Julia; and she, on hearing Denah's proposal, at once saw that
     Joost was included as he had not been before. Joost did not like fairs; he objected to noise,
     and glare, and crowds, and all such things; neither did he care for pooferchjes; they
     were too bilious for him. Nevertheless he agreed to join the party; Denah was quite sure it was
     entirely on her account.
On the morning of the first day of the fair, Julia went into the town to buy cakes to take
     with her on to-morrow's excursion. She had not changed her mind about that; she was still fully
     determined to go and spend a long day in the Dunes. She had not told the Van Heigens of the
     place chosen; she and Mijnheer had much fun and mystery about it, he declaring she was going to
     the wood to ride donkeys with the head gardener's fat wife. There was another thing she also
     had not told the Van Heigens—a slight alteration there had been in her plans; she was not, as
     she had first intended, going alone. It had somehow come about that Rawson-Clew was going with
     her; he had never seen the Dunes, and he had nothing to do that day, and he was not going to
     Herr Van de Greutz in the evening, it seemed rather a good idea that he should go for a holiday
     too; Julia saw no objection to it, but also she saw that it would not do to tell her
     Dutch employers. She had never mentioned Rawson Clew to them—there had not seemed
     any need; she never met him till she was clear of the town and the range of reporting tongues
     there, and she usually parted from him before she reached the village and the observers there,
     so nothing was known of the evening walks. Which was rather a pity, for, as Julia afterwards
     found out, it is often wisest to tell something of your doings, especially if you cannot tell
     all, and they are likely to come in for public notice.
Julia bought her cakes, and went about the town feeling as holiday-like as the gayest peasant
     there, although she had no wonderful holiday head-dress of starched lace and gold plates. She
     did not see any one she knew, except old Marthe, Herr Van de Greutz's housekeeper. She had met
     the old woman several times when she was marketing, and was on speaking terms with her now, so
     she had to stop and listen to her troubles. They were only the same old tale; her newest young
     cook had left suddenly, and she had come to the town to see if she could get another from among
     the girls who had come in for the fair. She had no success at all, and was setting out for
     home, despondent, and not at all comforted to think that she would have to trudge in and try
     all over again the day after to-morrow. To-morrow, itself, the great day, it was no good
     trying; no girl would pay attention to business then.
In the evening Julia went again into the town, but this time with Mijnheer and Joost, and
     dressed in her best dress. It was not at all a new dress, nor at all a grand one, but it was
     well chosen, well made and well fitted, and certainly very well put on; the gloves and hat,
     too, accorded with it, and she herself was in a humour of gaiety that bordered on brilliancy.
     Was she not going to have a holiday to-morrow, and was she not going to spend
      it in company with a man she liked, and in despite of Dutch propriety, which
     would certainly have been thoroughly and outrageously shocked thereby? Denah knew nothing of
     the causes at work, but she was not slow to discern the result when she and her father and
     sister met the Van Heigen party that evening. She smoothed the bow at the neck of her best
     dress, and looked at her gloves discontentedly; she did not altogether admire Julia's clothes,
     they were not at all Dutch; but she had an intuitive idea that they came nearer to Paris, the
     sartorial ideal of the nations, than her own did. She looked suspiciously at the English girl,
     her eyes were shining and sparkling like stars; they were full of alert interest and
     half-suppressed mischief. She looked at everything, and overlooked nothing, though she was
     talking to Mijnheer in a soft, purring voice, that was full of fun and wickedness. Now she
     turned to Joost, and her voice took another tone; she was teasing him, making fun of him in a
     way that Denah decided was scandalous, although his father was there, aiding and abetting her.
     Joost did not seem to resent it a bit; he listened quite serenely, and even turned a look on
     her as one who has another and private interpretation of the words. Anna saw nothing of this;
     she only thought Julia very nice, and her dress pretty, and her talk gay. But Denah, though not
     always so acute, was in love, and she saw a good deal, and treasured it up for use when the
     occasion should offer.
They ate pooferchjes, sitting in a funny little covered stall; at least, the top and
     three sides were covered, the fourth was open to the street. A long, narrow table, with clean
     white calico spread on it, ran down the centre of the place, and narrow forms stood on either
     side of it. It was lighted by a Chinese lantern hung from the roof, and also, and more
     especially, by a flare outside of the
      charcoal fire, where the pooferchjes were cooked. A powerful brown-armed
     peasant woman made them, beating the batter till it frothed, and dropping it by the spoonful
     into the little hollows in the great sheet of iron that glowed on the stove without. The glow
     of the fire was on her too, on her short skirt and her fine arms, and the flaring light, that
     flickered in the breeze, danced on her strong, brown face, with its resolute lines, and
     splendid gold-ringed head-dress. People kept passing to and fro all the time, or stopping
     sometimes to look in; solemnly-gay holiday people, enjoying themselves after their own fashion.
     The light flickered on them, too, and on the brick pavement, and on the trees, plentiful almost
     as canals in the town. Julia leaned forward and looked, and listened to the guttural Dutch
     voices, and the curious patois to be heard now and then, and the distant notes of music that
     blended with it. And the flickering lights and shadows danced across her mind, and the simple
     holiday feeling of it all got to her head.
Then the pooferchjes were done and brought in, little round, crisp things, smoking
     hot, and very greasy; something like tiny English pancakes—at least one might say so if one had
     not tasted them. And then more people came in and sat at the opposite side of the table, a
     gardener of another bulb grower, and his two daughters. He raised his hat to the Van Heigen
     party, and received a similar salutation in return, though he and they were careful to put
     their hats on again, a draught being a thing much feared. Mijnheer shook hands with the father,
     and they entered into conversation about the weather; the girls looked across at Denah and
     Anna, and more still at Julia, whose small, slim hands they evidently admired.
But at last the pooferchjes were all eaten and paid for. To do the latter the
     notary, Mijnheer and Joost all
      brought out large purses and counted out small coins with care, and the party
     came out, making way for new-comers. They did not go straight home again, as was first
     intended, Julia's interest and gaiety seemed to have infected the others—all except Denah, and
     they walked for a little while among the booths of toys, and sweets, and peepshows, and
     entertainments. And as they went, Denah grew more and more silent, watching Julia, who was
     walking with Joost; the arrangement was not of the English girl's seeking, but Denah took no
     account of that. The thing of which she did take account was that they two talked as they
     walked together, he as well as she, but both with the ease and quick comprehension of people
     who have talked together often.
Mijnheer stopped to look at the merry-go-round; he admired the cheerful tune that it played.
     He was not a connoisseur of music; a barrel-organ was as good to him as the organ in the Groote
     Kerk. The others stopped too; Anna exclaimed on the life-like and clever appearance of the
     bobbing horses, whereupon her father suggested that perhaps the girls would like to try a ride
     on the machine, and then befel the crowning mischief of the evening. Julia and Anna accepted
     the proposal readily. Denah declined; she felt in no humour for it; also she thought a refusal
     showed a superior mind—one likely to appeal to a serious young man, who had no taste for the
     gaudy, gay, or fast, and who also had a tendency towards seasickness. But, alas, for the
     fickleness of man! While Denah stood with her father and Mijnheer, Julia rode round the centre
     of lighted mirrors on a prancing wooden horse, and Joost—the serious, the sometimes
     seasick—rode beside her on a dappled grey, to the familiar old English tune,
     "Ta-ra-ra-boom-de-a."


</div></body></text></TEI>