<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Good Comrade, by Una L.
      Silberrad</title><author>Silberrad, Una Lucy (1872-1955). </author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="2">
CHAPTER I
THE POLKINGTONS
The Polkingtons were of those people who do not dine. They lunched, though few besides Johnny
     Gillat, who did not count, had been invited to share that meal with them. They took tea, the
     daintiest, pleasantest, most charming of teas, as the élite of Marbridge knew;
     everybody—or, rather, a selection of everybody, had had tea with them one time or another.
     After that there was no record; the élite, who would as soon have thought of going
     without their heads as without their dinner, concluded they dined, because they were "one of
     us." But some humbler folk were of opinion that they only dined once a week, and that after
     morning service on Sundays; but even this idea was dispelled when the eldest Miss Polkington
     was heard to excuse her non-appearance at an organ recital because "lunch was always so late on
     Sunday."
Let it not be imagined from this that the Polkingtons were common people—they were not; they
     were extremely well connected; indeed, their connections were one of the two striking features
     about them, the other was their handicap, Captain Polkington, late of the ——th Bengal Lancers.
     He was well connected, though not quite so much so as his wife; still—well, but he was not
      very presentable. If only he had been dead he would have been a valuable asset, but
     living, he was decidedly rather a drawback; there are some relatives like this. Mrs. Polkington
     bore up under it valiantly; in fact, they all did so well that in time they, or at least she
     and two of her three daughters, came almost to believe some of the legends they told of the
     Captain.
The Polkingtons lived at No. 27 East Street, which, as all who know Marbridge are aware, is a
     very good street in which to live. The house was rather small, but the drawing-room was good,
     with two beautiful Queen Anne windows, and a white door with six panels. The rest of the house
     did not matter. On the whole the drawing-room did not so very much matter, because visitors
     seldom went into it when the Miss Polkingtons were not there; and when they were, no one but a
     jealous woman would have noticed that the furniture was rather slight, and there were no
     flowers except those in obvious places.
There was only one Miss Polkington in the drawing-room that wintry afternoon—Julia, the
     middle one of the three, the only one who could not fill even a larger room to the complete
     obliteration of furniture and fitments. Julia was not pretty, therefore she was seldom to be
     found in the drawing-room alone; she knew better than to attempt to occupy that stage by
     herself. But it was now almost seven o'clock, too late for any one to come; also, since there
     was no light but the fire, deficiencies were not noticeable. She felt secure of interruption,
     and stood with one foot on the fender, looking earnestly into the fire.
That day had been an important one to the Polkingtons; Violet, the eldest of the sisters, had
     that afternoon accepted an offer of marriage from the Reverend Richard
      Frazer. The young man had not left the house an hour, and Mrs. Polkington was not
     yet returned from some afternoon engagement more than half, but already the matter had been in
     part discussed by the family. Julia, standing by the drawing-room fire, was in a position to
     review at least some points of the case dispassionately. Violet was two and twenty, tall, and
     of a fine presence, like her mother, but handsomer than the elder woman could ever have been.
     She had undoubted abilities, principally of a social order, but not a penny apiece to her
     dower. She had this afternoon accepted Richard Frazer, though he was only a curate—an
     aristocratic one certainly, with a small private income, and an uncle lately made bishop of one
     of the minor sees. Violet was fond of him; she was too nice a girl to accept a man she was not
     fond of, though too well brought up to become fond of one who was impossible. The engagement,
     though it probably did not fulfil all Mrs. Polkington's ambitions, was in Julia's opinion a
     good thing for several reasons.
There was a swish and rustle of silk by the door—Mrs. Polkington did not wear silk skirts,
     only a silk flounce somewhere, but she got more creak and rustle out of it than the average
     woman does out of two skirts. An imposing woman she was, with an eye that had once been
     described as "eagle," though, for that, it was a little inquiring and eager now, by reason of
     the look-out she had been obliged to keep for a good part of her life. She entered the room
     now, followed by her eldest and youngest daughters, Violet and Chèrie.
"At twelve to-morrow?" she was saying as she came in. "Is that when he is coming to see your
     father?"
Violet said it was; then added, in a tone of some dissatisfaction, "I suppose he must see
     father about it? We couldn't arrange something?"
     
"Certainly not," Mrs. Polkington replied with decision; "it is not for me to give or refuse
     consent to your marriage. Of course, Mr. Frazer knows your father does not have good health, or
     trouble himself to mix much in society here—it is not likely that an old military man should,
     but in a case like this he would expect to be called upon; it would have shown a great lack of
     breeding on Mr. Frazer's part had he suggested anything different."
Violet agreed, though she did not seem exactly convinced, and Julia created a diversion by
     saying—
"Twelve is rather an awkward time. A quarter of an hour with father, five minutes—no,
     ten—with you, half an hour with Violet, altogether brings it very near lunch time."
"Mr. Frazer will, of course, lunch with us to-morrow," Mrs. Polkington said, as if stray
     guests to lunch were the most usual and convenient thing in the world. The Polkingtons kept up
     a good many of their farces in private life; most of them found it easier, as well as
     pleasanter, to do so. "The cold beef," Mrs. Polkington said, mentally reviewing her larder,
     "can be hashed; that and a small boned loin of mutton will do, he would naturally expect to be
     treated as one of the family; fortunately the apple tart has not been cut—with a little
     cream—"
"I thought we were to have the tart to-night," Julia interrupted, thinking of Johnny Gillat,
     who was coming to spend the evening with her father.
Mrs. Polkington thought of him too, but she did not change her mind on this account. "We
     can't, then," she said, and turned to the discussion of other matters. She had carried these as
     far as the probable date of marriage, and the preferment the young man might easily expect,
     when the little servant came up to announce Mr. Gillat.
     
Mrs. Polkington did not express impatience. "Is he in the dining-room?" she said. "I hope you
     lighted the heater, Mary."
Mary said she had, and Mrs. Polkington returned to her interesting subject, only pausing to
     remark, "How tiresome that your father is not back yet!"
For a little none of the three girls moved, then Julia rose.
"Are you going down to Mr. Gillat?" her mother asked. "There really is no necessity; he is
     perfectly happy with the paper."
Perhaps he was, though the paper was a half-penny morning one; he did not make extravagant
     demands on fate, or anything else; nevertheless, Julia went down.
The Polkingtons' house was furnished on an ascending scale, which found its zenith in the
     drawing-room, but deteriorated again very rapidly afterwards. The dining-room, being midway
     between the kitchen and the drawing-room, was only a middling-looking apartment. They did not
     often have a fire there; a paraffin lamp stove stood in the fire-place, leering with its red
     eye as if it took a wicked satisfaction in its own smell. Before the fire-place, re-reading the
     already-known newspaper by the light of one gas jet, sat Johnny Gillat. Poor old Johnny, with
     his round, pink face, whereon a grizzled little moustache looked as much out of place as on a
     twelve-year-old school-boy. There was something of the school-boy in his look and in his
     deprecating manner, especially to Mrs. Polkington; he had always been a little deprecating to
     her even when he had first known her, a bride, while he himself was the wealthy bachelor friend
     of her husband. He was still a bachelor, and still her husband's friend, but the wealth had
     gone long ago. He had now only just enough to keep him, fortunately so secured that he could
      not touch the principal. It was a mercy he had it, for there was no known work at
     which he could have earned sixpence, unless perhaps it was road scraping under a not too
     exacting District Council. He was a harmless enough person, but when he took it into his head
     to leave his lodgings in town for others, equally cheap and nasty, at Marbridge, Mrs.
     Polkington felt fate was hard upon her. It was like having two Captain Polkingtons, of a
     different sort, but equally unsuitable for public use, in the place. In self defence she had
     been obliged to make definite rules for Mr. Gillat's coming and going about the house, and
     still more definite rules as to the rooms in which he might be found. The dining-room was
     allowed him, and there he was when Julia came.
He looked up as she entered, and smiled; he regarded her as almost as much his friend as her
     father; a composite creature, and a necessary connection between the superior and inferior
     halves of the household.
"Father not in, I hear," he said.
"No," Julia answered. "What a smell there is!"
Mr. Gillat allowed it. "There's something gone wrong with Bouquet," he said, thoughtfully
     regarding the stove.
The "Bouquet Heater" was the name under which it was patented; it did not seem quite honest
     to speak of it as a heater, so perhaps "Bouquet" was the better name.
Julia went to it. "I should think there is," she said, and turned it up, and turn it down,
     and altered the wicks, until she had improved matters a little.
"I'm afraid your father's having larks," Johnny said, watching her.
"It's rather a pity if he is," Julia answered; "he has got to see some one on business
     to-morrow."
"Who?"
"Mr. Frazer, a clergyman who wants to marry Violet."
     
Mr. Gillat sat upright. "Dear, dear!" he exclaimed. "No? Really?" and when Julia had given
     him an outline of the circumstances, he added softly, "A wonderful woman! I always had a great
     respect for your mother." From which it is clear he thought Mrs. Polkington was to be
     congratulated. "And when is it to be?" he asked.
"Violet says a year's time; they could not afford to marry sooner and do it properly, but it
     will have to be sooner all the same."
"A year is not a very long time," Mr. Gillat observed; "they go fast, years; one almost loses
     count of them, they go so fast."
"I dare say," Julia answered, "but Violet will have to get married without waiting for the
     year to pass. We can't afford a long engagement."
Mr. Gillat looked mildly surprised and troubled; he always did when scarcity of money was
     brought home to him, but Julia regarded it quite calmly.
"The sooner Violet is married," she said, "the sooner we can reduce some of the expenses; we
     are living beyond our income now—not a great deal, perhaps, still a bit; Violet's going would
     save enough, I believe; we could catch up then. That is one reason, but the chief is that a
     long engagement is expensive; you see, we should have to have meals different, and fires
     different, and all manner of extras if Mr. Frazer came in and out constantly. We should have to
     live altogether in a more expensive style; we might manage it for three months, or six if we
     were driven to it, but for a year—it is out of the question."
"But," Mr. Gillat protested, "if they can't afford it? You said he could not; he is a
     curate."
"He must get a living, or a chaplaincy, or something;
     or rather, I expect we must get it for him. Oh, no, we have no Church influence, and
     we don't know any bishops; but one can always rake up influence, and get to know people, if one
     is not too particular how."
Mr. Gillat looked at her uneasily; every now and then there flitted through his mind a
     suspicion that Julia was clever too, as clever perhaps as her mother, and though not, like her,
     a moral and social pillar standing in the high first estate from which he and the Captain had
     fallen. Julia had never been that, never aspired to it; she was no success at all; content to
     come and sit in the dining-room with him and Bouquet; she could not really be clever, or else
     she would have achieved something for herself, and scorned to consort with failures. He smiled
     benignly as he remembered this, observing, "I dare say something will be done—I hope it may;
     your mother's a wonderful woman, a wonderful—"
He broke off to listen; Julia listened too, then she rose to her feet. "That's father," she
     said, and went to let him in.
Mr. Gillat followed her to the door. "Ah—h'm," he said, as he saw the Captain coming in
     slowly, with a face of despairing melancholy and a drooping step.
"Come down-stairs, father," Julia said. "Come along, Johnny."
They followed her meekly to the basement, where there was a gloomy little room behind the
     kitchen reserved for the Captain's special use. A paraffin stove stood in the fire-place also,
     own brother to the one in the dining-room; Julia stooped to light it, while her father sank
     into a chair.
"Gillat," he said in a voice of hopelessness, "I am a ruined man."
"No?" Mr. Gillat answered sympathetically, but without surprise. "Dear me!" He carefully put
     down the
      hat and stick he had brought with him, the one on the edge of the table, the other
     against it, both so badly balanced that they fell to the ground.
"You shouldn't do it, you know," he said, with mild reproof; "you really shouldn't."
"Do it!" the Captain cried. "Do what?"
Julia looked up from the floor where she knelt trimming the stove-lamp. "Have five whiskeys
     and sodas," she said, examining her father judicially.
He did not deny the charge; Julia's observation was not to be avoided.
"And what is five?" he demanded with dignity.
"Three too many for you," she answered.
"Do you mean to insinuate that I am intoxicated?" he asked. "Johnny," he turned pathetically
     to his friend, "my own daughter insinuates that I am intoxicated."
"No," Julia said, "I don't; I say it does not agree with you, and it doesn't—you know you
     ought not to take more than two glasses."
"Is that your opinion, Gillat?" Captain Polkington asked. "Is that what you meant? That I—I
     should confine myself to two glasses of whiskey and water?"
"I wasn't thinking of the whiskey," Johnny said apologetically; "it was the gees."
The Captain groaned, but what he said more Julia did not hear; she went out into the kitchen
     to get paraffin. But she had no doubt that he defended the attacked point to his own
     satisfaction, as he always had done—cards, races, and kindred pleasant, if expensive, things,
     ever since the days long ago before he sent in his papers.
These same pleasant things had had a good deal to do with the sending in of the papers; not
     that they had led the Captain into anything disgraceful, the compulsion to resign his
     commission came solely from relatives, prin
     cipally those of his wife. It was their opinion that he worked too little and
     played too much, and an expensive kind of play. That he drank too much was not said; of course,
     the Indian climate and life tempted to whiskey pegs, and nature had not fitted him for them in
     large quantities; still that was never cast up against him. Enough was, however, to bring
     things to an end; he resigned, relations helped to pay his debts, and he came home with the
     avowed intention of getting some gentlemanly employment. Of course he never got any, it wasn't
     likely, hardly possible; but he had something left to live upon—a very small private income, a
     clever wife, and some useful and conscientious relations.
Somehow the family lived, quite how in the early days no one knew; Mrs. Polkington never
     spoke of it at the time, and now, mercifully, she had forgotten part, but the struggle must
     have been bitter. Herself disillusioned, her daughters mere children, her position insecure,
     and her husband not yet reduced to submission, and always prone to slip back into his old ways.
     But she had won through somehow, and time had given her the compensations possible to her
     nature. She was, by her own untiring efforts, a social factor now, even a social success; her
     eldest daughter was engaged to a clergyman of sufficient, if small, means, and her youngest was
     almost a beauty. As to the Captain, he was still there; time had not taken him away, but it had
     reduced him; he gave little trouble now even when Johnny Gillat came; he kept so out of the way
     that she had almost come to regard him as a negligible factor—which was a mistake.
Both the Captain and his friend had a great respect for Mrs. Polkington, though both felt at
     times that she treated them a little hardly. The Captain especially felt this, but he put up
     with it; after all it is easier to acqui
     esce than to assert one's rights, and, as Johnny pointed out, it was on the whole
     more comfortable, in spite of horse-hair chairs, down in the basement than up in the
     drawing-room. There was no need to make polite conversation down here, and one might smoke, no
     matter how cheap the tobacco, and put one's feet up, and really Bouquet was almost as good as a
     fire when you once get used to it.
Johnny was of a contented mind, he even looked contented sitting by the empty stove when
     Julia came back with the paraffin; the Captain, on the other hand, appeared to be very gloomy
     and unhappy; he sat silent all the time his daughter was present. As she was leaving the room
     Johnny tried to rouse him. "We might have a game," he suggested, looking towards a pack of
     cards that stuck out of a half-opened drawer.
"I have nothing in the world that I can call my own," Captain Polkington answered, without
     moving.
Mr. Gillat felt in his own lean pockets surreptitiously. "We might play for paper," he
     said.
And as she went up-stairs Julia listened to hear their chairs scroop on the kamptulikon floor
     as they drew them to the table; she was surprised not to hear the sound, but she imagined the
     game must have been put off a little so that her father could talk over his troubles. Which,
     indeed, was the case, though the magnitude of those troubles she did not guess.


</div></body></text></TEI>