<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Good Comrade, by Una L.
      Silberrad</title><author>Silberrad, Una Lucy (1872-1955). </author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1907</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER VII
HOW JULIA DID NOT GET THE BLUE DAFFODIL
Vrouw Van Heigen was learning a new crochet pattern; one did it in thread of a Sèvres blue
     shade; when several long strips were made, one sewed them together with pieces of black satin
     between each two, and there was an antimacassar of severe but rich beauty. Denah explained all
     this as she set Mevrouw to work on the pattern; it was very intricate, quite exciting, because
     it was so difficult; the more excited the old lady became the more mistakes she made, but it
     did not matter; Denah was patience itself, and did not seem to mind how much time she gave. She
     came every day after dinner (that is to say, about six o'clock), and when she came it was
     frequently found necessary that Julia should go to inquire after the invalid cousin. Denah
     thought herself the deepest and most diplomatic young woman in Holland; she even found it in
     her heart to pity Julia, the poor companion, who she used as a pawn in her romance. The which,
     since it was transparently obvious to the pawn, gave her vast, though private, delight.
So Julia went almost daily down the long flat road to the village, and very often Rawson-Clew
     had to go that way too; and when he did, his time of going being of necessity much the same
     time as hers, he was almost bound to walk with her. There was but one way to the place; they
     must either walk together in the middle of the
      road, or else separately, one side of it; and seeing that they were of the same
     nationality, in a foreign land, and had some previous acquaintance, it would have been nothing
     short of absurd to have done the latter. So as often as they met they walked together and
     talked of many things, and in the course of time Rawson-Clew came to find Julia's company a
     good deal more entertaining than his own; although she had read nothing she ought to have read,
     seen nothing she ought to have seen, and occasionally both thought and said things she
     certainly ought not, and was not even conventionally unconventional.
They usually parted at the footpath, which shortened her way a little, Rawson-Clew giving her
     the basket there, and going down the road alone; in consequence of this it was some time before
     she knew for certain where it was he went, although she had early guessed. But one damp evening
     she departed from her usual custom. It had been raining heavily all day, and although it had
     cleared now, a thick mist lay over the wet fields.
"I shall have to go round by the road," she said, as she looked at the track.
Rawson-Clew agreed with her. "I am rather surprised that you came out at all this evening,"
     he remarked. "I should have thought your careful friends would have been afraid of colds and
     wet feet."
"Vrouw Van Heigen was," Julia answered, "but Denah and I were not. It is the last opportunity
     we shall have for a little while; Joost goes to Germany on business to-morrow."
Rawson-Clew laughed. "Which means, I suppose," he said, "that she will neglect the crochet
     work, and you will have to superintend it? Not very congenial to you, is it?"
"Good discipline," she told him.
     
"And for that reason to be welcomed? Really you deserve to succeed in whatever it is you are
     attempting; you do not neglect details."
"Details are often important," she said; "stopping at home and doing crochet work while Joost
     is in Germany, for instance, may help me a good deal."
The tone struck Rawson-Clew as implying more than the words said, but he did not ask for an
     interpretation, and before long she had put a question to him. They were nearing a large house
     that stood far back from the road on the left hand side. It was a big block of a place,
     greyish-white in colour, and with more than half of its windows bricked up, indescribably
     gloomy. A long, straight piece of water lay before it, stretching almost from the walls to the
     road, from which it was separated by a low fence. Tall, thick trees grew in a close row on
     either side, narrowing the prospect; a path ran up beside them on the one hand, the only way to
     the house, but in the steamy mist which lay thick over everything this evening one could hardly
     see it, and it looked as if the place were unapproachable from the front.
Julia glanced curiously towards the house; it was the only one of any size or possible
     interest in the village; the only one, she had decided some time ago, that Rawson-Clew could
     have any reason to visit.
As they approached the gate she ventured, "You go here, do you not?"
"Yes," he answered; "to Herr Van de Greutz."
"The cousin tells me he is a great chemist," Julia said.
"He is," Rawson-Clew agreed, "and one much absorbed in his work; it is impossible to see him
     even on business except in the evening."
He paused by the gate as he spoke. "You have not much further to go, have you?" he said.
     "Will you ex
     cuse me carrying your basket further? I am afraid I am rather behind my time."
Julia took the basket, assuring him she had no distance to carry it, but her eyes as she said
     it twinkled with amusement; it was not really late, and she knew it.
"You are afraid of what will be said next," she thought as she looked back at the man, who
     was already vanishing among the mists by the lake. And the thought pleased her somewhat, for it
     suggested that Rawson-Clew had a respect for her acumen, and also that her private fancy—that
     the business which brought him here was not of a kind for public discussion—was correct.
The cousin was better that evening; she even expressed hopes of living through the summer, a
     thing she had not done for more than three days. Julia cheered and encouraged her in this
     belief (which, indeed, there was every reason to think well founded) and gave her the messages
     and dainties she had brought. After that they talked of the weather, which was bad; and the
     neighbours, who, on the whole, were good. Julia knew most of them by name by this time—the kind
     old Padre and his wife; the captain of the little cargo-boat, who drank a little, and his
     generous wife, who talked a great deal; the fat woman who kept fowls, and the thin one who
     sometimes stole the eggs. Julia had heard all about them before, but she heard over again, and
     a little about the great chemist, Herr Van de Greutz, too.
This great man was naturally only a name to the invalid and her friends, but they had always
     plenty to say about him. He was so distinguished that all the village felt proud to have him
     live on their borders, and so disagreeable that they were decidedly in awe of him. Of his
     domestic arrangements there was always talk; he lived in his great gloomy house with an old
     housekeeper, whom
      Julia knew by sight, and a young cook, whom she did not; the former was a
     permanency, the latter very much the reverse, it being difficult to find a cook equal to his
     demands who would for any length of time endure the shortness of the housekeeper's temper, and
     the worse one of her master. The domestic affairs of the chemist were a favourite subject of
     gossip, but sometimes his attainments came in for mention too; they did to-night, the cousin
     being in a garrulous mood. According to her, the great man had done everything in science worth
     mentioning, and was not only the first chemist in Holland, but in all the world; he looked down
     on all others, she said, regarding two Germans only as anything approaching his peers, all the
     English and French being nothing to him. He had discovered a great many things, dyes, poisons,
     and explosives; of the last he had recently perfected one which was twenty-two times stronger
     than anything before known. Its nature was, of course, a secret, but it would eventually raise
     the little army of Holland far above those of all other nations.
Julia listened, but especially to the last piece of information, which struck her as being
     the one most likely to prove interesting. Soon after hearing it, however, she was obliged to
     go. She made her farewells, and received messages of affection for Mevrouw, condolence for
     Mijnheer—who had a cold—and good wishes for Joost's journey. Then she started homewards, with a
     light basket and a busy mind.
It did not take her very long to decide that if there was any truth in this talk of Van de
     Greutz's achievements, it must be the last mentioned—the explosive—which brought Rawson-Clew
     here. Her judgment of men, for working purposes at least, was quick and fairly accurate,
     necessity and experience had helped Nature to make it so.
      There were one or two things in connection with Rawson-Clew which were very clear
     to her, he was not a scientist pure and simple; she had never met one, but she knew he was not
     one, and so was not likely to be interested in the great chemist for chemistry only. Nor was he
     a commercial man; neither his instincts nor his abilities lay in that direction; it was not a
     new process, not a trade secret which brought him here. Indeed, even though he might appreciate
     the value of such things, he would never dream of trying to possess himself of them.
Julia understood perfectly the scale in which such acts stood to men like Rawson-Clew. To
     attempt to master a man's discovery for one's own ends (as in a way she was doing) was
     impossible, rank dishonesty, never even contemplated; to do it for business purposes—well, he
     might admit it was sometimes necessary in business—commerce had its morality as law, and the
     army had theirs—but it was not a thing he would ever do himself, he would not feel it exactly
     honourable. But to attempt to gain a secret for national use was quite another thing, not only
     justifiable but right, more especially if, as was probably the case, the attempt was in
     fulfilment of a direct order. If after Herr Van de Greutz had a secret worth anything to
     England, it was that which had brought Rawson-Clew to the little town. She was as sure of it as
     she was that it was the blue daffodil which had brought her.
The hateful blue daffodil! Daily, to possess it grew more imperative. The intercourse with
     this man, the curious seeming equality that was being established between them, cried aloud for
     the paying of the debt, and the establishing of the reality of equality. She longed almost
     passionately to be able to regard herself, to know that the man had reason to regard her, as
     his equal. And yet to possess the thing seemed daily more difficult; more
      and more plainly did she see that bribery, persuasion, cajolery were alike
     useless. The precious bulb could be got in one way, and one only; it would never fall into her
     hands by skilful accident, or nicely stimulated generosity; she must take it, or she must do
     without it. She must get it for herself as deliberately as, in all probability, Rawson-Clew
     meant to get Herr Van de Greutz's secret.
She raised her head and looked at the flat, wet landscape with unseeing eyes that were
     contemptuous. How different two not dissimilar acts could be made to look! If she took the
     daffodil—and she would have unique opportunity to try during the next two days—Rawson-Clew
     would regard her as little better than a common thief; that is, if he happened to know about
     it. She winced a little as she thought of the faint expression of surprise the knowledge would
     call up in his impassive face and cold grey eyes. She could well imagine the slight difference
     in his manner to her afterwards, scarcely noticeable to the casual observer, impossible to be
     overlooked by her. She told herself she did not care what he thought; but she did. Pride was
     grasping at a desired, but impossible, equality with this man, and here, were the means used
     only known, was the nearest way to lose it. At times he had forgotten the gap of age and
     circumstances between them—really forgotten it, she knew, not only ignored it in his well-bred
     way. He had for a moment really regarded her as an equal; not, perhaps, as he might the women
     of his class, rather the men of like experience and attainments with himself. That was not what
     she wanted, but she recognised plainly that in grasping at a shadowy social feminine equality
     by paying the debt, she might well lose this small substance of masculine equality, for there
     is no gulf so unbridgeable between man and man as a different standard of honour.
     
But after all, she asked herself, what did it matter? He need not know; she would pay,
     fulfilling her word, and proving her father an honest man (which he was not); the debtor could
     not know how it was done. And if he did, what then? If she told him herself—he would know no
     other way—she would do it deliberately with the set purpose of tarring him with the same brush;
     she would show him how his attempt on Herr Van de Greutz might also be made to look. He would
     not be convinced, of course, but at bottom the two things were so related that it would be
     surprising if she did not get a few shafts home. He would not show the wounds then, but they
     would be there; they would rankle; there would be some humiliation for him, too. A curious
     light crept into her eyes at the thought; she was surer of being able to reduce him than of
     exalting herself, and it is good, when circumstances prevent one from mounting, to drag a
     superior to the level of one's humiliation. For a moment she understood something of the
     feelings of the brute mob that throws mud.
By this time she had reached the town, though almost without knowing it; so deep was she in
     her thoughts that she did not see Joost coming towards her. He had been to escort Denah, who
     had thoughtfully forgotten to provide herself with a cloak; he was now coming back, carrying
     the wrap his mother had lent her.
Julia started when she became aware of him just in front of her. She was not pleased to see
     him; she had no room for him in her mind just then; he seemed incongruous and out of place. She
     even looked at him a little suspiciously, as if she were afraid the fermenting thoughts in her
     brain might make themselves felt by him.
He turned and walked beside her. "I have been to take
     home Miss Denah," he explained. "I saw you a long way off, and thought perhaps I
     might escort you; but you are angry; I am sorry."
Julia could not forbear smiling at him. "I am not angry," she said, as she would to a child;
     "I was only thinking."
"Of something unpleasant, then, that makes you angry?"
"No; of something that must have been enjoyable. I was thinking how, in the French
     Revolution, the women of the people must have enjoyed throwing mud at the women of the
     aristocrats; how they must have liked scratching the paint and the skin from their faces, and
     tearing their hair down, and their clothes off."
Joost stared in amazement. "Do you call that not unpleasant?" he said. "It is the most
     grievous, the most pitiable thing in all the world."
"For the aristocrats, yes," Julia agreed; "but for the others? Can you not imagine how they
     must have revelled in it?"
Joost could not; he could not imagine anything violent or terrible, and Julia went on to ask
     him another question, which, however, she answered herself.
"Do you know why the women of the people did it? It was not only because the others had food
     and they had not; I think it was more because the aristocrats had a thousand other things that
     they had not, and could never have—feelings, instincts, pleasures, traditions—which they could
     not have had or enjoyed even if they had been put in palaces and dressed like queens. It was
     the fact that they could never, never rise to them, that helped to make them so furious to pull
     all down."
There was a sincerity of conviction in her tone, but Joost only said, "You cannot enjoy to
     think of such
      things; it is horrible and pitiable to remember that human creatures became so
     like beasts."
Julia's mood altered. "Pitiable, yes; perhaps you are right. After all, we are pitiful
     creatures, and, under the thin veneer, like enough to the beasts." Then she changed the subject
     abruptly, and began to talk of his flowers.
But he was not satisfied with the change; instinctively he felt she was talking to his level.
     "Why do you always speak to me of bulbs and plants?" he said. "Do you think I am interested in
     nothing else?"
"No," she said; "I speak of them because I am interested. Do you not believe me? It is quite
     true; you yourself have said that I should make a good florist; already I have learnt a great
     deal, although I have not been here long, and knew nothing before I came."
"That is so," he admitted; "you are very clever. Nevertheless, I do not think, if you were
     alone now, you would be thinking of plants. You were not when I met you; it was the Revolution,
     or, perhaps, human nature—you called it the Revolution in a parable, as you often do when you
     speak your thoughts."
"Why do you trouble about my thoughts?" Julia said, impatiently. "How do you know what I
     think?"
"Perhaps I don't," he answered; "only sometimes it seems to me your voice tells me though
     your words do not."
"My voice?"
"Yes; it is full of notes like a violin, and speaks more than words. I suppose all voices
     have many notes really, but people do not often use them; they use only a few. You use many;
     that is why I like to listen to you when you talk to my parents, or any one. It is like a
     master playing on an instrument; you make simple words mean much, more than I understand
     sometimes; you can caress
      and you can laugh with your voice; I have heard you do it when I have not been
     able to understand what you caress, or at what you laugh, any more than an ignorant person can
     understand what the violin says, although he may enjoy to hear it. To-night you do not caress
     or laugh; there is something black in your thoughts."
"That is human nature, as you say," Julia said shortly, ignoring the comment on her voice.
     "Human nature is a hateful, ugly thing; there is no use in thinking about it."
"It has certainly fallen," Joost allowed; "but I have sometimes thought perhaps, if it were
     not so, it would be a little—a very little—monotonous."
"You would not find it dull," Julia told him. "I believe you would not have got on very well
     in the Garden of Eden, except that, since all the herbs grew after their own kind, there would
     be no opportunity to hybridise them."
But the mystery of production and generation, even in the vegetable world, was not a subject
     that modesty permitted Joost to discuss with a girl. His manner showed it, to her impatient
     annoyance, as he hastily introduced another aspect of man's first estate. "If we were not
     fallen," he added, "we should have no opportunity to rise. That, indeed, would be a loss; is it
     not the struggle which makes the grand and fine characters which we admire?"
"I don't admire them," Julia returned; "I admire the people who are born good, because they
     are a miracle."
He stopped to unfasten the gate; it did not occur to him that she was thinking of
     himself.
"I cannot agree with you," he said, as they went up the drive together. "Rather, I admire
     those who have fought temptation, who are strong, who know and understand and have conquered;
     they inspire me to try and follow.
      What inspiration is there in the other? Consider Miss Denah, for an example; she
     has perhaps never wanted to do more wrong than to take her mother's prunes, but is there
     inspiration in her? She is as soft and as kind as a feather pillow, and as inspiring. But
     you—you told me once you were bad; I did not believe you; I did not understand, but now I know
     your meaning. You have it in your power to be bad or to be good; you know which is which, for
     you have seen badness, and know it as men who live see it. You have fought with it and
     conquered; you have struggled, you do struggle, you have strength in you. That is why you are
     like a lantern that is sometimes bright and sometimes dim, but always a beacon."
"I am nothing of the sort," Julia said sharply. They were in the dense shadow of the trees,
     so he could not see her face, but her voice sounded strange to him. "You do not know what you
     are talking about," she said; "hardly in my life have I asked myself if a thing is right or
     wrong—do you understand me? Right and wrong are not things I think about."
"It is quite likely," he said, serenely; "different persons have different names for the same
     things, as you have once said; one calls it 'honourable' and 'dishonourable,' and another
     'right' and 'wrong,' and another 'wise' and 'unwise.' But it is always the same thing; it means
     to choose the more difficult path that leads to the greater end, and leave the other way to the
     lesser and smaller souls."
Julia caught her breath with a little gasping choke. Joost turned and looked at her, puzzled
     at last; but though they had now reached the house, and the lamplight shone on her, he could
     make out nothing; she brushed past him and went in quickly.
The next day Joost started for Germany. It rained
      more or less all day, and Julia did not go out, except for half-an-hour during
     the morning, when she was obliged to go marketing. She met Denah bound on the same errand, and
     heard from her, what she knew already, that she would not be able to come and superintend the
     crochet that day. And being in a black and reckless mood, she had the effrontery to laugh a
     silent, comprehending little laugh in the face of the Dutch girl's elaborate explanations.
     Denah was a good deal annoyed, and, though her self-esteem did not allow her to realise the
     full meaning of the offence, she did not forget it.
Julia went home with her purchases, and spent the rest of the day in the usual small
     occupations. It was an interminably long day she found. She contrived to hide her feelings,
     however, and behaved beautifully, giving the suitable attention and suitable answers to all
     Mevrouw's little remarks about the weather, and Joost's wet journey (though, since he was in
     the train, Julia could not see that the wet mattered to him), and about Mijnheer's cold, which
     was very bad indeed.
The day wore on. Julia missed Joost's presence at meals; they were not in the habit of
     talking much to each other at such times, it is true, but she always knew when she talked to
     his parents that he was listening, and putting another and fuller interpretation on her words.
     That was stimulating and pleasant too; it was a new form of intercourse, and she did not
     pretend she did not enjoy it for itself, as well as for the opportunity it gave her of probing
     his mind and trying different ideas on him.
At last dinner was over, and tea; the tea things were washed, and the long-neglected fancy
     work brought out. A clock in the passage struck the hour when, of late, after an exhilirating
     verbal skirmish with the anxious Denah, she had set out for the village and Rawson-Clew.
     
She did not pretend to herself that she did not enjoy that too, she did immensely; there was
     a breath from the outside world in it; there was sometimes the inspiring clash of wits, of
     steel on steel, always the charm of educated intercourse and quick comprehension. To-night
     there was nothing; no exercise to stir the blood, no solitude to stimulate the imagination, no
     effort of talk or understanding to rouse the mind. Nothing but to sit at work, giving
     one-eighth of attention to talk with Mevrouw—more was not needed, and the rest to the blue
     daffodils that lay securely locked up in a place only too well known.
Evening darkened, grey and dripping, to-night, supper-getting time came, and the hour for
     locking up the barns. Mijnheer, snuffling and wheezing a good deal, put on a coat, a
     mackintosh, a comforter, a pair of boots and a pair of galoshes; took an umbrella, the lantern,
     a great bunch of keys, and went out. Julia watched him go, and said nothing; she had been the
     rounds a good many times with Joost now; the family had talked about it more than once, and
     about her bravery with regard to rats and robbers. Neither of the old people would have been
     surprised if she had volunteered to go in place of Mijnheer, even if his cold had not offered a
     reason for such a thing. But she did not do it; he went alone, and the blue daffodil bulbs lay
     snug in their locked place.
The next day it still rained, but a good deal harder. There was a sudden drop in the
     temperature, too, such as one often finds in an English summer. The Van Heigens did not have a
     fire on that account, their stoves always kept a four months' sabbath; the advent of a
     snow-storm in July would not have been allowed to break it. Mijnheer's cold was decidedly
     worse; towards evening it grew very bad. He came in early from the office, and sat and shivered
     in the sitting-room with Julia and his
      wife, who was continuing the crochet unaided, and so laying up much future work
     for Denah. At last it was considered dark enough for the lamp to be lighted. Julia got up and
     lit it, and drew the blind, shutting out the grey sheet of the canal and the slanting rain.
"Dear me," Mevrouw said once again, "how bad the rain must be for Joost!"
Julia agreed, but reminded her—also once again—that it was possibly not raining in
     Germany.
Mijnheer looked up from his paper to remark that the weather was very bad for the crops.
"It is bad for every one," his wife rejoined; "but worse of all for you. You should be in
     bed. Indeed, it is not fit that you should be up; the house is like a cellar this evening."
Mijnheer did not suggest the remedy of a fire; he, too, shared the belief that stoves should
     not be lighted before the appointed time; he only protested at the idea of bed. "Pooh!" he
     said. "Make myself an invalid with Joost away! Will you go and nurse my nose, and put plasters
     on my chest? Go to bed now, do you say? No, no, my dear, I will sit here; I am comfortable
     enough; I read my paper, I smoke my cigar; by and by, I go out to see that my barns are all
     safe for the night."
But at this Mevrouw gave an exclamation; the idea of his going out in such weather was
     terrible, she said, and she said it a good many times.
Julia bent over her work; she heard the swish of the rain on the window, the uneven sob of
     the fitful wind; she heard the old people talk, the husband persist, the wife protest. She did
     not look up; her eyes were fixed on her needle, but she hardly saw it; more plainly she saw the
     dark barns, the crowded shelves, the place where
     the blue daffodils were. She could find them with perfect ease; could choose one
     in the dark as easily as Mijnheer himself; she could substitute for it another, one of the
     common sort of the same shape and size; no one would be the wiser; even when it bloomed, with
     the simple yellow flower that has beautified spring woods so long, no one would know it was not
     a sport of nature, a throw back to the original parent. It was the simplest thing in all the
     world; the safest. Not that that recommended it; she would rather it had been difficult or
     dangerous, it would have savoured more of a fair fight and less of trickery. Besides, such
     safety was nothing; anything can be made safe with care and forethought.
She caught her own name in the talk now; husband and wife were speaking lower, evidently
     arguing as to the propriety of asking her to go the rounds; for a moment she pretended not to
     hear, then she raised her head, contempt for her own weakness in her mind. It is not
     opportunity that makes thieves of thinking folk, and she knew it; rather it is the thief that
     makes opportunity, if he is up to his work. Why should she be afraid to go to the barns? She
     would not take the daffodil the more for going; if she meant to do it, and, through cowardice,
     let this opportunity slip, she would soon find another. And if she did not mean to, the
     proximity of the thing would not make her take it.
She put down her work. "I will lock up for you, Mijnheer; give me the keys."
He protested, and his wife protested, much more feebly, and thanked her for going the while.
     They gave her many directions, and told her she must put on this, that, and the other, and must
     be careful not to get her feet wet, and really need not to be too particular in examining all
     the doors. She answered them with impatient politeness, as one does who is waiting for the
     advent of a greater
      matter; she was not irritated by the trivial interruptions which came between her
     and the decision which was yet to be made; it was somehow so great to her that it seemed as if
     it could wait. At last she was off, Mijnheer's galoshes wallowing about her feet, his
     black-caped mackintosh thrown round her shoulders. She had neither hat nor umbrella. Mevrouw
     literally wailed when she started; but it made no impression, she came of the nation most
     indifferent to getting wet, and most-susceptible to death by consumption of any in Europe.
She slopped along in the great galoshes, her back to the lighted house now, her face to the
     dark barns. There they were, easily accessible, waiting for her. Was she to take one, or was
     she not? She did not give herself any excuse for taking it, or tell herself that one out of six
     was not much; or that Joost, could he know the case, would not have grudged her one of his
     precious bulbs. There was only one thing she admitted—it was there, and her need for it was
     great. With it she could pay a debt that was due, show her father an honourable man, and,
     seeing that the affair could always remain secret, raise herself nearer to Rawson-Clew's level.
     Without it she could not.
She had come to the first barn now, and, unbarring the door, went in. Almost oppressive came
     the dry smell of the bulbs to her; very familiar, too, as familiar as the distorted shadows
     that her lantern made. Together they brought vividly to her mind the first time she went the
     rounds with Joost—the night when she told him she was bad, the worst person he knew. Poor
     Joost, he had interpreted her words his own way; she remembered very plainly what he said but
     two nights ago—right and wrong, honourable and dishonourable, wise and unwise, they meant the
     same thing to different people, the choosing
      of the higher, the leaving of the lower—and he believed no less of her. That
     belief, surely, was a thing that fought on the side of the angels? And then there was that
     other man, able, well-bred, intellectual, her superior, who had treated her as an equal, and so
     tacitly demanded that she should conform to his code of honour. And there was Johnny Gillat,
     poor, old round-faced Johnny, who, under his silly, shabby exterior, had somewhere, quite
     understood, the same code, and standard of a gentleman, and never doubted but that she had it
     too—surely these two, also, were on the side of the angels?
But it was not a matter of angels, neither was it a matter of this man's thought, or that. At
     bottom, it seemed all questions could be brought to plain terms—What do I think? I, alone in
     the big, black, contradictory world. Julia realised it, and asked herself what it mattered if
     he, if they, if all the world called it wrong? What—pitiless, logical question—was wrong? Why
     should to take in one case be so called, and in another not? By whose word, and by what law was
     a thing thus, and why was she to submit to it?
She faced the darkness, the lantern at her feet, her back against the shelves, and asked
     herself the world-old question; and, like many before her, found no answer, because logic,
     merciless solvent of faith and hope and law, never answers its own riddles. Only, as she stood
     there, there rose up before her mind's eye the face of Joost, with its simple gravity, its
     earnest, trusting blue eyes. She saw it, and she saw the humble dignity with which he had shown
     her his six bulbs. Not as a proud possessor shows a treasure, rather as an adept shares some
     secret of his faith or art; so had he placed them in her power, given her a chance to so use
     this trust. She almost groaned aloud as she recalled him, and recalled, sorely against her
      will, a horrible tale she had once read, of a Brahmin who murdered a little child
     for her worthless silver anklets. Joost was a veritable child to her, powerless before her
     ability, trusting in her good faith, a child indeed, even if he had not placed his secret in
     her grasp. And it was he—this child—that she, with her superior strength, was going to rob!
She shivered. Why was he not Rawson-Clew? Why could not he take better care of himself and
     his possessions? She could have done it with a light heart then; there would have been a
     semblance of fight in it; but now—now it could not be done. Logic, the pitiless solvent, has no
     action on those old long-transmitted instincts; it may argue with, but it cannot destroy, those
     vague yearnings of the natural man towards righteousness. Julia did not argue, she only obeyed;
     she did not know why.
She picked up the lantern, and moved to go; as she did so, the barn door, lightly fastened,
     blew open. A rush of rain and wind swept in, the smell of the wet earth, and the sight of the
     tossing trees, and massed clouds that fled across the sky. For a moment she stood and looked,
     hearing the wild night voices, the sob of the wet wind, the rustle and mutter of the
     trees—those primitive inarticulate things that do not lie. And in her heart she felt very weary
     of shams and pretences, very hungry for the rest of reality and truth. She turned away, and
     made the round of the barns systematically, and without haste; she did not hurry past the
     resting-place of the blue daffodils, they were safe from her now and always.
It was not till some weeks later that she saw, and not then without also seeing it was quite
     impossible to disprove the proposition, that there was something grimly absurd in the idea
     which had possessed her that night—the thought of stealing to prove a lie, and acting dis
     honourably to pay a debt of honour. At the time she did not think at all, she
     acted on instinct only. Thank God for those dumb instincts, making for righteousness, which, in
     spite of theologians, are implanted somewhere in the heart of man.
So she went the rounds, fastened the barns, and came out of the last one, locking the door
     after her. Outside, she stood a second, the rain falling upon her bare head, the wind blowing
     her cloak about her. And she did not feel triumphant or victorious, nor reluctant and
     contemptuous of her weakness; only somehow apart and alone, and very, very tired.


</div></body></text></TEI>