<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="16">
CHAPTER XV.

And doubt shall be as lead upon the feet
Of thy most anxious will.
Mr Lyon was careful to look in at Felix as soon as possible after Christian's
      departure, to tell him that his trust was discharged. During the rest of the day he was
      somewhat relieved from agitating reflections by the necessity of attending to his ministerial
      duties, the rebuke of rebellious singers being one of them; and on his return from the Monday
      evening prayer-meeting he was so overcome with weariness that he went to bed without taking
      note of any objects in his study. But when he rose the
       next morning, his mind, once more eagerly active, was arrested by Philip Debarry's
      letter, which still lay open on his desk, and was arrested by precisely that portion which had
      been unheeded the day before:—" I shall consider myself doubly fortunate if at any time
       you can point out to me some method by which I may procure you as lively a satisfaction as I
       am now feeling, in that full and speedy relief from anxiety which I owe to your considerate
       conduct ."
To understand how these words could carry the suggestion they actually had for the minister
      in a crisis of peculiar personal anxiety and struggle, we must bear in mind that for many
      years he had walked through life with the sense of having for a space been unfaithful to what
      he esteemed the highest trust ever committed to man—the ministerial vocation. In a mind of any
      nobleness, a lapse into transgression against an object still regarded as supreme, issues in a
      new and purer devotedness, chastised by humility and watched over by a passionate regret. So
      it was with that ardent spirit which animated the little body of Rufus Lyon. Once in his life
      he had been blinded, deafened, hurried along by rebellious impulse; he had gone astray after
      his own desires, and had let the fire die
       out on the altar; and as the true penitent, hating his self-besotted error, asks from
      all coming life duty instead of joy, and service instead of ease, so Rufus was perpetually on
      the watch lest he should ever again postpone to some private affection a great public
      opportunity which to him was equivalent to a command.
Now here was an opportunity brought by a combination of that unexpected incalculable kind
      which might be regarded as the Divine emphasis invoking especial attention to trivial
      events—an opportunity of securing what Rufus Lyon had often wished for as a means of honouring
      truth, and exhibiting error in the character of a stammering, halting, short-breathed usurper
      of office and dignity. What was more exasperating to a zealous preacher, with whom copious
      speech was not a difficulty but a relief—who never lacked argument, but only combatants and
      listeners—than to reflect that there were thousands on thousands of pulpits in this kingdom,
      supplied with handsome sounding-boards, and occupying an advantageous position in buildings
      far larger than the chapel in Malthouse Yard—buildings sure to be places of resort, even as
      the markets were, if only from habit and interest; and that these pulpits were filled, or
       rather made vacuous, by men whose privileged education in the ancient centres of
      instruction issued in twenty minutes' formal reading of tepid exhortation or probably infirm
      deductions from premises based on rotten scaffolding? And it is in the nature of exasperation
      gradually to concentrate itself. The sincere antipathy of a dog towards cats in general,
      necessarily takes the form of indignant barking at the neighbour's black cat which makes daily
      trespass; the bark at imagined cats, though a frequent exercise of the canine mind, is yet
      comparatively feeble. Mr Lyon's sarcasm was not without an edge when he dilated in general on
      an elaborate education for teachers which issued in the minimum of teaching, but it found a
      whetstone in the particular example of that bad system known as the Rector of Treby Magna.
      There was nothing positive to be said against the Rev. Augustus Debarry; his life could not be
      pronounced blameworthy except for its negatives. And the good Rufus was too pure-minded not to
      be glad of that. He had no delight in vice as discrediting wicked opponents; he shrank from
      dwelling on the images of cruelty or of grossness, and his indignation was habitually inspired
      only by those moral and intellectual mistakes which darken the soul but do not injure or
      degrade
       the temple of the body. If the Rector had been a less respectable man, Rufus would have
      more reluctantly made him an object of antagonism; but as an incarnation of soul-destroying
      error, dissociated from those baser sins which have no good repute even with the worldly, it
      would be an argumentative luxury to get into close quarters with him, and fight with a
      dialectic short-sowrd in the eyes of the Treby world (sending also a written account thereof
      to the chief organs of Dissenting opinion). Vice was essentially stupid—a deaf and eyeless
      monster, insusceptible to demonstration: the Spirit might work on it by unseen ways, and the
      unstudied sallies of sermons were often as the arrows which pierced and awakened the brutified
      conscience; but illuminated thought, finely-dividing speech, were the choicer weapons of the
      Divine armoury, which whoso could wield must be careful not to leave idle.
Here, then, was the longed-for opportunity. Here was an engagement—an expression of a strong
      wish—on the part of Philip Debarry, if it were in his power, to procure a satisfaction to
      Rufus Lyon. How had that man of God and exemplary Independent minister, Mr Ainsworth, of
      persecuted sanctity, conducted himself when a similar occasion had befallen
       him at Amsterdam? He had thought of nothing but the glory of the highest cause, and had
      converted the offer of recompense into a public debate with a Jew on the chief mysteries of
      the faith. Here was a model: the case was nothing short of a heavenly indication, and he,
      Rufus Lyon, would seize the occasion to demand a public debate with the Rector on the
      Constitution of the true Church.
What if he were inwardly torn by doubt and anxiety concerning his own private relations and
      the facts of his past life? That danger of absorption within the narrow bounds of self only
      urged him the more towards action which had a wider bearing, and might tell on the welfare of
      England at large. It was decided. Before the minister went down to his breakfast that morning
      he had written the following letter to Mr Philip Debarry:—
Sir,—Referring to your letter of yesterday, I find the following words: "I shall
       consider myself doubly fortunate if at any time you can point out to me some method by which
       I may procure you as lively a satisfaction as I am now feeling, in that full and speedy
       relief from anxiety which I owe to your considerate conduct ."
I am not unaware, sir, that, in the usage of the

world, there are words of courtesy (so called) which are understood, by those amongst whom
       they are current, to have no precise meaning, and to constitute no bond or obligation. I will
       not now insist that this is an abuse of language, wherein our fallible nature requires the
       strictest safeguards against laxity and misapplication, for I do not apprehend that in
       writing the words I have above quoted, you were open to the reproach of using phrases which,
       while seeming to carry a specific meaning, were really no more than what is called a polite
       form. I believe, sir, that you used these words advisedly, sincerely, and with an honourable
       intention of acting on them as a pledge, should such action be demanded. No other supposition
       on my part would correspond to the character you bear as a young man who aspires (albeit
       mistakenly) to engraft the finest fruits of public virtue on a creed and institutions,
       whereof the sap is composed rather of human self-seeking than of everlasting truth.
Wherefore I act on this my belief in the integrity of your written word; and I beg you
       to procure for me (as it is doubtless in your power) that I may be allowed a public
       discussion with your near relative, the Rector of this parish, the Reverned Augustus Debarry,
       to be held in the large room of the Free School,

or in the Assembly Room of the Marquis of Granby, these being the largest covered spaces
       at our command. For I presume he would neither allow me to speak within his church, nor would
       consent himself to speak within my chapel; and the probable inclemency of the approaching
       season forbids an assured expectation that we could discourse in the open air. The subjects I
       desire to discuss are,—first, the Constitution of the true Church; and, secondly, the bearing
       thereupon of the English Reformation. Confidently expecting that you will comply with this
       request, which is the sequence of your expressed desire, I remain, sir, yours, with the
       respect offered to a sincere withstander,
RUFUS LYON.
Malthouse Yard.
After writing this letter, the good Rufus felt that serenity and elevation of mind which is
      infallibly brought by a preoccupation with the wider relations of things. Already he was
      beginning to sketch the course his argument might most judiciously take in the coming debate;
      his thoughts were running into sentences, and marking off careful exceptions in parentheses;
      and he had come down and seated himself at the breakfast-table quite automatically, without
      expectation of toast
       or coffee, when Esther's voice and touch recalled him to an inward debate of another
      kind, in which he felt himself much weaker. Again there arose before him the image of that
      cool, hard-eyed, worldly man, who might be this dear child's father, and one against whose
      rights he had himself grievously offended. Always as the image recurred to him Mr Lyon's heart
      sent forth a prayer for guidance, but no definite guidance had yet made itself visible for
      him. It could not be guidance—it was a temptation—that said, "Let the matter rest: seek to
      know no more; know only what is thrust upon you." The remembrance that in his time of
      wandering he had wilfully remained in ignorance of facts which he might have inquired after,
      deepened the impression that it was now an imperative duty to seek the fullest attainable
      knowledge. And the inquiry might possibly issue in a blessed repose, by putting a negative on
      all his suspicions. But the more vividly all the circumstances became present to him, the more
      unfit he felt himself to set about any investigation concerning this man who called himself
      Maurice Christian. He could seek no confidant or helper among "the brethren;" he was obliged
      to admit to himself that the members of
       his church, with whom he hoped to go to heaven, were not easy to converse with on
      earth touching the deeper secrets of his experience, and were still less able to advise him as
      to the wisest procedure, in a case of high delicacy, with a worldling who had a
      carefully-trimmed whisker and a fashionable costume. For the first time in his life it
      occurred to the minister that he should be glad of an adviser who had more worldly than
      spiritual experience, and that it might not be inconsistent with his principles to seek some
      light from one who had studied human law. But it was a thought to be paused upon, and not
      followed out rashly; some other guidance might intervene.
Esther noticed that her father was in a fit of abstraction, that he seemed to swallow his
      coffee and toast quite unconsciously, and that he vented from time to time a low guttural
      interjection, which was habitual with him when he was absorbed by an inward discussion. She
      did not disturb him by remarks, and only wondered whether anything unusual had occurred on
      Sunday evening. But at last she thought it needful to say, "You recollect what I told you
      yesterday, father?"
"Nay, child; what?" said Mr Lyon, rousing himself.

"That Mr Jermyn asked me if you would probably be at home this morning before one
      o'clock."
Esther was surprised to see her father start and change colour as if he had been shaken by
      some sudden collision before he answered,
"Assuredly; I do not intend to move from my study after I have once been out to give this
      letter to Zachary."
"Shall I tell Lyddy to take him up at once to your study if he comes? If not, I shall have
      to stay in my own room, because I shall be at home all this morning, and it is rather cold now
      to sit without a fire."
"Yes, my dear, let him come up to me; unless, indeed, he should bring a second person, which
      might happen, seeing that in all likelihood he is coming, as hitherto, on electioneering
      business. And I could not well accommodate two visitors up-stairs."
While Mr Lyon went out to Zachary, the pewopener, to give him a second time the commission
      of carrying a letter to Treby Manor, Esther gave her injunction to Lyddy that if one gentleman
      came he was to be shown up-stairs—if two, they were to be shown into the parlour. But she had
      to resolve various questions before Lyddy clearly saw what was expected of her,—as that, "if
      it was
       the gentleman as came on Thursday in the pepper-and-salt coat, was he to be shown
      up-stairs? And the gentleman from the Manor yesterday as went out whistling—had Miss Esther
      heard about him? There seemed no end of these great folks coming to Malthouse Yard since there
      was talk of the election; but they might be poor lost creatures the most of 'em." Whereupon
      Lyddy shook her head and groaned, under an edifying despair as to the future lot of gentlemen
      callers.
Esther always avoided asking questions of Lyddy, who found an answer as she found a key, by
      pouring out a pocketful of miscellanies. But she had remarked so many indications that
      something had happened to cause her father unusual excitement and mental preoccupation, that
      she could not help connecting with them the fact of this visit from the Manor, which he had
      not mentioned to her.
She sat down in the dull parlour and took up her netting; for since Sunday she had felt
      unable to read when she was alone, being obliged, in spite of herself, to think of Felix
      Holt—to imagine what he would like her to be, and what sort of views he took of life so as to
      make it seem valuable in the absence of all elegance, luxury, gaiety, or romance. Had he yet
      reflected that he had behaved very
       rudely to her on Sunday? Perhaps not. Perhaps he had dismissed her from his mind
      with contempt. And at that thought Esther's eyes smarted unpleasantly. She was fond of
      netting, because it showed to advantage both her hand and her foot; and across this image of
      Felix Holt's indifference and contempt there passed the vaguer image of a possible somebody
      who would admire her hands and feet, and delight in looking at their beauty, and long, yet not
      dare, to kiss them. Life would be much easier in the presence of such a love. But it was
      precisely this longing after her own satisfaction that Felix had reproached her with. Did he
      want her to be heroic? That seemed impossible without some great occasion. Her life was a heap
      of fragments, and so were her thoughts: some great energy was needed to bind them together.
      Esther was beginning to lose her complacency at her own wit and criticism; to lose the sense
      of superiority in an awakening need for reliance on one whose vision was wider, whose nature
      was purer and stronger than her own. But then, she said to herself, that "one" must be tender
      to her, not rude and predominating in his manners. A man with any chivalry in him could never
      adopt a scolding tone towards a woman—that is, towards a charming woman. But
       Felix had no chivalry in him. He loved lecturing and opinion too well ever to
      love any woman.
In this way Esther strove to see that Felix was thoroughly in the wrong—at least, if he did
      not come again expressly to show that he was sorry.

</div></body></text></TEI>