<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="5">
CHAPTER IV.

"A pious and painful preacher." — Fuller.
Mr Lyon lived in a small house, not quite so good as the parish clerk's, adjoining
      the entry which led to the Chapel Yard. The new prosperity of Dissent at Treby had led to an
      enlargement of the chapel, which absorbed all extra funds and left none for the enlargement of
      the minister's income. He sat this morning, as usual, in a low up-stairs room, called his
      study, which, by means of a closet capable of holding his bed, served also as a sleeping-room.
      The book-shelves did not suffice for his store of old books, which lay about him in piles so
      arranged as to leave narrow lanes between them; for the minister was much given to walking
      about during his hours of meditation, and very narrow passages would serve for his small legs,
      unencumbered by any other drapery than his black silk stockings and the flexible, though
      prominent, bows of black
       ribbon that tied his knee-breeches. He was walking about now, with his hands
      clasped behind him, an attitude in which his body seemed to bear about the same proportion to
      his head as the lower part of a stone Hermes bears to the carven image that crowns it. His
      face looked old and worn, yet the curtain of hair that fell from his bald crown and hung about
      his neck retained much of its original auburn tint, and his large, brown, shortsighted eyes
      were still clear and bright. At the first glance, every one thought him a very odd-looking
      rusty old man; the free-school boys often hooted after him, and called him "Revelations;" and
      to many respectable Church people, old Lyon's little legs and large head seemed to make
      Dissent additionally preposterous. But he was too shortsighted to notice those who tittered at
      him—too absent from the world of small facts and petty impulses in which titterers live. With
      Satan to argue against on matters of vital experience as well as of church government, with
      great texts to meditate on, which seemed to get deeper as he tried to fathom them, it had
      never occurred to him to reflect what sort of image his small person made on the retina of a
      light-minded beholder. The good Rufus had his ire and his egoism; but they existed only as the
       red heat which gave force to his belief and his teaching. He was susceptible
      concerning the true office of deacons in the primitive church, and his small nervous body was
      jarred from head to foot by the concussion of an argument to which he saw no answer. In fact,
      the only moments when he could be said to be really conscious of his body, were when he
      trembled under the pressure of some agitating thought.
He was meditating on the text for his Sunday morning sermon: "And all the people said,
      Amen"— a mere mustard-seed of a text, which had split at first only into two divisions, "What
      was said," and "Who said it;" but these were growing into a many-branched discourse, and the
      preacher's eyes dilated, and a smile played about his mouth till, as his manner was, when he
      felt happily inspired, he had begun to utter his thoughts aloud in the varied measure and
      cadence habitual to him, changing from a rapid but distinct undertone to a loud emphatic
       rallentando.
"My brethren, do you think that great shout was raised in Israel by each man's waiting to
      say 'amen' till his neighbours had said amen? Do you think there will ever be a great shout
      for the right—the shout of a nation as of one man,
       rounded and whole, like the voice of the archangel that bound together all the
      listeners of earth and heaven—if every Christian of you peeps round to see what his neighbours
      in good coats are doing, or else puts his hat before his face that he may shout and never be
      heard? But this is what you do: when the servant of God stands up to deliver his message, do
      you lay your souls beneath the Word as you set out your plants beneath the falling rain? No;
      one of you sends his eyes to all corners, he smothers his soul with small questions, 'What
      does brother Y. think?' 'Is this doctrine high enough for brother Z.?' 'Will the church
      members be pleased?' And another—"
Here the door was opened, and old Lyddy, the minister's servant, put in her head to say, in
      a tone of despondency, finishing with a groan, "Here is Mrs Holt wanting to speak to you; she
      says she comes out of season, but she's in trouble."
"Lyddy," said Mr Lyon, falling at once into a quiet conversational tone, "if you are
      wrestling with the enemy, let me refer you to Ezekiel the thirteenth and twenty-second, and
      beg of you not to groan. It is a stumbling-block and offence to my daughter; she would take no
      broth yesterday, because she said you had cried into it. Thus you cause the truth to
       be lightly spoken of, and make the enemy rejoice. If your face-ache gives him an
      advantage, take a little warm ale with your meat—I do not grudge the money."
"If I thought my drinking warm ale would hinder poor dear Miss Esther from speaking light—
      but she hates the smell of it."
"Answer not again, Lyddy, but send up Mistress Holt to me."
Lyddy closed the door immediately.
"I lack grace to deal with these weak sisters," said the minister, again thinking aloud, and
      walking. "Their needs lie too much out of the track of my meditations, and take me often
      unawares. Mistress Holt is another who darkens counsel by words without knowledge, and angers
      the reason of the natural man. Lord, give me patience. My sins were heavier to bear than this
      woman's folly. Come in, Mistress Holt, come in."
He hastened to disencumber a chair of Matthew Henry's Commentary, and begged his visitor to
      be seated. She was a tall elderly woman, dressed in black, with a light-brown front and a
      black band over her forehead. She moved the chair a little and seated herself in it with some
      emphasis, looking fixedly at the opposite wall with a hurt and argumentative
       expression. Mr Lyon had placed himself in the chair against his desk, and waited
      with the resolute resignation of a patient who is about to undergo an operation. But his
      visitor did not speak.
"You have something on your mind, Mistress Holt?" he said, at last.
"Indeed I have, sir, else I shouldn't be here."
"Speak freely."
"It's well known to you, Mr Lyon, that my husband, Mr Holt, came from the north, and was a
      member in Malthouse Yard long before you began to be pastor of it, which was seven
      year ago last Michaelmas. It's the truth, Mr Lyon, and I'm not that woman to sit here and say
      it if it wasn't true."
"Certainly, it is true."
"And if my husband had been alive when you'd come to preach upon trial, he'd have been as
      good a judge of your gifts as Mr Nuttwood or Mr Muscat, though whether he'd have agreed with
      some that your doctrine wasn't high enough, I can't say. For myself, I've my opinion about
      high doctrine."
"Was it my preaching you came to speak about?" said the minister, hurrying in the
      question.
"No, Mr Lyon, I'm not that woman. But this I will say, for my husband died before
      your time,
       that he had a wonderful gift in prayer, as the old members well know, if anybody
      likes to ask 'em, not believing my words; and he believed himself that the receipt for the
      Cancer Cure, which I've sent out in bottles till this very last April before September as now
      is, and have bottles standing by me, —he believed it was sent him in answer to prayer; and
      nobody can deny it, for he prayed most regular, and read out of the green baize Bible."
Mrs Holt paused, appearing to think that Mr Lyon had been successfully confuted, and should
      show himself convinced.
"Has any one been aspersing your husband's character?" said Mr Lyon, with a slight
      initiative towards that relief of groaning for which he had reproved Lyddy.
"Sir, they daredn't. For though he was a man of prayer, he didn't want skill and knowledge
      to find things out for himself; and that was what I used to say to my friends when
      they wondered at my marrying a man from Lancashire, with no trade nor fortune but what he'd
      got in his head. But my husband's tongue 'ud have been a fortune to anybody, and there was
      many a one said it was as good as a dose of physic to hear him talk; not but what that got him
      into trouble in Lancashire, but he
       always said, if the worst came to the worst, he could go and preach to the
      blacks. But he did better than that, Mr Lyon, for he married me; and this I will say,
      that for age, and conduct, and managing—"
"Mistress Holt," interrupted the minister, "these are not the things whereby we may edify
      one another. Let me beg of you to be as brief as you can. My time is not my own."
"Well, Mr Lyon, I've a right to speak to my own character; and I'm one of your congregation,
      though I'm not a church member, for I was born in the general Baptist connection: and as for
      being saved without works, there's a many, I daresay, can't do without that doctrine; but I
      thank the Lord I never needed to put my self on a level with the thief on the cross.
      I've done my duty, and more, if anybody comes to that; for I've gone without my bit
      of meat to make broth for a sick neighbour: and if there's any of the church members say
      they've done the same, I'd ask them if they had the sinking at the stomach as I have; for I've
      ever strove to do the right thing, and more, for good-natured I always was; and I little
      thought, after being respected by everybody, I should come to be reproached by my own son. And
      my husband said, when he was
       a-dying—'Mary,' he said, 'the Elixir, and the Pills, and the Cure will support
      you, for they've a great name in all the country round, and you'll pray for a blessing on
      them.' And so I have done, Mr Lyon; and to say they're not good medicines, when they've been
      taken for fifty miles round by high and low, and rich and poor, and nobody speaking against
      'em but Dr Lukin, it seems to me it's a flying in the face of Heaven; for if it was wrong to
      take the medicines, couldn't the blessed Lord have stopped it?"
Mrs Holt was not given to tears; she was much sustained by conscious unimpeachableness, and
      by an argumentative tendency which usually checks the too great activity of the lachrymal
      gland; nevertheless her eyes had become moist, her fingers played on her knee in an agitated
      manner, and she finally plucked a bit of her gown and held it with great nicety between her
      thumb and finger. Mr Lyon, however, by listening attentively, had begun partly to divine the
      source of her trouble.
"Am I wrong in gathering from what you say, Mistress Holt, that your son has objected in
      some way to your sale of your late husband's medicines?"
"Mr Lyon, he's masterful beyond everything, and
       he talks more than his father did. I've got my reason, Mr Lyon, and if anybody
      talks sense I can follow him; but Felix talks so wild, and contradicts his mother. And what do
      you think he says, after giving up his 'prenticeship, and going off to study at Glasgow, and
      getting through all the bit of money his father saved for his bringing-up—what has all his
      learning come to? He says I'd better never open my Bible, for it's as bad poison to me as the
      pills are to half the people as swallow 'em. You'll not speak of this again, Mr Lyon—I don't
      think ill enough of you to believe that . For I suppose a Christian can understand
      the word o' God without going to Glasgow, and there's texts upon texts about ointment and
      medicine, and there's one as might have been made for a receipt of my husband's—it's just as
      if it was a riddle, and Holt's Elixir was the answer."
"Your son uses rash words, Mistress Holt," said the minister, "but it is quite true that we
      may err in giving a too private interpretation to the Scripture. The word of God has to
      satisfy the larger needs of His people, like the rain and the sunshine— which no man must
      think to be meant for his own patch of seed-ground solely. Will it not be well that I should
      see your son, and talk with him
       on these matters? He was at chapel, I observed, and I suppose I am to be his
      pastor."
"That was what I wanted to ask you, Mr Lyon. For perhaps he'll listen to you, and not talk
      you down as he does his poor mother. For after we'd been to chapel, he spoke better of you
      than he does of most: he said you was a fine old fellow, and an old-fashioned Puritan—he uses
      dreadful language, Mr Lyon; but I saw he didn't mean you ill, for all that. He calls most
      folks' religion rottenness; and yet another time he'll tell me I ought to feel myself a
      sinner, and do God's will and not my own. But it's my belief he says first one thing and then
      another only to abuse his mother. Or else he's going off his head, and must be sent to a
      'sylum. But if he writes to the North Loamshire Herald first, to tell everybody the
      medicines are good for nothing, how can I ever keep him and myself?"
"Tell him I shall feel favoured if he will come and see me this evening," said Mr Lyon, not
      without a little prejudice in favour of the young man, whose language about the preacher in
      Malthouse Yard did not seem to him to be altogether dreadful. "Meanwhile, my friend, I counsel
      you to send up a supplication, which I shall not fail to offer also, that you may receive a
      spirit of humility and submission,
       so that you may not be hindered from seeing and following the Divine guidance in
      this matter by any false lights of pride and obstinacy. Of this more when I have spoken with
      your son."
"I'm not proud or obstinate, Mr Lyon. I never did say I was everything that was bad, and I
      never will. And why this trouble should be sent on me above everybody else—for I haven't told
      you all. He's made himself a journeyman to Mr Prowd the watchmaker—after all this learning—and
      he says he'll go with patches on his knees, and he shall like himself the better. And as for
      his having little boys to teach, they'll come in all weathers with dirty shoes. If it's
      madness, Mr Lyon, it's no use your talking to him."
"We shall see. Perhaps it may even be the disguised working of grace within him. We must not
      judge rashly. Many eminent servants of God have been led by ways as strange."
"Then I'm sorry for their mothers, that's all, Mr Lyon; and all the more if they'd been
      well-spoken-on women. For not my biggest enemy, whether it's he or she, if they'll speak the
      truth, can turn round and say I've deserved this trouble. And when everybody gets their due,
      and people's doing are spoke of on the house-tops, as the Bible says
       they will be, it'll be known what I've gone through with those medicines—the
      pounding, and the pouring, and the letting stand, and the weighing—up early and down
      late—there's nobody knows yet but One that's worthy to know; and the pasting o' the printed
      labels right side upwards. There's few women would have gone through with it; and it's
      reasonable to think it'll be made up to me; for if there's promised and purchased blessings, I
      should think this trouble is purchasing 'em. For if my son Felix doesn't have a
      strait-waistcoat put on him, he'll have his way. But I say no more. I wish you good morning,
      Mr Lyon, and thank you, though I well know it's your duty to act as you're doing. And I never
      troubled you about my own soul, as some do who look down on me for not being a church
      member."
"Farewell, Mistress Holt, farewell. I pray that a more powerful teacher than I am may
      instruct you."
The door was closed, and the much-tried Rufus walked about again, saying aloud,
      groaningly,
"This woman has sat under the Gospel all her life, and she is as blind as a heathen, and as
      proud and stiff-necked as a Pharisee; yet she is one of the souls I watch for. 'Tis true that
      even Sara, the
       chosen mother of God's people, showed a spirit of unbelief, and perhaps of
      selfish anger; and it is a passage that bears the unmistakable signet, 'doing honour to the
      wife or woman, as unto the weaker vessel.' For therein is the greatest check put on the ready
      scorn of the natural man."

</div></body></text></TEI>