<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="50">
CHAPTER XLIX.
That day Esther dined with old Mr Transome only. Harold sent word that he was
      engaged and had already dined, and Mrs Transome that she was feeling ill. Esther was much
      disappointed that any tidings Harold might have brought relating to Felix were deferred in
      this way; and, her anxiety making her fearful, she was haunted by the thought that if there
      had been anything cheering to tell, he would have found time to tell it without delay. Old Mr
      Transome went as usual to his sofa in the library to sleep after dinner, and Esther had to
      seat herself in the small drawing-room, in a well-lit solitude that was unusually dispiriting
      to her. Pretty as this room was, she did not like it. Mrs Transome's fulllength portrait,
      being the only picture there, urged
       itself too strongly on her attention: the youthful brilliancy it represented
      saddened Esther by its inevitable association with what she daily saw had come instead of it—a
      joyless, embittered age. The sense that Mrs Transome was unhappy, affected Esther more and
      more deeply as the growing familiarity which relaxed the efforts of the hostess revealed more
      and more the threadbare tissue of this majestic lady's life. Even the flowers and the pure
      sunshine and the sweet waters of Paradise would have been spoiled for a young heart, if the
      bowered walks had been haunted by an Eve gone grey with bitter memories of an Adam who had
      complained, "The woman ... she gave me of the tree, and I did eat." And many of us know how,
      even in our childhood, some blank discontented face on the background of our home has marred
      our summer mornings. Why was it, when the birds were singing, when the fields were a garden,
      and when we were clasping another little hand just larger than our own, there was somebody who
      found it hard to smile? Esther had got far beyond that childhood to a time and circumstances
      when this daily presence of elderly dissatisfaction amidst such outward things as she had
      always thought must greatly help to satisfy, awaked, not merely vague questioning emotion, but
      strong determining
       thought. And now, in these hours since her return from Loamford, her mind was in
      that state of highly-wrought activity, that large discourse, in which we seem to stand aloof
      from our own life— weighing impartially our own temptations and the weak desires that most
      habitually solicit us. "I think I am getting that power Felix wished me to have: I shall soon
      see strong visions," she said to herself, with a melancholy smile flitting across her face, as
      she put out the wax lights that she might get rid of the oppressive urgency of walls and
      upholstery and that portrait smiling with deluded brightness, unwitting of the future.
Just then Dominic came to say that Mr Harold sent his compliments, and begged that she would
      grant him an interview in his study. He disliked the small drawing-room: if she would oblige
      him by going to the study at once, he would join her very soon. Esther went, in some wonder
      and anxiety. What she most feared or hoped in these moments related to Felix Holt, and it did
      not occur to her that Harold could have anything special to say to her that evening on other
      subjects.
Certainly the study was pleasanter than the small drawing-room. A quiet light shone on
      nothing but greenness and dark wood, and Dominic
       had placed a delightful chair for her opposite to his master's, which was still
      empty. All the little objects of luxury around indicated Harold's habitual occupancy; and as
      Esther sat opposite all these things along with the empty chair which suggested the coming
      presence, the expectation of his beseeching homage brought with it an impatience and
      repugnance which she had never felt before. While these feelings were strongly upon her, the
      door opened and Harold appeared.
He had recovered his self-possession since his interview with his mother: he had dressed,
      and was perfectly calm. He had been occupied with resolute thoughts, determining to do what he
      knew that perfect honour demanded, let it cost him what it would. It is true he had a tacit
      hope behind, that it might not cost him what he prized most highly: it is true he had a
      glimpse even of reward; but it was not less true that he would have acted as he did without
      that hope or glimpse. It was the most serious moment in Harold Transome's life: for the first
      time the iron had entered into his soul, and he felt the hard pressure of our common lot, the
      yoke of that mighty resistless destiny laid upon us by the acts of other men as well as our
      own.

When Esther looked at him she relented, and felt ashamed of her gratuitous impatience. She
      saw that his mind was in some way burdened. But then immediately sprang the dread that he had
      to say something hopeless about Felix.
They shook hands in silence, Esther looking at him with anxious surprise. He released her
      hand, but it did not occur to her to sit down, and they both continued standing on the
      hearth.
"Don't let me alarm you," said Harold, seeing that her face gathered solemnity from his. "I
      suppose I carry the marks of a past agitation. It relates entirely to troubles of my own—of my
      own family. No one beyond is involved in them."
Esther wondered still more, and felt still more relenting.
"But," said Harold, after a slight pause, and in a voice that was weighted with new feeling,
      "it involves a difference in my position with regard to you; and it is on this point that I
      wished to speak to you at once. When a man sees what ought to be done, he had better do it
      forthwith. He can't answer for himself to-morrow."
While Esther continued to look at him, with eyes widened by anxious expectation, Harold
      turned a
       little, leaned on the mantelpiece, and ceased to look at her as he spoke.
"My feelings drag me another way. I need not tell you that your regard has become very
      important to me—that if our mutual position had been different— that, in short, you must have
      seen—if it had not seemed to be a matter of worldly interest, I should have told you plainly
      already that I loved you, and that my happiness could be complete only if you would consent to
      marry me."
Esther felt her heart beginning to beat painfully. Harold's voice and words moved her so
      much that her own task seemed more difficult than she had before imagined. It seemed as if the
      silence, unbroken by anything but the clicking of the fire, had been long, before Harold
      turned round towards her again and said.
"But to-day I have heard something that affects my own position. I cannot tell you what it
      is. There is no need. It is not any culpability of my own. But I have not just the same
      unsullied name and fame in the eyes of the world around us, as I believed that I had when I
      allowed myself to entertain that wish about you. You are very young, entering on a fresh life
      with bright prospects—you are worthy of everything that is best. I may be
       too vain in thinking it was at all necessary; but I take this precaution against
      myself. I shut myself out from the chance of trying, after to-day, to induce you to accept
      anything which others may regard as specked and stained by any obloquy, however slight."
Esther was keenly touched. With a paradoxical longing, such as often happens to us, she
      wished at that moment that she could have loved this man with her whole heart. The tears came
      into her eyes; she did not speak, but, with an angel's tenderness in her face, she laid her
      hand on his sleeve. Harold commanded himself strongly, and said,
"What is to be done now is, that we should proceed at once to the necessary legal measures
      for putting you in possession of your own, and arranging mutual claims. After that I shall
      probably leave England."
Esther was oppressed by an overpowering difficulty. Her sympathy with Harold at this moment
      was so strong, that it spread itself like a mist over all previous thought and resolve. It was
      impossible now to wound him afresh. With her hand still resting on his arm, she said
      timidly,
"Should you be urged—obliged to go—in any case?"

"Not in every case, perhaps," Harold said, with an evident movement of the blood towards his
      face; "at least not for long, not for always."
Esther was conscious of the gleam in his eyes. With terror at herself, she said, in
      difficult haste, "I can't speak. I can't say anything to-night. A great decision has to be
      made: I must wait—till to-morrow."
She was moving her hand from his arm, when Harold took it reverentially and raised it to his
      lips. She turned towards her chair, and as he released her hand she sank down on the seat with
      a sense that she needed that support. She did not want to go away from Harold yet. All the
      while there was something she needed to know, and yet she could not bring herself to ask it.
      She must resign herself to depend entirely on his recollection of anything beyond his own
      immediate trial. She sat helpless under contending sympathies, while Harold stood at some
      distance from her, feeling more harassed by weariness and uncertainty, now that he had
      fulfilled his resolve, and was no longer under the excitement of actually fulfilling it.
Esther's last words had forbidden his revival of the subject that was necessarily supreme
      with him. But still she sat there, and his mind, busy as to the
       probabilities of her feeling, glanced over all she had done and said in the
      later days of their intercourse. It was this retrospect that led him to say at last,
"You will be glad to hear that we shall get a very powerfully signed memorial to the Home
      Secretary about young Holt. I think your speaking for him helped a great deal. You made all
      the men wish what you wished."
This was what Esther had been yearning to hear and dared not ask, as well from respect for
      Harold's absorption in his own sorrow, as from the shrinking that belongs to our dearest need.
      The intense relief of hearing what she longed to hear, affected her whole frame: her colour,
      her expression, changed as if she had been suddenly freed from some torturing constraint. But
      we interpret signs of emotion as we interpret other signs—often quite erroneously, unless we
      have the right key to what they signify. Harold did not gather that this was what Esther had
      waited for, or that the change in her indicated more than he had expected her to feel at this
      allusion to an unusual act which she had done under a strong impulse.
Besides, the introduction of a new subject after very momentous words have passed, and are
      still dwelling on the mind, is necessarily a sort of concussion,
       shaking us into a new adjustment of ourselves.
It seemed natural that soon afterward Esther put out her hand and said, "Good-night."
Harold went to his bedroom on the same level with his study, thinking of the morning with an
      uncertainty that dipped on the side of hope. This sweet woman, for whom he felt a passion
      newer than any he had expected to feel, might possibly make some hard things more bearable—if
      she loved him. If not—well, he had acted so that he could defy any one to say he was not a
      gentleman.
Esther went up-stairs to her bedroom, thinking that she should not sleep that night. She set
      her light on a high stand, and did not touch her dress. What she desired to see with
      undisturbed clearness were things not present: the rest she needed was the rest of a final
      choice. It was difficult. On each side there was renunciation.
She drew up her blinds, liking to see the grey sky, where there were some veiled glimmerings
      of moonlight, and the lines of the for-ever running river, and the bending movement of the
      black trees. She wanted the largeness of the world to help her thought. This young creature,
      who trod lightly backward and forward, and leaned against the window-frame,
       and shook back her brown curls as she looked at something not visible, had lived
      hardly more than six months since she saw Felix Holt for the first time. But life is measured
      by the rapidity of change, the succession of influences that modify the being; and Esther had
      undergone something little short of an inward revolution. The revolutionary struggle, however,
      was not quite at an end.
There was something which she now felt profoundly to be the best thing that life could give
      her. But—if it was to be had at all—it was not to be had without paying a heavy price for it,
      such as we must pay for all that is greatly good. A supreme love, a motive that gives a
      sublime rhythm to a woman's life, and exalts habit into partnership with the soul's highest
      needs, is not to be had where and how she wills: to know that high initiation, she must often
      tread where it is hard to tread, and feel the chill air, and watch through darkness. It is not
      true that love makes all things easy: it makes us choose what is difficult. Esther's previous
      life had brought her into close acquaintance with many negations, and with many positive ills
      too, not of the acutely painful, but of the distasteful sort. What if she chose the hardship,
      and had to bear it alone, with no strength to lean upon—no other
       better self to make a place for trust and joy? Her past experience saved her
      from illusions. She knew the dim life of the back street, the contact with sordid vulgarity,
      the lack of refinement for the senses, the summons to a daily task; and the gain that was to
      make that life of privation something on which she dreaded to turn her back, as if it were
      heaven—the presence and the love of Felix Holt—was only a quivering hope, not a certainty. It
      was not in her woman's nature that the hope should not spring within her and make a strong
      impulse. She knew that he loved her: had he not said how a woman might help a man if she were
      worthy? and if she proved herself worthy? But still there was the dread that after all she
      might find herself on the stony road alone, and faint and be weary. Even with the fulfilment
      of her hope, she knew that she pledged herself to meet high demands.
And on the other side there was a lot where everything seemed easy—but for the fatal absence
      of those feelings which, now she had once known them, it seemed nothing less than a fall and a
      degradation to do without. With a terrible prescience which a multitude of impressions during
      her stay at Transome Court had contributed to form, she saw
       herself in a silken bondage that arrested all motive, and was nothing better
      than a well cushioned despair. To be restless amidst ease, to be languid among all appliances
      for pleasure, was a possibility that seemed to haunt the rooms of this house, and wander with
      her under the oaks and elms of the park. And Harold Transome's love, no longer a hovering
      fancy with which she played, but become a serious fact, seemed to threaten her with a stifling
      oppression. The homage of a man may be delightful until he asks straight for love, by which a
      woman renders homage. Since she and Felix had kissed each other in the prison, she felt as if
      she had vowed herself away, as if memory lay on her lips like a seal of possession. Yet what
      had happened that very evening had strengthened her liking for Harold, and her care for all
      that regarded him: it had increased her repugnance to turning him out of anything he had
      expected to be his, or to snatching anything from him on the ground of an arbitrary claim. It
      had even made her dread, as a coming pain, the task of saying anything to him that was not a
      promise of the utmost comfort under this newly-disclosed trouble of his.
It was already near midnight, but with these thoughts succeeding and returning in her mind
      like
       scenes through which she was living, Esther had a more intense wakefulness than
      any she had known by day. All had been stillness hitherto, except the fitful wind outside. But
      her ears now caught a sound within—slight, but sudden. She moved near her door, and heard the
      sweep of something on the matting outside. It came closer, and paused. Then it began again,
      and seemed to sweep away from her. Then it approached, and paused as it had done before.
      Esther listened, wondering. The same thing happened again and again, till she could bear it no
      longer. She opened her door, and in the dim light of the corridor, where the glass above
      seemed to make a glimmering sky, she saw Mrs Transome's tall figure pacing slowly, with her
      cheek upon her hand.

</div></body></text></TEI>