<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Felix Holt, the Radical</title><author>Eliot, George [pseud.] (1819-1880)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1866</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER II.

A jolly parson of the good old stock,
By birth a gentleman, yet homely too,
Suiting his phrase to Hodge and Margery
Whom he once christened, and has married since.
A little lax in doctrine and in life,
Not thinking God was captions in such things
As what a man might drink on holidays,
But holding true religion was to do
As you'd be done by—which could never mean
That he should preach three sermons in a week.
Harold Transome did not choose to spend the whole evening with his mother. It was
      his habit to compress a great deal of effective conversation into a short space of time,
      asking rapidly all the questions he wanted to get answered, and diluting no subject with
      irrelevancies, paraphrase, or repetitions. He volunteered no information about himself and his
      past life at Smyrna, but answered pleasantly enough, though briefly, whenever his mother asked
      for any detail. He was evidently ill-satisfied as to his palate, trying red pepper to
      everything, then asking if there were any relishing sauces in
       the house, and when Hickes brought various home-filled bottles, trying several,
      finding them failures, and finally falling back from his plate in despair. Yet he remained
      good-humoured, saying something to his father now and then for the sake of being kind, and
      looking on with a pitying shrug as he saw him watch Hickes cutting his food. Mrs Transome
      thought with some bitterness that Harold showed more feeling for her feeble husband who had
      never cared in the least about him, than for her, who had given him more than the usual share
      of mother's love. An hour after dinner, Harold, who had already been turning over the leaves
      of his mother's account-books, said,
"I shall just cross the park to the parsonage to see my uncle Lingon."
"Very well. He can answer more questions for you."
"Yes," said Harold, quite deaf to the innuendo, and accepting the words as a simple
      statement of the fact. "I want to hear all about the game and the North Loamshire hunt. I'm
      fond of sport; we had a great deal of it at Smyrna, and it keeps down my fat."
The Reverend John Lingon became very talkative over his second bottle of port, which was
      opened on
       his nephew's arrival. He was not curious about the manners of Smyrna, or about
      Harold's experience, but he unbosomed himself very freely as to what he himself liked and
      disliked, which of the farmers he suspected of killing the foxes, what game he had bagged that
      very morning, what spot he would recommend as a new cover, and the comparative flatness of all
      existing sport compared with cock-fighting, under which Old England had been prosperous and
      glorious, while, so far as he could see, it had gained little by the abolition of a practice
      which sharpened the faculties of men, gratified the instincts of the fowl, and carried out the
      designs of heaven in its admirable device of spurs. From these main topics, which made his
      points of departure and return, he rambled easily enough at any new suggestion or query; so
      that when Harold got home at a late hour, he was conscious of having gathered from amidst the
      pompous full-toned triviality of his uncle's chat some impressions which were of practical
      importance. Among the Rector's dislikes, it appeared, was Mr Matthew Jermyn.
"A fat-handed, glib-tongued fellow, with a scented cambric handkerchief; one of your
      educated lowbred fellows; a foundling who got his Latin for nothing at Christ's Hospital; one
      of your middle-class
       upstarts who want to rank with gentlemen, and think they'll do it with kid gloves
      and new furniture."
But since Harold meant to stand for the county, Mr Lingon was equally emphatic as to the
      necessity of his not quarrelling with Jermyn till the election was over. Jermyn must be his
      agent; Harold must wink hard till he found himself safely returned; and even then it might be
      well to let Jermyn drop gently and raise no scandal. He himself had no quarrel with the
      fellow: a clergyman should have no quarrels, and he made it a point to be able to take wine
      with any man he met at table. And as to the estate, and his sister's going too much by
      Jermyn's advice, he never meddled with business: it was not his duty as a clergyman. That, he
      considered, was the meaning of Melchisedec and the tithe, a subject into which he had gone to
      some depth thirty years ago, when he preached the Visitation sermon.
The discovery that Harold meant to stand on the Liberal side—nay, that he boldly declared
      himself a Radical—was rather startling; but to his uncle's good-humour, beatified by the
      sipping of port-wine, nothing could seem highly objectionable, provided it did not disturb
      that operation. In the course of
       half an hour he had brought himself to see that anything really worthy to be
      called British Toryism had been entirely extinct since the Duke of Wellington and Sir Robert
      Peel had passed the Catholic Emancipation Bill; that Whiggery, with its rights of man stopping
      short at ten-pound householders, and its policy of pacifying a wild best with a bite, was a
      ridiculous monstrosity; that therefore, since an honest man could not call himself a Tory,
      which it was, in fact, as impossible to be now as to fight for the old Pretender, and could
      still less become that execrable monstrosity a Whig, there remained but one course open to
      him. "Why, lad, if the world was turned into a swamp, I suppose we should leave off shoes and
      stockings, and walk about like cranes"—whence it followed plainly enough that, in these
      hopeless times, nothing was left to men of sense and good family but to retard the national
      ruin by declaring themselves Radicals, and take the inevitable process of changing everything
      out of the hands of beggarly demagogues and purse-proud tradesmen. It is true the Rector was
      helped to this chain of reasoning by Harold's remarks; but he soon became quite ardent in
      asserting the conclusion.
"If the mob can't be turned back, a man of
       family must try and head the mob, and save a few homes and hearths, and keep the
      country up on its last legs as long as he can. And you're a man of family, my lad—dash it!
      you're a Lingon, whatever else you may be, and I'll stand by you. I've no great interest; I'm
      a poor parson. I've been forced to give up hunting; my pointers and a glass of good wine are
      the only decencies becoming my station that I can allow myself. But I'll give you my
      countenance—I'll stick to you as my nephew. There's no need for me to change sides exactly. I
      was born a Tory, and I shall never be a bishop. But if anybody says you're in the wrong, I
      shall say, 'My nephew is in the right; he has turned Radical to save his country. If William
      Pitt had been living now, he'd have done the same; for what did he say when he was dying? Not
      'O save my party!' but 'O save my country, heaven!' That was what they dinned in our ears
      about Peel and the Duke; and now I'll turn it round upon them. They shall be hoist with their
      own petrad. Yes, yes, I'll stand by you."
Harold did not feel sure that his uncle would thoroughly retain this satisfactory thread of
      argument in the uninspired hours of the morning; but the old gentleman was sure to take the
      facts easily
       in the end, and there was no fear of family coolness or quarrelling on this side.
      Harold was glad of it. He was not to be turned aside from any course he had chosen; but he
      disliked all quarrelling as an unpleasant expenditure of energy that could have no good
      practical result. He was at once active and luxurious; fond of mastery, and good-natured
      enough to wish that every one about him should like his mastery; not caring greatly to know
      other people's thoughts, and ready to despise them as blockheads if their thoughts differed
      from his, and yet solicitous that they should have no colourable reason for slight thoughts
      about him . The blockheads must be forced to respect him. Hence, in proportion as he
      foresaw that his equals in the neighbourhood would be indignant with him for his political
      choice, he cared keenly about making a good figure before them in every other way. His conduct
      as a landholder was to be judicious, his establishment was to be kept up generously, his
      imbecile father treated with careful regard, his family relations entirely without scandal. He
      knew that affairs had been unpleasant in his youth —that there had been ugly lawsuits—and that
      his scapegrace brother Durfey had helped to lower still farther the depressed condition of the
      family. All
       this must be retrieved, now that events had made Harold the head of the Transome
      name.
Jermyn must be used for the election, and after that, if he must be got rid of, it would be
      well to shake him loose quietly: his uncle was probably right on both those points. But
      Harold's expectation that he should want to get rid of Jermyn was founded on other reasons
      than his scented handkerchief and his charity-school Latin.
If the lawyer had been presuming on Mrs Transome's ignorance as a woman, and on the stupid
      rakishness of the original heir, the new heir would prove to him that he had calculated
      rashly. Otherwise, Harold had no prejudice against him. In his boyhood and youth he had seen
      Jermyn frequenting Transome Court, but had regarded him with that total indifference with
      which youngsters are apt to view those who neither deny them pleasures nor give them any.
      Jermyn used to smile at him, and speak to him affably; but Harold, half proud, half shy, got
      away from such patronage as soon as possible: he knew Jermyn was a man of business; his
      father, his uncle, and Sir Maximus Debarry did not regard him as a gentleman and their equal.
      He had known no evil of the man; but he saw now that if he were really a covetous upstart,
      there had
       been a temptation for him in the management of the Transome affairs; and it was
      clear that the estate was in a bad condition.
When Mr Jermyn was ushered into the breakfast-room the next morning, Harold found him
      surprisingly little altered by the fifteen years. He was grey, but still remarkably handsome;
      fat, but tall enough to bear that trial to man's dignity. There was as strong a suggestion of
      toilette about him as if he had been five-and-twenty instead of nearly sixty. He chose always
      to dress in black, and was especially addicted to black satin waistcoats, which carried out
      the general sleekness of his appearance; and this, together with his white, fat, but
      beautifully-shaped hands, which he was in the habit of rubbing gently on his entrance into a
      room, gave him very much the air of a lady's physician. Harold remembered with some amusement
      his uncle's dislike of those conspicuous hands; but as his own were soft and dimpled, and as
      he too was given to the innocent practice of rubbing those members, his suspicions were not
      yet deepened.
"I congratulate you, Mrs Transome," said Jermyn, with a soft and deferential smile, "all the
      more," he added, turning towards Harold, "now I have the pleasure of actually seeing your son.
      I
       am glad to perceive that an Eastern climate has not been unfavourable to
      him."
"No," said Harold, shaking Jermyn's hand carelessly, and speaking with more than his usual
      rapid brusqueness, "the question is, whether the English climate will agree with me. It's
      deuced shifting and damp; and as for food, it would be the finest thing in the world for this
      country if the southern cooks would change their religion, get persecuted, and fly to England,
      as the old silk-weavers did."
"There are plenty of foreign cooks for those who are rich enough to pay for them, I
      suppose," said Mrs Transome, "but they are unpleasant people to have about one's house."
"Gad! I don't think so," said Harold.
"The old servants are sure to quarrel with them."
"That's no concern of mine. The old servants will have to put up with my man Dominic, who
      will show them how to cook and do everything else, in a way that will rather astonish
      them."
"Old people are not so easily taught to change all their ways, Harold."
"Well, they can give up and watch the young ones," said Harold, thinking only at that moment
       of old Mrs Hickes and Dominic. But his mother was not thinking of them only.
"You have a valuable servant, it seems," said Jermyn, who understood Mrs Transome better
      than her son did, and wished to smoothen the current of their dialogue.
"O! one of those wonderful southern fellows that make one's life easy. He's of no country in
      particular. I don't know whether he's most of a Jew, a Greek, an Italian, or a Spaniard. He
      speaks five or six languages, one as well as another. He's cook, valet, major-domo, and
      secretary all in one; and what's more, he's an affectionate fellow— I can trust to his
      attachment. That's a sort of human specimen that doesn't grow here in England, I fancy. I
      should have been badly off if I could not have brought Dominic."
They sat down to breakfast with such slight talk as this going on. Each of the party was
      pre-occupied and uneasy. Harold's mind was busy constructing probabilities about what he
      should discover of Jermyn's mismanagement or dubious application of funds, and the sort of
      self-command he must in the worst case exercise in order to use the man as long as he wanted
      him. Jermyn was closely observing Harold with an unpleasant
       sense that there was an expression of acuteness and determination about him which
      would make him formidable. He would certainly have preferred at that moment that there had
      been no second heir of the Transome name to come back upon him from the East. Mrs Transome was
      not observing the two men; rather, her hands were cold, and her whole person shaken by their
      presence; she seemed to hear and see what they said and did with preternatural acuteness, and
      yet she was also seeing and hearing what had been said and done many years before, and feeling
      a dim terror about the future. There were piteous sensibilities in this faded woman, who
      thirty-four years ago, in the splendour of her bloom, had been imperious to one of these men,
      and had rapturously pressed the other as an infant to her bosom, and now knew that she was of
      little consequence to either of them.
"Well, what are the prospects about the election?" said Harold, as the breakfast was
      advancing. "There are two Whigs and one Conservative likely to be in the field, I know. What
      is your opinion of the chances?"
Mr Jermyn had a copious supply of words, which often led him into periphrase, but he
      cultivated a hesitating stammer, which, with a handsome impassiveness
       of face, except when he was smiling at a woman, or when the latent savageness of
      his nature was thoroughly roused, he had found useful in many relations, especially in
      business. No one could have found out that he was not at his ease. "My opinion," he replied,
      "is in a state of balance at present. This division of the county, you are aware, contains one
      manufacturing town of the first magnitude, and several smaller ones. The manufacturing
      interest is widely dispersed. So far— a—there is a presumption—a—in favour of the two Liberal
      candidates. Still with a careful canvass of the agricultural districts, such as those we have
      round us at Treby Magna, I think—a—the auguries— a—would not be unfavourable to the return of
      a Conservative. A fourth candidate of good position, who should coalesce with Mr Debarry—
      a—"
Here Mr Jermyn hesitated for the third time, and Harold broke in.
"That will not be my line of action, so we need not discuss it. If I put up it will be as a
      Radical; and I fancy, in any county that would return Whigs there would be plenty of voters to
      be combed off by a Radical who offered himself with good pretensions."

There was the slightest possible quiver discernible across Jermyn's face. Otherwise he sat
      as he had done before, with his eyes fixed abstractedly on the frill of a ham before him, and
      his hand trifling with his fork. He did not answer immediately, but when he did, he looked
      round steadily at Harold.
"I'm delighted to perceive that you have kept yourself so thoroughly acquainted with English
      politics."
"O, of course," said Harold, impatiently. "I'm aware how things have been going on in
      England. I always meant to come back ultimately. I suppose I know the state of Europe as well
      as if I'd been stationary at Little Treby for the last fifteen years. If a man goes to the
      East, people seem to think he gets turned into something like the one-eyed calender in the
      'Arabian Nights.'"
"Yet I should think there are some things which people who have been stationary at Little
      Treby could tell you, Harold," said Mrs Transome. "It did not signify about your holding
      Radical opinions at Smyrna; but you seem not to imagine how your putting up as a Radical will
      affect your position here, and the position of your family. No one will visit you. And
      then—the sort of people who will support you! You really have no idea what an
       impression it conveys when you say you are a Radical. There are none of our
      equals who will not feel that you have disgraced yourself."
"Pooh!" said Harold, rising and walking along the room.
But Mrs Transome went on with growing anger in her voice—"It seems to me that a man owes
      something to his birth and station, and has no right to take up this notion or the other, just
      as it suits his fancy; still less to work at the overthrow of his class. That was what every
      one said of Lord Grey, and my family at least is as good as Lord Grey's. You have wealth now,
      and might distinguish yourself in the county; and if you had been true to your colours as a
      gentleman, you would have had all the greater opportunity because the times are so bad. The
      Debarrys and Lord Wyvern would have set all the more store by you. For my part, I can't
      conceive what good you propose to yourself. I only entreat you to think again before you take
      any decided step."
"Mother," said Harold, not angrily or with any raising of his voice, but in a quick,
      impatient manner, as if the scene must be got through as quickly as possible; "it is natural
      that you should think in this way. Women, very properly, don't change
       their views, but keep to the notions in which they have been brought up. It
      doesn't signify what they think—they are not called upon to judge or to act. You must really
      leave me to take my own course in these matters, which properly belong to men. Beyond that, I
      will gratify any wish you choose to mention. You shall have a new carriage and a pair of bays
      all to yourself; you shall have the house done up in first-rate style, and I am not thinking
      of marrying. But let us understand that there shall be no further collision between us on
      subjects in which I must be master of my own actions."
"And you will put the crown to the mortifications of my life, Harold. I don't know who would
      be a mother if she could foresee what a slight thing she will be to her son when she is
      old."
Mrs Transome here walked out of the room by the nearest way—the glass door open towards the
      terrance. Mr Jermyn had risen too, and his hands were on the back of his chair. He looked
      quite impassive: it was not the first time he had seen Mrs Transome angry; but now, for the
      first time, he thought the outburst of her temper would be useful to him. She, poor woman,
      knew quite well that she had been unwise, and that she had been
       making herself disaggreeable to Harold to no purpose. But half the sorrows of
      women would be averted if they could repress the speech they know to be useless; nay, the
      speech they have resolved not to utter. Harold continued his walking a moment longer, and then
      said to Jermyn,
"You smoke?"
"No, I always defer to the ladies. Mrs Jermyn is peculiarly sensitive in such matters, and
      doesn't like tobacco."
Harold, who, underneath all the tendencies which had made him a Liberal, had intense
      personal pride, thought, "Confound the fellow—with his Mrs Jermyn! Does he think we are on a
      footing for me to know anything about his wife?"
"Well, I took my hookah before breakfast," he said aloud; "so, if you like, we'll go into
      the library. My father never gets up till mid-day, I find."
"Sit down, sit down," said Harold, as they entered the handsome, spacious library. But he
      himself continued to stand before a map of the county which he had opened from a series of
      rollers occupying a compartment among the book-shelves. "The first question, Mr Jermyn, now
      you know my intentions, is, whether you will undertake to be my agent in this election, and
      help me through? There's no
       time to be lost, and I don't want to lose my chance, as I may not have another
      for seven years. I understand," he went on, flashing a look straight at Jermyn, "that you have
      not taken any conspicuous course in politics; and I know that Labron is agent for the
      Debarrys."
"O—a—my dear sir—a man necessarily has his political convictions, but of what use is it for
      a professional man—a—of some education, to talk of them in a little country town? There really
      is no comprehension of public questions in such places. Party feeling, indeed, was quite
      asleep here before the agitation about the Catholic Relief Bill. It is true that I concurred
      with our incumbent in getting up a petition against the Reform Bill, but I did not state my
      reasons. The weak points in that Bill are—a—too palpable, and I fancy you and I should not
      differ much on that head. The fact is, when I knew that you were to come back to us, I kept
      myself in reserve, though I was much pressed by the friends of Sir James Clement, the
      Ministerial candidate, who is—"
"However, you will act for me—that's settled?" said Harold.
"Certainly," said Jermyn, inwardly irritated by Harold's rapid manner of cutting him
      short.

"Which of the Liberal candidates, as they call themselves, has the better chance, eh?"
"I was going to observe that Sir James Clement has not so good a chance as Mr Garstin,
      supposing that a third Liberal candidate presents himself. There are two senses in which a
      politician can be liberal"—here Mr Jermyn smiled—"Sir James Clement is a poor baronet, hoping
      for an appointment, and can't be expected to be liberal in that wider sense which commands
      majorities."
"I wish this man were not so much of a talker," thought Harold; "he'll bore me. We shall
      see," he said aloud, "what can be done in the way of combination. I'll come down to your
      office after one o'clock, if it will suit you?"
"Perfectly."
"Ah, and you'll have all the lists and papers and necessary information ready for me there.
      I must get up a dinner for the tenants, and we can invite whom we like besides the tenants.
      Just now, I'm going over one of the farms on hand with the bailiff. By the way, that's a
      desperately bad business, having three farms unlet—how comes that about, eh?"
"That is precisely what I wanted to say a few words about to you. You have observed already
       how strongly Mrs Transome takes certain things to heart. You can imagine that she
      has been severely tried in many ways. Mr Transome's want of health; Mr Durfey's
      habits—a—."
"Yes, yes."
"She is a woman for whom I naturally entertain the highest respect, and she has had hardly
      any gratification for many years, except the sense of having affairs to a certain extent in
      her own hands. She objects to changes; she will not have a new style of tenants; she likes the
      old stock of farmers who milk their own cows, and send their younger daughters out to service:
      all this makes it difficult to do the best with the estate. I am aware things are not as they
      ought to be, for, in point of fact, an improved agricultural management is a matter in which I
      take considerable interest, and the farm which I myself hold on the estate you will see, I
      think, to be in a superior condition. But Mrs Transome is a woman of strong feeling, and I
      would urge you, my dear sir, to make the changes which you have, but which I had not, the
      right to insist on, as little painful to her as possible."
"I shall know what to do, sir, never fear," said Harold, much offended.

"You will pardon, I hope, a perhaps undue freedom of suggestion from a man of my age, who
      has been so long in a close connection with the family affairs—a—I have never considered that
      connection simply in the light of business—a—".
"Damn him, I'll soon let him know that I do," thought Harold. But in proportion as
      he found Jermyn's manners annoying, he felt the necessity of controlling himself. He despised
      all persons who defeated their own projects by the indulgence of momentary impulses.
"I understand, I understand," he said aloud. "You've had more awkward business on your hands
      than usually falls to the share of a family lawyer. We shall set everything right by degrees.
      But now as to the canvassing. I've made arrangements with a first-rate man in London, who
      understands these matters thoroughly—a solicitor of course—he has carried no end of men into
      Parliament. I'll engage him to meet us at Duffield— say when?"
The conversation after this was driven carefully clear of all angles, and ended with
      determined amicableness. When Harold, in his ride an hour or two afterwards, encountered his
      uncle shouldering a gun, and followed by one black and one
       liver-spotted pointer, his muscular person with its red eagle face set off by a
      velveteen jacket and leather leggings, Mr Lingon's first question was,
"Well, lad, how have you got on with Jermyn?"
"O, I don't think I shall like the fellow. He's a sort of amateur gentleman. But I must make
      use of him. I expect whatever I get out of him will only be something short of fair pay for
      what he has got out of us. But I shall see."
"Ay, ay, use his gun to bring down your game, and after that beat the thief with the
      butt-end. That's wisdom and justice and pleasure all in one —talking between ourselves, as
      uncle and nephew. But I say, Harold, I was going to tell you, now I come to think of it, this
      is rather a nasty business, your calling yourself a Radical. I've been turning it over in
      after-dinner speeches, but it looks awkward—it's not what people are used to— it wants a good
      deal of Latin to make it go down. I shall be worried about it at the sessions, and I can think
      of nothing neat enough to carry about in my pocket by way of answer."
"Nonsense, uncle; I remember what a good speechifier you always were: you'll never be at a
      loss. You only want a few more evenings to think of it."

"But you'll not be attacking the Church and the institutions of the country—you'll not be
      going those lengths; you'll keep up the bulwarks, and so on, eh?"
"No, I shan't attack the Church—only the incomes of the bishops, perhaps, to make them eke
      out the incomes of the poor clergy."
"Well, well, I have no objection to that. Nobody likes our Bishop: he's all Greek and
      greediness; too proud to dine with his own father. You may pepper the bishops a little. But
      you'll respect the constitution handed down, etc.—and you'll rally round the throne—and the
      King, God bless him, and the usual toasts, eh?"
"Of course, of course. I am a Radical only in rooting out abuses."
"That's the word I wanted, my lad!" said the Vicar, slapping Harold's knee. "That's a spool
      to wind a speech on. Abuses is the very word; and if anybody shows himself offended, he'll put
      the cap on for himself."
"I remove the rotten timbers," said Harold, inwardly amused, "and substitute fresh oak,
      that's all."
"Well done, my boy! By George, you'll be a speaker. But, I say, Harold, I hope you've got a
      little Latin left. This young Debarry is a tremendous
       fellow at the classics, and walks on stilts to any length. He's one of the new
      Conservatives. Old Sir Maximus doesn't understand him at all."
"That won't do at the hustings," said Harold. "He'll get knocked off his stilts pretty
      quickly there."
"Bless me! it's astonishing how well you're up in the affairs of the country, my boy. But
      rub up a few quotations—' Quod turpe bonis decebat Crispinum '—and that sort of
      thing—just to show Debarry what you could do if you liked. But you want to ride on?"
"Yes; I have an appointment at Treby. Goodbye."
"He's a cleverish chap," muttered the Vicar, as Harold rode away. "When he's had plenty of
      English exercise, and brought out his knuckle a bit, he'll be a Lingon again as he used to be.
      I must go and see how Arabella takes his being a Radical. It's a little awkward; but a
      clergyman must keep peace in a family. Confound it! I'm not bound to love Toryism better than
      my own flesh and blood, and the manor I shoot over. That's a heathenish, Brutus-like sort of
      thing, as if Providence couldn't take care of the country without my quarrelling with my own
      sister's son!"

</div></body></text></TEI>