
EPILOGUE.
The very next May, Felix and Esther were married. Every one in those days was
      married at the parish church; but Mr Lyon was not satisfied without an additional private
      solemnity, "wherein there was no bondage to questionable forms, so that he might have a more
      enlarged utterance of joy and supplication."
It was a very simple wedding; but no wedding, even the gayest, ever raised so much interest
      and debate in Treby Magna. Even very great people, like Sir Maximus and his family, went to
      the church to look at this bride, who had renounced wealth, and chosen to be the wife of a man
      who said he would always be poor.
Some few shook their heads; could not quite believe it; and thought there was "more behind."
       But the majority of honest Trebians were affected somewhat in the same way as
      happy-looking Mr Wace was, who observed to his wife, as they walked from under the churchyard
      chestnuts, "It's wonderful how things go through you—you don't know how. I feel somehow as if
      I believed more in everything that's good."
Mrs Holt, that day, said she felt herself to be receiving "some reward," implying that
      justice certainly had much more in reserve. Little Job Tudge had an entirely new suit, of
      which he fingered every separate brass button in a way that threatened an arithmetical mania;
      and Mrs Holt had out her best tea-trays and put down her carpet again, with the satisfaction
      of thinking that there would no more be boys coming in all weathers with dirty shoes.
For Felix and Esther did not take up their abode in Treby Magna; and after a while Mr Lyon
      left the town too, and joined them where they dwelt. On his resignation the church in
      Malthouse Yard chose a successor to him whose doctrine was rather higher.
There were other departures from Treby. Mr Jermyn's establishment was broken up, and he was
      understood to have gone to reside at a great distance: some said "abroad," that large home of
       ruined reputations. Mr Johnson continued blond and sufficiently prosperous till
      he got grey and rather more prosperous. Some persons, who did not think highly of him, held
      that his prosperity was a fact to be kept in the background, as being dangerous to the morals
      of the young; judging that it was not altogether creditable to the Divine Providence that
      anything but virtue should be rewarded by a front and back drawing-room in Bedford Row.
As for Mr Christian, he had no more profitable secrets at his disposal. But he got his
      thousand pounds from Harold Transome.
The Transome family were absent for some time from Transome Court. The place was kept up and
      shown to visitors, but not by Denner, who was away with her mistress. After a while the family
      came back, and Mrs Transome died there. Sir Maximus was at her funeral, and throughout that
      neighbourhood there was silence about the past.
Uncle Lingon continued to watch over the shooting on the Manor and the covers until that
      event occurred which he had predicted as a part of Church reform sure to come. Little Treby
      had a new rector, but others were sorry besides the old pointers.
As to all that wide parish of Treby Magna, it has since prospered as the rest of England has
      prospered.
       Doubtless there is more enlightenment now. Whether the farmers are all
      public-spirited, the shopkeepers nobly independent, the Sproxton men entirely sober and
      judicious, the Dissenters quite without narrowness or asperity in religion and politics, and
      the publicans all fit, like Gaius, to be the friends of an apostle—these things I have not
      heard, not having correspondence in those parts. Whether any presumption may be drawn from the
      fact that North Loamshire does not yet return a Radical candidate, I leave to the all-wise—I
      mean the newspapers.
As to the town in which Felix Holt now resides, I will keep that a secret, lest he should be
      troubled by any visitor having the insufferable motive of curiosity.
I will only say that Esther has never repented. Felix, however, grumbles a little that she
      has made his life too easy, and that, if it were not for much walking, he should be a sleek
      dog.
There is a young Felix, who has a great deal more science than his father, but not much more
      money.
THE END.
