
CHAPTER XXIX.
I doe believe that, as the gall has severall receptacles in several creatures, soe there's
      scarce any creature but hath that emunctorye somewhere.
Sir Thomas Browne.
Fancy what a game at chess would be if all the chessmen had passions and
      intellects, more or less small and cunning: if you were not only uncertain about your
      adversary's men, but a little uncertain also about your own; if your knight could shuffle
      himself on to a new square by the sly; if your bishop, in disgust at your castling, could
      wheedle your pawns out of their places; and if your pawns, hating you because they are pawns,
      could make away from their appointed posts that you might get checkmate on a sudden. You might
      be the longest-headed of deductive reasoners, and yet you might be beaten by your own pawns.
      You would be especially likely to be beaten, if you depended arrogantly on your mathematical
       imagination, and regarded your passionate pieces with contempt.
Yet this imaginary chess is easy compared with the game a man has to play against his
      fellow-men with other fellow-men for his instruments. He thinks himself sagacious, perhaps,
      because he trusts no bond except that of self-interest; but the only self-interest he can
      safely rely on is what seems to be such to the mind he would use or govern. Can he ever be
      sure of knowing this?
Matthew Jermyn was under no misgivings as to the fealty of Johnson. He had "been the making
      of Johnson;" and this seems to many men a reason for expecting devotion, in spite of the fact
      that they themselves, though very fond of their own persons and lives, are not at all devoted
      to the Maker they believe in. Johnson was a most serviceable subordinate. Being a man who
      aimed at respectability, a family man, who had a good church-pew, subscribed for engravings of
      banquet pictures where there were portraits of political celebrities, and wished his children
      to be more unquestionably genteel than their father, he presented all the more numerous
      handles of worldly motive by which a judicious superior might keep a hold on him. But this
      useful regard to respectability had
       its inconvenience in relation to such a superior: it was a mark of some vanity
      and some pride, which, if they were not touched just in the right handling-place, were liable
      to become raw and sensitive. Jermyn was aware of Johnson's weaknesses, and thought he had
      flattered them sufficiently. But on the point of knowing when we are disagreeable, our human
      nature is fallible. Our lavender-water, our smiles, our compliments, and other polite
      falsities, are constantly offensive, when in the very nature of them they can only be meant to
      attract admiration and regard. Jermyn had often been unconsciously disagreeable to Johnson,
      over and above the constant offence of being an ostentatious patron. He would never let
      Johnson dine with his wife and daughters; he would not himself dine at Johnson's house when he
      was in town. He often did what was equivalent to pooh-poohing his conversation by not even
      appearing to listen, and by suddenly cutting it short with a query on a new subject. Jermyn
      was able and politic enough to have commanded a great deal of success in his life, but he
      could not help being handsome, arrogant, fond of being heard, indisposed to any kind of
      comradeship, amorous and bland towards women, cold and self-contained towards men. You will
      bear very strong
       denials that an attorney's being handsome could enter into the dislike he
      excited; but conversation consists a good deal in the denial of what is true. From the British
      point of view masculine beauty is regarded very much as it is in the drapery business: —as
      good solely for the fancy department—for young noblemen, artists, poets, and the clergy. Some
      one who, like Mr Lingon, was disposed to revile Jermyn (perhaps it was Sir Maximus), had
      called him "a cursed, sleek, handsome, long-winded, overbearing sycophant;" epithets which
      expressed, rather confusedly, the mingled character of the dislike he excited. And serviceable
      John Johnson, himself sleek, and mindful about his broadcloth and his cambric fronts, had what
      he considered "spirit" enough within him to feel that dislike of Jermyn gradually gathering
      force through years of obligation and subjection, till it had become an actuating motive
      disposed to use an opportunity, if not to watch for one.
It was not this motive, however, but rather the ordinary course of business, which accounted
      for Johnson's playing a double part as an electioneering agent. What men do in elections, is
      not to be classed either among sins or marks of grace: it would be profane to include business
      in religion, and conscience
       refers to failure, not to success. Still, the sense of being galled by Jermyn's
      harness was an additional reason for cultivating all relations that were independent of him;
      and pique at Harold Transome's behaviour to him in Jermyn's office perhaps gave all the more
      zest to Johnson's use of his pen and ink when he wrote a handbill in the service of Garstin,
      and Garstin's incomparable agent, Putty, full of inuendoes against Harold Transome, as a
      descendant of the Durfey-Transomes. It is a natural subject of self-congratulation to a man,
      when special knowledge, gained long ago without any forecast, turns out to afford a special
      inspiration in the present; and Johnson felt a new pleasure in the consciousness that he of
      all people in the world next to Jermyn had the most intimate knowledge of the Transome
      affairs. Still better—some of these affairs were secrets of Jermyn's. If in an uncomplimentary
      spirit he might have been called Jermyn's "man of straw," it was a satisfaction to know that
      the unreality of the man John Johnson was confined to his appearance in annuity deeds, and
      that elsewhere he was solid, locomotive, and capable of remembering anything for his own
      pleasure and benefit. To act with doubleness towards a man whose own conduct was double, was
      so near
       an approach to virtue that it deserved to be called by no meaner name than
      Diplomacy.
By such causes it came to pass that Christian held in his hands a bill in which Jermyn was
      playfully alluded to as Mr German Cozen, who won games by clever shunffling and odd tricks
      without any honour, and backed Durfey's crib against Bycliffe,—in which it was adroitly
      implied that the so-called head of the Transomes was only the tail of the Durfeys,—and that
      some said the Durfeys would have died out and left their nest empty if it had not been for
      their German Cozen.
Johnson had not dared to use any recollections except such as might credibly exist in other
      minds besides his own. In the truth of the case, no one but himself had the prompting to
      recall these outworn scandals; but it was likely enough that such foul-winged things should be
      revived by election heats for Johnson to escape all suspicion.
Christian could gather only dim and uncertain inferences from this flat irony and heavy
      joking; but one chief thing was clear to him. He had been right in his conjecture that
      Jermyn's interest about Bycliffe had its source in some claim of Bycliffe's on the Transome
      property. And then, there was that story of the old bill-sticker's, which, closely
       considered, indicated that the right of the present Transomes depended, or at
      least had depended, on the continuance of some other lives. Christian in his time had gathered
      enough legal notions to be aware that possession by one man sometimes depended on the life of
      another; that a man might sell his own interest in property, and the interest of his
      descendants, while a claim on that property would still remain to some one else than the
      purchaser, supposing the descendants became extinct, and the interest they had sold were at an
      end. But under what conditions the claim might be valid or void in any particular case, was
      all darkness to him. Suppose Bycliffe had any such claim on the Transome estates: how was
      Christian to know whether at the present moment it was worth anything more than a bit of
      rotten parchment? Old Tommy Trounsem had said that Johnson knew all about it. But even if
      Johnson were still above-ground —and all Johnsons are mortal—he might still be an
      understrapper of Jermyn's, in which case his knowledge would be on the wrong side of the hedge
      for the purposes of Henry Scaddon. His immediate care must be to find out all he could about
      Johnson. He blamed himself for not having questioned Tommy further while he had him at
       command; but on this head the bill-sticker could hardly know more than the less
      dilapidated denizens of Treby.
Now it had happened that during the weeks in which Christian had been at work in trying to
      solve the enigma of Jermyn's interest about Bycliffe, Johnson's mind also had been somewhat
      occupied with suspicion and conjecture as to new information on the subject of the old
      Bycliffe claims which Jermyn intended to conceal from him. The letter which, after his
      interview with Christian, Jermyn had written with a sense of perfect safety to his faithful
      ally Johnson, was, as we know, written to a Johnson who had found his self-love incompatible
      with that faithfulness of which it was supposed to be the foundation. Anything that the patron
      felt it inconvenient for his obliged friend and servant to know, became by that very fact an
      object of peculiar curiosity. The obliged friend and servant secretly doated on his patron's
      inconvenience, provided that he himself did not share it; and conjecture naturally became
      active.
Johnson's legal imagination, being very differently furnished from Christian's, was at no
      loss to conceive conditions under which there might arise a new claim on the Transome estates.
      He had before
       him the whole history of the settlement of those estates made a hundred years
      ago by John Justus Transome, entailing them, whilst in his possession, on his son Thomas and
      his heirs-male, with remainder to the Bycliffes in fee. He knew that Thomas, son of John
      Justus, proving a prodigal, had, without the knowledge of his father, the tenant in
      possession, sold his own and his descendants' rights to a lawyer-cousin named Durfey; that,
      therefore, the title of the Durfey-Transomes, in spite of that old Durfey's tricks to show the
      contrary, depended solely on the purchase of the "base fee" thus created by Thomas Transome;
      and that the Bycliffes were the "remainder-men" who might fairly oust the Durfey-Transomes if
      ever the issue of the prodigal Thomas went clean out of existence, and ceased to represent a
      right which he had bargained away from them.
Johnson, as Jermyn's subordinate, had been closely cognisant of the details concerning the
      suit instituted by successive Bycliffes, of whom Maurice Christian Bycliffe was the last, on
      the plea that the extinction of Thomas Transome's line had actually come to pass—a weary suit,
      which had eaten into the fortunes of two families, and had only made the cankerworms fat. The
      suit had closed with the
       death of Maurice Christian Bycliffe in prison; but before his death, Jermyn's
      exertions to get evidence that there was still issue of Thomas Transome's line surviving, as a
      security of the Durfey title, had issued in the discovery of a Thomas Transome at Littleshaw,
      in Stonyshire, who was the representative of a pawned inheritance. The death of Maurice had
      made this discovery useless—had made it seem the wiser part to say nothing about it; and the
      fact had remained a secret known only to Jermyn and Johnson. No other Bycliffe was known or
      believed to exist, and the Durfey-Transomes might be considered safe, unless—yes, there was an
      "unless" which Johnson could conceive: an heir or heiress of the Bycliffes—if such a personage
      turned out to be in existence—might some time raise a new and valid claim when once informed
      that wretched old Tommy Trounsem the bill-sticker, tottering drunkenly on the edge of the
      grave, was the last issue remaining above ground from that dissolute Thomas who played his
      Esau part a century before. While the poor old bill-sticker breathed, the Durfey-Transomes
      could legally keep their possession in spite of a possible Bycliffe proved real; but not when
      the parish had buried the bill-sticker.

Still, it is one thing to conceive conditions, and another to see any chance of proving
      their existence. Johnson at present had no glimpse of such a chance; and even if he ever
      gained the glimpse, he was not sure that he should ever make any use of it. His inquiries of
      Medwin, in obedience to Jermyn's letter, had extracted only a negative as to any information
      possessed by the lawyers of Bycliffe concerning a marriage, or expectation of offspring on his
      part. But Johnson felt not the less stung by curiosity to know what Jermyn had found out: that
      he had found something in relation to a possible Bycliffe, Johnson felt pretty sure. And he
      thought with satisfaction that Jermyn could not hinder him from knowing what he already knew
      about Thomas Transome's issue. Many things might occur to alter his policy and give a new
      value to facts. Was it certain that Jermyn would always be fortunate?
When greed and unscrupulousness exhibit themselves on a grand historical scale, and there is
      question of peace or war or amicable partition, it often occurs that gentlemen of high
      diplomatic talents have their minds bent on the same object from different points of view.
      Each, perhaps, is thinking of a certain duchy or province, with a view to arranging the
      ownership in such a way as shall best serve
       the purposes of the gentleman with high diplomatic talents in whom each is more
      especially interested. But these select minds in high office can never miss their aims from
      ignorance of each other's existence or whereabouts. Their high titles may be learned even by
      common people from every pocket almanac.
But with meaner diplomatists, who might be mutually useful, such ignorance is often
      obstructive. Mr John Johnson and Mr Christian, otherwise Henry Scaddon, might have had a
      concentration of purpose and an ingenuity of device fitting them to make a figure in the
      parcelling of Europe, and yet they might never have met, simply because Johnson knew nothing
      of Christian, and because Christian did not know where to find Johnson.

