
CHAPTER XLVI.

Why, there are maidens of heroic touch,
And yet they seem like things of gossamer
You'd pinch the life out of, as out of moths.
O, it is not loud tones and mouthingness,
'Tis not the arms akimbo and large strides,
That make a woman's force. The tiniest birds,
With softest downy breasts, have passions in them
And are brave with love.
Esther was so placed in the Court, under Mrs Transome's wing, as to see and hear
      everything without effort. Harold had received them at the hotel, and had observed that Esther
      looked ill, and was unusually abstracted in her manner, but this seemed to be sufficiently
      accounted for by her sympathetic anxiety about the result of a trial in which the prisoner at
      the bar was a friend, and in which both her father and himself were important witnesses. Mrs
      Transome had no reluctance to keep a small secret from her son, and no betrayal was made of
      that previous "engagement" of Esther's with her father. Harold was particularly delicate and
      unobtrusive in
       his attentions to-day: he had the consciousness that he was going to behave in a
      way that would gratify Esther and win her admiration, and we are all of us made more graceful
      by the inward presence of what we believe to be a generous purpose; our actions move to a
      hidden music—"a melody that's sweetly pitched in tune."
If Esther had been less absorbed by supreme feelings, she would have been aware that she was
      an object of special notice. In the bare squareness of a public hall, where there was not one
      jutting angle to hang a guess or a thought upon, not an image or a bit of colour to stir the
      fancy, and where the only objects of speculation, of admiration, or of any interest whatever,
      were human beings, and especially the human beings that occupied positions indicating some
      importance, the notice bestowed on Esther would not have been surprising, even if it had been
      merely a tribute to her youthful charm, which was well companioned by Mrs Transome's elderly
      majesty. But it was due also to whisperings that she was an hereditary claimant of the
      Transome estates, whom Harold Transome was about to marry. Harold himself had of late not
      cared to conceal either the fact or the probability: they both tended rather to his honour
      than his dishonour.
       And to-day, when there was a good proportion of Trebians present, the
      whisperings spread rapidly.
The Court was still more crowded than on the previous day, when our poor acquaintance Dredge
      and his two collier companions were sentenced to a year's imprisonment with hard labour, and
      the more enlightened prisoner, who stole the Debarrys' plate, to transportation for life. Poor
      Dredge had cried, had wished he'd "never heared of a 'lection," and in spite of sermons from
      the jail chaplain, fell back on the explanation that this was a world in which Spratt and Old
      Nick were sure to get the best of it; so that in Dredge's case, at least, most observers must
      have had the melancholy conviction that there had been no enhancement of public spirit and
      faith in progress from that wave of political agitation which had reached the Sproxton
      Pits.
But curiosity was necessarily at a higher pitch to-day, when the character of the prisoner
      and the circumstances of his offence were of a highly unusual kind. As soon as Felix appeared
      at the bar, a murmur rose and spread into a loud buzz, which continued until there had been
      repeated authoritative calls for silence in the Court. Rather singularly, it was now for the
      first time that Esther had a feeling of pride in him on the ground simply of
       his appearance. At this moment, when he was the centre of a multitudinous gaze,
      which seemed to act on her own vision like a broad unmitigated daylight, she felt that there
      was something pre-eminent in him, notwithstanding the vicinity of numerous gentlemen. No
      apple-woman would have admired him; not only to feminine minds like Mrs Tiliot's, but to many
      minds in coat and waistcoat, there was something dangerous and perhaps unprincipled in his
      bare throat and great Gothic head; and his somewhat massive person would doubtless have come
      out very oddly from the hands of a fashionable tailor of that time. But as Esther saw his
      large grey eyes looking round calmly and undefiantly, first at the audience generally, and
      then with a more observant expression at the lawyers and other persons immediately around him,
      she felt that he bore the outward stamp of a distinguished nature. Forgive her if she needed
      this satisfaction: all of us—whether men or women —are liable to this weakness of liking to
      have our preference justified before others as well as ourselves. Esther said inwardly, with a
      certain triumph, that Felix Holt looked as worthy to be chosen in the midst of this large
      assembly, as he had ever looked in their tête-à-tête under the sombre light of the
      little parlour in Malthouse Yard.

Esther had felt some relief in hearing from her father that Felix had insisted on doing
      without his mother's presence; and since to Mrs Holt's imagination, notwithstanding her
      general desire to have her character inquired into, there was no greatly consolatory
      difference between being a witness and a criminal, and an appearance of any kind "before the
      judge" could hardly be made to suggest anything definite that would overcome the dim sense of
      unalleviated disgrace, she had been less inclined than usual to complain of her son's
      decision. Esther had shuddered beforehand at the inevitable farce there would be in Mrs Holt's
      testimony. But surely Felix would lose something for want of a witness who could testify to
      his behaviour in the morning before he became involved in the tumult?
"He is really a fine young fellow," said Harold, coming to speak to Esther after a colloquy
      with the prisoner's solicitor. "I hope he will not make a blunder in defending himself."
"He is not likely to make a blunder," said Esther. She had recovered her colour a little,
      and was brighter than she had been all the morning before.
Felix had seemed to include her in his general glance, but had avoided looking at her
      particularly.
       She understood how delicate feeling for her would prevent this, and that she
      might safely look at him, and towards her father, whom she could see in the same direction.
      Turning to Harold to make an observation, she saw that he was looking towards the same point,
      but with an expression on his face that surprised her.
"Dear me," she said, prompted to speak without any reflection; "how angry you look! I never
      saw you look so angry before. It is not my father you are looking at?"
"Oh no! I am angry at something I'm looking away from," said Harold, making an effort to
      drive back the troublesome demon who would stare out at window. "It's that Jermyn," he added,
      glancing at his mother as well as Esther. "He will thrust himself under my eyes everywhere
      since I refused him an interview and returned his letter. I'm determined never to speak to him
      directly again, if I can help it."
Mrs Transome heard with a changeless face. She had for some time been watching, and had
      taken on her marble look of immobility. She said an inward bitter "Of course!" to everything
      that was unpleasant.
After this Esther soon became impatient of all
       speech: her attention was riveted on the proceedings of the Court, and on the
      mode in which Felix bore himself. In the case for the prosecution there was nothing more than
      a reproduction, with irrelevancies added by witnesses, of the facts already known to us.
      Spratt had retained consciousness enough, in the midst of his terror, to swear that, when he
      was tied to the finger-post, Felix was presiding over the actions of the mob. The landlady of
      the Seven Stars, who was indebted to Felix for rescue from pursuit by some drunken rioters,
      gave evidence that went to prove his assumption of leadership prior to the assault on
      Spratt,—remembering only that he had called away her pursuers to "better sport." Various
      respectable witnesses swore to Felix's "encouragement" of the rioters who were dragging Spratt
      in King Street; to his fatal assault on Tucker; and to his attitude in front of the
      drawing-room window at the Manor.
Three other witnesses gave evidence of expressions used by the prisoner, tending to show the
      character of the acts with which he was charged. Two were Treby tradesmen, the third was a
      clerk from Duffield. The clerk had heard Felix speak at Duffield; the Treby men had frequently
      heard him declare himself on public matters; and they all
       quoted expressions which tended to show that he had a virulent feeling against
      the respectable shop-keeping class, and that nothing was likely to be more congenial to him
      than the gutting of retailers' shops. No one else knew—the witnesses themselves did not know
      fully—how far their strong perception and memory on these points was due to a fourth mind,
      namely, that of Mr John Johnson, the attorney, who was nearly related to one of the Treby
      witnesses, and a familiar acquaintance of the Duffield clerk. Man cannot be defined as an
      evidence-giving animal; and in the difficulty of getting up evidence on any subject, there is
      room for much unrecognised action of diligent persons who have the extra stimulus of some
      private motive. Mr Johnson was present in court to-day, but in a modest, retired situation. He
      had come down to give information to Mr Jermyn, and to gather information in other quarters,
      which was well illuminated by the appearance of Esther in company with the Transomes.
When the case for the prosecution closed, all strangers thought that it looked very black
      for the prisoner. In two instances only Felix had chosen to put a cross-examining question.
      The first was to ask Spratt if he did not believe that his having been tied to the post had
      saved him from a probably
       mortal injury? The second was to ask the tradesman who swore to his having heard
      Felix tell the rioters to leave Tucker alone and come along with him, whether he had not,
      shortly before, heard cries among the mob summoning to an attack on the wine-vaults and
      brewery.
Esther had hitherto listened closely but calmly. She knew that there would be this strong
      adverse testimony; and all her hopes and fears were bent on what was to come beyond it. It was
      when the prisoner was asked what he had to adduce in reply that she felt herself in the grasp
      of that tremor which does not disable the mind, but rather gives keener consciousness of a
      mind having a penalty of body attached to it.
There was a silence as of night when Felix Holt began to speak. His voice was firm and
      clear: he spoke with simple gravity, and evidently without any enjoyment of the occasion.
      Esther had never seen his face look so weary.
"My Lord, I am not going to occupy the time of the Court with unnecessary words. I believe
      the witnesses for the prosecution have spoken the truth as far as a superficial observation
      would enable them to do it; and I see nothing that can weigh with the jury in my favour,
      unless they believe my
       statement of my own motives, and the testimony that certain witnesses will give
      to my character and purposes as being inconsistent with my willingly abetting disorder. I will
      tell the Court in as few words as I can, how I got entangled in the mob, how I came to attack
      the constable, and how I was led to take a course which seems rather mad to myself, now I look
      back upon it."
Felix then gave a concise narrative of his motives and conduct on the day of the riot, from
      the moment when he was startled into quitting his work by the earlier uproar of the morning.
      He omitted, of course, his visit to Malthouse Yard, and merely said that he went out to walk
      again after returning to quiet his mother's mind. He got warmed by the story of his
      experience, which moved him more strongly than ever, now he recalled it in vibrating words
      before a large audience of his fellow-men. The sublime delight of truthful speech to one who
      has the great gift of uttering it, will make itself felt even through the pangs of sorrow.
"That is all I have to say for myself, my Lord. I pleaded 'Not guilty' to the charge of
      Manslaughter, because I know that word may carry a meaning which would not fairly apply to my
      act. When I threw Tucker down, I did not see the possibility
       that he would die from a sort of attack which ordinarily occurs in fighting
      without any fatal effect. As to my assaulting a constable, it was a quick choice between two
      evils: I should else have been disabled. And he attacked me under a mistake about my
      intentions. I'm not prepared to say I never would assault a constable where I had more chance
      of deliberation. I certainly should assault him if I saw him doing anything that made my blood
      boil: I reverence the law, but not where it is a pretext for wrong, which it should be the
      very object of law to hinder. I consider that I should be making an unworthy defence, if I let
      the Court infer from what I say myself, or from what is said by my witnesses, that because I
      am a man who hate drunken motiveless disorder, or any wanton harm, therefore I am a man who
      would never fight against authority. I hold it blasphemy to say that a man ought not to fight
      against authority: there is no great religion and no great freedom that has not done it, in
      the beginning. It would be impertinent for me to speak of this now, if I did not need to say
      in my own defence, that I should hold myself the worst sort of traitor if I put my hand either
      to fighting or disorder—which must mean injury to somebody— if I were not urged to it by what
      I hold to be sacred
       feelings, making a sacred duty either to my own manhood or to my fellow-man. And
      certainly," Felix ended with a strong ring of scorn in his voice, "I never held it a sacred
      duty to try and get a Radical candidate returned for North Loamshire, by willingly heading a
      drunken howling mob, whose public action must consist in breaking windows, destroying hard-got
      produce, and endangering the lives of men and women. I have no more to say, my Lord."
"I foresaw he would make a blunder," said Harold, in a low voice to Esther. Then, seeing her
      shrink a little, he feared she might suspect him of being merely stung by the allusion to
      himself. "I don't mean what he said about the Radical candidate," he added hastily, in
      correction. "I don't mean the last sentence. I mean that whole peroration of his, which he
      ought to have left unsaid. It has done him harm with the jury— they won't understand it, or
      rather will misunderstand it. And I'll answer for it, it has soured the judge. It remains to
      be seen what we witnesses can say for him, to nullify the effect of what he has said for
      himself. I hope the attorney has done his best in collecting the evidence: I understand the
      expense of the witnesses is undertaken by some
       Liberals at Glasgow and in Lancashire, friends of Holt's. But I suppose your
      father has told you."
The first witness called for the defence was Mr Lyon. The gist of his statements was, that
      from the beginning of September last until the day of election he was in very frequent
      intercourse with the prisoner; that he had become intimately acquainted with his character and
      views of life, and his conduct with respect to the election, and that these were totally
      inconsistent with any other supposition than that his being involved in the riot, and his
      fatal encounter with the constable, were due to the calamitous failure of a bold but good
      purpose. He stated further that he had been present when an interview had occurred in his own
      house between the prisoner and Mr Harold Transome, who was then canvassing for the
      representation of North Loamshire. That the object of the prisoner in seeking this interview
      had been to inform Mr Transome of treating given in his name to the workmen in the pits and on
      the canal at Sproxton, and to remonstrate against its continuance; the prisoner fearing that
      disturbance and mischief might result from what he believed to be the end towards which this
      treating was directed—namely, the presence of these men on the occasions of the
       nomination and polling. Several times after this interview, Mr Lyon said, he had
      heard Felix Holt recur to the subject therein discussed with expressions of grief and anxiety.
      He himself was in the habit of visiting Sproxton in his ministerial capacity: he knew fully
      what the prisoner had done there in order to found a night-school, and was certain that the
      prisoner's interest in the working men of that district turned entirely on the possibility of
      converting them somewhat to habits of soberness and to a due care for the instruction of their
      children. Finally, he stated that the prisoner, in compliance with his request, had been
      present at Duffield on the day of the nomination, and had on his return expressed himself with
      strong indignation concerning the employment of the Sproxton men on that occasion, and what he
      called the wickedness of hiring blind violence.
The quaint appearance and manner of the little Dissenting minister could not fail to
      stimulate the peculiar wit of the bar. He was subjected to a troublesome cross-examination,
      which he bore with wide-eyed shortsighted quietude and absorption in the duty of truthful
      response. On being asked, rather sneeringly, if the prisoner was not one of his flock? he
      answered, in that deeper tone which
       made one of the most effective transitions of his varying voice,
"Nay—would to God he were! I should then feel that the great virtues and the pure life I
      have beheld in him were a witness to the efficacy of the faith I believe in and the discipline
      of the Church whereunto I belong."
Perhaps it required a larger power of comparison than was possessed by any of that audience
      to appreciate the moral elevation of an Independent minister who could utter those words.
      Nevertheless there was a murmur, which was clearly one of sympathy.
The next witness, and the one on whom the interest of the spectators was chiefly
      concentrated, was Harold Transome. There was a decided predominance of Tory feeling in the
      Court, and the human disposition to enjoy the infliction of a little punishment on an opposite
      party, was, in this instance, of a Tory complexion. Harold was keenly alive to this, and to
      everything else that might prove disagreeable to him in his having to appear in the
      witness-box. But he was not likely to lose his self-possession, or to fail in adjusting
      himself gracefully, under conditions which most men would find it difficult to carry without
      awkwardness. He
       had generosity and candour enough to bear Felix Holt's proud rejection of his
      advances without any petty resentment; he had all the susceptibilties of a gentleman; and
      these moral qualities gave the right direction to his acumen, in judging of the behaviour that
      would best secure his dignity. Everything requiring self-command was easier to him because of
      Esther's presence; for her admiration was just then the object which this well-tanned man of
      the world had it most at heart to secure.
When he entered the witness-box he was much admired by the ladies amongst the audience, many
      of whom sighed a little at the thought of his wrong course in politics. He certainly looked
      like a handsome portrait by Sir Thomas Lawrence, in which that remarkable artist had happily
      omitted the usual excess of honeyed blandness mixed with alert intelligence, which is hardly
      compatible with the state of man out of paradise. He stood not far off Felix; and the two
      Radicals certainly made a striking contrast. Felix might have come from the hands of a
      sculptor in the later Roman period, when the plastic impulse was stirred by the grandeur of
      barbaric forms—when rolled collars were not yet conceived, and satin stocks were not.
Harold Transome declared that he had had only
       one interview with the prisoner: it was the interview referred to by the
      previous witness, in whose presence and in whose house it was begun. The interview, however,
      was continued beyond the observation of Mr Lyon. The prisoner and himself quitted the
      Dissenting minister's house in Malthouse Yard together, and proceeded to the office of Mr
      Jermyn, who was then conducting electioneering business on his behalf. His object was to
      comply with Holt's remonstrance by inquiring into the alleged proceedings at Sproxton, and, if
      possible, to put a stop to them. Holt's language, both in Malthouse Yard and in the attorney's
      office, was strong: he was evidently indignant, and his indignation turned on the danger of
      employing ignorant men excited by drink on an occasion of popular concourse. He believed that
      Holt's sole motive was the prevention of disorder, and what he considered the demoralisation
      of the workmen by treating. The event had certainly justified his remonstrances. He had not
      had any subsequent opportunities of observing the prisoner; but if any reliance was to be
      placed on a rational conclusion, it must, he thought, be plain that the anxiety thus
      manifested by Holt was a guarantee of the statement he had made as to his motives on the day
      of the riot. His entire impression
       from Holt's manner in that single interview was, that he was a moral and
      political enthusiast, who, if he sought to coerce others, would seek to coerce them into a
      difficult, and perhaps impracticable, scrupulosity.
Harold spoke with as noticeable a directness and emphasis, as if what he said could have no
      reaction on himself. He had of course not entered unnecessarily into what occurred in Jermyn's
      office. But now he was subjected to a cross-examination on this subject, which gave rise to
      some subdued shrugs, smiles, and winks, among county gentlemen.
The questions were directed so as to bring out, if possible, some indication that Felix Holt
      was moved to his remonstrance by personal resentment against the political agents concerned in
      setting on foot the treating at Sproxton, but such questioning is a sort of target-shooting
      that sometimes hits about widely. The cross-examining counsel had close connections among the
      Tories of Loamshire, and enjoyed his business to-day. Under the fire of various questions
      about Jermyn and the agent employed by him at Sproxton, Harold got warm, and in one of his
      replies said, with his rapid sharpness,
"Mr Jermyn was my agent then, not now: I
       have no longer any but hostile relations with him."
The sense that he had shown a slight heat would have vexed Harold more if he had not got
      some satisfaction out of the thought that Jermyn heard those words. He recovered his good
      temper quickly, and when, subsequently, the question came,
"You acquiesced in the treating of the Sproxton men, as necesary to the efficient working of
      the reformed constituency?" Harold replied, with quiet fluency,
"Yes; on my return to England, before I put up for North Loamshire, I got the best advice
      from practised agents, both Whig and Tory. They all agreed as to electioneering measures."
The next witness was Michael Brincey, otherwise Mike Brindle, who gave evidence of the
      sayings and doings of the prisoner amongst the Sproxton men. Mike declared the Felix went
      "uncommon again' drink, and pitch-and-toss, and quarrelling, and sich," and was "all for
      schooling and bringing up the little chaps;" but on being cross-examined, he admitted that he
      "couldn't give much account;" that Felix did talk again'idle folks, whether poor or rich, and
      that most like he meant the rich, who had "a rights to be idle," which was
       what he, Mike, liked himself sometimes, though for the most part he was "a
      hard-working butty." On being checked for this superfluous allegation of his own theory and
      practice, Mike became timidly conscious that answering was a great mystery beyond the reaches
      of a butty's soul, and began to err from defect instead of excess. However, he reasserted that
      what Felix most wanted was, "to get 'em to set up a school for the little chaps."
With the two succeeding witnesses, who swore to the fact that Felix had tried to lead the
      mob along Hobb's Lane instead of towards the Manor, and to the violently threatening character
      of Tucker's attack on him, the case for the defence was understood to close.
Meanwhile Esther had been looking on and listening with growing misery, in the sense that
      all had not been said which might have been said on behalf of Felix. If it was the jury who
      were to be acted on, she argued to herself, there might have been an impression made on their
      feeling which would determine their verdict. Was it not constantly said and seen that juries
      pronounced Guilty or Not Guilty from sympathy for or against the accused? She was too
      inexperienced to check her own argument by thoroughly representing to herself the
       course of things: how the counsel for the prosecution would reply, and how the
      judge would sum up, with the object of cooling down sympathy into deliberation. What she had
      painfully pressing on her inward vision was, that the trial was coming to an end, and that the
      voice of right and truth had not been strong enough.
When a woman feels purely and nobly, that ardour of hers which breaks through formulas too
      rigorously urged on men by daily practical needs, makes one of her most precious influences:
      she is the added impulse that shatters the stiffening crust of cautious experience. Her
      inspired ignorance gives a sublimity to actions so incongruously simple, that otherwise they
      would make men smile. Some of that ardour which has flashed out and illuminated all poetry and
      history was burning to-day in the bosom of sweet Esther Lyon. In this, at least, her woman's
      lot was perfect: that the man she loved was her hero; that her woman's passion and her
      reverence for rarest goodness rushed together in an undivided current. And to-day they were
      making one danger, one terror, one irresistible impulse for her heart. Her feelings were
      growing into a necessity for action, rather than a resolve to act. She could not support the
      thought that the
       trial would come to an end, that sentence would be passed on Felix, and that all
      the while something had been omitted which might have been said for him. There had been no
      witness to tell what had been his behaviour and state of mind just before the riot. She must
      do it. It was possible. There was time. But not too much time. All other agitation became
      merged in eagerness not to let the moment escape. The last witness was being called. Harold
      Transome had not been able to get back to her on leaving the witness-box, but Mr Lingon was
      close by her. With firm quickness she said to him—
"Pray tell the attorney that I have evidence to give for the prisoner—lose no time."
"Do you know what you are going to say, my dear?" said Mr Lingon, looking at her in
      astonishment.
"Yes—I entreat you, for God's sake," said Esther, in that low tone of urgent beseeching
      which is equivalent to a cry; and with a look of appeal more penetrating still, "I would
      rather die than not do it."
The old Rector, always leaning to the good-natured view of things, felt chiefly that there
      seemed to be an additional chance for the poor fellow who
       had got himself into trouble. He disputed no farther, but went to the
      attorney.
Before Harold was aware of Esther's intention she was on her way to the witness-box. When
      she appeared there, it was as if a vibration, quick as light, had gone through the Court and
      had shaken Felix himself, who had hitherto seemed impassive. A sort of gleam seemed to shoot
      across his face, and any one close to him could have seen that his hand, which lay on the edge
      of the dock, trembled.
At the first moment Harold was startled and alarmed; the next, he felt delight in Esther's
      beautiful aspect, and in the admiration of the Court. There was no blush on her face: she
      stood, divested of all personal considerations whether of vanity or shyness. Her clear voice
      sounded as it might have done if she had been making a confession of faith. She began and went
      on without query or interruption. Every face looked grave and respectful.
"I am Esther Lyon, the daughter of Mr Lyon, the Independent minister at Treby, who has been
      one of the witnesses for the prisoner. I know Felix Holt well. On the day of the election at
      Treby, when I had been much alarmed by the noises that reached me from the main street, Felix
      Holt came to call upon me. He knew that my father was away,
       and he thought that I should be alarmed by the sounds of disturbance. It was
      about the middle of the day, and he came to tell me that the disturbance was quieted, and that
      the streets were nearly emptied. But he said he feared that the men would collect again after
      drinking, and that something worse might happen later in the day. And he was in much sadness
      at this thought. He stayed a little while, and then he left me. He was very melancholy. His
      mind was full of great resolutions that came from his kind feeling towards others. It was the
      last thing he would have done to join in riot or to hurt any man, if he could have helped it.
      His nature is very noble; he is tender-hearted; he could never have had any intention that was
      not brave and good."
There was something so naive and beautiful in this action of Esther's, that it conquered
      every low or petty suggestion even in the commonest minds. The three men in that assembly who
      knew her best —even her father and Felix Holt—felt a thrill of surprise mingling with their
      admiration. This bright, delicate, beautiful-shaped thing that seemed most like a toy or
      ornament—some hand had touched the chords, and there came forth music that brought tears. Half
      a year before, Esther's dread of being
       ridiculous spread over the surface of her life; but the depth below was
      sleeping.
Harold Transome was ready to give her his hand and lead her back to her place. When she was
      there, Felix, for the first time, could not help looking towards her, and their eyes met in
      one solemn glance.
Afterwards Esther found herself unable to listen so as to form any judgment on what she
      heard. The acting out of that strong impulse had exhausted her energy. There was a brief
      pause, filled with a murmur, a buzz, and much coughing. The audience generally felt as if dull
      weather was setting in again. And under those auspices the counsel for the prosecution got up
      to make his reply. Esther's deed had its effect beyond the momentary one, but the effect was
      not visible in the rigid necessities of legal procedure. The counsel's duty of restoring all
      unfavourable facts to due prominence in the minds of the jurors, had its effect altogether
      reinforced by the summing-up of the judge. Even the bare discernment of facts, much more their
      arrangement with a view to inferences, must carry a bias: human impartiality, whether judicial
      or not, can hardly escape being more or less loaded. It was not that the judge had severe
      intentions; it was only that he
       saw with severity. The conduct of Felix was not such as inclined him to
      indulgent consideration, and, in his directions to the jury, that mental attitude necessarily
      told on the light in which he placed the homicide. Even to many in the Court who were not
      constrained by judicial duty, it seemed that though this high regard felt for the prisoner by
      his friends, and especially by a generous-hearted woman, was very pretty, such conduct as his
      was not the less dangerous and foolish, and assaulting and killing a constable was not the
      less an offence to be regarded without leniency.
Esther seemed now so tremulous, and looked so ill, that Harold begged her to leave the Court
      with his mother and Mr Lingon. He would come and tell her the issue. But she said, quietly,
      that she would rather stay; she was only a little overcome by the exertion of speaking. She
      was inwardly resolved to see Felix to the last moment before he left the Court.
Though she could not follow the address of the counsel or the judge, she had a keen ear for
      what was brief and decisive. She heard the verdict, "Guilty of manslaughter." And every word
      uttered by the judge in pronouncing sentence fell upon her like an unforgetable sound that
      would come
       back in dreaming and in waking. She had her eyes on Felix, and at the words,
      "Imprisonment for four years," she saw his lip tremble. But otherwise he stood firm and
      calm.
Esther gave a start from her seat. Her heart swelled with a horrible sensation of pain; but,
      alarmed lest she should lose her self-command, she grasped Mrs Transome's hand, getting some
      strength from that human contact.
Esther saw that Felix had turned. She could no longer see his face. "Yes," she said, drawing
      down her veil, "let us go."

