
CHAPTER XI.

Truth is the precious harvest of the earth.
But once, when harvest waved upon a land.
The noisome cankerworm and caterpillar,
Locusts, and all the swarming foul-born broods,
Fastened upon it with swift, greedy jaws,
And turned the harvest into pestilence,
Until men said, What profits it to sow?
Felix was going to Sproxton that Sunday afternoon. He always enjoyed his walk to
      that outlying hamlet; it took him (by a short cut) through a corner of Sir Maximus Debarry's
      park; then across a piece of common, broken here and there into red ridges below dark masses
      of furze; and for the rest of the way alongside the canal, where the Sunday peacefulness that
      seemed to rest on the bordering meadows and pastures was hardly broken if a horse pulled into
      sight along the towing-path, and a boat, with a little curl of blue smoke issuing from its tin
      chimney, came slowly gliding behind. Felix retained something of his boyish impression that
      the days in a canal-boat were all like Sundays;
       but the horse, if it had been put to him, would probably have preferred a more
      Judaic or Scotch rigour with regard to canal-boats, or at least that the Sunday towing should
      be done by asses, as a lower order.
This canal was only a branch of the grand trunk, and ended among the coal-pits, where Felix,
      crossing a network of black tram-roads, soon came to his destination—that public institute of
      Sproxton, known to its frequenters chiefly as Chubb's, but less familiarly as the Sugar Loaf,
      or the New Pits; this last being the name for the more modern and lively nucleus of the
      Sproxton hamlet. The other nucleus, known as the Old Pits, also supported its "public," but it
      had something of the forlorn air of an abandoned capital; and the company at the Blue Cow was
      of an inferior kind—equal, of course, in the fundamental attributes of humanity, such as
      desire for beer, but not equal in ability to pay for it.
When Felix arrived, the great Chubb was standing at the door. Mr Chubb was a remarkable
      publican; none of your stock Bonifaces, red, bloated, jolly, and joking. He was thin and
      sallow, and was never, as his constant guests observed, seen to be the worse (or the better)
      for liquor; indeed, as among soldiers an eminent general was held to have a
       charmed life, Chubb was held by the members of the Benefit Club to have a
      charmed sobriety, a vigilance over his own interest that resisted all narcotics. His very
      dreams, as stated by himself, had a method in them beyond the waking thoughts of other men.
      Pharaoh's dream, he observed, was nothing to them; and, as lying so much out of ordinary
      experience, they were held particularly suitable for narration on Sunday evenings, when the
      listening colliers, well washed and in their best coats, shook their heads with a sense of
      that peculiar edification which belongs to the inexplicable. Mr Chubb's reasons for becoming
      landlord of the Sugar Loaf were founded on the severest calculation. Having an active mind,
      and being averse to bodily labour, he had thoroughly considered what calling would yield him
      the best livelihood with the least possible exertion, and in that sort of line he had seen
      that a "public" amongst miners who earned high wages was a fine opening. He had prospered
      according to the merits of such judicious calculation, was already a forty-shilling
      freeholder, and was conscious of a vote for the county. He was not one of those mean-spirited
      men who found the franchise embarrassing, and would rather have been without it: he regarded
      his vote as part
       of his investment, and meant to make the best of it. He called himself a
      straightforward man, and at suitable moments expressed his views freely; in fact, he was known
      to have one fundamental division for all opinion—"my idee" and "humbug."
When Felix approached, Mr Chubb was standing, as usual, with his hands nervously busy in his
      pockets, his eyes glancing round with a detective expression at the black landscape, and his
      lipless mouth compressed yet in constant movement. On a superficial view it might be supposed
      that so eager-seeming a personality was unsuited to the publican's business; but in fact it
      was a great provocative to drinking. Like the shrill biting talk of a vixenish wife, it would
      have compelled you to "take a little something" by way of dulling your sensibility.
Hitherto, notwithstanding Felix drank so little ale, the publican had treated him with high
      civility. The coming election was a great opportunity for applying his political "idee," which
      was, that society existed for the sake of the individual, and that the name of that individual
      was Chubb. Now, from a conjunction of absurd circumstances inconsistent with that idea, it
      happened that Sproxton had been hitherto somewhat neglected in the canvass.
       The head member of the Company that worked the mines was Mr Peter Garstin, and
      the same company received the rent for the Sugar Loaf. Hence, as the person who had the most
      power of annoying Mr Chubb, and being of detriment to him, Mr Garstin was naturally the
      candidate for whom he had reserved his vote. But where there is this intention of ultimately
      gratifying a gentleman by voting for him in an open British manner on the day of the poll, a
      man, whether Publican or Pharisee (Mr Chubb used this generic classification of mankind as one
      that was sanctioned by Scripture), is all the freer in his relations with those deluded
      persons who take him for what he is not, and imagine him to be a waverer. But for some time
      opportunity had seemed barren. There were but three dubious votes besides Mr Chubb's in the
      small district of which the Sugar Loaf could be regarded as the centre of intelligence and
      inspiration: the colliers, of course, had no votes, and did not need political conversion;
      consequently, the interests of Sproxton had only been tacitly cherished in the breasts of
      candidates. But ever since it had been known that a Radical candidate was in the field, that
      in consequences of this Mr Debarry had coalesced with Mr Garstin, and that Sir James Clement,
      the
       poor baronet, had retired, Mr Chubb had been occupied with the most ingenious
      mental combinations in order to ascertain what possibilities of profit to the Sugar Loaf might
      lie in this altered state of the canvass.
He had a cousin in another county, also a publican, but in a larger way, and resident in a
      borough, and from him Mr Chubb had gathered more detailed political information than he could
      find in the Loamshire newspapers. He was now enlightened enough to know that there was a way
      of using voteless miners and navvies at Nominations and Elections. He approved of that; it
      entered into his political "idee;" and indeed he would have been for extending the franchise
      to this class—at least in Sproxton. If any one had observed that you must draw a line
      somewhere, Mr Chubb would have concurred at once, and would have given permission to draw it
      at a radius of two miles from his own tap.
From the first Sunday evening when Felix had appeared at the Sugar Loaf, Mr Chubb had made
      up his mind that this 'cute man who kept himself sober was an electioneering agent. That he
      was hired for some purpose or other there was not a doubt; a man didn't come and drink nothing
      without a good reason. In proportion as Felix's purpose
       was not obvious to Chubb's mind, it must be deep; and this growing conviction
      had even led the publican on the last Sunday evening privately to urge his mysterious visitor
      to let a little ale be chalked up for him—it was of no consequence. Felix knew his man, and
      had taken care not to betray too soon that his real object was so to win the ear of the best
      fellows about him as to induce them to meet him on a Saturday evening in the room where Mr
      Lyon, or one of his deacons, habitually held his Wednesday preachings. Only women and
      children, three old men, a journeyman tailor, and a consumptive youth, attended those
      preachings; not a collier had been won from the strong ale of the Sugar Loaf, not even a navvy
      from the muddier drink of the Blue Cow. Felix was sanguine; he saw some pleasant faces among
      the miners when they were washed on Sundays; they might be taught to spend their wages better.
      At all events, he was going to try: he had great confidence in his powers of appeal, and it
      was quite true that he never spoke without arresting attention. There was nothing better than
      a dame school in the hamlet; he thought that if he could move the fathers, whose blackened
      week-day persons and flannel caps, ornamented with tallow candles by way of plume, were a
      badge of hard
       labour for which he had a more sympathetic fibre than for any ribbon in the
      button-hole—if he could move these men to save something from their drink and pay a
      schoolmaster for their boys, a greater service would be done them than if Mr Garstin and his
      company were persuaded to establish a school.
"I'll lay hold of them by their fatherhood," said Felix; "I'll take one of their little
      fellows and set him in the midst. Till they can show there's something they love better than
      swilling themselves with ale, extension of the suffrage can never mean anything for them but
      extension of boozing. One must begin somewhere: I'll begin at what is under my nose. I'll
      begin at Sproxton. That's what a man would do if he had a red-hot superstition. Can't one work
      for sober truth as hard as for megrims?"
Felix Holt had his illusions, like other young men, though they were not of a fashionable
      sort; referring neither to the impression his costume and horsemanship might make on
      beholders, nor to the ease with which he would pay the Jews when he gave a loose to his
      talents and applied himself to work. He had fixed his choice on a certain Mike Brindle (not
      that Brindle was his real name—each collier had his sobriquet ) as the man whom he
      would induce to walk part of the way home with him this
       very evening, and get to invite some of his comrades for the next Saturday.
      Brindle was one of the head miners; he had a bright good-natured face, and had given especial
      attention to certain performances with a magnet which Felix carried in his pocket.
Mr Chubb, who had also his illusions, smiled graciously as the enigmatic customer came up to
      the door-step.
"Well, sir, Sunday seems to be your day: I begin to look for you on a Sunday now."
"Yes, I'm a working man; Sunday is my holiday," said Felix, pausing at the door since the
      host seemed to expect this.
"Ah, sir, there's many ways of working. I look at it you're one of those as work with your
      brains. That's what I do myself."
"One may do a good deal of that and work with one's hands too."
"Ah, sir," said Mr Chubb, with a certain bitterness in his smile, "I've that sort of head
      that I've often wished I was stupider. I use things up, sir; I see into things a deal too
      quick. I eat my dinner, as you may say, at breakfast-time. That's why I hardly ever smoke a
      pipe. No sooner do I stick a pipe in my mouth than I puff and puff till it's gone before other
      folks are well lit; and then, where am
       I? I might as well have let it alone. In this world it's better not to be too
      quick. But you know what it is, sir."
"Not I," said Felix, rubbing the back of his head, with a grimace. "I generally feel myself
      rather a blockhead. The world's a largish place, and I haven't turned everything inside out
      yet."
"Ah, that's your deepness. I think we understand one another. And about this here election,
      I lay two to one we should agree if we was to come to talk about it."
"Ah!" said Felix, with an air of caution,
"You're none of a Tory, eh, sir? You won't go to vote for Debarry? That was what I said at
      the very first go-off. Says I, he's no Tory. I think I was right, sir—eh?"
"Certainly; I'm no Tory."
"No, no, you don't catch me wrong in a hurry. Well, between you and me, I care no more for
      the Debarrys than I care for Johnny Groats. I live on none o'their land, and not a pot's-worth
      did they ever send to the Sugar Loaf. I'm not frightened at the Debarrys: there's no man more
      independent than me. I'll plump or I'll split for them as treat me the handsomest and are the
      most of what I call gentlemen; that's my idee. And in the way of
       hacting for any man, them are fools that don't employ me."
We mortals sometimes cut a pitiable figure in our attempts at display. We may be sure of our
      own merits, yet fatally ignorant of the point of view from which we are regarded by our
      neighbour. Our fine patterns in tattooing may be far from throwing him into a swoon of
      admiration, though we turn ourselves all round to show them. Thus it was with Mr Chubb.
"Yes," said Felix, dryly; "I should think there are some sorts of work for which you are
      just fitted."
"Ah, you see that? Well, we understand one another. You're no Tory; no more am I. And if I'd
      got four hands to show at a nomination, the Debarrys shouldn't have one of 'em. My idee is,
      there's a deal too much of their scutchins and their moniments in Treby Church. What's their
      scutchins mean? They're a sign with little liquor behind 'em; that's how I take it. There's
      nobody can give account of 'em as I ever heard."
Mr Chubb was hindered from further explaining his views as to the historical element in
      society by the arrival of new guests, who approached in two groups. The foremost group
      consisted of well-known colliers, in their good Sunday beavers and
       coloured handkerchiefs serving as cravats, with the long ends floating. The
      second group was a more unusual one, and caused Mr Chubb to compress his mouth and agitate the
      muscles about it in rather an excited manner.
First came a smartly-dressed personage on horseback, with a conspicuous expansive
      shirt-front and figured satin stock. He was a stout man, and gave a strong sense of
      broadcloth. A wild idea shot through Mr Chubb's brain: could this grand visitor be Harold
      Transome? Excuse him: he had been given to understand by his cousin from the distant borough
      that a Radical candidate in the condescension of canvassing had even gone the length of eating
      bread-and-treacle with the children of an honest freeman, and declaring his preference for
      that simple fare. Mr Chubb's notion of a Radical was that he was a new and agreeable kind of
      lick-spittle who fawned on the poor instead of on the rich, and so was likely to send
      customers to a "public;" so that he argued well enough from the premises at his command.
The mounted man of broadcloth had followers: several shabby-looking men, and Sproxton boys
      of all sizes, whose curiosity had been stimulated by unexpected largesse. A stranger on
      horseback
       scattering halfpence on a Sunday was so unprecedented that there was no knowing
      what he might do next; and the smallest hindmost fellows in sealskin caps were not without
      hope that an entirely new order of things had set in.
Every one waited outside for the stranger to dismount, and Mr Chubb advanced to take the
      bridle.
"Well, Mr Chubb," were the first words when the great man was safely out of the saddle,
      "I've often heard of your fine tap, and I'm come to taste it."
"Walk in, sir—pray walk in," said Mr Chubb, giving the horse to the stable-boy. "I shall be
      proud to draw for you. If anybody's been praising me, I think my ale will back him."
All entered in the rear of the stranger except the boys, who peeped in at the window.
"Won't you please to walk into the parlour, sir?" said Chubb, obsequiously.
"No, no, I'll sit down here. This is what I like to see," said the stranger, looking round
      at the colliers, who eyed him rather shyly—"a bright hearth where working men can enjoy
      themselves. However, I'll step into the other room for three minutes, just to speak
      half-a-dozen words with you."

Mr Chubb threw open the parlour door, and then stepping back, took the opportunity of
      saying, in a low tone, to Felix, "Do you know this gentleman?"
"Not I; no."
Mr Chubb's opinion of Felix Holt sank from that moment. The parlour door was closed, but no
      one sat down or ordered beer.
"I say, master," said Mike Brindle, going up to Felix, "don't you think that's one o' the
      'lection men?"
"Very likely."
"I heared a chap say they're up and down everywhere," said Brindle; "and now's the time,
      they say, when a man can get beer for nothing."
"Ay, that's sin' the Reform," said a big, red-whiskered man, called Dredge. "That's brought
      the 'lections and the drink into these parts; for afore that, it was all kep up the Lord knows
      wheer."
"Well, but the Reform's niver come anigh Sprox'on," said a grey-haired but stalwart man
      called Old Sleck. "I don't believe nothing about'n, I don't."
"Don't you?" said Brindle, with some contempt. "Well, I do. There's folks won't believe
      beyond the end o' their own pickaxes. You can't drive nothing into 'em, not if you split their
      skulls. I
       know for certain sure, from a chap in the cartin' way, as he's got money and
      drink too, only for hollering. Eh, master, what do you say?" Brindle ended, turning
      with some deference to Felix.
"Should you like to know all about the Reform?" said Felix, using his opportunity. "If you
      would, I can tell you."
"Ay, ay—tell's; you know, I'll be bound," said several voices at once.
"Ah, but it will take some little time. And we must be quiet. The cleverest of you—those who
      are looked up to in the Club—must come and meet me at Peggy Button's cottage next Saturday, at
      seven o'clock, after dark. And, Brindle, you must bring that little yellow-haired lad of
      yours. And anybody that's got a little boy—a very little fellow, who won't understand what is
      said—may bring him. But you must keep it close, you know. We don't want fools there. But
      everybody who hears me may come. I shall be at Peggy Button's."
"Why, that's where the Wednesday preachin' is," said Dredge. "I've been aforced to give my
      wife a black eye to hinder her from going to the preachin.' Lors-a-massy, she thinks she knows
      better nor me, and I can't make head nor tail of her talk."
"Why can't you let the woman alone?" said
       Brindle, with some disgust. "I'd be ashamed to beat a poor crawling thing 'cause
      she likes preaching."
"No more I did beat her afore, not if she scrat' me," said Dredge, in vindication; "but if
      she jabbers at me, I can't abide it. Howsomever, I'll bring my Jack to Peggy's o' Saturday.
      His mother shall wash him. He is but four year old, and he'll swear and square at me a good
      un, if I set him on."
"There you go blatherin'", said Brindle, intending a mild rebuke.
This dialogue, which was in danger of becoming too personal, was interrupted by the
      reopening of the parlour door, and the reappearance of the impressive stranger with Mr Chubb,
      whose countenance seemed unusually radiant.
"Sit you down here, Mr Johnson," said Chubb, moving an arm-chair. "This gentleman is kind
      enough to treat the company," he added, looking round, "and what's more, he'll take a cup with
      'em; and I think there's no man but what'll say that's a honour."
The company had nothing equivalent to a "hear, hear," at command, but they perhaps felt the
      more, as they seated themselves with an expectation unvented by utterance. There was a general
      satisfactory
       sense that the hitherto shadowy Reform had at length come to Sproxton in a good
      round shape, with broadcloth and pockets. Felix did not intend to accept the treating, but he
      chose to stay and hear, taking his pint as usual.
"Capital ale, capital ale," said Mr Johnson, as he set down his glass, speaking in a quick,
      smooth treble. "Now," he went on, with a certain pathos in his voice, looking at Mr Chubb, who
      sat opposite, "there's some satisfaction to me in finding an establishment like this at the
      Pits. For what would higher wages do for the working man if he couldn't get a good article for
      his money? Why, gentlemen"— here he looked round—"I've been into ale-houses where I've seen a
      fine fellow of a miner or a stone-cutter come in and have to lay down money for beer that I
      should be sorry to give to my pigs!" Here Mr Johnson leaned forward with squared elbows, hands
      placed on his knees, and a defiant shake of the head.
"Aw, like at the Blue Cow," fell in the irrepressible Dredge, in a deep bass; but he was
      rebuked by a severe nudge from Brindle
"Yes, yes, you know what it is, my friend," said Mr Johnson, looking at Dredge, and
      restoring his self-satisfaction. "But it won't last much longer,
       that's one good thing. Bad liquor will be swept away with other bad articles.
      Trade will prosper— and what's trade now without steam? and what is steam without coal? And
      mark you this, gentlemen —there's no man and no government can make coal."
A brief loud "Haw, haw," showed that this fact was appreciated.
"Nor freeston' nayther," said a wide-mouthed wiry man called Gills, who wished for an
      exhaustive treatment of the subject, being a stone-cutter.
"Nor freestone, as you say; else, I think, if coal could be made aboveground, honest fellows
      who are the pith of our population would not have to bend their backs and sweat in a pit six
      days out of the seven. No, no: I say, as this country prospers it has more and more need of
      you, sirs. It can do without a pack of lazy lords and ladies, but it can never do without
      brave colliers. And the country will prosper. I pledge you my word, sirs, this
      country will rise to the tip-top of everything, and there isn't a man in it but what shall
      have his joint in the pot, and his spare money jingling in his pocket, if we only exert
      ourselves to send the right men to Parliament—men who will speak up for the collier, and the
      stone-cutter, and
       the navvy" (Mr Johnson waved his hand liberally), "and will stand no nonsense.
      This is a crisis, and we must exert ourselves. We've got Reform, gentlemen, but now the thing
      is to make Reform work. It's a crisis—I pledge you my word it's a crisis."
Mr Johnson threw himself back as if from the concussion of that great noun. He did not
      suppose that one of his audience knew what a crisis meant; but he had large experience in the
      effect of uncomprehended words; and in this case the colliers were thrown into a state of
      conviction concerning they did not know what, which was a fine preparation for "hitting out,"
      or any other act carrying a due sequence to such a conviction.
Felix felt himself in danger of getting into a rage. There is hardly any mental misery worse
      than that of having our own serious phrases, our own rooted beliefs, caricatured by a
      charlatan or a hireling. He began to feel the sharp lower edge of his tin pint-measure, and to
      think it a tempting missile.
Mr Johnson certainly had some qualifications as an orator. After this impressive pause he
      leaned forward again, and said, in a lowered tone, looking round,
"I think you all know the good news."
There was a movement of shoe-soles on the quarried
       floor, and a scrape of some chair legs, but no other answer.
"The good news I mean is, that a first-rate man, Mr Transome of Transome Court, has offered
      himself to represent you in Parliament, sirs. I say you in particular, for what he has at
      heart is the welfare of the working man—of the brave fellows that wield the pickaxe, and the
      saw, and the hammer. He's rich—has more money than Garstin—but he doesn't want to keep it to
      himself. What he wants is, to make a good use of it, gentlemen. He's come back from foreign
      parts with his pockets full of gold. He could buy up the Debarrys if they were worth buying,
      but he's got something better to do with his money. He means to use it for the good of the
      working men in these parts. I know there are some men who put up for Parliament and talk a
      little too big. They may say they want to befriend the colliers, for example. But I should
      like to put a question to them. I should like to ask them, 'What colliers?' There are colliers
      up at Newcastle, and there are colliers down in Wales. Will it do any good to honest Tom, who
      is hungry in Sproxton, to hear that Jack at Newcastle has his bellyful of beef and
      pudding?"
"It ought to do him good," Felix burst in, with
       his loud abrupt voice, in odd contrast with glib Mr Johnson's. "If he knows it's
      a bad thing to be hungry and not have enough to eat, he ought to be glad that another fellow,
      who is not idle, is not suffering in the same way."
Every one was startled. The audience was much impressed with the grandeur, the knowledge,
      and the power of Mr Johnson. His brilliant promises confirmed the impression that Reform had
      at length reached the New Pits; and Reform, if it were good for anything, must at last resolve
      itself into spare money—meaning "sport" and drink, and keeping away from work for several days
      in the week. These "brave" men of Sproxton liked Felix as one of themselves, only much more
      knowing—as a working man who had seen many distant parts, but who must be very poor, since he
      never drank more than a pint or so. They were quite inclined to hear what he had got to say on
      another occasion, but they were rather irritated by his interruption at the present moment. Mr
      Johnson was annoyed, but he spoke with the same glib quietness as before, though with an
      expression of contempt.
"I call it a poor-spirited thing to take up a man's straightforward words and twist them.
      What I meant to say was plain enough—that
       no man can be saved from starving by looking on while others eat. I think that's
      common sense, eh, sirs?"
There was again an approving "Haw, haw." To hear anything said, and understand it, was a
      stimulus that had the effect of wit. Mr Chubb cast a suspicious and viperous glance at Felix,
      who felt that he had been a simpleton for his pains.
"Well, then," continued Mr Johnson, "I suppose I may go on. But if there is any one here
      better able to inform the company than I am, I give way —I give way."
"Sir," said Mr Chubb, magisterially, "no man shall take the words out of your mouth
      in this house. And," he added, looking pointedly at Felix, "Company that's got no more orders
      to give, and wants to turn up rusty to them that has, had better be making room than filling
      it. Love an' 'armony's the word on our Club's flag, an' love an' 'armony's the meaning of 'The
      Sugar Loaf, William Chubb.' Folks of a different mind had better seek another house of
      call."
"Very good," said Felix, laying down his money and taking his cap, "I'm going." He saw
      clearly enough that if he said more, there would be a disturbance which could have no
      desirable end.

When the door had closed behind him, Mr Johnson said, "What is that person's name?"
"Does anybody know it?" said Mr Chubb.
A few noes were heard.
"I've heard him speak like a downright Reformer, else I should have looked a little sharper
      after him. But you may see he's nothing partic'lar."
"It looks rather bad that no one knows his name," said Mr Johnson. "He's most likely a Tory
      in disguise—a Tory spy. You must be careful, sirs, of men who come to you and say they're
      Radicals, and yet do nothing for you. They'll stuff you with words—no lack of words—but words
      are wind. Now, a man like Transome comes forward and says to the working men of this country:
      'Here I am, ready to serve you and to speak for you in Parliament, and to get the laws made
      all right for you; and in the meanwhile, if there's any of you who are my neighbours who want
      a day's holiday, or a cup to drink with friends, or a copy of the King's likeness—why, I'm
      your man. I'm not a paper handbill—all words and no substance—nor a man with land and nothing
      else; I've got bags of gold as well as land'. I think you know what I mean by the King's
      likeness?"
Here Mr Johnson took a half-crown out of
       his pocket and held the head towards the company.
"Well, sirs, there are some men who like to keep this pretty picture a great deal too much
      to themselves. I don't know whether I'm right, but I think I've heard of such a one not a
      hundred miles from here. I think his name was Spratt, and he managed some company's
      coal-pits."
"Haw, haw! Spratt—Spratt's his name," was rolled forth to an accompaniment of scraping
      shoe-soles.
"A screwing fellow, by what I understand—a domineering fellow—who would expect men to do as
      he liked without paying them for it. I think there's not an honest man who wouldn't like to
      disappoint such an upstart."
There was a murmur which was interpreted by Mr Chubb. "I'll answer for 'em, sir."
"Now, listen to me. Here's Garstin: he's one of the Company you work under. What's Garstin
      to you? who sees him? and when they do see him they see a thin miserly fellow who keeps his
      pockets buttoned. He calls himself a Whig, yet he'll split votes with a Tory—he'll drive with
      the Debarrys. Now, gentlemen, if I said I'd got a vote, and anybody asked me what I should do
      with it, I should say, 'I'll plump for Transome.' You've
       got no votes, and that's a shame. But you will have some day, if such
      men as Transome are returned; and then you'll be on a level with the first gentleman in the
      land, and if he wants to sit in Parliament, he must take off his hat and ask your leave. But
      though you haven't got a vote you can give a cheer for the right man, and Transome's not a man
      like Garstin; if you lost a day's wages by giving a cheer for Transome, he'll make you amends.
      That's the way a man who has no vote can yet serve himself and his country: he can lift up his
      hand and shout 'Transome for ever'—'hurray for Transome.' Let the working men—let colliers and
      navvies and stone-cutters, who between you and me have a good deal too much the worst of it,
      as things are now— let them join together and give their hands and voices for the right man,
      and they'll make the great people shake in their shoes a little; and when you shout for
      Transome, remember you shout for more wages, and more of your rights, and you shout to get rid
      of rats and sprats and such small animals, who are the tools the rich make use of to
      squeeze the blood out of the poor man."
"I wish there'd be a row—I'd pommel him," said Dredge, who was generally felt to be speaking
      to the question.

"No, no, my friend—there you're a little wrong. No pommelling—no striking first. There you
      have the law and the constable against you. A little rolling in the dust and knocking hats
      off, a little pelting with soft things that'll stick and not bruise —all that doesn't spoil
      the fun. If a man is to speak when you don't like to hear him, it is but fair you should give
      him something he doesn't like in return. And the same if he's got a vote and doesn't use it
      for the good of the country; I see no harm in splitting his coat in a quiet way. A man must be
      taught what's right if he doesn't know it. But no kicks, no knocking down, no pommelling."
"It 'ud be good fun, though, if so- be ," said Old Sleck, allowing himself an
      imaginative pleasure.
"Well, well, if a Spratt wants you to say Garstin, it's some pleasure to think you can say
      Transome. Now, my notion is this. You are men who can put two and two together—I don't know a
      more solid lot of fellows than you are; and what I say is, let the honest men in this country
      who've got no vote show themselves in a body when they have the chance. Why, sirs, for every
      Tory sneak that's got a vote, there's fifty-five fellows who must stand by and be expected
      to-hold their tongues. But I say, let 'em hiss the sneaks, let 'em groan at
       the sneaks, and the sneaks will be ashamed of themselves. The men who've got
      votes don't know how to use them. There's many a fool with a vote, who is not sure in his mind
      whether he shall poll, say for Debarry, or Garstin, or Transome—whether he'll plump or whether
      he'll split; a straw will turn him. Let him know your mind if he doesn't know his own. What's
      the reason Debarry gets returned? Because people are frightened at the Debarrys. What's that
      to you? You don't care for the Debarrys. If people are frightened at the Tories, we'll turn
      round and frighten them . You know what a Tory is—one who wants to drive the working
      men as he'd drive cattle. That's what a Tory is; and a Whig is no better, if he's like
      Garstin. A Whig wants to knock the Tory down and get the whip, that's all. But Transome's
      neither Whig nor Tory; he's the working man's friend, the collier's friend, the friend of the
      honest navvy. And if he gets into Parliament, let me tell you, it will be the better for you.
      I don't say it will be the better for overlookers and screws, and rats and sprats ;
      but it will be the better for every good fellow who takes his pot at the Sugar Loaf."
Mr Johnson's exertions for the political education of the Sproxton men did not stop here,
      which
       was the more disinterested in him as he did not expect to see them again, and
      could only set on foot an organisation by which their instruction could be continued without
      him. In this he was quite successful. A man known among the "butties" as Pack, who had already
      been mentioned by Mr Chubb, presently joined the party, and had a private audience of Mr
      Johnson, that he might be instituted as the "shepherd" of this new flock.
"That's a right down genelman," said Pack, as he took the seat vacated by the orator, who
      had ridden away.
"What's his trade, think you?" said Gills, the wiry stone-cutter.
"Trade?" said Mr Chubb. "He's one of the top-sawyers of the country. He works with his head,
      you may see that."
"Let's have our pipes, then," said Old Sleck; "I'm pretty well tired o'jaw."
"So am I," said Dredge. "It's wriggling work— like follering a stoat. It makes a man dry.
      I'd as lief hear preaching, on'y there's nought to be got by't. I shouldn't know which end I
      stood on if it wasn't for the tickets and the treatin'."

