
CHAPTER XVII.

It is a good and soothfast saw;
Half-roasted never will be raw;
No dough is dried once more to meal,
No crock new-shapen by the wheel;
You can't turn curds to milk again,
Nor Now, by wishing, back to Then;
And having tasted stolen honey,
You can't buy innoceuce for money.
Jermyn was not particularly pleased that some chance had apparently hindered Harold
      Transome from making other canvassing visits immediately after leaving Mr Lyon, and so had
      sent him back to the office earlier than he had been expected to come. The inconvenient chance
      he guessed at once to be represented by Felix Holt, whom he knew very well by Trebian report
      to be a young man with so little of the ordinary Christian motives as to making an appearance
      and getting on in the world, that he presented no handle to any judicious and respectable
      person who might be willing to make use of him.
Harold Transome, on his side, was a good deal
       annoyed at being worried by Felix into an inquiry about electioneering details.
      The real dignity and honesty there was in him made him shrink from this necessity of
      satisfying a man with a troublesome tongue; it was as if he were to show indignation at the
      discovery of one barrel with a false bottom, when he had invested his money in a manufactory
      where a larger or smaller number of such barrels had always been made. A practical man must
      seek a good end by the only possible means; that is to say, if he is to get into Parliament he
      must not be too particular. It was not disgraceful to be neither a Quixote nor a theorist,
      aiming to correct the moral rules of the world; but whatever actually was, or might prove to
      be, disgraceful, Harold held in detestation. In this mood he pushed on unceremoniously to the
      inner office without waiting to ask questions; and when he perceived that Jermyn was not
      alone, he said, with haughty quickness,
"A question about the electioneering at Sproxton. Can you give your attention to it at once?
      Here is Mr Holt, who has come to me about the business."
"A—yes—a—certainly," said Jermyn, who, as usual, was the more cool and deliberate because he
       was vexed. He was standing, and, as he turned round, his broad figure concealed
      the person who was seated writing at the bureau. "Mr Holt—a—will doubtless—a—make a point of
      saving a busy man's time. You can speak at once. This gentleman" —here Jermyn made a slight
      backward movement of the head—"is one of ourselves; he is a true-blue."
'I have simply to complain,' said Felix, "that one of your agents has been sent on a bribing
      expedition to Sproxton—with what purpose you, sir, may know better than I do. Mr Transome, it
      appears, was ignorant of the affair, and does not approve it."
Jermyn, looking gravely and steadily at Felix while he was speaking, at the same time drew
      forth a small sheaf of papers from his side-pocket, and then, as he turned his eyes slowly on
      Harold, felt in his waistcoat-pocket for his pencil-case.
"I don't approve it at all," said Harold, who hated Jermyn's calculated slowness and conceit
      in his own impenetrability. "Be good enough to put a stop to it, will you?"
"Mr Holt, I know, is an excellent Liberal," said Jermyn, just inclining his head to Harold,
      and then alternately looking at Felix and docketing his bills; "but he is perhaps too
      inexperienced to be aware
       that no canvass—a—can be conducted without the action of able men, who must—a—be
      trusted, and not interfered with. And as to any possibility of promising to put a stop—a—to
      any procedure—a—that depends. If he had ever held the coachman's ribbons in his hands, as I
      have in my younger days—a—he would know that stopping is not always easy."
"I know very little about holding ribbons," said Felix; "but I saw clearly enough at once
      that more mischief had been done than could be well mended. Though I believe, if it were
      heartily tried, the treating might be reduced, and something might be done to hinder the men
      from turning out in a body to make a noise, which might end in worse."
"They might be hindered from making a noise on our side," said Jermyn, smiling. "That is
      perfectly true. But if they made a noise on the other—would your purpose be answered better,
      sir?"
Harold was moving about in an irritated manner while Felix and Jermyn were speaking. He
      preferred leaving the talk to the attorney, of whose talk he himself liked to keep as clear as
      possible.
"I can only say," answered Felix, "that if you make use of those heavy fellows when the
      drink is in them, I shouldn't like your responsibility. You
       might as well drive bulls to roar on our side as bribe a set of colliers and
      navvies to shout and groan."
"A lawyer may well envy your command of language, Mr Holt," said Jermyn, pocketing his bills
      again, and shutting up his pencil; "but he would not be satisfied with the accuracy—a—of your
      terms. You must permit me to check your use of the word 'bribery.' The essence of bribery is,
      that it should be legally proved; there is not such a thing—a— in rerum natura —a—as
      unproved bribery. There has been no such thing as bribery at Sproxton, I'll answer for it. The
      presence of a body of stalwart fellows on—a—the Liberal side will tend to preserve order; for
      we know that the benefit clubs from the Pitchley district will show for Debarry. Indeed, the
      gentleman who has conducted the canvass at Sproxton is experienced in Parliamentary affairs,
      and would not exceed—a—the necessary measures that a rational judgment would dictate."
"What! you mean the man who calls himself Johnson?" said Felix, in a tone of disgust.
Before Jermyn chose to answer, Harold broke in, saying, quickly and peremptorily, "The long
      and the short of it is this, Mr Holt: I shall desire and
       insist that whatever can be done by way of remedy shall be done. Will that
      satisfy you? You see now some of a candidate's difficulties?" said Harold, breaking into his
      most agreeable smile. "I hope you will have some pity for me."
"I suppose I must be content," said Felix, not thoroughly propitiated. "I bid you
      good-morning, gentlemen."
When he was gone out, and had closed the door behind him, Harold, turning round and
      flashing, in spite of himself, an angry look at Jermyn, said,
"And who is Johnson? an alias , I suppose. It seems you are fond of the name."
Jermyn turned perceptibly paler, but disagreeables of this sort between himself and Harold
      had been too much in his anticipations of late for him to be taken by surprise. He turned
      quietly round and just touched the shoulder of the person seated at the bureau, who now
      rose.
"On the contrary," Jermyn answered, "the Johnson in question is this gentleman, whom I have
      the pleasure of introducing to you as one of my most active helpmates in electioneering
      business—Mr Johnson, of Bedford Row, London. I am comparatively a novice—a—in these matters.
      But he was engaged with James Putty in two hardly-contested
       elections, and there could scarcely be a better initiation. Putty is one of the
      first men of the country as an agent—a—on the Liberal side—a—eh, Johnson? I think Makepiece
      is—a—not altogether a match for him, not quite of the same calibre—a— haud consimili
       ingenio —a—in tactics—a—and in experience?"
"Makepiece is a wonderful man, and so is Putty," said the glib Johnson, too vain not to be
      pleased with an opportunity of speaking, even when the situation was rather awkward.
      "Makepiece for scheming, but Putty for management. Putty knows men, sir," he went on, turning
      to Harold; "it's a thousand pities that you have not had his talents employed in your service.
      He's beyond any man for saving a candidate's money—does half the work with his tongue. He'll
      talk of anything, from the Areopagus, and that sort of thing, down to the joke about 'Where
      are you going, Paddy?'—you know what I mean, sir! 'Back again, says Paddy'—an excellent
      electioneering joke. Putty understands these things. He has said to me, 'Johnson, bear in mind
      there are two ways of speaking an audience will always like: one is, to tell them what they
      don't understand; and the other is, to tell them what they're
       used to.' I shall never be the man to deny that I owe a great deal to Putty. I
      always say it was a most providential thing in the Mugham election last year that Putty was
      not on the Tory side. He managed the women; and, if you'll believe me, sir, one fourth of the
      men would never have voted if their wives hadn't driven them to it for the good of their
      families. And as for speaking—it's currently reported in our London circles that Putty writes
      regularly for the 'Times.' He has that kind of language; and I needn't tell you, Mr Transome,
      that it's the apex, which, I take it, means the tip-top —and nobody can get higher than that,
      I think. I've belonged to a political debating society myself; I've heard a little language in
      my time; but when Mr Jermyn first spoke to me about having the honour to assist in your
      canvass of North Loamshire" —here Johnson played with his watch-seals and balanced himself a
      moment on his toes—"the very first thing I said was, 'And there's Garstin has got Putty! No
      Whig could stand against a Whig,' I said, 'who had Putty on his side: I hope Mr Transome goes
      in for something of a deeper colour.' I don't say that, as a general rule, opinions go for
      much in a return, Mr Transome; it depends on who are in the field before you, and on the skill
      of
       your agents. But as a Radical, and a moneyed Radical, you are in a fine position,
      sir; and with care and judgment—with care and judgment—"
It had been impossible to interrupt Johnson before, without the most impolitic rudeness.
      Jermyn was not sorry that he should talk, even if he made a fool of himself; for in that solid
      shape, exhibiting the average amount of human foibles, he seemed less of the alias
      which Harold had insinuated him to be, and had all the additional plausibility of a lie with a
      circumstance.
Harold had thrown himself with contemptuous resignation into a chair, had drawn off one of
      his buff gloves, and was looking at his hand. But when Johnson gave his iteration with a
      slightly slackened pace, Harold looked up at him and broke in,
"Well then, Mr Johnson, I shall be glad if you will use your care and judgment in putting an
      end as well as you can to this Sproxton affair; else it may turn out an ugly business."
"Excuse me, sir, I must beg you to look at the matter a little more closely. You will see
      that it is impossible to take a single step backward at Sproxton. It was a matter of necessity
      to get the Sproxton men; else I know to a certainty
       the other side would have laid hold of them first, and now I've undermined
      Garstin's people. They'll use their authority, and give a little shabby treating, but I've
      taken all the wind out of their sails. But if, by your orders, I or Mr Jermyn here were to
      break promise with the honest fellows, and offend Chubb the publican, what would come of it?
      Chubb would leave no stone unturned against you, sir; he would egg on his customers against
      you; the colliers and navvies would be at the nomination and at the election all the same, or
      rather not all the same, for they would be there against us; and instead of hustling people
      good-humouredly by way of a joke, and counterbalancing Debarry's cheers, they'd help to kick
      the cheering and the voting out of our men, and instead of being, let us say, half—a—dozen
      ahead of Garstin, you'd be half—a—dozen behind him, that's all. I speak plain English to you,
      Mr Transome, though I've the highest respect for you as a gentleman of first-rate talents and
      position. But, sir, to judge of these things a man must know the English voter and the English
      publican; and it would be a poor tale indeed"—here Mr Johnson's mouth took an expression at
      once bitter and pathetic—"that a gentleman like you, to say nothing
       of the good of the country, should have gone to the expense and trouble of a
      canvass for nothing but to find himself out of Parliament at the end of it. I've seen it again
      and again; it looks bad in the cleverest man to have to sing small."
Mr Johnson's argument was not the less stringent because his idioms were vulgar. It requires
      a conviction and resolution amounting to heroism not to wince at phrases that class our
      foreshadowed endurance among those common and ignominious troubles which the world is more
      likely to sneer at than to pity. Harold remained a few moments in angry silence looking at the
      floor, with one hand on his knee, and the other on his hat, as if he were preparing to start
      up.
"As to undoing anything that's been done down there," said Johnson, throwing in this
      observation as something into the bargain, "I must wash my hands of it, sir. I couldn't work
      knowingly against your interest. And that young man who is just gone out,—you don't believe
      that he need be listened to, I hope? Chubb, the publican, hates him. Chubb would guess he was
      at the bottom of your having the treating stopped, and he'd set half—a—dozen of the colliers
      to duck him in the canal, or break his head by mistake. I'm
       an experienced man, sir. I hope I've put it clear enough."
"Certainly, the exposition befits the subject," said Harold, scornfully, his dislike of the
      man Johnson's personality being stimulated by causes which Jermyn more than conjectured. "It's
      a dammed, unpleasant, ravelled business that you and Mr Jermyn have knit up between you. I've
      no more to say."
"Then, sir, if you've no more commands, I don't wish to intrude. I shall wish you
      good-morning sir," said Johnson, passing out quickly.
Harold knew that he was indulging his temper, and he would probably have restrained it as a
      foolish move if he had thought there was great danger in it. But he was beginning to drop much
      of his caution and self-mastery where Jermyn was concerned, under the growing conviction that
      the attorney had very strong reasons for being afraid of him; reasons which would only be
      reinforced by any action hostile to the Transome interest. As for a sneak like this Johnson, a
      gentleman had to pay him, not to please him. Harold had smiles at command in the right place,
      but he was not going to smile when it was neither necessary nor agreeable. He was one of those
       good-humoured, yet energetic men, who have the gift of anger, hatred, and scorn
      upon occasion, though they are too healthy and self-contented for such feelings to get
      generated in them without external occasion. And in relation to Jermyn the gift was coming
      into fine exercise.
"A—pardon me, Mr Harold," said Jermyn, speaking as soon as Johnson went out, "but I am
      sorry—a—you should behave disobligingly to a man who has it in his power to do much
      service—who, in fact, holds many threads in his hands. I admit that—a— nemo mortalium
       omnibus horis sapit , as we say—a—"
"Speak for yourself," said Harold. "I don't talk in tags of Latin, which might be learned by
      a schoolmaster's footboy. I find the King's English express my meaning better."
"In the King's English, then," said Jermyn, who could be idiomatic enough when he was stung,
      "a candidate should keep his kicks till he's a member."
"O, I suppose Johnson will bear a kick if you bid him. You're his principal, I believe."
"Certainly, thus far—a—he is my London agent. But he is a man of substance, and—"
"I shall know that he is if it's necessary, I daresay. But I must jump into the carriage
      again.
       I've no time to lose; I must go to Hawkins at the factory. Will you go?"
When Harold was gone, Jermyn's handsome face gathered blackness. He hardly ever wore his
      worst expression in the presence of others, and but seldom when he was alone, for he was not
      given to believe that any game would ultimately go against him. His luck had been good. New
      conditions might always turn up to give him new chances; and if affairs threatened to come to
      an extremity between Harold and himself, he trusted to finding some sure resource.
"He means to see to the bottom of everything if he can, that's quite plain," said Jermyn to
      himself. "I believe he has been getting another opinion; he has some new light about those
      annuities on the estate that are held in Johnson's name. He has inherited a deuced faculty for
      business—there's no denying that. But I shall beg leave to tell him that I've propped up the
      family. I don't know where they would have been without me; and if it comes to balancing, I
      know into which scale the gratitude ought to go. Not that he's likely to feel any—but he can
      feel something else; and if he makes signs of setting the dogs on me, I shall make him feel
      it. The people named Transome owe me a good deal more than I owe them."

In this way Mr Jermyn inwardly appealed against an unjust construction which he foresaw that
      his old acquaintance the Law might put on certain items in his history.
I have known persons who have been suspected of undervaluing gratitude, and excluding it
      from the list of virtues; but on closer observation it has been seen that, if they have never
      felt grateful, it has been for want of an opportunity; and that, far from despising gratitude,
      they regard it as the virtue most of all incumbent—on others towards them.

