<div type="chapter">
<head>INTRODUCTION.</head>
<p>Five-and-Thirty years ago the glory had not yet departed from the old coach-roads:
     the great roadside inns were still brilliant with well-polished tankards, the smiling glances
     of pretty barmaids and the repartees of jocose ostlers; the mail still announced itself by the
     merry notes of the horn; the hedge-cutter or the rick-thatcher might still know the exact hour
     by the unfailing yet otherwise meteoric apparition of the pea-green Tally-ho or the yellow
     Independent; and elderly gentlemen in pony-chaises, quartering nervously to make way for the
     rolling swinging swiftness, had not ceased
     <pb/> to remark that times were finely changed since they used to see the pack-horses and hear
     the tinkling of their bells on this very highway.</p>
<p>In those days there were pocket boroughs, a Birmingham unrepresented in Parliament and
     compelled to make strong representations out of it, unrepealed corn-laws, three-and-sixpenny
     letters, a brawny and many-breeding pauperism, and other departed evils; but there were some
     pleasant things too, which have also departed. <hi>Non omnia grandior oetas quoe fugiamus
      habet</hi> , says the wise goddess: you have not the best of it in all things, O youngsters!
     the elderly man has his enviable memories, and not the least of them is the memory of a long
     journey in mid-spring or autumn on the outside of a stage-coach. Posterity may be shot, like a
     bullet through a tube, by atmospheric pressure from Winchester to Newcastle: that is a fine
     result to have among our hopes; but the slow old-fashioned way of getting from one end of our
     country to the other is the better thing to have in the memory. The tube-journey can never lend
     much to picture and narrative; it is as barren as an exclamatory O! Whereas the happy outside
     passenger seated on the box from the dawn to the gloaming gathered enough stories of English
     life, enough of English
     <pb/> labours in town and country, enough aspects of earth and sky, to make episodes for a
     modern Odyssey. Suppose only that his journey took him through that central plain, watered at
     one extremity by the Avon, at the other by the Trent. As the morning silvered the meadows with
     their long lines of bushy willows marking the watercourses, or burnished the golden corn-ricks
     clustered near the long roofs of some midland homestead, he saw the full-uddered cows driven
     from their pasture to the early milking. Perhaps it was the shepherd, head-servant of the farm,
     who drove them, his sheep-dog following with a heedless unofficial air as of a beadle in
     undress. The shepherd with a slow and slouching walk, timed by the walk of grazing beasts,
     moved aside, as if unwillingly, throwing out a monosyllabic hint to his cattle; his glance,
     accustomed to rest on things very near the earth, seemed to lift itself with difficulty to the
     coachman. Mail or stage coach for him belonged to that mysterious distant system of things
     called "Gover'ment," which, whatever it might be, was no business of his, any more than the
     most out-lying nebula or the coal-sacks of the southern hemisphere: his solar system was the
     parish; the master's temper and the casualties of lambing-time were his
     <pb/> region of storms. He cut his bread and bacon with his pocket-knife, and felt no
     bitterness except in the matter of pauper labourers and the bad-luck that sent contrarious
     seasons and the sheep-rot. He and his cows were soon left behind, and the homestead too, with
     its pond overhung by elder-trees, its untidy kitchen-garden and cone-shaped yew-tree arbour.
     But everywhere the bushy hedgerows wasted the land with their straggling beauty, shrouded the
     grassy borders of the pastures with cat-kined hazels, and tossed their long blackberry branches
     on the corn-fields. Perhaps they were white with May, or starred with pale pink dogroses;
     perhaps the urchins were already nutting amongst them, or gathering the plenteous crabs. It was
     worth the journey only to see those hedgerows, the liberal homes of unmarketable beauty—of the
     purple-blossomed ruby-berried nightshade, of the wild convolvulus climbing and spreading in
     tendrilled strength till it made a great curtain of pale-green hearts and white trumpets, of
     the many-tubed honeysuckle which, in its most delicate fragrance, hid a charm more subtle and
     penetrating than beauty. Even if it were winter the hedgerows showed their coral, the scarlet
     haws, the deep-crimson hips, with lingering brown leaves to make a
     <pb/> resting-place for the jewels of the hoar-frost. Such hedgerows were often as tall as the
     labourers' cottages dotted along the lanes, or clustered into a small hamlet, their little
     dingy windows telling, like thick-filmed eyes, of nothing but the darkness within. The
     passenger on the coach-box, bowled along above such a hamlet, saw chiefly the roofs of it:
     probably it turned its back on the road, and seemed to lie away from everything but its own
     patch of earth and sky, away from the parish church by long fields and green lanes, away from
     all intercourse except that of tramps. If its face could be seen, it was most likely dirty; but
     the dirt was Protestant dirt, and the big, bold, gin-breathing tramps were Protestant tramps.
     There was no sign of superstition near, no crucifix or image to indicate a misguided reverence:
     the inhabitants were probably so free from superstition that they were in much less awe of the
     parson than of the overseer. Yet they were saved from the excesses of Protestantism by not
     knowing how to read, and by the absence of handlooms and mines to be the pioneers of Dissent:
     they were kept safely in the <hi>via media</hi> of indifference, and could have registered
     themselves in the census by a big black mark as members of the Church of England.</p>
<pb/>
<p>But there were trim cheerful villages too, with a neat or handsome parsonage and grey church
     set in the midst; there was the pleasant tinkle of the blacksmith's anvil, the patient
     cart-horses waiting at his door; the basket-maker peeling his willow wands in the sunshine; the
     wheelwright putting the last touch to a blue cart with red wheels; here and there a cottage
     with bright transparent windows showing pots full of blooming balsams or geraniums, and little
     gardens in front all double daisies or dark wallflowers; at the well, clean and comely women
     carrying yoked buckets, and towards the free school small Britons dawdling on, and handling
     their marbles in the pockets of unpatched corduroys adorned with brass buttons. The land around
     was rich and marly, great corn-stacks stood in the rick-yards— for the rick-burners had not
     found their way hither; the homesteads were those of rich farmers who paid no rent, or had the
     rare advantage of a lease, and could afford to keep their corn till prices had risen. The coach
     would be sure to overtake some of them on their way to their outlying fields or to the
     market-town, sitting heavily on their well-groomed horses, or weighing down one side of an
     olive-green gig. They probably thought of the coach with some contempt, as an accommodation for
     people who had
     <pb/> not their own gigs, or who, wanting to travel to London and such distant places, belonged
     to the trading and less solid part of the nation. The passenger on the box could see that this
     was the district of protuberant optimists, sure that old England was the best of all possible
     countries, and that if there were any facts which had not fallen under their own observation,
     they were facts not worth observing: the district of clean little market-towns without
     manufactures, of fat livings, an aristocratic clergy, and low poor-rates. But as the day wore
     on the scene would change: the land would begin to be blackened with coal-pits, the rattle of
     handlooms to be heard in hamlets and villages. Here were powerful men walking queerly with
     knees bent outward from squatting in the mine, going home to throw themselves down in their
     blackened flannel and sleep through the daylight, then rise and spend much of their high wages
     at the ale-house with their fellows of the Benefit Club; here the pale eager faces of
     handloom-weavers, men and women, haggard from sitting up late at night to finish the week's
     work, hardly begun till the Wednesday. Everywhere the cottages and the small children were
     dirty, for the languid mothers gave their strength to the loom; pious Dissenting women,
     perhaps, who
     <pb/> took life patiently, and thought that salvation depended chiefly on predestination, and
     not at all on cleanliness. The gables of Dissenting chapels now made a visible sign of
     religion, and of a meeting-place to counterbalance the ale-house, even in the hamlets; but if a
     couple of old termagants were seen tearing each other's caps, it was a safe conclusion that, if
     they had not received the sacraments of the Church, they had not at least given in to
     schismatic rites, and were free from the errors of Voluntaryism. The breath of the
     manufacturing town, which made a cloudy day and a red gloom by night on the horizon, diffused
     itself over all the surrounding country, filling the air with eager unrest. Here was a
     population not convinced that old England was as good as possible; here were multitudinous men
     and women aware that their religion was not exactly the religion of their rulers, who might
     therefore be better than they were, and who, if better, might alter many things which now made
     the world perhaps more painful than it need be, and certainly more sinful. Yet there were the
     grey steeples too, and the churchyards, with their grassy mounds and venerable headstones,
     sleeping in the sunlight; there were broad fields and homesteads, and fine old woods covering a
     rising ground, or
     <pb/> stretching far by the roadside, allowing only peeps at the park and mansion which they
     shut in from the working-day world. In these midland districts the traveller passed rapidly
     from one phase of English life to another: after looking down on a village dingy with
     coal-dust, noisy with the shaking of looms, he might skirt a parish all of fields, high hedges,
     and deep-rutted lanes; after the coach had rattled over the pavement of a manufacturing town,
     the scene of riots and trades-union meetings, it would take him in another ten minutes into a
     rural region, where the neighbourhood of the town was only felt in the advantages of a near
     market for corn, cheese, and hay, and where men with a considerable banking account were
     accustomed to say that "they never meddled with politics themselves." The busy scenes of the
     shuttle and the wheel, of the roaring furnace, of the shaft and the pulley, seemed to make but
     crowded nests in the midst of the large-spaced, slow-moving life of homesteads and far-away
     cottages and oak-sheltered parks. Looking at the dwellings scattered amongst the woody flats
     and the ploughed uplands, under the low grey sky which overhung them with an unchanging
     stillness as if Time itself were pausing, it was easy for the traveller to conceive that town
     and country had no pulse
     <pb n="10"/> in common, except where the handlooms made a far-reaching straggling fringe about
     the great centres of manufacture; that till the agitation about the Catholics in '29, rural
     Englishmen had hardly known more of Catholics than of the fossil mammals; and that their notion
     of Reform was a confused combination of rick-burners, trades-unions, Nottingham riots, and in
     general whatever required the calling-out of the yeomanry. It was still easier to see that, for
     the most part, they resisted the rotation of crops and stood by their fallows: and the coachman
     would perhaps tell how in one parish an innovating farmer, who talked of Sir Humphrey Davy, had
     been fairly driven out by popular dislike, as if he had been a confounded Radical; and how, the
     parson having one Sunday preached from the words, "Plough up the fallow-ground of your hearts,"
     the people thought he had made the text out of his own head, otherwise it would never have come
     "so pat" on a matter of business; but when they found it in the Bible at home, some said it was
     an argument for fallows (else why should the Bible mention fallows?), but a few of the weaker
     sort were shaken, and thought it was an argument that fallows should be done away with, else
     the Bible would have said, "Let your hearts lie fallow;" and the next morning
     <pb n="11"/> the parson had a stroke of apoplexy, which, as coincident with a dispute about
     fallows, so set the parish against the innovating farmer and the rotation of crops, that he
     could stand his ground no longer, and transferred his lease.</p>
<p>The coachman was an excellent travelling companion and commentator on the landscape: he could
     tell the names of sites and persons, and explain the meaning of groups, as well as the shade of
     Virgil in a more memorable journey; he had as many stories about parishes, and the men and
     women in them, as the Wanderer in the 'Excursion,' only his style was different. His view of
     life had originally been genial, and such as became a man who was well warmed within and
     without, and held a position of easy, undisputed authority; but the recent initiation of
     Railways had embittered him: he now, as in a perpetual vision, saw the ruined country strewn
     with shattered limbs, and regarded Mr Huskisson's death as a proof of God's anger against
     Stephenson. "Why, every inn on the road would be shut up!" and at that word the coachman looked
     before him with the blank gaze of one who had driven his coach to the outermost edge of the
     universe, and saw his leaders plunging into the abyss. Still he would soon relapse from the
     high
     <pb n="12"/> prophetic strain to the familiar one of narrative. He knew whose the land was
     wherever he drove; what noblemen had half-ruined themselves by gambling; who made handsome
     returns of rent; and who was at daggers-drawn with his eldest son. He perhaps remembered the
     fathers of actual baronets, and knew stories of their extravagant or stingy housekeeping; whom
     they had married, whom they had horsewhipped, whether they were particular about preserving
     their game, and whether they had had much to do with canal companies. About any actual landed
     proprietor he could also tell whether he was a Reformer or an Anti-Reformer. That was a
     distinction which had "turned up" in latter times, and along with it the paradox, very puzzling
     to the coachman's mind, that there were men of old family and large estate who voted for the
     Bill. He did not grapple with the paradox; he let it pass, with all the discreetness of an
     experienced theologian or learned scholiast, preferring to point his whip at some object which
     could raise no questions.</p>
<p>No such paradox troubled our coachman when, leaving the town of Treby Magna behind him, he
     drove between the hedges for a mile or so, crossed the queer long bridge over the river Lapp,
     and then put his horses to a swift gallop up the hill
     <pb n="13"/> by the low-nestled village of Little Treby, till they were on the fine level road,
     skirted on one side by grand larches, oaks, and wych elms, which sometimes opened so far as to
     let the traveller see that there was a park behind them.</p>
<p>How many times in the year, as the coach rolled past the neglected-looking lodges which
     interrupted the screen of trees, and showed the river winding through a finely-timbered park,
     had the coachman answered the same questions, or told the same things without being questioned!
     That?—oh, that was Transome Court, a place there had been a fine sight of lawsuits about.
     Generations back, the heir of the Transome name had somehow bargained away the estate, and it
     fell to the Durfeys, very distant connections, who only called themselves Transomes because
     they had got the estate. But the Durfeys' claim had been disputed over and over again; and the
     coachman, if he had been asked, would have said, though he might have to fall down dead the
     next minute, that property didn't always get into the right hands. However, the lawyers had
     found their luck in it; and people who inherited estates that were lawed about often lived in
     them as poorly as a mouse in a hollow cheese; and, by what he could make out, that had
     <pb n="14"/> been the way with these present Durfeys, or Transomes, as they called themselves.
     As for Mr Transome, he was as poor, half-witted a fellow as you'd wish to see; but <hi>she</hi>
     was master, had come of a high family, and had a spirit—you might see it in her eye and the way
     she sat her horse. Forty years ago, when she came into this country, they said she was a
     picture; but her family was poor, and so she took up with a hatchet-faced fellow like this
     Transome. And the eldest son had been just such another as his father, only worse—a wild sort
     of half-natural, who got into bad company. They said his mother hated him and wished him dead;
     for she'd got another son, quite of a different cut, who had gone to foreign parts when he was
     a youngster, and she wanted her favourite to be heir. But heir or no heir, Lawyer Jermyn had
     had <hi>his</hi> picking out of the estate. Not a door in his big house but what was the finest
     polished oak, all got off the Transome estate. If anybody liked to believe he paid for it, they
     were welcome. However, Lawyer Jermyn had sat on that box-seat many and many a time. He had made
     the wills of most people thereabout. The coachman would not say that Lawyer Jermyn was not the
     man he would choose to make his own will some day. It was not so well for a lawyer to
     <pb n="15"/> be over-honest, else he might not be up to other people's tricks. And as for the
     Transome business, there had been ins and outs in time gone by, so that you couldn't look into
     it straight backward. At this Mr Sampson (everybody in North Loamshire knew Sampson's coach)
     would screw his features into a grimace expressive of entire neutrality, and appear to aim his
     whip at a particular spot on the horse's flank. If the passenger was curious for further
     knowledge concerning the Transome affairs, Sampson would shake his head and say there had been
     fine stories in his time; but he never condescended to state what the stories were. Some
     attributed this reticence to a wise incredulity, others to a want of memory, others to simple
     ignorance. But at least Sampson was right in saying that there had been fine stories—meaning,
     ironically, stories not altogether creditable to the parties concerned.</p>
<p>And such stories often come to be fine in a sense that is not ironical. For there is seldom
     any wrong-doing which does not carry along with it some downfall of blindly-climbing hopes,
     some hard entail of suffering, some quickly-satiated desire that survives, with the life in
     death of old paralytic vice, to see itself cursed by its woeful progeny—some tragic mark of
     kinship in the one brief life to the
     <pb n="16"/> far-stretching life that went before, and to the life that is to come after, such
     as has raised the pity and terror of men ever since they began to discern between will and
     destiny. But these things are often unknown to the world; for there is much pain that is quite
     noiseless; and vibrations that make human agonies are often a mere whisper in the roar of
     hurrying existence. There are glances of hatred that stab and raise no cry of murder; robberies
     that leave man or woman for ever beggared of peace and joy, yet kept secret by the sufferer—
     committed to no sound except that of low moans in the night, seen in no writing except that
     made on the face by the slow months of suppressed anguish and early morning tears. Many an
     inherited sorrow that has marred a life has been breathed into no human ear.</p>
<p>The poets have told us of a dolorous enchanted forest in the under world. The thorn-bushes
     there, and the thick-barked stems, have human histories hidden in them; the power of unuttered
     cries dwells in the passionless-seeming branches, and the red warm blood is darkly feeding the
     quivering nerves of a sleepless memory that watches through all dreams. These things are a
     parable.</p>
</div>