<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="6">
  CHAPTER VI.
The most popular girl at Mrs. Penfold's "Seminary for Young Ladies," near Edinburgh, was
     Marion Dunbar, too much loved by her companions to be envied; admired by all, and almost
     idolized by each, while beneath the gay, sparkling surface of her joyous disposition, there
     rolled on a warm current of sensibility and feeling sufficient to repay, and more than repay,
     all the deep tenderness and enthusiastic affection she excited among the little circle of her
     young and ardent friends.
Cast in the finest mould of classical beauty, and formed mentally as well as personally in
     the very poetry of nature, the perfect grace and symmetry of her features became enlivened
     frequently by a rich and radiant smile, like a Hebe, glowing with the richest hues of health
     and joy. Her splendid eyes sparkled with every passing emotion, sometimes dimmed for a moment
     by tears of sensibility, but usually glittering with smiles, while occasionally, when amused or
     delighted, she burst into a comic, elfish laugh, the very essence of glee and joyousness—a most
     enlivening accompaniment to what she said, while her conversation, always fresh and
     unpremeditated, rushed straight from her heart, fresh and natural as a mountain stream.
The color of a violet was not more deeply blue than the dark, unfathomable eyes of Marion,
     shaded by a fringe of eye-lashes that might have been mistaken for black. No description could
     do justice to the fascination of her smile, without one shade of affectation, while her pure
     transparent complexion, fresh as a bouquet of roses, took a richer tint from all the fleeting
     emotions which chased each other through her mind. A rich profusion of nut-brown hair played
     around her high arched forehead of alabaster whiteness, and a thousand laughing dimples
     quivered around her delicately-formed mouth, giving her a merry, joyous look of girlish beauty,
     varied occasionally by a melting softness of expression when she looked on any countenance that
     she loved. On one occasion, a celebrated sculptor asked Sir Patrick's permission to take a cast
     of Marion's head, and on obtaining the desired permission, he observed, that if those features
     could be turned into marble, he would stake his whole fame on the impossibility of any critic
     pointing out a single defect. But while admiration is given by the eye of an artist merely to
     symmetry, expression is the mystery of beauty; and the charm of Marion, in the estimation of
     her friends, was, that her face seemed like a mirror formed to reflect every emotion of their
     own hearts.
The most stern and morose of human beings must have been conciliated into some degree of
     regard by the deep tenderness of a character "without one jarring atom form'd," which seemed
     made only to love and to be loved. While her gay fancy revelled in "cheerful yesterdays and
     confident to-morrows," the flowers that grew around her path, the birds that sang as she
     passed, the very turf beneath her feet, and the sky above her head, called forth her feelings.
     She had a tear to spare for the sorrows of every one who claimed her sympathy, and a ready
     smile for the joys of all her companions, while yet a great deal of unoccupied love remained at
     her disposal, the chief portion of which was bestowed with prodigal enthusiasm on her indulgent
     uncle Sir Arthur, whose doting affection would have spoiled any other disposition, but only
     rendered her more keenly to merit and to deserve his partiality.
In the estimation of Sir Arthur, his "little Marion" never became a day older, and he
     considered her a perfect prodigy in everything she said or did, watching all her words, and
     entering into all her juvenile feelings with a versatility of mind astonishing at his advanced
     age. Nothing on earth is more touching than to see the warmth of sensibility and enthusiasm yet
     surviving the chill of many a year in this disappointing and sorrowing world; but there was a
     degree of mutual confidence between Sir Arthur and his young niece which can seldom exist with
     a disparity of years and circumstances. Besides all her feminine gentleness, and almost
     poetical gracefulness of character, Marion yet displayed at times a power of intellect and an
     energetic strength of character for which a superficial observer would have been totally
     unprepared; for her mind seemed always to rise in proportion to the occasion, while she had
     been born apparently to practise without reserve that beautiful Christian rule, for each
     individual always to consider himself last. Rarely are deep feelings and intense sensibility
     united with that high intelligence of mind, and that vivid gladness of spirit peculiar to
     Marion; but the stream of her mind was deep as well as sparkling, while during her early years
     sorrow flitted through her cheerful, laughter-loving mind, like the shadow of a butterfly in a
     bright sunny flower-bed. Pleased "she knew not why, and car'd not wherefore," there was a
     peculiar grace in all she did, and an infectious merriment in all she said, which attracted a
     joyous group of companions continually around her, on whom the light of her own buoyant
     vivacity seemed to be continually and brightly reflected.
Nothing could be more pleasing and characteristic than to observe the refined ingenuity with
     which, from the earliest age, Marion tried to evade receiving the multitude of little presents
     with which it was Sir Arthur's delight to surprise her. Trinkets and toys would have multiplied
     around her, if she had not frequently made an ostentation of possessing more than it was
     possible for her to use; and when Sir Arthur allowed her a choice in any gift he was about to
     force on her acceptance, she invariably selected that which seemed least expensive; and her
     uncle afterwards told, that when, on the twelfth anniversary of her birthday, he clasped a
     beautiful Maltese chain round her neck, she said to him, with a deepening color and faltering
     voice, "I would like better to love you for nothing, uncle Arthur! My drawers up stairs are
     like a jeweler's shop already. You know I inherited half dear mamma's ornaments, and Patrick
     says you bring Rundell and Bridge in your pocket every time I have a holiday; but I would be
     quite as happy to see you all for yourself."
The merry-eyed Marion seemed to "wear her heart upon her sleeve," and to see only what was
     best in all those with whom she associated. With her small means, it was truly astonishing how
     frequently and ingeniously she invented some unobtrusive way of conferring a favor on her
     companions, as if she were receiving rather than bestowing one; and it certainly appeared as if
     she scarcely knew the difference. There was not an individual among her numerous young
     contemporaries who did not often relate traits of goodness in one whom they always found ready
     to answer the largest drafts that could be drawn upon her good offices, while the cheerfulness
     of her mind reflected itself on all.
If one of her young friends rushed joyously forward to announce some unexpected success,
     Marion's features seemed as if they had been put together only for smiles and laughter, while
     her bright eye glittered with instant gladness, and a glow of color mounted to her dimpling
     cheek, as she felt and expressed with spontaneous warmth all that kindness could dictate, and
     more; but if some unforeseen affliction visited the hearts of her juvenile associates, there
     seemed no limits to the patience with which she listened to their complaints, or to the eager
     assiduity with which she endeavored to alleviate their sorrow. The most trifling attentions she
     never overlooked, were it merely the tying of a string, or the picking up of a handkerchief,
     which she did with a good-humored grace all her own, and the trifling actions of life are those
     by which the character can generally be most justly appreciated. Great achievements are a
     conspicuous embroidery laid on the surface often for effect, but the ground-work and material
     are formed of what is most unobtrusive and often scarcely noticed. With Marion, every kind and
     generous feeling was as natural as perfume to the violet, and equally inseparable from her
     daily existence; her ideas were fresh and vivid, while her manner was thoroughly fascinating
     and thoroughly feminine, at the same time that all the grace of look and expression added a
     surpassing charm to her lively and intelligent conversation, every word of which sprang from
     the spontaneous impulse of a heart full of natural emotion and straightforward sentiments.
Many a difficult exercise she had secretly assisted to write for her young contemporaries,
     many an unintelligible drawing she had touched up, many a dress she had privately mended, many
     a little debt she had clandestinely paid for her juvenile friends, and far from wishing to be
     thanked, she shrunk with modest sensibility from letting her services be over-estimated, even
     by those whom she had most exerted herself to oblige. Whenever a kindness had been privately
     done at school, the author of which could not be guessed at nor discovered, few hesitated to
     declare that it must have proceeded from Marion Dunbar, and none were ever mistaken in saying
     so.
It was indeed wonderful that the lovely and gay young school-girl found time for a tenth part
     of her kind and tender affections, at Mrs. Penfold's first-rate seminary for what Sir Arthur
     called "fiddle-faddle education." There no taste was inculcated for quiet pursuits or domestic
     intercourse, and it was one of Mrs. Penfold's favorite axioms, that nature is always vulgar;
     but in her zeal for the honor of her establishment she seemed resolute to make every pupil an
     Admirable Chrichton,—or more,—not in studying the experience of past ages, and reading the
     thoughts and feelings which have been recorded for their instruction by millions of the best
     and wisest of their predecessors in life, but in all the frivolities of existence; and to this
     end the pupils were stinted in sleep and food, while they pursued a course of application more
     incessant, though not so profound, as that of students for a double first class at Oxford. The
     most eminent masters were in hourly attendance to cultivate every thing but the heart or
     understanding. The various arts of killing or of wasting time were taught in perfection, by the
     best, or at least by the most fashionable teachers; and, as the Admiral disapprovingly remarked
     to her brother, "little Marion was surrounded by professors of every thing on earth,—by
     professors of trumpery in all its branches, but by no professors of common sense!"
With Mrs. Penfold each pupil was a favorite in exact proportion as she appeared likely to
     acquire a talent for the difficult art of rising in the world, by which she might reflect
     credit and celebrity on the theatre of her education; and it seemed, therefore, by no means
     intended as an expression of kindness, when the lady was heard one day impatiently to exclaim
     in accents of reproach, "Marion Dunbar is all heart, and no head! Some girls do nothing, but
     she does less than nothing; and though she gets on in years, she gets on in no other
     thing!"
Wearily busied in being taught, Marion yet felt that there was no incitement, and one only,
     which made every effort a pleasure, while it gave life to the dull routine of her heartless
     labors, and that incitement was her fervent, incessant desire to please, not the dictate of
     vanity, but of spontaneous sensibility; and while, with her bright and beaming looks, she was
     by no means a prodigy, Marion very much under-rated her own powers, believing, in the
     simplicity of her heart, that she really was the most hopeless dunce on many subjects, only
     able to recommend herself by diligence and by alacrity to oblige.
Even Mrs. Penfold was disarmed of half her severity, by the eagerness with which Marion,
     buoyant with youth, and joyous as a bird on wing, undertook any task, or suffered any penance
     to compensate for such little etourderies as had caused her to be in
     temporary disgrace; and the stern schoolmistress herself could not but smile sometimes in the
     midst of her gravest lecture, to observe the look of extreme anxiety and self-reproach with
     which Marion listened to the catalogue of her small indiscretions, and the grateful joy with
     which she heard that there were any terms on which she might yet be restored to favor. Caroline
     Smythe, her most frolicsome companion, frequently amused herself by inventing imaginary scrapes
     into which Marion was supposed to have fallen, and by sending her express to Mrs. Penfold for a
     reprimand, while the lively girl watched, in laughing ambuscade, for the bright beaming smile
     which flashed into the supposed culprit's countenance, the instant she unexpectedly found
     herself honorably acquitted.
Thus the foundation of Marion's mind was laid, and these were the light breezes that ruffled
     the smooth current of her life; but enchanted by the slightest pleasures, few ever bore the
     burden of her annoyances so lightly, while a brilliant painted curtain hung over the future,
     filled with images of anticipated joy, to be realized in all their brightness and beauty, as
     soon as she became emancipated from the dreary thralldom of Mrs. Penfold's manufactory of young
     ladies.
Meantime, Marion's mind grew and flourished, like some rare and beautiful plant injudiciously
     cultivated, yet glowing in almost unprecedented luxuriance. Plunged in this inextricable
     labyrinth of educational troubles, she had to undergo lessons from sunrise till sunset, while
     all the varied arts, sciences, and languages were piled promiscuously on her brain, like an
     ill-grown coppice, distorted and stunted for want of more judicious thinning and training. She
     could name things in every language, but was told nothing of their nature and properties;
     while, as Sir Arthur complained, "poor little Marion was taught plenty of sound, but no sound
     sense, except what she had inherited by nature, without paying £100 a-year for it."
In music Marion displayed great taste and expression, while her flexible, richly-toned voice
     poured out sometimes a flood of harmony most exquisite to hear, as the pathos of her full round
     intonations drew forth the feeling and sympathy of all her auditors. Expression in music is
     like expression of countenance, not to be taught or acquired, but the spontaneous result of
     natural emotion, and with Marion music was almost a passion, for her whole spirit seemed
     instinct with melody, while her lark-like voice trilled its liquid notes with joyful
     hilarity.
Signors and Signoras, who might have fitted their pupils to become chorus-singers at the
     opera, were multiplied around the young ladies at Mrs. Penfold's "College of Frivolity,"
     followed in ceaseless succession by Messieurs and Mesdames, who taught the young ladies to
     maltreat pianofortes, by playing on them at the rate of 100 miles an hour, or to speak foreign
     languages better than the natives, and to write them better than they could write their
     own;—

While hands, lips, and eyes were put to school,
And each instructed feature had its rule.

On Sunday evenings, for the sake of effect, the girls were regularly assembled to prayers,
     which were conducted like those of Frederick the Great's soldiers, being performed
     simultaneously at the word of command as a part of their exercise, without a semblance of
     reverence, and within a very limited number of minutes, while they were hastily slurred over by
     Mrs. Penfold herself, with scarcely an external aspect of solemnity or interest. Sunday had
     long been considered by all the pupils at Mrs. Penfold's as a privileged day for writing
     letters, wearing best bonnets, peeping from behind a red silk curtain at the congregation,
     criticising the clergyman's manner, dress, and appearance, discussing, in suppressed whispers,
     who it would be possible or impossible for them to think of marrying, and enjoying rather a
     longer walk than common in strolling to church and returning again.
Any knowledge of the Bible inculcated at Mrs. Penfold's was like all the other acquirements
     taught in that establishment, more for show than use. Each young pupil could repeat by heart,
     without hesitation or mistake, the whole history of Jacob, Abraham, and any of the patriarchs,
     prophets, or apostles, and enumerate all the kings who ever reigned over Israel, but they
     remained utterly uninstructed respecting the influence which the Divine revelation should
     obtain over their own life and character, nor were they ever taught to inquire what was their
     own nature, why they were placed upon the earth, and whither they were likely to go after this
     perishable world had passed from their sight. Summer flowers alone were implanted in their
     minds, but no thoughts, hopes, or affections, such as may last for winter wear. To them their
     birth seemed merely to have been the commencement of an existence, given entirely for their own
     individual pleasure or advantage, which was finally to terminate at their death.
Before Marion had been long at school, however, she formed an intimacy which produced a
     permanent and most happy effect on all her subsequent life and feelings. Clara Granville,
     several years older than herself, had been nurtured, like her brother, in holiness, and in
     every domestic excellence, while she lived only for the dictates of a chastened and sanctified
     heart. Delicate in health, and fragile in extreme to appearance, there was something almost
     seraphic in the delicate purity of her lovely countenance, and in the tranquil composure of her
     graceful manner. During a long and tedious illness, with which Clara was seized, a short time
     before leaving school, she testified a tender and almost exclusive affection for Marion, who
     spent all her leisure hours—or rather moments, for hours were scarce at Mrs. Penfold's—in the
     most assiduous attention to the beloved invalid, and in imbibing those elements of good, those
     feelings and principles of religion which were to be guides of all her future life, and thus
     she became, before long, an enlightened, well informed, and deeply pious Christian, not
     shrinking from the society of one who excelled herself, but humbly and gratefully seeking, on
     all occasions, her advice and instruction, while both had their hearts filled with a fervent
     desire, steadily and consistently to pursue their own best interests, and an anxious wish also
     to succor and benefit others, in all the troubles and sorrows of life, though Marion was apt to
     feel like the poet,—

Ready to aid all beings, I would go
The world around to succor human woe,
Yet am so largely happy, that it seems,
There are no woes, and sorrows are but dreams.

Marion's health and spirits were refreshed and invigorated by frequent excursions to visit
     Sir Arthur, who endeared himself to his eager young auditors, Henry and Marion, by expatiating
     with all the freshness of youth, to their wondering ears, on the times long past, when
     holidays, romping, sight-seeing, birth-days, and festivals, were still in fashion, but these
     were the days of his own boyhood, before children were too wise and busy to have time for
     natural enjoyment. The Admiral was thought, by Mrs. Penfold, a sad marplot, having already, as
     she knew, done all in his power to dissuade Sir Patrick from placing the "little fairy," as he
     called his favorite, in such a tread-mill as her school-room, where he said the only knowledge
     to be acquired was, that knowledge of the world which ruins the heart, and where fascination
     was to be taught as one of the fine arts, but all his representations, whether in jest or in
     earnest, were in vain. Sir Patrick, being the guardian of both his sisters, had determined to
     expend a considerable part of the provision bequeathed by their father in training them up as
     carefully, for the course of fashionable life, as he would have trained a promising race-horse
     which was expected to win the St. Leger, confidently anticipating a short and brilliant career
     of admiration and success, ending with a splendid trousseau, a chariot and four, and a
     profusion of wedding favors.
Even the gay, frolicsome Caroline Smythe, many years older than Marion, and the most
     seditious and unruly of pupils, became speedily tamed down to mechanical obedience at school,
     where, losing her naturally intense enjoyment of mere existence, she seemed at best almost a
     habitual drudge in the usual routine of labor. There was a mystery never apparently to be
     fathomed about this lively girl, which excited the most intense curiosity among her companions,
     but though she was gifted with an extraordinary degree of volubility, which astonished and
     diverted the whole school, talking in a rapid and irregular manner of all events, past,
     present, or to come, with a brilliant confusion of drollery and humor, still she never dropped
     a hint which threw the most transient light on her own situation and affairs. No one knew
     whence she came or who she was, but though defying all the powers of all the masters to render
     her accomplished, yet Mrs. Penfold evidently treated her with extraordinary consideration, and
     almost with respect.
Many were the restrictions and directions given respecting her to the scholars and teachers,
     which seemed to them most unaccountable, and several of which were voted by the juvenile
     community to be so peculiarly barbarous and oppressive, that though the young lady herself
     seemed neither surprised nor annoyed by the rigid watchfulness exercised over all her motions,
     it excited among her companions an indignant pity, and a keen spirit of partizanship. She was
     never on any occasion known to walk with the governesses and the other girls beyond the narrow
     limits of the high garden walls, and on Sundays, instead of attending the parish church, it was
     observed that one of the teachers invariably remained at home to read prayers with her. No
     general invitations sent for all the pupils by the friends of other girls, were ever accepted
     for Caroline, who had special permission to visit with Marion at Sir Arthur Dunbar's, but at no
     other house in the visible world.
She never spoke of home,—received no letters, and once only had a visitor, an object of keen
     and eager scrutiny to the little gossiping community of Dartmore House, who discovered nothing
     more, however, than that Caroline's aunt, Mrs. Smythe, was a gay, fantastic-looking,
     showily-dressed little woman of no certain age, for whom her niece seemed to care very little,
     as the whole flood of her affections was concentrated on her companions at school. Money she
     had in the most lavish abundance, while she squandered it with a degree of reckless, and almost
     contemptuous profusion, perfectly startling to those who scarcely received as much in a year as
     she seemed able to spend in a day on presents for those she loved, which was the chief use to
     which her large funds were devoted.
Marion, the companion and pet of her two elder companions, Clara and Caroline, tried with all
     her powers to extend her affection also to Mrs. Penfold, but her feelings found nothing to feed
     upon in the cold, formal, rigid manner, and stern upright appearance of the schoolmistress, who
     repelled all intercourse with her pupils, considering them necessary grievances to be endured
     in her house, as a source of existence to herself, but not of pleasure. Towards these little
     slaves of education, driven from task to task with ceaseless pertinacity, no confidence was
     shown, and between them conversation became systematically discouraged. A governess was
     appointed to sleep in each room to secure silence among the pupils, few of whom had that glow
     of heart and imagination peculiar to Marion, and it was fortunate, perhaps, that her large
     stock of sympathy was not more frequently in requisition, as the most astounding confidences
     were sometimes imparted to her wondering ears.
One young lady, in a high fever of romance, described to Marion at great length, in the
     strictest confidence, an elopement which took place from the school where she had last been
     educated, on which occasion the young narrator had accompanied the bride part of her way, and
     returned home without detection, by climbing in at an open window. Another of the pupils asked
     if she did not think Monsieur D'Ambereau, the Italian master, wore singularly handsome
     mustachios, adding that it was a very common custom now for noblemen to go about in disguise,
     teaching at boarding-schools, in order to see the young ladies; and a third of Marion's young
     friends pointed out to her notice that many a ringlet appeared to be more carefully curled than
     usual, and many a dress to be put on with unwonted solicitude, when Monsieur Frescati, the
     singing-master, was expected.
Girls in a boarding school are as unnaturally situated as nuns in a convent, where the
     feelings and emotions, being checked in their spontaneous course, are thrust into channels for
     which they never were originally intended. Marion had a sufficient object in view, every time
     she entered a room, from the desire she felt to please all with whom she associated, which gave
     a vent to the warmth of her affections in seeking the reciprocal attachment of her companions;
     but many of the other pupils, shut out from nature with her sunshine and flowers, her feelings
     and emotions, and wearied by a monotonous, uneventful life of dictionaries and grammars,
     snatched at every legitimate or illegitimate source of novelty or excitement, and their
     conversation became as frivolous as a toy-shop, while the hopeless vacancy of their thoughts
     obtained relief if even a blind fiddler or a hand-organ appeared beneath their windows. It was
     an object of romantic interest for the day, to most of the girls, if an officer in uniform
     passed along the high-road within sight; an equestrian in plain clothes, if tolerably mounted,
     furnished them with a subject of exclamations during the following half-hour, and even the very
     Doctor, a mere country pill-box, who prescribed for Mrs. Penfold's pupils, being well-dressed,
     and not much above forty, would himself have been astonished could he possibly have guessed the
     interest excited by his visits, and the keen discussion that ensued after his exit, respecting
     his slightly grey hair, and brilliant yellow gloves.
Each young lady at school had a large assortment of romantic stories to relate, in a
     confidential under-tone, to her listening companions, of lovers who had committed suicide, gone
     mad, or been, at the very least, rendered miserable for life, in consequence of a disappointed
     attachment; while the whole party impatiently anticipated the time, not perhaps far distant,
     when their own turn would come to be idolized, admired, courted, and finally married to some
     "perfect love," with title, fortune, and establishment all pre-eminently superlative. Pure as
     the swan that passes through the darkest and most turbid stream, with plumage unsoiled,
     Marion's mind, in the meantime, remained untainted by the atmosphere of evil and frivolity
     around her. She caught at all that seemed good, avoided what was evil, and rejected every
     thought that might injure the unsophisticated excellence of her artless mind.
There arose, however, in time, one source of individual anxiety to Marion, known only to
     herself and Mrs. Penfold; but it increased in weight and urgency every year, throwing
     occasionally a shadow of care over that bright young countenance, in general so beaming with
     joy, though with true philosophy Marion tried often to forget what it had proved impossible for
     her to remedy. Once a quarter, or at least during every successive "half," the mortifying fact
     forced itself upon her observation, that no bills were so irregularly paid as her own; for
     while their amount rapidly accumulated, Sir Patrick's agent forwarded annually the very
     smallest instalments, with a thousand apologies, and many promises of a final satisfactory
     settlement at some future period, which period never seemed any nearer; and Mrs. Penfold often
     dryly remarked, in the hearing of Marion, that "short accounts make long friends."
An appeal to Sir Arthur for his interference often occasionally suggested itself to the mind
     of Marion; but she knew that his influence was less than nothing, and she greatly feared lest
     his vehement partiality to herself might lead him to overlook the very limited nature of his
     income, and to volunteer some generous sacrifice, such as she would rather suffer any
     privations than occasion. The pension and half-pay of Sir Arthur very barely sufficed, she
     knew, to defray his extensive charities, and to furnish sometimes the hospitable table, and the
     bottle of first-rate claret, round which it was his delight to gather a frequent circle of old
     brother admirals; but his purse was little calculated to stand the shock of such a draft as Sir
     Patrick would unhesitatingly have drawn upon it, had the idea occurred to him that Sir Arthur
     might perhaps be induced to take Marion's school bills upon himself.
In no instance was it more obvious than in that of Sir Patrick Dunbar, how precisely in
     society men are generally estimated at their own valuation. He was, like his sisters,
     pre-eminently handsome, while the hauteur of his demeanor, bordering on a sort of well-bred
     contempt for others, rendered his slightest notice an event of considerable magnitude even to
     many whom the world might have deemed his superiors in rank, fortune, and talents. There were a
     few exclusives, however, among his own exclusive set, whom he admitted to the most unbounded
     familiarity and good fellowship, inviting them to entertainments, given much more as an
     ostentatious display of wealth and taste, than from any feeling that might be dignified with
     the name of friendship; and thus, by a reckless and unbounded profusion in dress, equipage, and
     hospitality, unchecked by one sentiment of justice or of prudence, the young Baronet obtained
     universal celebrity for his generosity and good humor,—anecdotes of which were circulated with
     delighted approbation in every house.
He was known to have tossed a sovereign one day to an old woman at a cottage door, for merely
     reaching him a glass of water; he paid the post-boys double always when travelling; he gave ten
     pounds at a ladies' bazaar, for a paper card-case, which he presented the next moment to Clara
     Granville; and he sent Marion a magnificent rosewood box, filled with crystal perfume bottles,
     and gold tops, which cost twenty pounds, when at that very time she had scarcely a frock to put
     on, and was in agonies of vexation under an unpaid shoemaker's bill.
Sir Patrick's grooms and footmen always roundly estimated his income at £20,000 a year; and
     his rent-roll certainly exceeded that of all the parents united who paid Mrs. Penfold regularly
     for cramming their children's understandings; but while Sir Patrick made it a matter of
     accurate calculation to train Marion with skill and sagacity in the way most likely to take her
     speedily off his hands, yet it was no part of his calculation to pay for anything in money if
     he could do so in words; and while he rattled off whole estates in a dice-box, and raced
     himself into difficulties, entering horses for every cup, and dogs for every coursing-match, he
     privately resolved that Marion and her embarrassments should always remain both out of sight
     and out of mind.
Mrs. Penfold's grave and dry expression of countenance became graver and drier every time she
     contemplated the rapidly-increasing amount of Marion's bill, while she urgently impressed on
     her pupil's mind the absolute necessity of entreating more zealously than ever for the speedy
     payment of such very old scores.
Observing Sir Patrick so exceedingly profuse in his expenditure, however, Mrs. Penfold
     believed there could be no cause to apprehend any defalcation at last, being convinced that he
     might at any time defray her demands with ease, though the only thing he never found it
     convenient to command was ready money; and Marion soon discovered that it made him frantic with
     ill-humor to be asked for any. Of this peculiarity she had once an early instance, never
     afterwards to be forgotten. Having received from Sir Arthur, on her fifteenth birth-day, the
     first five sovereigns which it had ever been her good fortune to possess, she accidentally
     heard Sir Arthur laughingly complain during her mid-summer holidays at home, to Mr. De
     Crespigny, that he had arrived at the bank that morning too late to present a draft for money,
     and having given his last shilling to a beggar, he was, according to his own expression,
     "completely cleaned out," not having enough even to pay for being admitted to the exhibition of
     pictures, and actually put to some temporary inconvenience by his penniless condition for that
     day.
In all the pride of exhaustless wealth, Marion soon after stole up to her brother's side, and
     displayed her glittering treasure; but afraid to be suspected of conferring a favor, with
     intuitive delicacy she asked Sir Patrick to take charge of it until the following Saturday,
     that she might consider what to purchase on that day. Scarcely conscious of what she said or
     did, the young Baronet mechanically dropped the sovereigns into his pocket, where sovereigns in
     general had a very short reign, and soon after sauntered away to the club.
Day after day elapsed, week after week, and every time Sir Patrick entered the room, or drew
     out his pocket handkerchief, Marion thought she was on the eve of being paid; but at length her
     holidays came to a close, and still not a syllable transpired respecting her funds. Rendered
     desperate at last by anxiety to re-enter school, laden with presents to her favorite
     companions, Marion, who valued money only as a means of being kind to others, ventured one day,
     with glowing cheeks, and faltering voice, to remind Sir Patrick, for the first time, of their
     little pecuniary transactions, which was so very trifling that he had probably forgotten
     it.
"You tiresome little dear! am I never to hear the last of those sovereigns!" exclaimed he
     angrily, throwing down his newspaper. "You deserve not to be paid till Christmas! But here they
     are! No! I have no change, I see, at present. Well! I shall remember it some other time!"
That "other time" never came, however, and Marion returned penniless to school, sympathizing
     more fully than she had ever done before, in Mrs. Penfold's lamentations respecting Sir
     Patrick's carelessness about money,—a subject which supplied that lady with a ready-made
     excuse, whenever she was out of humor at any rate, for venting it all on her unoffending pupil,
     whose sensitive heart became so imbued at last with vexation and anxiety, that on attaining the
     age of sixteen, she ventured to pen an earnest appeal to Sir Patrick, begging with all the
     eloquence of natural feeling, that if the expenses of her education were inconvenient, she
     might return home, where she would willingly shew all the benefit derived from the advantages
     he had already afforded her, by continuing her studies alone, and by devoting herself entirely
     to his comfort, amusement, and happiness.
This letter, which cost Marion agonies of thought, and a shower of tears, received no answer
     whatever; and with a sigh of unwonted depression, she dismissed the subject from her thoughts,
     and trying to hope the best, quietly resumed the course of her occupations, comforted by the
     consolatory reflection, that in two years she would have nothing more to learn—the whole range
     of human acquirement being supposed to attain its completion by each of Mrs. Penfold's pupils
     at the age of eighteen.
Clara Granville, and Caroline Smythe, having attained the highest acme of perfection under
     the finishing hand of Mrs. Penfold, were about to be emancipated in a few months from the
     thralldom of school, and to astonish society by their brilliant acquirements; respecting the
     most advantageous mode of displaying which, great pains had been taken to instruct them, though
     the inclination seemed wanting in both girls, being already surfeited with admiration and
     panegyric among their masters and governesses, who vied with each other in praising their two
     most advanced pupils, by whose influence they hoped hereafter to obtain recommendations and
     employment.
Marion had strolled one evening with Caroline, farther than Miss Smythe had ever been known
     to venture before; and the two young friends were seated in an arbor at the extreme verge of
     the bounds prescribed by Mrs. Penfold, in earnest conversation, while watching with delight the
     declining sun, which superbly illuminated a heavy mass of clouds in the western horizon. Time
     flew on, and darkness nearly closed around them while they discussed with lively, careless
     humor, all the petty annoyances of their daily life, and compared the little hopes and fears
     they entertained for the future. As the hour became later, Marion felt that the high
     exhilarating key in which Caroline spoke, and her gay, well-rung-out laugh, made her almost
     nervous in the obscure and solitary retreat to which they had withdrawn; but ashamed of her own
     timidity, she determined to conquer or conceal it.
Marion was flattered when a companion like Caroline, some years older than herself, thus
     treated her with familiarity; though certainly, neither on this occasion, nor on any other, was
     it with confidence, as no living being seemed entirely in the confidence of Miss Smythe, who,
     while she appeared gayly and heedlessly to rattle on in conversation, yet kept a cautious
     silence respecting all that concerned herself.
Many very reserved persons pass for being perfectly open, by means of a frank, free manner,
     and by speaking in a confidential tone concerning the most private affairs of those with whom
     they converse; and this Caroline did to excess, asking Marion, with every appearance of
     kindness, a hundred questions, which in her own case she either could not, or would not have
     answered, and testifying the most cordial, unfeigned interest in all that related to the
     prospects or feelings of her companion, who never attempted to conceal a wish or a thought, and
     often forgot that the trust was not mutual.
Caroline was talking eagerly with great animation, and telling Marion that the only injury
     she never would forgive, was, if any of those she loved had a sorrow that did not allow her to
     share with them; and especially if they permitted themselves to suffer from any pecuniary
     difficulties which it was within her power to relieve, when suddenly Marion laid a hand on her
     arm, making a hurried signal for silence, while she whispered in a low undertone,
"I have scarcely heard you for the last five minutes. Did you observe that strange-looking
     man, very much muffled up, who scrambled several minutes ago to the top of the garden-wall? He
     was staring wildly about him for some time, then gliding noiselessly down, and has suddenly
     disappeared?"
"Where? where?" whispered Caroline, grasping Marion's hand with a look of wild alarm, and
     speaking in a low, hoarse tone of extreme terror. "For your life, Marion, do not stir! Tell me
     which way he went! He must not see us. O how on earth has he traced me out!"
"Who?" asked Marion, bewildered and terrified, when she beheld a degree of frantic alarm
     depicted on the countenance of her companion, which seemed almost unaccountable. "Dear
     Caroline! whom do you fear?"
"A madman!" replied Miss Smythe, in accents of mingled anger and disgust. "He has haunted me
     for years! He threatens either to murder or to marry me; and you may guess which I think the
     worst! He has even adopted my name! Did you never hear, Marion, that he actually put his
     marriage to me last year in the newspapers! He besets my footsteps—besieges my dwelling-place,
     persecutes me with letters, sends me his picture, follows me to church, throws stones at my
     windows in the night, and frightens my very life out, yet the law leaves me unprotected,
     because he commits no actual breach of the peace. It was to avoid him that I begged my aunt to
     let me live here! How did he discover my retreat?"
Caroline seemed to have lost all command of herself in the agony of her fear, and poured out
     a flood of words in the rapid and subdued accents of extreme terror, while she retreated into
     the darkest corner of the arbor to screen herself from observation, hastily dragging Marion
     along with her, and whispering an eager request, if they were discovered, that she would
     endeavor herself to get off, and fly towards the house for assistance. "Meantime I shall engage
     his attention; but if he once sees me, all hope of escape on my part would be vain, while the
     very endeavor might irritate him! Everything depends on you, Marion! Be resolute, and lose not
     a moment, or you may be too late."
In agonized suspense and apprehension the two friends remained during several minutes,
     cowering behind the overhanging branches, and scarcely venturing to breathe, while Caroline
     bent her head eagerly forward to catch the slightest sound, and grasped Marion's arm almost
     convulsively, as if to secure her being perfectly immovable; at length, after some time, she
     heaved a deep sigh, expressive of relief, and looked up, saying
"He is surely gone! he must be gone! I never eluded his eye before!—his sight is almost
     supernatural; but he must be gone at last! Let us hurry home!"
"Stop!" whispered Marion, in an under tone, "I heard a rustling close behind us, among the
     leaves and branches. Some one certainly approaches!"
"Fly, then, Marion! all is over, and I must face the danger!" said Caroline, with sudden
     energy, while rising and drawing herself up to her full height, with resolute countenance,
     though her limbs evidently trembled beneath her, she walked towards the door, saying, in a
     loud, commanding accent, to a tall man, much muffled up in a loose great-coat, who had now
     appeared at the door, "Who goes there? Ernest!!" added she, in tones of remonstrance. "How dare
     you enter my presence again! How dare you intrude here!"
"Be true to yourself and me!" replied the stranger, in a voice which sounded harsh and
     excited, while the deep, full tones appeared to Marion as if she had heard them before; but the
     darkness prevented her from seeing him distinctly, even if his dress had not been sufficient to
     disguise him from the most penetrating eye. "Say what you will, I know you are glad to meet
     me," added he, in accents of increasing wildness. "All that you do is dictated by others; but
     Caroline, in her secret heart, loves me! I know that! By your looks, by your voice, by your
     manner, it was revealed to me years ago! Yes, you love me, and cannot deny it! Speak but the
     word, and we may both be happy,—happier than the wildest dreams of fancy! No impediment can
     prevent it! Let your aunt conceal you where she will, she cannot hide you from me. In the
     farthest corner of the earth—in the deepest dungeon that was ever dug, I shall find you out,
     and still free you from persecution. She may do her worst, but love laughs at locksmiths, and I
     can still enable you to elude her vigilance. I come now prepared, if you will but consent to
     fly with me!—now,—this moment. If not,——"
The madman's voice, which had been loud and vehement, here dropped into a low, stern,
     inaudible murmur, and his hand plunged into the breast of his coat, seemed as if it grasped
     some weapon there, while Marion, taking advantage of his pre-occupied attention, darted off
     with the speed of thought, and almost as noiselessly fled towards the house. A loud, angry cry
     to stop her, mingled with curses and imprecations, from the madman, while he waved his
     singularly long arms menacingly above his head, only accelerated her pace, while he followed
     some steps in pursuit; but terror gave wings to her feet, and rushing into the entrance-hall,
     she instantly rang the large dinner bell, and raised an alarm, which assembled the whole
     household, all of whom gazed with looks of panic-struck astonishment at Marion's pale and
     ghastly countenance.
Not a moment required to be lost in explanation, for Mrs. Penfold seemed at once to guess the
     whole nature and extent of Caroline's danger, the instant her name was mentioned; therefore
     Marion had but to point out the direction in which she might be found, when Mrs. Penfold
     hastened forward, preceded by several of the more active servants.
When Marion had rapidly executed some orders committed to her she quickly returned towards
     the arbor, but not a trace remained there of any one. The little table had been upset, several
     branches torn down that surrounded the entrance, and the grass beneath was much trampled and
     disfigured; but all was silent and deserted. After one hurried glance of alarm and perplexity,
     Marion hastened forward to the garden gate, which she found had been violently burst open, and
     on emerging into the high road beyond, she there found Mrs. Penfold and her servants all
     crowding round Caroline, who remained in a dead faint on the ground for nearly half an
     hour.
A carriage was rapidly disappearing at full speed in the distance, but already almost too far
     off to be distinguished; and Marion perceived the figure of a man lurking behind the hedge
     close beside her; but when she made it evident that he was observed, he rushed close up to her
     side, saying, in a threatening tone, between his clenched teeth, "You have provoked a
     madman!"
Scarcely had Marion time to utter an exclamation of sudden affright, before he sprung over
     the hedge, and was seen running across the neighboring fields, until his figure mingled with
     the surrounding gloom, and vanished out of sight.
Mrs. Penfold's chief care, after Caroline's recovery from her alarming swoon, was earnestly
     to enjoin that the circumstances of this adventure should never be mentioned, or so much as
     remembered by those who had witnessed them; a story so extraordinary and alarming, being likely
     to injure her establishment, besides causing much unnecessary gossip among the younger pupils;
     but had Marion ever been disposed to consign, as desired, the whole adventure to oblivion, she
     could not but be continually reminded of it for several weeks afterwards, by the startled and
     agitated manner of Caroline, whose frolicsome spirits had entirely deserted her, while she
     seemed for some time to be in imminent danger of a nervous fever. If any one appeared suddenly
     in the room, she almost screamed with the start it occasioned her; she could not bear for a
     moment to be left alone, and seemed as if continually listening, even when safe in the house,
     for the sound of steps in pursuit of her. Gradually, however, her mind became more composed,
     and she ventured one day to take a stroll with Marion in some of the nearer parts of the
     garden, though even there she scarcely spoke above her breath, and turning hastily round
     several times, as if apprehensive that some one approached.
Had the far-famed Upas tree grown over the arbor, Caroline could scarcely have shunned more
     fearfully the slightest approach in that direction, and with equal care did she avoid any
     allusion to what had occurred there, not a hint of which ever transpired in her most
     confidential moments. The very sound of her own feet on the gravel seemed to startle her, and
     as she walked beneath the shade of some tall forest trees which overhung the garden-wall,
     Marion observed that Caroline trod more cautiously; and though she dropped not a word
     respecting her feelings or fears, it was evident that her nerves were strung to an agony of
     sensitiveness, for the fluttering of a bird in the hedge, or the fall of a leaf, made her
     start, and she seemed about at last to give up the point in despair, and hurry homewards, when
     suddenly a loud shrill whistle arose amidst the branches of an ash-tree, almost directly over
     their heads, and before Marion had time to look round, a small packet had dropped at the feet
     of Caroline.
With a half-suppressed cry of alarm, the terrified girl fled, while Marion, scarcely less
     frightened, instinctively picked up the parcel, and followed, while again she was pursued by a
     volley of oaths and imprecations, which ended in a laugh so wild, so maniacal, and so fearful,
     that for months afterwards it rung in her ears, causing her a shudder of horror and alarm.
When Mrs. Penfold tore open an innumerable multitude of seals which closed the packet
     addressed to Caroline, she discovered within only a long incoherent letter of several sheets,
     filled with the most extravagant professions of ardent love, and the most vehement
     declarations, that nothing on earth could impede or discourage him in his resolution to carry
     her off, which he seemed still persuaded, with the self-delusion peculiar to madness, must be a
     welcome assurance to Caroline, whose words and actions he perseveringly attributed to the
     arbitrary influence of others. Accompanying this farrago of most intolerable nonsense, was a
     black shade in a wooden frame, representing the profile of a young man, certainly handsome, and
     which seemed to Marion like features she had known elsewhere, but being frequently addicted to
     observing resemblances, she felt at once persuaded that this must be some such vague and
     unaccountable likeness as she had frequently found or fancied before.
Time wore on, and still Caroline lingered at school, unwilling apparently to forsake the
     comparative quietness of Mrs. Penfold's, where, though her age exceeded by some years that of
     the other pupils, and though her cotemporary Clara had been already introduced into society,
     she still seemed anxious to forget herself and her affairs in the multitude of her masters and
     studies, so completely was she engrossed by which, that she evidently grudged every moment and
     every thought which interrupted her progress. At length, on the evening previous to that fixed
     on for her final departure from school, when Mrs. Smythe was expected to convey her home, Mrs.
     Penfold was bestowing on Caroline some of her last advice, of the most approved mode of
     "getting on" in society, and especially on the manners and conversation most attractive to
     gentlemen, when a note was brought into the room, which had arrived by express, bringing the
     melancholy intelligence that Mrs. Smythe's carriage had been upset a few miles off, causing so
     severe a blow on the head, that a concussion of the brain had taken place, and she continued
     insensible, at a village some miles off, where little hope remained of her recovery. The Doctor
     who wrote these hurried particulars had obligingly sent his own carriage and servant to
     accompany Miss Smythe to the spot, that she might take a last leave of her dying relative, and
     he recommended that she should not lose an instant, or it might be too late to find the
     sufferer in life.
Struck with grief and consternation by this most unexpected and calamitous intelligence,
     Caroline, though she had never before seemed much to love her aunt, yet now became overwhelmed
     with the shock, and lost not an instant in hastily preparing to obey the melancholy summons, by
     throwing on her coat and bonnet, while she rushed into the arms of Marion, and burst into an
     agony of tears in bidding her farewell.
The French governess who had been summoned to escort Caroline in the carriage, was one of
     those nervous persons, who became perfectly frantic when hurried, and she flew about the room,
     uttering a volley of incoherent exclamations, expressive of her wonder and perplexity at so
     sudden a call on her activity, while her preparations seemed to make no visible progress. There
     is a secret, mysterious pleasure in being waited for, which every living mortal seems to enjoy
     when they have the opportunity; and without a thought of Caroline's impatience, her anxiety,
     and her sorrow, Madame D'Aubert expressed the most eager and vehement solicitude about her own
     dress, and a resolution not to stir till equipped to her entire satisfaction, for so rare and
     almost unprecedented an event, as leaving the boundaries of Dartmore House.
Every thing that has a limit, however, must come to an end, and Madame D'Aubert's toilette
     being at last completed she leisurely advanced, talking to herself and to everybody else,
     arranging her shawl, and giving a last finish to the contour of her bonnet, before she threw
     herself with dignified deliberation into the chariot.
Marion had affectionately insisted on conveying her weeping friend to the carriage, while,
     with all the little arts of affection, she tried to console and encourage her, till at length
     they exchanged a final embrace, and parted. Scarcely, however, had Miss Smythe placed her foot
     upon the steps, while the man-servant who accompanied the carriage carefully assisted her in,
     before Marion suddenly sprung forward with an exclamation of terror, seized hold of Caroline's
     dress, and before she could speak, dragged her forcibly into the house, exclaiming in accents
     almost inarticulate from alarm,
"Come back, Caroline! come back! This is some mistake! some dreadful trick! Caroline! dear
     Caroline! come back! That servant wears the very dress of the person who attacked you in the
     garden! I cannot see his face, but I am certain it is he!"
Before Marion could finish her sentence, the supposed servant had violently seized Miss
     Smythe by the arms, and was about forcibly to drag her towards the carriage, when the loud
     cries of Marion brought assistance. The almost fainting girl was rescued, and the post-chaise
     secured; but not a trace could be seen of the madman, who instantly vanished; and the post-boy
     could give no intelligence respecting him, except that he had been ordered out at an inn close
     by, in urgent haste, that evening, with a promise of double payment if he implicitly obeyed the
     gentleman, who seemed highly irritable, and swore at him in a most fearful manner, if he made
     the slightest delay, or so much as asked a direction which way to turn.
The most diligent search was made, but made in vain, by the officers of police, to find out
     the lunatic's retreat, which eluded their utmost research; and as Caroline Smythe was privately
     removed soon afterwards from school, where the subject was forbidden ever to be mentioned, the
     whole story seemed almost buried in oblivion, and Marion herself felt at last as if the entire
     adventure had been an agitating dream, remembered by no one but herself.
</div></body></text></TEI>