<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="37">
  CHAPTER XXXVII.
It is absolutely indispensable that every visitor at Harrowgate shall go through a course,
     not merely of its waters, but of all the castles, ruins, rocks, lakes, gardens, and houses in
     the neighborhood, and especially that, bon gre, mal gre, he shall spend
     one entire day in rhapsodizing among the splendid fragments of Fountain Abbey. The leading
     question asked of every visitor at the Granby, at least nine times a day is, whether he has
     seen the Abbey, followed by exclamations of dismay and astonishment, if he have not. A shower
     of inquiries then follows, how soon he intends to go there, after which no one forgets the
     exact day and hour named, while every good-natured friend fills up occasional gaps in the
     conversation by hoping he may be favored with a fine morning for his excursion.
No stranger, unmarried and marriageable, at the Granby, has any right or title to the
     squandering of his own time, as the whole race of chaperons have assumed the privilege of
     knowing how he spends it, as well as of dictating the various ways in which he should and must
     dispose of himself; and, accordingly, Sir Patrick and Captain De Crespigny found themselves one
     day ensnared into a soi-disant party of pleasure to Studley, from which
     they had no more chance of escape than a brace of partridges at a battu.
As Madame De Stael remarks, "English weather does better to rail at, than if it were finer;
     and if Britain had a settled climate and a despotic government, there would be an end of all
     conversation." After a long succession of good-for-nothing days, during which the rain seemed
     to pour from a thousand water-spouts, till the world was in a perfect dropsy, and it was feared
     the sun must have met with an accident, as he seemed unable to appear, he at last, contrary to
     custom, when a pic-nic is in the case, blazed out with unprecedented splendor, and became quite
     a spendthrift of his rays. September had evidently borrowed a day from June for the occasion;
     and yet Sir Patrick, who would much rather have encountered any danger than the smallest
     discomfort, staid an hour in bed to consider whether there was anything that might happen in
     the whole course of that day, sufficiently agreeable to reward him for the effort of rising.
     Except a fox-chase, however, nothing could have done so; and he secretly detested the very
     thoughts of walking five mortal miles, and spending five mortal hours in "doing the rural"
     among the dismal cloisters of a roofless ruin, or bush-ranging through damp shrubberies, with a
     committee of enraptured young ladies.
His fellow-sufferer, Captain De Crespigny, stood yawning and humming a tune beside him,
     waiting for the carriage, and expressing a hope, that though he had almost fallen out of
     acquaintance with nature, and wished pic-nics had never been invented, yet perhaps, with the
     assistance of sandwiches, champagne, chicken pies, porter, music, and young ladies, the
     expedition might be endurable, when the noise of wheels grinding along the gravel, attracted
     their attention, and Mr. Crawford's carriage passed on its way to Studley, with the two tall
     footmen of the evening before, mounted behind. A moment afterwards, Sir Patrick perceived the
     excited looking stranger, whom he had already remarked, leading his horse out of the stable,
     with a degree of haste and impatience quite unaccountable, while the animal seemed resolute to
     postpone the evil hour of being mounted, though his master lashed and swore at him with an
     extreme of cruel violence, which raised Sir Patrick's utmost indignation. He was rather
     strangely attired for so sultry a morning, being equipped in a large, rough greatcoat, a thick
     neckcloth, a riding whip, and a broad brimmed, melo-dramatic looking hat. Having at length
     mastered his refractory charger, he rode straight up to Sir Patrick, with a contracted brow,
     saying, in tones of high irritation, while riveting his fierce eyes on the young baronet with
     an expression that strongly betokened insanity:
"You are disposed to be observant this morning! We shall certainly know each other again! In
     which direction did Mr. Crawford's carriage drive off?"
"I observe only for my own amusement!" replied Sir Patrick, haughtily turning away, and
     humming a tune.
"Allow me to remind you that those who whistle before breakfast, may weep before night," said
     the stranger, with a malignant scowl, drawing back his lips, and breathing through his clenched
     teeth, as he glanced at Captain De Crespigny, and galloped rapidly away, followed at a more
     moderate pace by the two gentlemen.
"I am in the humor to knock every body down!" said Sir Patrick; "and there was an admirable
     opportunity lost! I dislike the looks of that man! He is evidently cracked! Depend upon it, his
     skull will never ring again! Do you observe, De Crespigny, he has nearly overtaken the
     carriage, and pulls up now, apparently anxious not to be seen by the servants. In days of yore,
     we might have been certain he was a highwayman, going to rob that barouche; but such things are
     done in a pocket-picking, pettifogging way now, without an atom of spirit or adventure. Why, my
     good friend, what a very particularly brown study you are in! What is the matter?"
"Nothing! nothing! I am solving an enigma! I must get another look of this man! Dunbar, years
     have passed since that voice rang in my ears, but it must be Ernest Anstruther's! Though shrill
     from excitement, and every fibre of his body seems dilated with madness, it can be no other,
     and we must have him seized this day. I actually shivered before the fierce glare of his eye;
     but let us forget it. I cannot speak upon the subject at present, for it involves all the
     deepest interests of my life. Now, then, for Fountain Abbey! I feel in the humor that I could
     strike the air for breathing in my face. It would be dangerous for any body to ask me how I
     do!"
"I wish all gaunt skeletons of deceased houses were buried out of sight! The very idea of
     those damp, mouldy walls would give me the rheumatism. Had we not better return?" said Sir
     Patrick, looking anxiously at his companion.
"No!" replied Captain De Crespigny, who seemed resolute to conquer his agitation, or to
     conceal it. "I say like Luther, 'if it rained madmen, let us go on!'"
"Then, my good fellow, you deserve to be put in a straight waistcoat yourself!"
"Well, if you will buy and pay for one, I have not the slightest objection to wear it."
"If we could get up a good old-fashioned belief in ghosts, for this occasion, and go to
     Fountain Abbey some other day by moonlight, there would be some sense in it," persisted Sir
     Patrick; but seeing that his friend was not to be dissuaded, he changed the subject, adding:
     "Our existence now is detestably matter-of-fact. I should like to have lived in the days of
     giants, fairies, witchcraft, and the philosopher's stone!"
"You would have required the last, Dunbar, certainly. For an excursion, commend me to Harwood
     House. It is like a fashionable residence in Park Lane. Such Brussels carpets, rosewood sofas,
     and damask curtains, that I felt quite at home; but here we have a bad road; and worse dinner.
     A refrectory with no refreshments, and a kitchen fire, where a whole herd of oxen might be
     roasted whole, and not so much as a beefsteak to be had. Visitors may not even take, like the
     horses, a nose-bag with provisions."
"We might at least air the ruins with a segar. Well, here are the ladies; and now that I have
     brought you here, and you have brought me, let us make the best of it. We must honor the old
     Abbey with a glance, though I am sure, before we are done, I shall be walked off my legs."
"I knew a gentleman, once," said Agnes, "who walked till nothing was left of him but his
     hat."
"It seems as if all the birds and butterflies in Britain had an appointment here to-day,"
     said Marion. "How their twittering and mad spirits enliven me. That thrush is a perfect
     Orpheus! Few can ever sing like these simple, self-taught musicians."
"Anybody can. Grisi, Pasta, you, or I, could," replied Captain De Crespigny. "It is pleasant,
     however, to be received with so lively a serenade. These little creatures are happy without
     being able to say why or wherefore; and how often we ourselves are miserable, though unable to
     tell the cause, or perhaps, Miss Dunbar, to excite the pity we deserve."
"There is evidently a much greater proportion of happiness than of misery in the animal
     world, as they do not make unnecessary annoyances for themselves or others," said Marion,
     wishing to talk on indifferent topics, as she observed her brother watching, to see how she
     received his friend. "What bird in all the world would you like best to be?"
"A canary, or a piping bullfinch, because you would keep me in a cage, and treat me kindly. I
     should wish to borrow the language of any living creature that pleases you! I am born to
     succeed in everything but in gaining your approbation, which I would rather never have been
     born than live without. I could willingly go step by step round the world, to find out the
     secret of pleasing you; and I am falling rapidly into a Byron-like, misanthropic melancholy,
     because of your cruel indifference. How I wish emotions were communicated like electricity,
     without the slow, vulgar use of language, for I always feel so much more than I can express,
     especially in your society."
"Why do you not take to writing verses; for you know poets all work themselves up into
     fictitious emotions, which they pour out upon paper, without troubling any one individual more
     than another, to believe or disbelieve them. Your poems might be lithographed for private
     circulation, and one of each sent to Agnes and me, to the five Miss Ogilvies, and to all Lady
     Towercliffe's daughters. You would require eight eyes, like a spider, to look after so
     many!"
"But," replied he, in his most sentimental tone, "there is a want of which one might die in
     the midst of plenty. If all ladies were like you, one might be surrounded by a hundred, and yet
     die of a broken heart!"
"Any one may break his own heart, if he pleases, but he has no right to break other
     people's," replied Marion, jestingly; "and there are some who have no more scruple, I am told,
     in doing so, than in breaking stones on the road."
"Perhaps the hearts are as hard as the stones, if we may take yours as a specimen; but you
     really are becoming severe! Take care you do not hurt my feelings!"
"Your feelings!" exclaimed Marion, with a gay, half-reproachful laugh, as she caught the eye
     of Agnes. "I thought you only played upon the feelings of others, because you really had none
     of your own."
Near the gate leading into the superb grounds of Studley, no less than two-and-thirty
     carriages were assembled, from the low elderly gig and graceful pony carriage, to the
     aristocratic barouche and four, not to mention tax-carts, phaetons, curricles, and coronetted
     chariots, filled with joyous groups and laughing faces. The landscape around seemed as if
     colored in the rich, deep tints of some ancient painter pre-eminent in his art, so bright, so
     distinct, and so immoveable in its rare and singular beauty, serene and lovely, like a mind at
     peace. The pencil of Poussin or of Watteau could scarcely have done justice to such a scene.
     The air was literally raining sunshine, and a light cloud here and there sailed across the blue
     sky from the foreground to the distant horizon, while the rich canopy of massy trees over head,
     tinted with the many-colored hues of autumn, and the carpet of velvet turf beneath, were
     enlivened by a thousand birds, hopping sportively from bough to bough, like feathered arrows,
     and by the gay insect world fluttering in rapid career from flower to flower, humming aloud
     their ceaseless sounds of joyful activity.
Every walk was sprinkled over with gaily-dressed loungers, sunning themselves in the bright
     atmosphere, and no flower in the field looked more fresh, more natural, or more lovely than
     Marion, whose beauty had never appeared more attractive than now, amidst all the sumptuous
     magnificence of nature, which seemed on the present occasion to be adorned in her full dress
     regalia.
"This is a very tolerable imitation of a fine day!" said Captain De Crespigny, shading his
     eyes to gaze around, and looking as if the landscape were made on purpose for him. "I see
     determined admiration in your countenance, Miss Dunbar, but I mean to out-ecstacy you
     altogether in my expressions of rapture! Ye hills and dales, ye rivers, woods, and plains."
"Charming!" said Marion, absently, and looking round for Sir Arthur. "I am glad you are
     pleased."
"To be sure! you are pleased, I am pleased, everybody is pleased! This was called a party of
     pleasure, and nothing could be a party of pleasure to me, unless you were included; but now all
     the world is here! at least those who are all the world to me, and I expect a day of perfect
     happiness."
"That is as much certainly as any reasonable person can reckon upon, and I believe it is more
     likely to be enjoyed in the simple rural pleasures of the country than anywhere! Some persons
     whom we might almost envy, think it pleasure enough for a whole day to find a tom-tit's nest,
     containing, for a wonder, five eggs instead of four, or follow the flight of a king-fisher
     during six whole hours, at full speed, in a morning, to see where he feeds, and can talk for
     half a day about some new combination of colors in pansy or chrysanthemum."
"And yet they would be reckoned silly and vulgar, to speak half as long about a new
     combination of color in a ribbon, which is in my estimation quite as interesting! If all those
     who detest the country, had courage to confess it, as I do, how the shades of rural life would
     be deserted, and volumes of rural poetry cast into the fire! I am not one to 'hang a thought on
     ev'ry thorn,' and indeed my thoughts have thorns enough already!"
"There is too much still water at Studley, and the grounds are altogether too artificial for
     my taste," said Marion. "Those little ponds, like globes for gold-fish, are dull and
     uninteresting."
"They resemble china bowls, and should be filled with iced punch!" observed Sir Patrick.
     "Anything so like the basin of the Serpentine reminds me of old women committing suicide! This
     is not a good sporting country, so crowded with laurels, temples, statues, cascades, and that
     sort of trash! I wish we had all staid at home, and looked over Turner's views of Studley, for
     they are beautifully done!"
"Yes!" said Agnes, yawning, "I like the works of art better than nature, pictures, statues,
     books, or pianofortes; and" added she, with a withering look at Captain De Crespigny, "I like
     human nature least of all."
"What has set you off Childe-Haroldizing this morning, Agnes?" asked Sir Patrick, with angry
     surprise. "Strike me poetical, but I like Marion's style of admiring, exclaiming, and wondering
     the best, for it is not either overdone or underdone!"
"You shall have a most intelligent guide, Sir, immediately," said the superintendent of the
     lodge, civilly touching his hat to Sir Patrick.
"Let him be deaf and dumb, if you have any compassion for me. It is trouble enough to come
     here, without listening to an endless rigmarole about ancient abbots, clustered pillars, and
     stone coffins. The fellow will not abate a single tomb or tree! I could invent a story quite as
     good as his, and equally true! 'built nobody knows when, and destroyed nobody knows how.'"
"I like to hear all, and believe all," said Marion; "but you remind me, Patrick, of the
     French lady, who said she wished to be taught everything in two words. Now let us summon up any
     little poetry that may be lurking in our composition, to admire those noble, pillar-like elms,
     with branches so thickly clustered that the wind can scarcely elbow its way through the leaves.
     Those shadows are magnificent, flickering across the road."
"Give me an old post-horse instead of an old tree, and I shall call up much finer
     associations!" said Sir Patrick. "My sole idea of enjoying the country is connected with
     hunting, shooting, and fishing; but as to living for ruins, flowers, green trees, fat cows,
     rocky mountains, and all that sort of trash, excuse me. They do for poets and painters,
     professionally, to rave about, but I care no more to look at that prodigiously aged tree before
     me, than at old Lord Doncaster, tottering behind us with Agnes."
"That tree, Sir, is a Spanish chesnut, 112 feet high, and 22 feet in girth," said the guide,
     in his usual business-like tone. "It has seen a hundred summers."
"Then it has certainly not lived in this country!" replied Sir Patrick, affecting to shiver.
     "There's a thing they call summer in England, made up of east wind and fog, with a
     half-extinguished sun, trees trying to put a good face on the matter, a few leaves and flowers
     born apparently in a consumption, and one or two misguided birds mistaking the imitation for a
     reality, while chirping their notes all out of tune."
"This oak, Sir, is 500 years old," continued the guide, pertinaciously bent on executing his
     task; "it contains 300 feet of solid timber."
"And how many leaves are there on it? You never heard! Do you pretend to be a guide, and not
     know that? The timber will cut up for a tolerable sum, which will suit the next heir."
"Have you the barbarity, even in imagination, to prostrate that kingly tree! look at its
     gigantic shadow on the grass!" exclaimed Mrs. O'Donoghoe. "I really had, even upon our very
     short acquaintance, conceived a better opinion of you."
"Then be not rash in altering it! I am all you ever thought me, and more! At the same time I
     cannot but think, in looking at this immense, overgrown prodigy among trees, how fortunate it
     is that they stop growing at last, or one such monster might at last overshadow the whole
     world. Now, it is a hundred years at least since the ground beneath that tree has been
     enlivened by a single sunbeam! Spare me all the exclamations of delight I see impending! Ladies
     are taught a taste for the picturesque as part of their full-dress manners, but the truth is,
     that you care no more for scenery than for a painted sign-post."
"I have no eye to spare for the landscape," said Captain De Crespigny, glancing towards
     Marion. "Therefore pray let us, like 'Puff in the Critic, omit all about gilding the Eastern
     hemisphere; or about the setting sun pillowing his chin upon an orient wave.' Nothing gives me
     so mournful an estimate of people's general happiness, as to join what they call a party of
     pleasure! Such rising before daylight, such climbing of inaccessible hills, such scrambling on
     slippery rocks, and such eating of trash, which no one in an ordinary rational state of mind
     would ever dream of tasting! In short, it begins with the total sacrifice of all comfort,
     bonnets and dresses in jeopardy, as well as every limb of your body in danger, a great deal of
     forced vivacity, a number of old, worn-out jests, a seat upon the damp grass, and returning
     home after sunset in a fog! If these are people's pleasures, what must their miseries be?"
"Certainly the most toilsome of all vocations is that of an idle man," said Marion. "I often
     think, when observing the extraordinary plans of life on which people set out in search of
     happiness, that if during one day in every year, we were all obliged to exchange the modes of
     life we voluntarily adopt, it would produce universal misery. If Mr. Granville were obliged to
     play sixteen hits at backgammon every forenoon instead of Lord Doncaster; if Patrick had to
     visit and condole with the sick all morning; if you had to blow the flute five hours a day for
     Lord Wigton; if he had to hunt eight hours in your place; and if I must lounge all morning in
     the public room, like Mrs. O'Donoghoe, how wretched each individual would be!"
"Very true," replied Captain De Crespigny. "The various species of men are as different from
     each other, and as little calculated to associate, as the various species of animals. Sportsmen
     have a natural antipathy to literary men, politicians to jockeys, and infidels to Christians.
     Life is to each of these a perfectly different affair. Their feelings, desires, habits,
     occupations, and pleasures, are entirely opposite, their conversation quite unsuitable, and
     they all hate each other."
While Sir Patrick, with ceaseless vivacity, teazed the guide by asking a thousand
     unanswerable questions, the replies to which should have occupied several hours, he amused
     himself with making premeditated blunders and lively questions, enough to bewilder the brain of
     their matter-of-fact conductor, who hurried forward with a velocity of body disproportioned to
     the slowness of his understanding, pointing to an arbor elevated high upon the ridge of a hill,
     from whence he intimated that the finest view was to be obtained. With a rueful grimace, Sir
     Patrick prepared to make a forced march in that direction, measuring the height with his eye,
     and protesting that the fellow certainly had an ill-will at him, for imposing such a task, when
     he was falling to pieces already with fatigue.
Marion, in the mean time, looked as happy as she felt; having now achieved two very great
     pleasures, as, in the first place, Captain De Crespigny had been called away by his uncle, and,
     in the second, he was succeeded by Sir Arthur leaning on the arm of Mr. Granville. The smile of
     confidence and interest with which Marion now listened and talked, when contrasted with the
     constrained attention she had bestowed on Captain De Crespigny, was like the difference between
     the glowing warmth of a summer morning and the icy brightness of winter. While loitering along
     their beautiful path, picking up here and there a wild flower, or pausing to enjoy the verdant
     beauties of nature in her holiday garb, cold would have been the heart, and vacant the
     imagination, not crowded with thoughts and feelings of poetical interest, when, thus surrounded
     by memorials of many romantic incidents in the national history. To Mr. Granville, all the
     charms of the place and season seemed familiar. He pointed out to Marion a thousand beauties
     overlooked by ordinary eyes, while many a refined allusion to his own attachment arose
     spontaneously out of the subject, and was listened to by her with modest but heartfelt
     interest. They conversed with glowing delight and perfect communion of thought, on the various
     interesting subjects which abound in the rich stores of a cultivated mind. Throughout the
     remarks of Mr. Granville on music, science, and every elevating enjoyment of the human
     intellect, the poetry of literature, as well as the poetry of nature might be traced. Even the
     most indifferent subjects were no longer indifferent to Richard and Marion when thus viewed
     with mutual interest, and when affording a deeper insight into each other's heart and mind;
     while the gorgeous scenery around inspired them with feelings of enjoyment beyond any that
     could be attained in gaudy festivity and artificial amusement.
"This place is quite a morsel of Arcadia!" exclaimed Marion, while her eyes were beaming with
     delight. "I could fancy it some undiscovered country of our own, with not a living being in it
     but ourselves."
"Excuse me there," said Sir Arthur, smiling. "I shall by no means vote for having my world
     made so small and select! I am the most sociable of created beings, having fully convinced
     myself that nothing renders people more utterly selfish than solitude; all your strollings
     alone in forests and reclining beside rivers, what do they lead to? a prodigious opinion of
     ourselves, and an extreme indifference or contempt for others!"
"Most undeniably true," replied Mr. Granville. "If we had no happiness to seek but our own, I
     should not have far to search for mine; yet, as a matter of duty, I am for association and for
     cultivating the kinder feeling produced by mingling with others. Man could not be happy alone,
     even in Paradise, and the sternest misanthropes can do nothing worse against society than to
     become solitary hermits."
"The injury is inflicted on themselves also, as Providence has ordained for wise purposes
     that, bad as men are, they should love one another," observed Sir Arthur. "My Marion here
     brings the joys of spring to cheer the winter of my life, and I give her in return the gathered
     experience of many a long year; while, with you both beside me, the withering leaves of autumn
     look almost green and almost gay."
"Yet this is certainly the most melancholy of all seasons," replied Mr. Granville. "It has
     been called the time of fulfilment, when hope is realized,—but it can be an emblem only of
     Christian hope realized in death. Every hue and every sound reminds me of decay. The howling
     winds, the fleeting clouds, and the rustling leaves all speak of change and mortality; but
     permanent hopes and feelings belong only to our religion, which become the charm of existence
     when they arise, and which neither time nor death can alter. Our earthly affections when
     founded on such ennobling prospects, entitle us to believe that we shall advance, hand in hand
     with those we love, along the journey of life, and even at the end, be only separated for a
     very short period, to be reunited in a world of which even hours so bright as these are but a
     faint representation. When a Christian dies, he dies into another world. He is then born into a
     scene more beautiful, more joyous, and more lasting than this."
"How surprising it seems, that so little real admiration is felt for the wonders of nature,
     though so much is pretended!" observed Marion. "If anything could vulgarize so glorious a
     scene, it would be that tawdry crowd of many-colored visitors, rending the air with
     exclamations of delight, which seem chiefly addressed to the crows and jackdaws."
"We should have a band of fairies here, to give suitable music," added Sir Arthur; "and you
     ought to rob the poets of a few verses to celebrate the shades of Studley. I observe, Marion,
     that though in actual conversation, a single line of poetry sounds pedantic, yet young ladies
     in all novels have the whole British poets by heart, and spout entire pages by the yard
     measure, for every emergency, taken from Cowper, Milton, Byron and Co."
An interesting discussion now ensued, respecting the effect produced on the mind by sacred
     poetry, which diverged to the subject of sacred music, when Mr. Granville spoke with enthusiasm
     of the exalting, touching, and saddening influence of Handel's choruses, and of the affecting
     thoughts they occasionally create. In every remark referring to the heart or imagination, he
     expressed himself with a depth and fervor, felt and appreciated by the fresh young mind of
     Marion, who now experienced, under the happiest auspices, how much the mental faculties are
     enlivened by studying nature. Amidst surrounding peace, the soul exercises its brightest powers
     of thought, undivided by the shifting scenes of human life, with its thousand fluctuating
     objects and cares; while the fancy, liberated and unoccupied, is thrown back upon itself, and
     discovers once more the visions of other days, the stores of memory, experience, and hope.
From the point of view to which their guide now left the party, all the finest
     characteristics of Fountain Abbey became visible, and Marion found Miss Smythe finishing a
     masterly sketch of the landscape, which she blushingly yielded up for examination, while Sir
     Patrick confessed that he had been standing in his most picturesque attitude during five
     minutes, in hopes of obtaining a place in the foreground. Nothing could be more strikingly
     beautiful than her spirited representation of the large eastern window, like a light triumphal
     arch, the patches of ivy clinging round those mouldering walls, and the high, stately tower,
     nearly transparent with its many windows, all yet in perfect preservation.
"What a fatigue!" exclaimed Sir Patrick, throwing himself in a graceful attitude full-length
     on the sloping turf. "This day is like the famous Peter Schlemihl, without a shadow!"
"Well done art and nature both!" added Captain De Crespigny; "we have not existed in vain
     after seeing that matchless view! I shall give bail to live contented and happy during the rest
     of my life, if you will only endow me with all I see, and let it be shared with the person in
     this company whom I like best, though perhaps she might tire of me."
Agnes bit her scarlet lip with scorn at words which would once have thrilled to her very
     heart, but she turned away with an insufferably haughty air on perceiving that her ci-devant admirer had turned his most irresistible looks towards Marion,
     who was earnestly talking in an undertone to Miss Smythe, while a look of anxious alarm had
     become depicted on the countenances of both.
"Such moments as these are like the colors of a rainbow, very bright and very fleeting,"
     observed Sir Arthur. "If I had a place magnificent as this, even with the power of choosing my
     own society, yet, as Dr. Johnson says, 'such possessions make men unwilling to die!'"
"Allow me to differ, then, from Dr. Johnson," replied Mr. Granville. "It is not our
     possessions, but our affections that could ever make me grieve to forsake this bright green
     earth. I would rather be loved by one than envied by thousands. I can imagine no happiness that
     does not spring from the heart, and the most splendid mansion that ever adorned the earth,
     would be a desert without the smile of those who loved me to welcome my entrance there."
"Who that knows the worth of friendship would not say the same," added Marion, in a deep, low
     tone. "My wishes never grasp at great possessions, as their very vastness appears
     disproportioned to our nature and powers. The most superb houses are those most generally
     deserted by their owners, but I scarcely ever see a retired and peaceful cottage without
     whispering to myself, 'There I could be happy.'"
"Take my word for it, the whole thing would be odious in a week," said Captain De Crespigny.
     "I have been a great observer of life from the windows of the New Club, and my serious opinion
     is, that poetry is all written to mislead our unsuspecting youth into an effervescence of empty
     enthusiasm about rural felicity on an income of nothing per annum; but I drew the cork out of
     that bottle long ago, and found it all froth. Once upon a time I was betrayed into living a
     month at one of those little bird's nests, a gaudy, stuccoed gimcrack, all plaster and green
     paint, surrounded with roses, hollyhocks, and the flaring trash people call flowers. There were
     within the walls, three noisy dogs, four ditto children, a roasting-jack and a mangle, all
     screeching at once! It was distracting! No! no! I hate money myself, but that cured me of ever
     making a mere bread-and-butter match."
"Yet I could live on the bread without the butter, for any one I really liked, or even the
     butter without the bread," said Mr. Granville, smiling. "Money is only the raw material of
     enjoyment, which must be raised into a fabric of solid strength, and embellished with taste, to
     suit my wishes and hopes. The hook and eye will never be of gold that attaches me, and nothing
     has ever been so difficult to my comprehension as that any one can possibly form the nearest
     ties of life upon a mere calculation of profit and loss!"
"Well," exclaimed Sir Patrick, who always assumed an air of bravado before Mr. Granville, to
     conceal his real feelings, "I am above all the follies of inferior mortals, but I do say, that
     to me, the most interesting object in nature is a young lady of large, independent fortune,
     ready to throw herself away on the first man who asks her!"
At this moment, Miss Smythe's sketch-book fell to the ground, while, with a sudden
     exclamation of affright, she started up, but instantly endeavored to recover herself, and when
     Sir Patrick had gathered up her pencils, she received them back with blush of double-dyed
     carnation, as if she could never unblush again, and making an apology for having been startled
     by the sudden apparition of a hare, she silently resumed her occupation, and Sir Patrick
     continued to rattle on at his full pitch of nonsense, as if nothing had occurred.
"I wonder Lady Sarah Marchmont did not wait another season for me! I was hastening rapidly to
     my last shilling, and might possibly have been driven, by stress of weather, to propose, if she
     had not accepted the Duke of Middlesex, in despair; yet had she possessed a thousand pounds for
     every shilling, I am not certain that the most golden of her gold could have gilded her.——"
"My dear fellow!" interrupted Captain De Crespigny, in his most sagacious tone, "L'amour fait beaucoup, mais l'argent fait tout; it is easy to say
     'fortune,' but where will you ever find one weigh in the scale against Lady Sarah?"
"Easily, any day! As the Spaniards say, 'a man of straw is worth a woman of gold.' Last
     season, in London, all the heiresses were dying for me."
"Except three who never saw you."
"And at balls, when a chaperon asked any young lady who she would prefer for a partner, the
     invariable answer was, in the sweetest voice imaginable, 'Sir Patrick Dunbar!'"
"Or the Duke of Tunbridge, and he never dances!"
"Indeed, next season I have serious thoughts of lending; myself out to parties, at so much an
     hour. It is all nonsense about fortune being blind! The goddess has one eye left, which has
     been fixed upon me during the last five years, if I would only accept her favors."
"Well, Dunbar! We all know that you are like the elephant in an Irish menagerie, who was the
     greatest elephant in the world except himself. But be warned in time! They say every man has
     one opportunity given him of succeeding in life, and if he lose that, he never has a second!
     Positively, old fellow, now is your time! Do not think me malicious, but even I, your best
     friend, must allow that you are growing fat."
"Yes!" observed Agnes, in the same rallying tone. "Pat is scarcely such a 'look-and-die'
     person as he was. I remember him younger, once!"
"Very true! I am getting quite uneasy about you," added Captain De Crespigny, in an
     admonitory voice. "A young lady's reign lasts from seventeen till twenty, and our best days are
     over at forty! Dunbar, shall I give you a line of recommendation to Miss Howard?"
"A million of thanks; but as you never succeeded in recommending yourself, De Crespigny, I
     shall be better, in case of extremity, standing on my own merits."
"Then you will stand as precariously as my old uncle Doncaster, toiling up the bank there,
     whose legs look so thin, that I often wonder he has courage to venture upon them at all. He is
     most unfit to come up hill, when actually going down the hill of life so very fast, that he
     might as well be setting his worldly affairs in order."
"Worldly affairs! He has no other affairs, I suppose," replied Agnes, with a supercilious
     smile on her haughty lip. "And I think Lord Doncaster will be able to manage his own affairs
     for many years to come! He intends to live as long as Great Britain is an island. Nobody is
     old, till he feels old!"
Captain De Crespigny looked at Agnes with a penetrating air of astonishment, which gradually
     changed to an expression of satirical indifference, while he added, "This is an odd world, Miss
     Dunbar!"
"So it is! When did that idea first occur to you? It seems so very new!" replied Agnes, in a
     tone of biting satire. "Patrick has often told me that the De Crespignys are reckoned a
     sagacious family; and perhaps, after so bright a remark, you may turn out by no means the sort
     of every-day person people expected."
"Probably not! I shall, perhaps, be like Cimon, awakened from stupidity by the charms of a
     second Iphigenia," said Captain De Crespigny, with an air as if he had surpassed himself; but
     the smile with which Agnes listened to this characteristic reply was cold and transient as a
     gleam of sunshine on a frozen lake; yet while her features remained immoveable as those of a
     beautiful statue, a strange, unnatural fire sparkled in her splendid eyes, and with a look of
     withering indignation she turned haughtily away to address Lord Doncaster; while Captain De
     Crespigny, humming the last opera tune, and switching with his cane the heads off all the
     flowers along his path, quickened his pace, and resumed his not very welcome assiduities to
     Marion, who felt insufferably annoyed at being obliged always to hear the same nonsense talked,
     and to play her part in what she considered a mere hack flirtation on the part of Captain De
     Crespigny; while she greatly wondered that he had not long since tired of always, in her
     company, drawing up an empty bucket.
Sir Patrick was preparing to follow, when he observed the young sketcher hastily adding a
     last touch to her beautiful drawing; and before she could assemble all her scattered implements
     and materials, which he had assisted her to do, the whole joyous party had nearly vanished out
     of sight; while the young Baronet's eyes flashed with amazement, on giving a clandestine glance
     into the sketch-book, to find there an extremely clever caricature of Captain De Crespigny, as
     he stood a few minutes before, endeavoring to divide his attentions among the whole group of
     ladies. On examining another leaf, he found, to his yet greater surprise, a beautiful likeness
     of Clara Granville; and turning instantly to his young companion, with sudden emotion, he
     entreated permission to have it copied. While he was yet speaking, the young lady, with
     crimsoned cheeks, though a lurking smile played about her mouth, continued hastily to follow
     the guide, tracing his footsteps with an accuracy worthy of a Mohican, impatient, evidently, to
     overtake their companions, as she hastily threaded her way through the forest glades, and
     beneath the arching branches of many a lofty tree, towards a dark, gloomy-looking plantation,
     to which their guide seemed now impatiently hurrying them. He was dressed in a smock frock, and
     had become singularly silent, his replies being all so short and so grudgingly given, that Sir
     Patrick had angrily yielded up the point, determined to give the man nothing, and not to ask
     him another question, when suddenly his arm was tremblingly grasped by the young lady beside
     him; while in a low, strange, unearthly whisper, and with a look of mortal terror, she said, "I
     do not like this! What can it mean? Has he escaped from confinement? Are you sure that man is
     our guide?"
"I scarcely looked, but of course he is! It can be no one else!" replied Sir Patrick, in a
     soothing tone; for he thought she must certainly be deranged. "There he waits for us! We shall
     overtake our friends immediately."
"Look at this tree!—pretend to be admiring the landscape!" continued the young lady, in a
     deep, concentrated voice; "but tell me,—can we make our escape unobserved by that man? My life,
     probably, depends upon your answer!"
Sir Patrick now became confirmed in his opinion respecting the insanity of his young
     companion, and fixing his eyes on her countenance, he perceived with amazement that every tinge
     of color had been drained from her cheek—that her lip quivered with fright, and that terror
     spoke in her eyes, and trembled in every limb; while her words poured out with a rushing
     vehemence of tone and manner which startled and alarmed him.
"I caught a momentary glance of his countenance! Where could I ever see these eyes and be
     mistaken? There is madness yet in their expression. He has sworn to destroy me. The whole
     purpose of his being is revenge!"
"Revenge on you—impossible! Who could be so unmanly—so——"
"You forget that my cousin is insane—that he thinks I drove him into madness—that he pursued
     me day and night till we shut him up! Can nothing be done?"
"Miss Howard! I might have guessed this! Can it be? When I am here, you need apprehend
     nothing! He dare not harm you."
"Oh! how little you know him! In his present state, he has the strength of ten men," replied
     she, with wild and hurried glances. "Once I saw him struggle in their grasp. Why must I forever
     remember that scene? His cries, his imprecations; but see, he returns! Let us appear still to
     advance, but concert some plan for my escape, or believe me, my moments are numbered."
The tone of intense agony in which these words were uttered, filled Sir Patrick with pity,
     while knowing the fearful and mysterious power communicated by madness, even to the feeblest
     frame, he felt a well-grounded apprehension for the terrified girl's safety, on observing the
     strong, muscular figure of the maniac; therefore, after walking on some steps, he whispered to
     her, almost inaudibly:
"The guide seldom looks back. Let me ask him a question, and immediately afterwards drop down
     the side of this hill, and conceal yourself. I shall continue to follow him, that the sound of
     your footsteps may not be missed. Whatever the danger is, be firm, and you will certainly
     escape. Guide!" continued he, elevating his voice in an authoritative tone, yet, even at this
     crisis, unable to resist a joke; "tell me the exact age of this tree, and how many stones it
     took to build the Abbey?"
The man threw back some inaudible reply, in a surly, dogged voice, and quickened his pace
     towards a dark group of fir trees, while again the almost fainting girl gave an agitated glance
     at Sir Patrick, who silently pointed towards the turf edging along the gravel-walk, making her
     a sign to take flight upon it as noiselessly as possible, while he proceeded forward himself
     with no fairy tread, making the sound of his footsteps as loud as if there had still been two
     behind.
After the terrified girl had hastily slid down a steep bank and disappeared amidst a mass of
     evergreens, Sir Patrick was beginning to contemplate the expediency of adopting a similar plan,
     seeing that in conflict with a madman he could gain neither honor or advantage, and might be
     seriously injured, when the maniac suddenly burst into a thrilling, fearful laugh, and,
     snatching a pistol from his breast, turned fiercely round, when Sir Patrick instantly
     recognised, as he had begun to expect, the countenance of that excited stranger, whom Captain
     De Crespigny had in the morning named to him as Ernest Anstruther.
Astonishment and unimaginable fury glittered in the madman's wild and haggard countenance,
     when he missed the object of his pursuit, and he looked for the moment like a wild beast at
     bay, till, springing upon Sir Patrick with a cry of hideous rage, he seized hold of his arm
     with a delirious grasp, and clenched his fist, shouting in accents of frenzied rage, while the
     white foam was on his lips:
"Where! where is she? Tell me, or you shall die! Have I tracked her through earth and air,
     through sky and ocean, to be disappointed now? With sleepless care have I dodged her steps!
     Demons drove me on! Fiends and serpents have beset me! Coals of fire are on my brain! Cold
     hands are on my heart! All is horror! Every human soul shall shudder for the deeds I do! A
     brand of shame shall be on my head! The dogs shall howl when I pass! Even now, the sun never
     shines on me! Show me, then, where she is, or I will tear you limb from limb."
Sir Patrick stood firm as a rock before this whirlwind of passion, though filled with
     horrible amazement, as he beheld the burning glare of the madman's eye, and heard the sharp,
     shrill, shrieking voice in which he spoke; but if he appeared terrible in his fierce
     excitement, he seemed more terrible still, when a moment afterwards, with a cold, livid look,
     as if turned into stone, he added:
"She shall be mine, or she shall never be given to another. I would not spare her for ten
     thousand lives. If she refuse me, her lips shall be closed forever and ever. I shall destroy
     and be destroyed. My love or my vengeance must be gratified; and mark my words. You are the
     friend of Louis De Crespigny. I would it had been himself, and one of us should never have left
     this spot alive. There is a dark and dreary account to be settled between him and me. My first
     warning shall be my last," added he, in a hollow whisper, while a look of dangerous meaning
     gleamed in his eye. "He deserves death at my hands. He wrenched my sister from her home,
     trampled on her affections, and is born in all things to injure and supplant me! He must die!"
     added the maniac, with a strange glare in his eye-balls. "It is, perhaps, for his sake that I
     am rejected! Wild voices are whispering in my ear! Unnameable horrors beset me! Fierce phantoms
     are hissing and shouting behind me!"
The unfortunate being uttered these words with preternatural fury, while his countenance wore
     an expression of deadly malignity. He then paused, ground his teeth, and with the frightful
     levity of a maniac, uttering a howling, fiendish laugh, and rushing away, disappeared into the
     thickest part of the forest, leaving Sir Patrick horror-struck at the awful spectacle of a
     shattered intellect, the fragments of which were of so deadly a nature; while, at the same
     time, amidst a torrent of other thoughts and feelings, chiefly directed to secure the safety of
     Captain De Crespigny, he could not but smile at his present discovery, that the plainly
     dressed, shy, reserved, but rather satirical young lady, whom he had been of late patronising
     and bringing forward, was no other than the superbly endowed heiress, Miss Howard Smytheson,
     respecting whom he had so often rallied himself.
</div></body></text></TEI>