<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="29">
  CHAPTER XXIX.
It was on a pleasant evening towards the end of August, that Sir Arthur's chariot stopped at
     the Granby Hotel, which looked to the travellers more like an entire street than a single
     house; and Marion thought that accommodation might be prepared in it for all the invalids in
     Great Britain. Her ears were instantly deafened by a noisy clamor of bells, while the carriage
     was surrounded by a cluster of shabby waiters, in second-hand looking clothes, dishevelled
     hair, soiled cotton stockings, and dusty shoes, who were vociferous in their protestations that
     the house was already more than full, and that a hundred and fifty guests dined every day at
     the ordinary. In the mean time, however, they hurriedly dismounted Sir Arthur's baggage from
     the chariot, and at length ushered him into a sitting room, with a promise of finding sleeping
     apartments for the whole party, up three pair of stairs, in a lodging across the common, a tall
     old building spotted over like a plum pudding with windows, where they must be ready to
     abdicate on a moment's notice, if necessary, the whole house having been bespoke some weeks
     before, for Miss Howard Smytheson, the heiress, and suite.
No place is so little changed by lapse of time as Harrowgate, during the last two centuries
     which have elapsed since first its unpalatable waters were tasted. There the same three great
     hotels flourish supreme, as in the days of Smollet, holding their crowded ordinaries, and
     distinguished by their former designations, as the House of Lords, the House of Commons, and
     the House of Drs. There, during three months of every successive year, an equal crowd assembles
     in search of health for their disordered bodies, and excitement for their stagnant minds, while
     time and money are frantically squandered, as if both were dealt out in unlimited portions
     among all who thus emulously seek with wearied eagerness for frivolous amusements, idle
     flutter, and all those relaxations of an unsatisfied existence, which soon became intolerable
     to those who can amuse themselves, but necessary to those who cannot.
The very same rooms and furniture, the very same tables, knives, glasses, and spoons, and the
     same hours of eating and drinking, which were used during the time of old Humphrey Bramble, are
     still in existence, while every thing remains as much unaltered as the blue firmament above,
     except the company. Year after year has, at Harrowgate, even more, perhaps, than elsewhere,
     testified the ceaseless mutability of human affairs, where, amidst light laughter, mirth and
     music, the young have become married, the old have died, and, as days roll on in that little
     world of eager excitement, the names of all are soon alike forgotten. At Harrowgate the
     visitors seem scarcely more permanently interested in each other than in actors on the stage,
     or in characters represented by a novelist. Any lounger who appears in the public saloons a
     second year, becomes completely naturalized in the house; after a third season, it is ten to
     one he may be considered a bore; and during the fourth or fifth, he is completely
     superannuated. In these gay rooms, how much of human life and feeling have existed! how many of
     its joys and sorrows been experienced! and how many of its deepest interests have arisen,
     amidst the gay dance, the ringing laugh, the lively coquetry, the frantic dissipation, and the
     vows of endless attachment! With many a past generation, the fever of frivolity is over, and
     the dust of death now shrouds every remembrance in oblivion: but a new race yet successively
     arises, to exist, like their predecessors, in an atmosphere of music, dancing, flirting,
     riding, driving, feasting, and gayety,
"Smiling as if earth contain'd no tomb."
"I cannot but think, when arriving at any new place," observed Marion, "what solitary
     desolation must frequently be experienced by those 'citizens of the world,' who are for ever on
     the wing, from country to country, throughout the habitable and uninhabitable globe! We who
     live only for social companionship, would feel perfectly lost in arriving at a perpetual
     succession of places, where not one human being depends upon us for comfort or enjoyment—where
     not a single genuine tear would be shed by any living individual, if we dropped down dead at
     their feet!"
"You are right, Marion," replied Sir Arthur. "Once when taken dangerously ill abroad, I was
     surrounded by those only to whom my very language was unknown, my features strange, my name
     unheard of, and my whole feelings indifferent. It was dreary and desolate indeed! A new place
     may divert us for a time, but we do not live to enjoy mere scenery or mere amusement. To find
     real happiness we must look within the circle of home feelings, home duties, and home
     enjoyments."
When the very aristocratic and distinguished-looking Sir Arthur Dunbar first appeared in the
     public room at the Granby, leading in his two radiantly beautiful nieces, the babbling murmur
     of conversation became suddenly hushed, while a general whisper of surprise and admiration
     circulated round the tea-table. Many an eager inquiry was rapidly promulgated who they could
     possibly be, and from whence they came; while Lord Wigton, to produce some amusement, secretly
     announced that it was the Duke of Lincolnshire and his two eldest unmarried daughters.
The better half of pleasure was its novelty to Marion, whose half-shy, half-amused looks, as
     she entered among a score or two of perfect strangers, found a pleasing contrast to the
     criticising, examining, fastidious air with which Agnes, in the full swell of magnificence,
     glanced her brilliant, haughty eyes round the tables, and muttered contemptuously to Sir
     Arthur, that the living furniture in the room seemed little better than a zoological garden—a
     human menagerie of tigers, bears, and monkeys, varied by a large proportion of red inflamed
     strawberry-colored faces belonging to the water-drinkers. By no means satisfied with the
     commencement of her Harrowgate existence, Agnes established on the spot a little whispering
     gallery of satirical discontent, while she ridiculed to Marion those of the company who were
     unlucky enough first to attract her notice and her disapprobation.
Though the room appeared abundantly peopled with dramatis personæ of
     many kinds and degrees, yet, instead of seeing, as she had rather too sanguinely anticipated, a
     society of distinguished-looking personages, as select as if they had been introduced at a
     drawing-room in St. James' Palace, the saloon was encumbered with groups of people as
     ridiculous as any that Agnes ever remembered to have seen at a country theatre. Old beaux of half a century's duration,—two or three remarkably conceited,
     overdressed officers in full-fledged mustachios,—crowds of busy, bustling, managing-looking
     mothers,—four or five over-dressed Irish fortune-hunters,—a knot of agricultural,
     kill-your-own-mutton country gentlemen,—one or two widows of not very doubtful age, but
      rouged to excess,—a few Oxonian professors, who were F.R.S. and the whole alphabet
     besides,—a multitude of whist-playing clergymen, reverened only on their visiting cards, who
     bore no symptom of their profession except a white neckcloth,—many old people to be made young,
     and young people to be made younger,—besides nearly an acre of very un-Almacks-like young
     ladies, showily attired in pink, blue, or yellow, like a bed of tulips, all in very gay
     spirits, or pretending to be so, who seemed to lead a life of perpetual smiles and good-humor,
     as if all the troubles of existence were unknown or a mere laughing matter to them.
Sir Arthur was not long in having a delighted recognition with an old, wooden-legged
     messmate, Captain Ogilvie, who introduced to Marion his "three head of daughters," pretty
     animated girls; and Agnes hastily seated herself at the tea-table, disappointed beyond measure
     in the first chapter of her adventures, and half determined already to set about hating the
     whole party. Though deceived only by her own too vivid anticipations, she felt in some way or
     other imposed upon, in being unexpectedly introduced to such very third-rate society, and for
     several minutes she maintained a petulant silence, so very unlike her usual volubility, that
     she began, before long, to wish for some one with whom to enjoy a laugh at the whole circle of
     whimsical-looking oddities.
Close beside the seat on which Agnes had accidentally placed herself, she very soon observed
     an old gentleman considerably past the meridian of life, who nevertheless dressed with very
     obvious pretensions to youth, wearing a fashionable, well-contrived wig, a perfectly startling
     set of teeth, and a gouty black velvet shoe. His figure was well built, and he had altogether a
     look of individual eccentricity peculiar to himself, with an air of supercilious haughtiness,
     which testified that, like Agnes, he thought himself too good for his company.
"Who can he be?" thought she, finding his eye fixed upon herself with a fastidious look of
     connoisseurship, such as that with which he might have examined some doubtful copy of a Vandyke
     or Titian, while an expression of complacent approbation gradually stole into his features.
     "Probably some eminent artist! He may perhaps ask leave to do my picture for the
     exhibition!"
Having reached this conclusion, she was almost startled to hear herself addressed by her
     unknown neighbor, in a consequential, rather patronising voice, and with an air of
     unembarrassed distinction, while he evidently watched her countenance with the same look of
     criticism as before, so that she felt certain if there had been a flaw in her teeth, or a
     single hair disarranged on her head, it could not have escaped his notice. So fastidious a
     personage seemed almost worth the trouble of pleasing, and Agnes, after replying rather
     graciously to his first few remarks, became exceedingly surprised to discover that there was a
     tone of well bred command in his dry, cynical manner, united with the most perfect polish,
     which both awed and surprised her. His assumption of superiority and importance seemed almost
     unconscious, but he evidently entertained not the fraction of a doubt that his conversation was
     a singular honor and an agreeable acquisition to any one on whom he condescended to bestow the
     slightest attention.
"I have lived here lately at the rate of twenty new acquaintances a day, and am happy this
     evening in adding another to my usual allowance. One must enter into the humors of a place like
     Harrowgate, and do at Rome as Rome does," said he, in a somewhat haughty, supercilious tone.
     "This is the only spot in all the earth where English people attempt the ease and sociability
     of foreign manners, and we must acknowledge it fits rather awkwardly. Nevertheless, being in my
     own neighborhood, I make a point every year of lending my countenance for a short time to this
     house."
Agnes gave an undervaluing glance at her companion, and privately thought his thin, dry
     countenance, with every vein like whip cord, might well have been dispensed with, but though he
     appeared to be unpardonably ugly, she prudently sipped her tea in silence, looking somewhat
     askance at the little consequential gentleman beside her; while he took the opportunity of
     examining her profile with his keen, observant eye, after which, having apparently satisfied
     himself that she was worth the honor of being spoken to, he continued, in a hard, croaking
     voice, like a door grating on its rusty hinges:
"The company here is nearly of the same calibre as you might probably encounter in a Margate
     hoy, or in a second-class train on the Birmingham railroad."
"Or at Bartholomew fair," added Agnes, determined not to be outdone. "I feel as if we were
     dining for once at the second table. There should be doorkeepers at Harrowgate to keep out the
      canaille! I wonder Captain De Crespigny misinformed my brother so much
     about the society here; but he would have said anything to make us come."
"No one would ever dream, in his wildest moments, of visiting Harrowgate for society. Mere
     knife-grinders from Sheffield, and country curates," replied her fastidious companion, in a
     short, abrupt tone. "Are you acquainted with Louis De Crespigny?"
"Yes; everybody who is anybody knows him, and those who do not often pretend they do,"
     replied Agnes, indignant at the easy, almost contemptuous manner in which her companion named
     one whom she considered as her own peculiar property. "Not to know him would argue ourselves
     unknown."
"I certainly am unknown," said her companion, with a strange little conscious laugh, which
     seemed to Agnes quite unaccountable. "Has De Crespigny so universal an acquaintance? People
     must be more at a loss for society than I had supposed!"
"You know," replied Agnes, in an unanswerable tone, "he is the future Marquis of
     Doncaster."
"Is he?" answered the old gentleman, with another short, dry laugh, and a proving shrug of
     polite non-conviction. "So much the better for him. You are quite sure of that?"
"Perfectly certain! His uncle is a rich old quiz, who never thought anybody good enough to
     marry till now, when nobody would accept of him. The old peer could not get a girl to marry him
     now if he sent the bellman round to advertise for one. Captain De Crespigny's succession is as
     undoubted as anything can be which depends on the life of a whimsical, superannuated uncle,
     these many years past in the last stage of infirmity. He has the wrinkles ironed out of his
     face every morning with a smoothing iron, and I am told his very bones rattle whenever he
     moves!"
"Indeed!" exclaimed the stranger, in a hard, withering tone, and with a cool sneer on his
     lip. "How very singular!"
"Poor, dear old man! he was handsome once, and never can forget that; but it is a century
     since he lost any looks he ever had, and I am told he is quite preternaturally old, withered,
     and whimsical. Quite ingeniously ugly! laid a faire peur! I should be
     afraid to go near him, in case his ugliness might be reflected upon me; but I hear he fancies
     himself quite captivating still. Patrick tells me that the old Marquis invested so large a sum
     of money lately in a new set of teeth, that his nephew is quite uneasy lest he should be robbed
     and murdered for the gold they are set in. He scratches his wig sometimes to look as if it were
     his own hair; and he had an ossification of the leg last year, in consequence of a
     disappointment in love!"
"Very remarkable!"
"Yes!" added Agnes, encouraged by the attention she had evidently excited, and happy to vent
     all her long accumulated antipathy. "The oldest man who ever lived certainly died at last, but
     I believe nobody ever before existed so long in this world without doing one atom of good
     either to himself or others. He keeps a Roman Catholic Abbe to think for him; and once his wig
     turned grey in a single night with distress of mind when they had a quarrel. The Marquis is so
     afraid of apoplexy, that when he walks out the Abbe Mordaunt always carries a lancet to bleed
     him instantly, in case he has a fit."
"How very considerate! You have all this authentic intelligence on the best authority of
     course?" asked the stranger with a submissive bow. "De Crespigny's entire! I understand the
     nephew has not inherited his uncle's antipathy to marrying! If this very whimsical old relative
     could be safely packed into his grave,—let me assure you he is even more whimsical than has
     been represented, though not quite so infirm,—I suppose Captain De Crespigny would very soon
     dispose of himself and his coronet."
"Certainly!" replied Agnes, unable to repress a conscious smile and heightened color. "In
     that case we should all probably see before long a Marchioness of Doncaster!"
"I might not, perhaps, live to be introduced," answered the old gentleman demurely. "And I
     could lay a bet that, as long as I exist, we shall never have Captain De Crespigny in the
     peerage. If you happen, however, to know any young lady at all impatient to become Marchioness
     of Doncaster, let her consult me, and I could, perhaps, suggest a shorter cut to that
     situation, than by waiting for Louis De Crespigny."
"How!" exclaimed Agnes, with a bewildered look. "Quite impossible!"
"Unless by accepting the present Marquis, who ought, by your description, to go very cheap,
     old, whimsical, and infirm as he is!" replied the stranger, with a sly smile, and a graceful
     bow. "The report you have heard of Lord Doncaster is such, that I feel almost tempted to
     forswear my own name!"
Agnes never in her life approached more nearly to a genuine fainting fit, than on hearing
     these words, and to have been swallowed up in an earthquake would have been quite a relief. She
     felt now like Abon Hassan, when he made the vizier bite his finger to ascertain if he were
     really awake, while, with a look of vacant wonder, she became aware that the middle-aged,
     nearly good-looking, and very elegant man beside her, was actually the old, worn-out, almost
     dead, and all but buried uncle, whose demise Captain De Crespigny had led her daily or hourly
     to expect for the last two years. If his ghost had appeared, she would not have been half so
     much astonished, while he seemed evidently more amused than he chose to acknowledge, at having
     created such a sensation, which he was by no means inclined to diminish, while silently
     admiring the beautiful fluctuations of expression in Agnes' resplendent eyes, fixed on himself
     with almost incredulous amazement. At length he rose to take leave, with a smiling,
     supercilious bow, and beckoned in an authoritative manner to a clerical-looking gentleman at
     some distance, to follow him, who spoke in a voice of almost feminine softness, though Agnes
     thought the expression of his countenance peculiarly sinister and forbidding.
"That, then, must be the Abbe Mordaunt!" exclaimed Agnes, almost aloud, while she gazed at
     his stern, sallow countenance, his shaggy eyebrows, low forehead, and artful-looking smile. "He
     might act the villain in any melo-drama! I would rather not stand between that man and any
     earthly object he may set his heart on! He is the most Jesuitical-looking Jesuit I ever
     beheld!"
Though Agnes' first recontre with the Marquis of Doncaster had been so calamitous, and her
     first prejudice against his shadow, the Abbe, had seemed most inveterate, she yet spent much of
     her time for the next few days in their society, and was delighted to engross the attention and
     the evident admiration of the two most distinguished-looking personages at the ordinary, while,
     without scruple, she flattered the Marquis most flagrantly, by laughing to excess at her own
     very mistaken ideas of him previous to their meeting, and hinting that this had rendered her
     subsequent surprise the more agreeable. Lord Doncaster in return amused himself with talking to
     her in a style suited to the female society in which most of his own time had hitherto been
     spent, though it should not certainly have suited any young girl educated like Agnes, who
     stretched her complaisance, however, to the utmost for a nobleman, and the uncle of her
     intended, Captain De Crespigny.
Marion's refined and delicate feelings shrunk at once from the libertine freedom of look and
     manner which she could not but observe in the old Marquis' tone to ladies, and though he
     repeatedly tried to engage her in the flippant and almost dissolute conversation which, in a
     low lover-like tone, he addressed to her sister, and made an ostentatious display of his
     admiration for both, Marion, disgusted and shocked at what seemed so utterly unsuitable to his
     years, gently but decidedly evaded all intercourse, being of opinion that the coquetry which
     was dishonorable in the nephew, became ridiculous and contemptible in the uncle, therefore she
     behaved to him with distant politeness, and a degree of gravity by no means natural to her in
     general. Marion devoted herself almost exclusively to Sir Arthur, leading him about in his
     walks, and enlivening his conversation with old Captain Ogilvy, while she could not but
     frequently compare the age and respectability of her venerable uncle, with the almost equal age
     and very opposite character of the Roman Catholic Marquis, whose thin skeleton figure, hollow
     ghost-like laugh and old stories, as broad as they were long, formed as unsuitable a contrast
     to his juvenile dress and manners, as his withered aspect did, to the fresh and fragrant
     flowers he constantly wore in his button-hole, and of which he lavished a splendid profusion on
     Agnes.
Marion observed with increasing surprise and regret, that the lively persiflage of
     her sister with the Marquis, was varied very frequently by long and apparently grave
     discussions, with the Abbe Mordaunt, and at the end of a week, she became startled to observe
     that Agnes wore round her neck a black ribbon, from which hung conspicuously suspended a large
     gold crucifix of very beautiful workmanship. On many former occasions, Marion had found reason
     to dread the bitter vengeance of Agnes' tongue, but at no loss to guess the source from whence
     this unusual ornament had been derived, she inwardly resolved not to let it pass unnoticed, but
     warmly to remonstrate with her sister on the growing influence of the Abbe, which seemed
     surprising and unaccountable, while an undefined feeling of alarm respecting the rapidly
     increasing intimacy of Agnes with Lord Doncaster, caused her to long impatiently for the
     arrival of Sir Patrick, as she felt unwilling to distress her uncle on the subject of Agnes'
     extraordinary conduct, trusting that the whole affair was a mere girlish whim—a piece of
     missyish coquetry to please Lord Doncaster, who in the mean time laughingly boasted that never
     before had he made a proselyte so young and beautiful.
</div></body></text></TEI>