<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Modern Flirtations, A Novel, by Catherine Sinclair—A Project
      Gutenberg eBook</title><author>Sinclair, Catherine (1800-1864)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1841</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="15">
  CHAPTER XV.
Marion's walk back from Portobello was of a very different aspect from her gay outset in the
     morning, and nature seemed to have suddenly gone out of tune as she gazed around, with an
     altered eye on the sombre massy hills with their giant shadows, throwing into mysterious
     obscurity the tall ancient buildings of the doleful Canongate, which looked like the ghost of a
     departed city; and the melancholy magnificence of Holyrood reminded her of greatness in
     adversity, while she reflected that the royal houses of Stuart and of Bourbon had there found a
     dismal refuge in their utmost destitution. But more immediately connected with herself, and
     more interesting still to her thoughts, though rather a sinking in poetry, was the
     consideration that there her own brother had been driven by his folly and indiscretion, and
     that her father's family, so long respected in Scotland, seemed now about to be finally
     extinguished in penury and disgrace. It was a misfortune without remedy, for Marion knew the
     limit of her influence with Sir Patrick to be less than nothing, and she believed that not a
     living being possessed more. She had never heard a surmise of his attachment to Clara, or deep
     and unconquerable as it was, she might have entertained some hope that the love of virtue and
     goodness in others, might lead to a respect for it in himself, though none can doubt the
     melancholy truth, that, as fevers are infectious, but health is not, so moral evil is far more
     contagious than moral good.
After a hurried walk, Marion reached home in some trepidation, lest she might be too late to
     dress for dinner, an offence which Sir Patrick always visited with his utmost indignation; but
     on entering the house, she was alarmed and surprised to hear, from the butler, that Agnes had
     been seized with sudden illness very soon after her return from Lady Towercliffe's ball, and
     that she was unable to leave her bed.
Marion flew, rather than walked up stairs, and entered her sister's room with the most
     affectionate solicitude, but great was her astonishment to find Agnes stretched almost
     insensible on the bed, and evidently in an agony of suffering, pale, cold, and languid. Her
     spirits were evidently in the lowest depression, and, for the first time in her life, she
     seemed to consider herself a mere mortal like other people.
Dixon, in the mean time, watched over the invalid with an air of excessive, almost
     exaggerated solicitude, emitting a series of very ostentatious sighs, while she kept her place
     close beside the bed, so as to exclude every one else, and made eager signs to Marion when she
     entered, to leave the room without speaking, and not approach her sister, or agitate her in any
     way.
Without heeding any such signals, however, Marion approached the bed-side with noiseless
     steps, and quietly assuming the place which had been occupied by Dixon, gently took hold of
     Agnes' hand, which felt so cold and clammy, that she started with a degree of alarm, greatly
     increased by the sight of the invalid's altered aspect.
"Have you called in a doctor?" said she, anxiously. "Surely Patrick does not know how very
     ill you are, Agnes?"
"Dixon says he thought nothing of it, and recommended me to put off my illness till after the
     assembly: unfeeling wretch! when I shall perhaps never recover. Since then he is gone hunting,"
     added Agnes, with a peevish look at Marion, as if it were her fault, "and he will not return
     home before night!"
"Who said Patrick had gone out hunting? It is not the case. I met him in the passage, and he
     had been told you complained only of a slight nervous headache!" said Marion, glancing at
     Dixon, whose countenance wore an expression so sinister and peculiar, that Marion felt the
     color rush to her face with surprise, but turned away instantly to conceal how much she had
     been startled by it, though determined privately to watch Dixon's face more narrowly than
     before, while feeling a vague apprehension of she knew not what.
"Miss Dunbar must be kept quiet," observed Dixon, in a harsh sulky voice, "she ought not to
     speak. It only fatigues her, and she should see no one!"
"Who ordered that?" asked Marion with a scrutinizing look at the abigail's averted face. "I
     shall remain here, Dixon, therefore leave the room yourself at present."
While she angrily and slowly prepared to obey this authoritative command, Agnes turned her
     pallid face towards Marion, saying, in a faint voice, and with a look of extreme lassitude,
"Dixon says I have been in a delirium. She is probably right, for I could have been certain
     that when the shutters were closed, I heard a voice in the farthest corner of my room. It
     sounded like muttered curses, and a dark figure crossed the fire-place. Could it be a dream? I
     was too weak to move—my hand trembled, so that I could not reach the bell, but surely I heard a
     low, strange, unearthly laugh. It was horrible! but a moment afterwards Dixon appeared, and she
     says I was in a deep sleep, evidently dreaming some horrible dream!"
"It is impossible sometimes to distinguish between a dream and a reality, especially when we
     are ill," said Marion soothingly, for she was alarmed at the look of terror and perplexity with
     which Agnes mentioned these circumstances, and privately determined, as soon as possible, to
     communicate on the subject with Sir Patrick. "I must be allowed, Agnes, to sleep in your room
     to-night."
"Dixon maintains that this is all mere fatigue, after the excitement of Lady Towercliffe's,
     but I was never yet wearied with being flattered and admired! This morning, however, strange to
     say, my spirits are dreadfully depressed. Nothing gives me pleasure. I can scarcely imagine any
     earthly thing that could interest me. Though the ball turned out pleasanter than any ball ever
     was before, and Captain De Crespigny seemed, as usual, the most lover-like of men, yet this
     morning, if he proposed to you, or even to Dixon, I should scarcely care. Everything seems a
     blank. I feel a sort of depression and horror not to be described or imagined."
"I desired you, Dixon, to leave the room," exclaimed Marion, astonished to perceive her still
     lurking about the bed. "Go instantly," added Marion in a more peremptory tone, for there was
     something that terrified her in the woman's look. "What do you think, my dear Agnes, can be the
     cause of this very sudden illness? Did you eat any supper?"
"Nothing; I Jephsonized completely; tasted not a morsel, and drank still less! That good
     creature, Dixon, brought me a cup of tea from her own breakfast, on my return home, merely to
     lay the dust in my throat, but, entre nous, I tossed the greater part
     out of that window clandestinely, as it had an odd, disagreeable taste, like stuff-petticoats!
     Poor Dixon would be mortified if she knew what I thought of her 'delicious mixture' at,
     probably, 3s. 6d. the pound. It is a pleasure to see any human being so attached as she is to
     me."
Marion's color deepened at the tone of reproach in which these last words were spoken. It was
     impossible, she thought, that they could be seriously considered applicable to her, and yet
     both the look and accent seemed to say so, and the ready color flushed her cheek when she felt
     that no attachment could have equalled her own, had she dared to express it either in word or
     deed.
As Agnes declined sending for a doctor, and seemed already better, though unable for more
     exertion, Marion took up a book, and remained silently by her side, watching, with anxious
     solicitude, every variation of her countenance, and, with affectionate ingenuity, anticipating
     all her many wants, the most troublesome of which appeared to be a craving and intolerable
     thirst.
After some time the door opened, and Dixon was about to enter with a tray containing Agnes'
     dinner, but on seeing Marion still there, she started and seemed about hastily to withdraw.
"Come in," said Marion, looking with astonishment at the abigail's countenance, which was
     flushed and inflamed, as if she had been intoxicated. "Come in."
"When Miss Dunbar is ill, she always likes her dinner alone," said Dixon, pertly. "This is
     only a plain pudding, so I shall keep it warm below."
"My sister will not like it the less for my helping her," said Marion, affectionately turning
     to Agnes. "You may leave it with me, Dixon."
Marion was surprised to see the woman visibly change color when she said this. The abigail
     instantly compressed her lips as if to prevent their quivering, fixed her wild glaring eyes on
     Agnes, and then gave an anxious glance at the dinner tray.
"This pudding seems excellent," continued Marion, helping Agnes; "but surely there is rather
     too much sugar scattered on the top! Sugar!" added Marion in accents of astonishment, when she
     had put it to her lips; "this is not sugar! stop, Agnes! stop! I charge you not to taste it!"
     exclaimed Marion, hastily dashing the spoon out of her sister's hand, as she was raising it to
     her mouth. "What can this mean? There is something here I do not understand. It must be
     explained!"
Bewildered and amazed, Marion looked round, and beheld a dark scowl of rage and fear, like
     insanity itself, never afterwards to be forgotten, which disturbed the countenance of Dixon for
     a moment, and then she became of a livid, unnatural whiteness, when, in a low, subdued voice,
     she uttered,
"I know nothing about it; the cook seasons Miss Dunbar's dinner; if this is not to her taste,
     I can take it away."
"Marion, what is the matter? I hate all this fuss. Pray do not make a scene when I am so ill.
     Dixon manages for me without half this trouble. The pudding seems good enough."
Marion trembled visibly as she got up, but without saying another word she rang three times
     for the cook, who expressed the greatest astonishment when the pudding was shown to her,
     saying, in a tone of pique, as she supposed her skill was in question,
"I put none of that there powdering on; sure it be something very queer; neither sugar, salt,
     nor mustard! It would be of little use in a kitchen, with no taste? I declare," added she,
     suddenly changing color, "to my thinking, it be nothing better nor worse than arsenic!"
A stifled cry of astonishment and consternation escaped from Marion at these words, while she
     hurriedly exclaimed, "Stop Dixon; do not let Dixon leave the house! Send for an apothecary.
     Where is Patrick?"
The powder, on being analyzed, proved, indeed, to be arsenic, which Dixon bought on the
     previous evening, on the usual pretext of poisoning rats; but while Marion was raising an
     alarm, the culprit herself absconded, carrying off all Agnes' trinkets and money, which she
     must previously have secreted; and notice of the robbery was immediately sent to the police.
     Among her valuable collection of jewelry, Agnes bestowed the most audible lamentations on a
     splendid locket set in diamonds with her brother's hair; but her secret regrets were the
     deepest for a crystal scent-bottle, with a gold top set in turquoises, which Captain De
     Crespigny had presented on the previous evening, pretending he had lost it to her in a bet.
"One would fancy," said Agnes, in her usual rallying tone, the first time she saw Captain De
     Crespigny after her recovery, "that Dixon had been some old admirer of yours. Not a vestige is
     left of anything I ever received from you! The last year's annual which you gave me, the music
     which you copied for me, even my withered bouquet of the night before, all gone at one fell
     swoop, leaving not a wreck behind!"
Captain De Crespigny colored violently, and strode to the window in evident confusion, which
     Marion could not but remark with astonishment and perplexity; but Agnes, quite unconscious of
     his agitation, rattled on with increasing animation.
"I always now put my money and everything valuable in the most conspicuous part of my room,
     to save anybody the trouble of murdering me for them. I have a perfect horror of being
     murdered! It never occurred to me, however, that the treasures which for certain reasons I
     value most, were in any danger, being of no intrinsic value to other people. I really would
     have died in defence of my little scent-bottle."
Captain De Crespigny had recourse now to the poker, an inestimable refuge in all cases where
     the concealment of emotion is an object, as his heightened color could excite no reasonable
     surprise after the exertion of lifting it, and the noise he made afterwards seemed equivalent
     to a reply.
"It was, after all, a most terrifying escape!" continued Agnes, rather delighted than
     otherwise by the importance she had acquired by this adventure, and holding it up continually
     in every light that she could. "That horrid Dixon! she always had a half-crazed look! You must
     remember my telling you so, Marion?"
"I remember it perfectly it was I who said so to you!" replied her sister, laughing,
"Ah! that is exactly the same thing!"
"Not in the least," persisted Marion, good-humoredly smiling. "All great discoveries occasion
     disputes about the originators. Watt and Bell about steam, and you and I about this poisoning
     affair!"
"Well, it was clever of you, Marion! I shall do as much for you another time. That ungrateful
     creature! The arsenic would probably, at the very least, have spoiled my teeth, and perhaps
     made my hair grow grey! That I never could have survived!"
"The strangest thing of all is, that there seems to have been so much malice in the whole
     business," continued Marion. "She might easily have carried off all the plate, or Patrick's
     gold dressing-case! What could ail Dixon at you, Agnes? You were kindness itself to her."
"This is an odd world, and very remarkable things happen in it," observed Sir Patrick, with a
     yawn. "But you may talk till you are both in your coffins, without making anything new of this
     business. Your affair has been the wonder of the house for two entire days, Agnes, without a
     single new fact having come out, and there is De Crespigny strolled into the garden to escape
     being wearied to death. I really think two days long enough to discuss any one subject, and the
     less you annoy yourselves about it the better. If the culprit is above ground, the police will
     ferret her out; and my advice to both of you is, to eat your puddings for the next month
     without sugar!"
Agnes assumed a look of majestic ire at this very cavalier allusion to her adventure, and
     threw herself back in her arm-chair, with an exceedingly ill-used aspect, heaving a succession
     of indignant sighs, which continued most provokingly unnoticed till they amounted at last
     almost to groans of suppressed anger, while Sir Patrick, taking up the "Times," concluded, by
     saying, in a tone of absent, careless indifference,
"One has no leisure now to be happy and sorry about everything that occurs. I remember once
     seeing a very impudent, forward-looking actress perform Juliet at Covent-Garden, when De
     Crespigny whispered to me, in his droll way, 'Depend upon it, this is not the first lover whom
     that young lady has met on a balcony!' and you may depend upon it, Agnes, this is not the first
     poisoning experiment your abigail has attempted: I hope she will never try her skill on me!
     What would you say if she were to administer a dose of zinc some day, and turn you blue! I
     often wonder that no jealous woman ever wreaked her vengeance in that way! It would be a
     capital joke!"
Agnes had been greatly flattered, and if any attention to herself could have surprised her,
     she might have been astonished at the intense interest almost inadvertently betrayed by Captain
     De Crespigny, in the mysterious circumstances of her lately discovered danger. When the
     particulars were first mentioned, he turned as pale as death, and asked with startling
     eagerness, for a minute description of the abigail's appearance, to which he listened with
     almost breathless attention. From that moment he became indefatigable in his efforts to trace
     out the fugitive, in which he seemed most truly and heartily in earnest, writing advertisements
     himself for the newspapers, to offer a reward for her apprehension, and never seeming to tire
     of hearing all that could be remembered or related, respecting the period of her being first
     engaged by Agnes, her dress, manner, age, and appearance, while his color varied visibly from
     red to pale several times during the narration.
"It is altogether most flattering to me!" observed Agnes next day, when pointing all this out
     to Sir Patrick. "Captain De Crespigny has been sometimes most maliciously accused of
     insincerity towards young ladies; but when he is in earnest you see how very much in earnest he
     is! It would be impossible for him to be more deeply interested and agitated on the occasion,
     if his own life, instead of mine, had been endangered. I wish everybody else had shown as much
     feeling!" added she, glancing angrily at Sir Patrick, who was carelessly whistling a tune, and
     beating time with a riding whip on his boot. "Well!" exclaimed Agnes, getting more and more
     irritated, "if I did not see that one person at least cares more for me in the world than you
     do, I would be ready yet, without giving Dixon the trouble, to poison myself! I would spend my
     last shilling on a dose of arsenic!"
"I am not sure that poisoning in such a case would be the best plan!" replied Sir Patrick,
     describing circles on the carpet with his whip, and speaking in a tone of most provoking
      nonchalance. "In the first place, if people are so very indifferent, it might be no
     great punishment to them; and besides, I do not exactly see how poisoning would improve your
     own prospects, either in this world or the next! In respect to my friend De Crespigny, it is
     quite a catch for any idle man like him, when something occurs that he can be interested in,
     for he was dying of too much leisure; but as for his ever falling seriously in love with any
     young lady in the creation, let me warn you, Agnes, once for all, that there cannot be a more
     hopeless hope invented or dreamed of."
</div></body></text></TEI>