<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Red House : VWWP edition </title><author>Nesbit, Edith (1858-1924)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1902</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="10">

X
THE INVADERS
“UGH-R-R-R!” I remarked, as we sat down to breakfast.
“I suppose it is,” said Chloe, pretending to shiver. “The Bandbox was warmer, certainly, but
      not much. Why do people make so much fuss about being too cold and too hot? Isn't it odd that
      they've never found out the great truth—that one has to be cold in the winter and hot in the
      summer? And if one has to be cold, how much warmer it is to be cold here than in the
      Bandbox!”
“You mean that great possessions warm the cockles o your heart,” I said; “that's because
      you're all soul. As for me, I must warm my hands in the tea-cozy before I can carve the
      eggs.”
The white parlor, with its dark-panelled walls, its olive-green curtains, its sparkling
      brass and silver, and nothing white about it save the ceiling
       ing and the table-cloth, was a delightful picture of a
      breakfast-room. Chloe's loose gown of turquoise-colored soft stuff with its brown furry
      trimmings became her to distraction. I told her so.
“But the tip of your pretty nose is pink,” I said. “It was quite white—with rage, I
      believe—the day you bit me so about my shaving-brush. Do you remember? And then the letter
      came enclosing the Red House and all our affluence! You had on some muslin thing that
      day—”
She shivered, almost in earnest this time, and poured out the coffee.
“Don't talk of muslin!” she said. “Look, isn't it fairyland? Only it's a little hard to
      believe that our green garden has only gone to sleep, and means to wake up again in the
      spring.”
A light veil of snow lay on our green garden now, and on the thatched roof of the old
      summer-house and on the sun-dial's face, whose sentimental expression had decided my wife to
      decide me to decide to live at the Red House. The snow lay in sheets, like cotton-wool, on the
      flat tops of the cedars; and the ivy round the windows, the creepers on the old arches, and
      the leaves of the tall box hedge were all outlined in sparkling white.

“It is a little different,” I said; “that day, when you wore—well, I won't,
      then—and we had haddock for breakfast, and the letter came. By-the-way, my hands are warm
      enough to open letters now.”
There were only two. One was a bill for repairs to the roof—the roof, now spread with snow,
      where one warm, wet morning we had fought a flood with brooms and a dust-pan; a bill that did
      not discompose me, for I was used to that roof. No living plumber could make its repairs
      permanent. The other letter was type-written, and that by a somewhat inexperienced hand. It
      read thus: 
Junior Blackheath Society of Antiquaries & Field Club.
Dear Sir%
At a Meeting of the Committe of thes dg Society it wasagreedt that a field day should.) be
        held on Dec 20 when the Society proposis to visit the interesting church of (x) Elmhurst
        andalsotheold Palace they call Kin (gons)Johns. Our president MrAlbert Morris F;J.B,S! has
        ob and so have the rest of us. tained permission to fo out on that day/ We venture to ask
        whether you would allowthe members of the Cociety to walk £ through your groundsa nd inspect
        from without of course your beauriful house, which is as you are doubtless aware of ? great
        ihstoric interest having been ½ for some years. We feel sure it was the 7; residence of the
         celebrated amn you know who I mean. We hope if the frost
        ohlds you will not mind us skating on yuor moat.
I; am dear Sir, Yours faithfully, Edward Turnbull Hon. Sec.
P%S¼ Please excuse mistakes% ihave not learned the typewriter properyl yet.


Such was the letter. The more obvious orthographical errors had been carefully corrected
      with blue pencil, but, even so, the document was a remarkable one. Chloe read it, taking
      absent bites at her buttered toast.
“Mad?” she queried, calmly.
“I don't know; the letter's very conventionally worded, except in one or two odd places. Is
      it possible that a genuine society could possibly employ such a ghastly rough-sketch of a
      typist?”
“The letter's not signed,” she remarked. “The secretary's name is typed as well as the
      rest.”
“I knew a solemn ass named Turnbull, once,” I reflected, “but I thought he'd got into a bank
      somewhere in Kent—Tonbridge or Dartford, or something. He used to fool around with brass
      rubbings and dates and archæological bores—”

“I expect it's the same man,” she said, indifferently. “But we don't want the nasty society
      bothering here, do we? Write and tell him there's nothing to see, and no one really important
      ever lived here till we did.”
“I don't know,” I said. “I wish I could be sure. Blackheath seems an unlikely place for it.
      If we were Woolwich, now, that simply bristles with improving societies; but I've
      a sort of idea this is a working-men's society. If the poor beggars have got a holiday on
      purpose, and are really interested—or think they are—it seems a bit piggy not to let them,
      doesn't it? We can keep a lookout from the loafery window and see that they don't get into any
      mischief. They only want to look at the house ‘from the outside.’”
“I suppose they give an address?”
“Yes; Morden House, Blackheath. It sounds decent. I'm almost certain it's a workman's club.
      I'll write and tell them they can come. You don't really mind?”
“I'm not wholly a piggy-wig. But that letter's odd, all the same. Perhaps it's from a gang
      of thieves who want to come and see how the shutters are fastened.”
“Well, they can't see that from the garden. Madam, I am beginning to realize that I am a
       proud man the day. Think of our position six months ago.
      Who would have wished to come and inspect, ‘from the outside, of course,’ our late lamented
      Bandbox? And now we are lords of the manor, holding the power of life and death over the
      field-days of antiquarian societies.”
“What I don't like,” she went on, quite unappeased by this feudal picture, “is that about
      the skating. Why should antiquaries want to skate?”
“Now to me,” I rejoined, “that's the most convincing touch of all. Of course these workmen
      don't often get a holiday, and they want to make the most of it. ‘If the frost holds’ is a
      charming touch. It's hardly begun yet.”
It did not hold. I signified to Mr. Edward Turnbull my gracious consent, and from that
      moment the snow began to melt, and the weather to settle itself down into something quite as
      warm and sunny as an English April, and far warmer than many an English May. A stray
      furze-bush or two at the end of our paddock broke into golden flower, and the skylarks sang in
      the pale blue above the orchard. The 20th was a day of cloudless beauty, and even in the midst
      of my mental congratulations to the members of the Antiquarian Society on their royal weather,
      I found room for a pang of sympathy
       pathy for those among them who might have had their skates
      ground.
I recurred again that day, I remember, to our old life at the Bandbox. We were sitting in
      the loafery, now made cosey with curtains and a big wood fire. Chloe sat sewing in her
      rocking-chair. She had had some verses that morning, and, bad as they were, they had pleased
      her. There were seven stanzas, I remember. The first two were quite ordinary, and the other
      five got sillier and sillier, till at the end they were a mere jingle of nonsense—a sort of
      nursery rhyme, mostly written in the “little language.” The poem—Chloe really did call it a
      poem—began something like this:

TO CHLOE AT WORK
When Chloe sings
And sews and swings,
Rocked in her guardian angel's wings;
When with dear, delicate finger-tips
She cuts and measures, sews and snips;—
Silent I worship at a shrine
Lighted for me, and warmed for mine,
By Chloe's eyes and lips.
For what she knows,
And what she sews,
And all the hope that grows and blows

About her sewing, twine and twist,
And veil her in a rainbow mist;
Until I rub my eyes and say,
“Oh, can it be there was a day
When Chloe was unkissed?”

She liked it all, even the nonsense of the last five stanzas, and she said that she liked it
      none the less because it happened to be written on the backs of a green-grocer's bill, the
      voting-card of a candidate for the school board, and two odd envelopes.
She said: “It is very pretty, Len. I didn't know you ever noticed whether I was sewing or
      not.”
“You don't know my observant nature,” I said, “and after all these years of married life,
      too.”
“It's more than one year, anyway,” she said.
“Do you remember the day when you made me decide to leave the dear Bandbox?”
“Shall I ever forget it?”
“And that other dear day when you invented the loafery and we looked at the bars?”
“Let's look at them now,” she cried, jumping up and dropping scissors, thimble, tapemeasure,
      and a mass of lace and muslin. When I had picked everything up we went to the window. The
      creeper's leaves were gone now, and
       we stood between dull red curtains and looked out on the
      misty garden, where the dead leaves lay, patches of wet gold and brown in the faint sunlight,
      and where a robin on a leafless apple-tree was singing his very best, and pretending to the
      rooks in the elms that he was a thrush disguised in a scarlet waistcoat.
“Those Antiquarian brutes,” I said, presently, “they'll be here directly. By Jove! they
       are here. They look horribly small. Can it be that the Junior Blackheath only
      admits dwarfs?”
“Those can't be the Antiquaries,” Chloe cried. “Why, Len, they look like children! Lots and
      lots of them. What can they want? They look like a slice of a strayed, frayed school treat.
      And they've all got books, and they don't seem to have got any grown-up people with them. Oh,
      do go and turn them out!”
“I'll go and find out what they want—”
“Oh yes, and they'll say they're botanizing, or geologizing, or something, and you'll let
      them stay, like you did the boys that wanted conquerors off the chestnut-trees, and overran
      everything. I've not forgotten it; I'll go myself.”
She ran down the stairs, slipped her feet into the wooden sabots that she keeps for sudden
      winter garden excursions, and stumped off
       angrily down the path under the cedars. I took a short-cut
      between Jim's celery-trenches. Chloe is terrible in her wrath, but if it grows too hot it
      boils over in tears of rage; and I did not wish Chloe to cry, and I not there.
The invaders were grouped round the sundial. All had their backs to us, and one of them was
      reading aloud. I caught a few words:
“....told the time when Charles the First was beheaded, and recorded the death-devouring
      progress of the Great Plague and the Fire of London. There is no doubt the sun often shone
      even in those devastating occasions, so we may picture—”
Then the reader heard the unmistakable threat in the emphatic stump, stump of Chloe's wooden
      shoes, and stopped short. Her eyes were angry, her mouth expressed inhospitable intentions. I
      thought I heard a murmur of, “Oh, Crikey!” from the reader, but the next moment he had stepped
      towards my wife and taken off his cap with an oddly graceful flourish. He was a boy; there
      were other boys, who followed his lead in cap-doffing. There were girls, too, rosy-faced
      little girls in highwayman coats and scarlet Tam-o'-Shanters. The whole invading company were,
      as Chloe had said, “children.” And all wore spectacles.

“Do you know that this is a private garden?” said Chloe, severely. “You are trespassing, you
      know.” Her voice is very pretty, even when she is angry, and she was not nearly so angry as
      she had been before the boys took their caps off.
“It's not your garden, is it?” asked the smallest boy of all, goggling at her
      through his spectacles, and speaking in an off-hand but perfectly agreeable manner. One of the
      girls shook him gently, and bade him shut up.
“We're most awfully sorry,” said the boy who had been reading. “We wouldn't have come if
      we'd thought you'd mind, but we've got a pass, so I thought it was all right. Here, hold my
      spectacles half a sec., Alice, and I'll find it.”
The prettiest of the red-capped girls took the spectacles, and the boy felt in several
      pockets, while I drew near to offer Chloe my moral support.
“Here it is!” he said, at last, disentangling a dingy paper from a mass of string, matches,
      envelopes, putty, and cobbler's wax, and, with really a rather nice bow, he handed to Chloe—my
      letter to the Antiquarian Society!
“But this was not meant for you,” she said. “This is to Mr. Turnbull—”

“That was my fault,” said a younger boy—a thin, pale, anxious-looking child. “We tossed up
      who should copy out the letter on Albert's uncle's type-writer, and I was thinking about
      something else, so I copied it, name and all.”
Chloe put her hands to her head with a gesture of despair. I said: “Just think a minute.
      Remember, we've no idea what all this is about. Just tell us, right away from the beginning,
      how you came to be here, and what you want.”
There was a silence. Then the eldest girl said, “Oswald, you tell.”
The boy who had been reading twisted his cap, and stood uneasily on one foot. But almost at
      once he planted his feet firmly on the ground and began, looking Chloe straight in the eyes
      with a most disarming frankness.
“First of all, we are very sorry the lady is vexed, and we beg her pardon.”
“That's all right,” said Chloe, unexpectedly. “Go on.”
“Well—when we were staying in the country some Antiquaries wrote to Albert's uncle—this is
      Albert”—he pushed forward a shy boy in velvet knickerbockers—“and asked him to let them come
      and see his house. And we thought we should be feeling a bit slack in the
       holidays, so we thought we'd play at being antiquaries. And
      Albert's uncle showed us this place once from the train when we were going to Bexley Heath,
      and he said some great person lived here once, and it was a historic place, and we can't
      remember who it was. And he said a clever writer lived here now, and he told us the name. So
      we wrote to ask leave to come, and you gave it right enough.”
The voice was reproachful.
“Yes,” I said, completely melted by this unexpected recognition of my—or the ghost's—talent
      as a writer. “Are you Mr. Edward Turnbull?”
“Rather not”—his tone was somewhat injured. “I was coming to that. We decided to copy out
      the letter that the real Antiquity secretary sent to Albert's uncle, and Noël had to do it,
      because we tossed up about it, and he lost. And he got thinking of a poem he's writing, and
      copied it, name and all—and only remembered it after we'd licked the stamp for the letter. So
      we thought it didn't matter. And if you'd rather we'd been Mr. Turnbull, you wouldn't have if
      you'd seen how thin his legs are, and how he couldn't laugh because his mouth was so
      tight.”
“I'd much rather have you,” said Chloe, smiling
       ing; and as she smiled I could see how deeply all present
      fell in love with her on the instant. “I'm sorry I didn't understand. We won't interfere any
      more. You'd like to go on reading your papers. Who wrote them?”
“We've each done one,” said the eldest girl—she was a little prim, and not so pretty as the
      others—”only mine is all out of a book, because it is so difficult to think of things.”
“Do you always wear spectacles?” I asked.
They all laughed. It was a very pleasant sound, this peal of young laughter in our old
      garden.
“Oh no!” said the prettiest girl, “only to make us look like learned
      antiquities—antiquaries, I mean. It was an awful bother collecting them all; some of them have
      no glass in.”
“One more question,” I said. “If you're not Edward Turnbull, who are you?”
“We're the Bastables,” the biggest boy said, with a sort of shy pride, as if he were
      confessing, in his modesty's despite, to royal lineage. “I'm Oswald, and these are Alice and
      Dora; Noël's the one who typed the letter; and this shaver is H.O.; and these are Daisy and
      Denny Foulkes; and Albert Morrison I told you about before.”
“You'll have lunch with us, won't you?” asked Chloe, abruptly, picking up her blue train
       and fixing her feet in her wooden shoes. “I don't think
      there'll be much, but we can make out with bread and jam—”
“I like you,” said the smallest boy, before the others could answer. “I like you very much,
      indeed, and I'll have lunch with you, whatever it is.”
The others murmured thanks, and we left them to their play.
“Aren't they perfect dears?” said Chloe, when we were out of earshot. “I don't like the
      Morrison boy, but the others are lovely. Why aren't all children nice?”
“They all are—if they have nice grown-ups belonging to them,” I said, enunciating lightly a
      tremendous dogma. “But, darling and reckless one, do you know that there's nothing in the
      house but cold neck of mutton, and even that, if I remember right, is invidiously
      distinguished as being not the best end?”
“I know,” she said; “but you must go up to Elmhurst and get things: tinned tongue—children
      always adore tongue—and candied pineapple and tangerine oranges in silver paper, and nuts, and
      bananas. Oh, I do think children are so nice! I wish these weren't so big. The smallest boy,
      the one they call H.O., he's simply a duck.”

“Oswald for my money,” said I, “and Alice! Make a list of what I'm to get, and I'll be off.
      It's half-past twelve now.”
I left Chloe laying the table for eleven in the white parlor. When I came back the cloth was
      spread, but Chloe had vanished. I found her in the garden submerged to the shoulders in a wave
      of children, and she carried nine pairs of spectacles in her hand. We all went in to lunch. I
      was now a mere outsider. Chloe, by some art unknown to me, had become one of the children, and
      was the most childlike child of all. The others really were not bad children. I don't think I
      ever met any so full of enthusiastic energy. As a permanency, they might have been a little
      wearing, for, strong in Chloe's extraordinary assumption of esprit de
       corps, they now threw away all shyness, and talked to us with simple directness of
      adventures, of contemporary literature, of the ways of Providence, and their own vital
      ambitions. They had a very full flow of conversation, and a much larger vocabulary than I
      remember having at their age. What struck me most was their confident assumption that, now we
      knew them, we could not help liking them; and the assumption was, I own, justified. This
      assumption was particularly marked in Oswald. He evidently
       thought a good deal of himself, but, as I could not but
      reluctantly acknowledge, with some justice! They were extremely “free in their talk,” as Mary
      said afterwards, but never vulgar. And they were very much funnier than they meant to be. The
      lunch, for which Chloe had madly brought out the best green-and-gold table-centre, charmed
      them. I had not thought that Chloe could be so thoroughly inspired with any menu. When no one
      could eat any more, the children looked at each other, and Dora, the prim one, said, quite
      unconscious of the evidence of rehearsal with which her speech bristled,
“Thank you very much for letting us come, and for having us to lunch.”
“And for getting such a jolly lunch,” said the pale boy. “I think it is splendid. If you
      will give me a piece of paper and a pencil I will write you a piece of poetry about it.”
While I was getting these I heard the prim child say anxiously to Chloe:
“I hope you don't mind. He will do it. We can't stop him.”
“It comes of his having bronchitis so often, I think,” said the stout child
      they called H.O. “It isn't really his fault.”
There was an awkward pause while the pale child sucked my pencil and rolled his eyes. He
       made the most shocking grimaces I ever saw, but when Chloe
      turned anxiously to Oswald, he said,
“It's all right; he's not ill; it's only the poetry working out of him.”
Presently he stopped writing, folded the paper very small, and said suddenly and
      earnestly,
“Have you got a secret staircase here?”
We owned our indigence in this respect.
“We have at the Moat House,” he said. “Have you explored your house thoroughly?”
“Yes, I think so,” said Chloe, with a glorious inspiration, adding, “but you may explore it
      if you like. Don't make too much hay, that's all! Off you go!”
Noël pressed the paper into Chloe's hand and they rushed from the room, and as they went I
      heard the words “jolly good sort.”
I drew a long breath.
“What a whirlwind!” I said.
“Children do make a difference in a house,” said Chloe, wistfully.
“They do,” I said, kissing her ears, “all the difference.”
She gave me a doubtful glance.
“My dear little old wife,” I said, “people might think themselves lucky if their children
      were half as nice as these.”

“They are dears, great dears,” she said, and then we read Noël's poem:

TO THE BLUE PRINCESS LADY WITH THE LUNCH
How good you are to give us lunch,
With pineapple and tongue to munch.
It is a generous thing to do,
And we are very pleased with you.
It is a wonderful thing to find
How many people in the world are kind.
If you would let us explore your house,
We would not harm even a mouse,
And perhaps we might find a pot of gold
Too heavy for you to hold.
Then we should have made your fortune. So
Please do let us go.
You will if you are at all wise.
We should like to find the gold
More than you can hold,
Because you are so soft and blue and pretty and nice.

“Two poems in one day,” I said. “Oh, Chloe, beware of vanity.”
“The dear!” she said. “And, Len, it's not half bad, is it? What extraordinary children!”
I could hear the wave of children surging wildly about the house. I lighted a cigarette, and
      strove for calm. I seemed to have been living in the embrace of a friendly tornado.
Chloe looked at me anxiously.

“They are dears,” she said, for the fourth time. “I do hope they haven't
      worried you!”
“Worry's not the word,” said I. “They have electrified, bewildered, enlightened. I never saw
      children with such energetic enthusiasms. The Morrison boy is a muff; but the others, they are
      very trusting. The world must have been kind to them.”
“Anybody would be,” she said, “and I hope the world always will.”
There was a silence in the house. I went to see whether the exploring party had drowned
      itself in the rain-water cistern, which is just the sort of thing that kind of child would do.
      No; Mary said they were exploring the cellars. As she spoke I heard a thunderous report
      reverberating below. Our cellars are large and vaulted; from recollections of my childhood, I
      could conceive that they might seem well worth exploring. But I had not all Chloe's confidence
      in these strange children. From the little I had seen of them I felt that they were quite
      capable of organizing a Guy Fawkes play, and carrying it out with scrupulous, enthusiastic
      fidelity if one of their number should happen, as seemed only too likely, to have any matches
      and loose gunpowder in his pocket.
Yolande had just come from town, and by
       a curious coincidence our tenant had come on the same
      train. I left them talking to Chloe, and went down the cellar steps. Half-way down I was met
      by an incredibly cobwebby boy.
“I was just coming after you,” he said, eagerly. “Do you know, we've found a door behind
      some beer-barrels, and Oswald and Denny got in from behind under the dining-room floor;
      they're hammering on the other side of the door now. There are barrels in front of the door.
      We rolled one away. Did it make an awful row? They say there's all sorts of things inside. Did
      you know it was there? And please can we have a candle and matches? We've used all ours.”
One-half at least of my foreboding was justified. I wondered where they had dropped the hot
      heads of all the matches they had used.
I got some candles and matches, and the cobwebbed child, whose name appeared to be Dickie,
      led me to a cellar where barrels were piled. Behind them I could just discern the shadowy
      outline of a door, from which came an intermittent knocking and voices:
“Have you got him?”
“Can you get the barrels away?”
“Can you get the door open, or shall we come back under the floor for the candles? It's a
       beastly tight fit, and I've split my waistcoat as it
      is.”
“The last match we lighted we saw some chairs and a mangle.”
There were three boys still in evidence, and the tenant had followed me to see the sport.
      The girls were as energetic as the boys, and one by one we rolled the barrels away. Curious
      that Chloe and I had never looked behind those barrels. The door was not fastened. It opened
      easily, and a shower of dust and cobwebs fell on the heads of the explorers who first pressed
      forward.
From my soul I congratulated these children. Even to such an adventurous band as this an
      adventure so exciting could not happen every day.
They were quite right. There was furniture in the inner cellar, odds and ends stowed away,
      to make room for new stuff, by busy, thrifty hands now long since folded in lavish
      idleness—hands that, in their life-day, could never bear to destroy or to waste.
We carried the things up-stairs—all but the vast box-mangle and one other thing which I said
      I would carry up myself later.
We bore into the kitchen, and displayed to the dazzled eyes of Chloe and Yolande, and the
      contemptuous
       temptuous ones of Mary, a full-sized oak dresser—in four
      pieces; five chestnut-wood chairs, more or less dilapidated; an oak settle—the seat was
      broken, but, oh, how our hearts rejoiced in the severe beauty of its panelled back! three
      ladder-backed chairs—seats gone; a large gate-table; an elm kneading-trough; and the
      magnificent wreck of a carved four-post bedstead!
The children were as delighted as we were, which is saying a good deal.
“I said we would,” said the poet, triumphantly. “It's not gold, but it is nice.
      You have lots of nice things. I like the way you stick up warming-pans and brass candlesticks
      instead of plush brackets and crinkly ornaments.”
A most discerning child, truly! When the children had been partially cleaned, our tenant
      invited them all to tea at his cottage. Yolande and Chloe went to help.
When they were gone I went down to the cellar and fetched the thing I said I would carry
      myself. I bore it up to the loafery and cleaned it, and polished it, and mended it a little,
      and set it by the hearth, in the glow of the fire; and that evening when Yolande and the
      tenant were deep in chess, I beckoned Chloe, and took her up to the loafery, and, lighting the
      candles, bade her look.

 

“Oh, Len,” she cried, throwing her arms round my neck, “it's miles better than the one we go
      to look at in the shop in Great Portland Street!”
“I meant to give you that for a Christmas present,” I said, “but this is
      better.” She fell on her knees beside it.
“Oh, look at the dear little daisy carving on the sides, and the little strong panelled
      hood, and the rockers! Oh, Len, it is lovely! Where did it come from?”
“It was in the cellar,” I said. “Do you like it? No; it's absurd to thank me; thank those
      outrageous, dear Bastable children.”
“I will,” she said, coming nearer to me. “Len—I've said it before, I know, but they
       are dears—and they shall come and see the cradle they found when—when it's
      better worth looking at.”
Presently my wife took me into our room, and, unlocking the corner drawer, showed me all
      that was in it. Little, little things.
</div></body></text></TEI>