
MARRIAGE
CHAPTER THE FIRST
A Day with the Popes

An extremely pretty girl occupied a second-class compartment in one of those trains which
      percolate through the rural tranquillities of middle England from Ganford in Oxfordshire to
      Rumbold Junction in Kent. She was going to join her family at Buryhamstreet after a visit to
      some Gloucestershire friends. Her father, Mr. Pope, once a leader in the coach-building world
      and now by retirement a gentleman, had taken the Buryhamstreet vicarage furnished for two
      months (beginning on the fifteenth of July) at his maximum summer rental of seven guineas a
      week. His daughter was on her way to this retreat.
At first she had been an animated traveller, erect and keenly regardful of every detail upon
      the platforms of the stations at which her conveyance lingered, but the tedium of the journey
      and the warmth of the sunny afternoon had relaxed her pose by imperceptible degrees, and she
      sat now comfortably in the corner, with her neat toes upon the seat before her, ready to drop
      them primly at the first sign of a fellow-traveller. Her expression lapsed more and more
      towards an almost somnolent reverie. She wished she had not taken a second-class ticket,
      because then she might have afforded a cup of tea at Reading,
       and so fortified herself against this insinuating indolence.
She was travelling second class, instead of third as she ought to have done, through one of
      those lapses so inevitable to young people in her position. The two Carmel boys and a cousin,
      two greyhounds and a chow had come to see her off; they had made a brilliant and prosperous
      group on the platform and extorted the manifest admiration of two youthful porters, and it had
      been altogether too much for Marjorie Pope to admit it was the family custom—except when her
      father's nerves had to be considered—to go third class. So she had made a hasty
      calculation—she knew her balance to a penny because of the recent tipping—and found it would
      just run to it. Fourpence remained,—and there would be a porter at Buryhamstreet!
Her mother had said: "You will have Ample." Well, opinions of amplitude vary. With numerous
      details fresh in her mind, Marjorie decided it would be wiser to avoid financial discussion
      during her first few days at Buryhamstreet.
There was much in Marjorie's equipment in the key of travelling second class at the
      sacrifice of afternoon tea. There was, for example, a certain quiet goodness of style about
      her clothes, though the skirt betrayed age, and an entire absence of style about her luggage,
      which was all in the compartment with her, and which consisted of a distended hold-all, a very
      good tennis racquet in a stretcher, a portmanteau of cheap white basketwork held together by
      straps, and a very new, expensive-looking and meretricious dressing-bag of imitation morocco,
      which had been one of her chief financial errors at Oxbridge. The collection was eloquent
      indeed of incompatible standards....
Marjorie had a chin that was small in size if
       resolute in form, and a mouth that was not noticeably soft and weak because it was
      conspicuously soft and pretty. Her nose was delicately aquiline and very subtly and finely
      modelled, and she looked out upon the world with steady, grey-blue eyes beneath broad, level
      brows that contradicted in a large measure the hint of weakness below. She had an abundance of
      copper-red hair, which flowed back very prettily from her broad, low forehead and over her
      delicate ears, and she had that warm-tinted clear skin that goes so well with reddish hair.
      She had a very dainty neck, and the long slender lines of her body were full of the promise of
      a riper beauty. She had the good open shoulders of a tennis-player and a swimmer. Some day she
      was to be a tall, ruddy, beautiful woman. She wore simple clothes of silvery grey and soft
      green, and about her waist was a belt of grey leather in which there now wilted two
      creamy-petalled roses.
That was the visible Marjorie. Somewhere out of time and space was an invisible Marjorie who
      looked out on the world with those steady eyes, and smiled or drooped with the soft red lips,
      and dreamt, and wondered, and desired.

What a queer thing the invisible human being would appear if, by some discovery as yet
      inconceivable, some spiritual X-ray photography, we could flash it into sight! Long ago I read
      a book called "Soul Shapes" that was full of ingenious ideas, but I doubt very much if the
      thing so revealed would have any shape, any abiding solid outline at all. It is something more
      fluctuating and discursive than that—at any rate, for every one young enough not to
       have set and hardened. Things come into it and become it, things drift out of it
      and cease to be it, things turn upside down in it and change and colour and dissolve, and grow
      and eddy about and blend into each other. One might figure it, I suppose, as a preposterous
      jumble animated by a will; a floundering disconnectedness through which an old hump of impulse
      rises and thrusts unaccountably; a river beast of purpose wallowing in a back eddy of mud and
      weeds and floating objects and creatures drowned. Now the sunshine of gladness makes it all
      vivid, now it is sombre and grimly insistent under the sky of some darkling mood, now an
      emotional gale sweeps across it and it is one confused agitation....
And surely these invisible selves of men were never so jumbled, so crowded, complicated, and
      stirred about as they are at the present time. Once I am told they had a sort of order, were
      sphered in religious beliefs, crystal clear, were arranged in a cosmogony that fitted them as
      hand fits glove, were separated by definite standards of right and wrong which presented life
      as planned in all its essential aspects from the cradle to the grave. Things are so no longer.
      That sphere is broken for most of us; even if it is tied about and mended again, it is burst
      like a seed case; things have fallen out and things have fallen in....
Can I convey in any measure how it was with Marjorie?
What was her religion?
In college forms and returns, and suchlike documents, she would describe herself as "Church
      of England." She had been baptized according to the usages of that body, but she had hitherto
      evaded confirmation into it, and although it is a large,
       wealthy, and powerful organization with many minds to serve it, it had never
      succeeded in getting into her quick and apprehensive intelligence any lucid and persuasive
      conception of what it considered God and the universe were up to with her. It had failed to
      catch her attention and state itself to her. A number of humorous and other writers and the
      general trend of talk around her, and perhaps her own shrewd little observation of superficial
      things, had, on the other hand, created a fairly definite belief in her that it wasn't as a
      matter of fact up to very much at all, that what it said wasn't said with that absolute
      honesty which is a logical necessity in every religious authority, and that its hierarchy had
      all sorts of political and social considerations confusing its treatment of her immortal
      soul....
Marjorie followed her father in abstaining from church. He too professed himself "Church of
      England," but he was, if we are to set aside merely superficial classifications, an irascible
      atheist with a respect for usage and Good Taste, and an abject fear of the disapproval of
      other gentlemen of his class. For the rest he secretly disliked clergymen on account of the
      peculiarity of their collars, and a certain influence they had with women. When Marjorie at
      the age of fourteen had displayed a hankering after ecclesiastical ceremony and emotional
      religion, he had declared: "We don't want any of that nonsense," and sent her into
      the country to a farm where there were young calves and a bottle-fed lamb and kittens. At
      times her mother went to church and displayed considerable orthodoxy and punctilio, at times
      the good lady didn't, and at times she thought in a broad-minded way that there was a Lot in
      Christian Science, and subjected herself to the ministrations of an American named Silas Root.
      But his ministrations
       were too expensive for continuous use, and so the old faith did not lose its hold
      upon the family altogether.
At school Marjorie had been taught what I may best describe as Muffled Christianity—a
      temperate and discreet system designed primarily not to irritate parents, in which the painful
      symbol of the crucifixion and the riddle of what Salvation was to save her from, and, indeed,
      the coarser aspects of religion generally, were entirely subordinate to images of amiable
      perambulations, and a rich mist of finer feelings. She had been shielded, not only from
      arguments against her religion, but from arguments for it—the two things go together—and I do
      not think it was particularly her fault if she was now growing up like the great majority of
      respectable English people, with her religious faculty as it were, artificially faded, and an
      acquired disposition to regard any speculation of why she was, and whence and whither, as
      rather foolish, not very important, and in the very worst possible taste.
And so, the crystal globe being broken which once held souls together, you may expect to
      find her a little dispersed and inconsistent in her motives, and with none of that assurance a
      simpler age possessed of the exact specification of goodness or badness, the exact
      delimitation of right and wrong. Indeed, she did not live in a world of right and wrong, or
      anything so stern; "horrid" and "jolly" had replaced these archaic orientations. In a world
      where a mercantile gentility has conquered passion and God is neither blasphemed nor adored,
      there necessarily arises this generation of young people, a little perplexed, indeed, and with
      a sense of something missing, but feeling their way inevitably at last to the great releasing
       question, "Then why shouldn't we have a good time?"
Yet there was something in Marjorie, as in most human beings, that demanded some general
      idea, some aim, to hold her life together. A girl upon the borders of her set at college was
      fond of the phrase "living for the moment," and Marjorie associated with it the speaker's lax
      mouth, sloe-like eyes, soft, quick-flushing, boneless face, and a habit of squawking and
      bouncing in a forced and graceless manner. Marjorie's natural disposition was to deal with
      life in a steadier spirit than that. Yet all sorts of powers and forces were at work in her,
      some exalted, some elvish, some vulgar, some subtle. She felt keenly and desired strongly, and
      in effect she came perhaps nearer the realization of that offending phrase than its original
      exponent. She had a clean intensity of feeling that made her delight in a thousand various
      things, in sunlight and textures, and the vividly quick acts of animals, in landscape, and the
      beauty of other girls, in wit, and people's voices, and good strong reasoning, and the desire
      and skill of art. She had a clear, rapid memory that made her excel perhaps a little too
      easily at school and college, an eagerness of sympathetic interest that won people very
      quickly and led to disappointments, and a very strong sense of the primary importance of Miss
      Marjorie Pope in the world. And when any very definite dream of what she would like to be and
      what she would like to do, such as being the principal of a ladies' college, or the first
      woman member of Parliament, or the wife of a barbaric chief in Borneo, or a great explorer, or
      the wife of a millionaire and a great social leader, or George Sand, or Saint Teresa, had had
      possession of her imagination for a few weeks, an entirely contrasted and equally attractive
       dream would presently arise beside it and compete with it and replace it. It
      wasn't so much that she turned against the old one as that she was attracted by the new, and
      she forgot the old dream rather than abandoned it, simply because she was only one person, and
      hadn't therefore the possibility of realizing both.
In certain types Marjorie's impressionability aroused a passion of proselytism. People of
      the most diverse kinds sought to influence her, and they invariably did so. Quite a number of
      people, including her mother and the principal of her college, believed themselves to be the
      leading influence in her life. And this was particularly the case with her aunt Plessington.
      Her aunt Plessington was devoted to social and political work of an austere and aggressive
      sort (in which Mr. Plessington participated); she was childless, and had a Movement of her
      own, the Good Habits Movement, a progressive movement of the utmost scope and benevolence
      which aimed at extensive interferences with the food and domestic intimacies of the more
      defenceless lower classes by means ultimately of legislation, and she had Marjorie up to see
      her, took her for long walks while she influenced with earnestness and vigour, and at times
      had an air of bequeathing her mantle, movement and everything, quite definitely to her "little
      Madge." She spoke of training her niece to succeed her, and bought all the novels of Mrs.
      Humphry Ward for her as they appeared, in the hope of quickening in her that flame of
      politico-social ambition, that insatiable craving for dinner-parties with important guests,
      which is so distinctive of the more influential variety of English womanhood. It was due
      rather to her own habit of monologue than to any reserve on the part of Marjorie that she
      entertained the belief that her niece was entirely acquiescent in these projects.
       They went into Marjorie's mind and passed. For nearly a week, it is true, she had
      dramatized herself as the angel and inspiration of some great modern statesman, but this had
      been ousted by a far more insistent dream, begotten by a picture she had seen in some
      exhibition, of a life of careless savagery, whose central and constantly recurrent incident
      was the riding of barebacked horses out of deep-shadowed forest into a foamy sunlit sea—in a
      costume that would certainly have struck Aunt Plessington as a mistake.
If you could have seen Marjorie in her railway compartment, with the sunshine, sunshine
      mottled by the dirty window, tangled in her hair and creeping to and fro over her face as the
      train followed the curves of the line, you would certainly have agreed with me that she was
      pretty, and you might even have thought her beautiful. But it was necessary to fall in love
      with Marjorie before you could find her absolutely beautiful. You might have speculated just
      what business was going on behind those drowsily thoughtful eyes. If you are—as people
      say—"Victorian," you might even have whispered "Day Dreams," at the sight of her....
She was dreaming, and in a sense she was thinking of beautiful things. But only
      mediately. She was thinking how very much she would enjoy spending freely and vigorously,
      quite a considerable amount of money,—heaps of money.
You see, the Carmels, with whom she had just been staying, were shockingly well off. They
      had two motor cars with them in the country, and the boys had the use of the second one as
      though it was just an old bicycle. Marjorie had had a cheap white dinner-dress, made the year
      before by a Chelsea French girl, a happy find of her mother's, and it was
       shapely and simple and not at all bad, and she had worn her green beads and her
      Egyptian necklace of jade; but Kitty Carmel and her sister had had a new costume nearly every
      night, and pretty bracelets, and rubies, big pearls, and woven gold, and half a score of
      delightful and precious things for neck and hair. Everything in the place was bright and good
      and abundant, the servants were easy and well-mannered, without a trace of hurry or
      resentment, and one didn't have to be sharp about the eggs and things at breakfast in the
      morning, or go without. All through the day, and even when they had gone to bathe from the
      smart little white and green shed on the upper lake, Marjorie had been made to feel the
      insufficiency of her equipment. Kitty Carmel, being twenty-one, possessed her own cheque-book
      and had accounts running at half a dozen West-end shops; and both sisters had furnished their
      own rooms according to their taste, with a sense of obvious effect that had set Marjorie
      speculating just how a room might be done by a girl with a real eye for colour and a real
      brain behind it....
The train slowed down for the seventeenth time. Marjorie looked up and read
      "Buryhamstreet."

Her reverie vanished, and by a complex but almost instantaneous movement she had her basket
      off the rack and the carriage door open. She became teeming anticipations. There, advancing in
      a string, were Daffy, her elder sister, Theodore, her younger brother, and the dog Toupee.
      Sydney and Rom hadn't come. Daffy was not copper red like her sister, but really quite
      coarsely red-haired; she was bigger than Marjorie, and with irregular teeth instead of
      Marjorie's neat row;
       she confessed them in a broad simple smile of welcome. Theodore was hatless,
      rustily fuzzy-headed, and now a wealth of quasi-humorous gesture. The dog Toupee was straining
      at a leash, and doing its best in a yapping, confused manner, to welcome the wrong people by
      getting its lead round their legs.
"Toupee!" cried Marjorie, waving the basket. "Toupee!"
They all called it Toupee because it was like one, but the name was forbidden in her
      father's hearing. Her father had decided that the proper name for a family dog in England is
      Towser, and did his utmost to suppress a sobriquet that was at once unprecedented and not in
      the best possible taste. Which was why the whole family, with the exception of Mrs. Pope, of
      course, stuck to Toupee....
Marjorie flashed a second's contrast with the Carmel splendours.
"Hullo, old Daffy. What's it like?" she asked, handing out the basket as her sister came
      up.
"It's a lark," said Daffy. "Where's the dressing-bag?"
"Thoddy," said Marjorie, following up the dressing-bag with the hold-all. "Lend a hand."
"Stow it, Toupee," said Theodore, and caught the hold-all in time.
In another moment Marjorie was out of the train, had done the swift kissing proper to the
      occasion, and rolled a hand over Toupee's head—Toupee, who, after a passionate lunge at a
      particularly savoury drover from the next compartment, was now frantically trying to indicate
      that Marjorie was the one human being he had ever cared for. Brother and sister were both
      sketching out the state of affairs at Buryhamstreet Vicarage in rapid competitive
       jerks, each eager to tell things first—and the whole party moved confusedly
      towards the station exit. Things pelted into Marjorie's mind.
"We've got an old donkey-cart. I thought we shouldn't get here—ever.... Madge, we can go up
      the church tower whenever we like, only old Daffy won't let me shin up the flagstaff. It's
       perfectly safe—you couldn't fall off if you tried.... Had positively to get out at
      the level crossing and pull him over.... There's a sort of moat in the garden.... You
      never saw such furniture, Madge! And the study! It's hung with texts, and stuffed with books
      about the Scarlet Woman.... Piano's rather good, it's a Broadwood.... The Dad's got a war on
      about the tennis net. Oh, frightful! You'll see. It won't keep up. He's had a letter kept
      waiting by the Times for a fortnight, and it's a terror at breakfast. Says the motor
      people have used influence to silence him. Says that's a game two can play at.... Old Sid got
      herself upset stuffing windfalls. Rather a sell for old Sid, considering how refined she's
      getting...."
There was a brief lull as the party got into the waiting governess cart. Toupee, after a
      preliminary refusal to enter, made a determined attempt on the best seat, from which he would
      be able to bark in a persistent, official manner at anything that passed. That suppressed, and
      Theodore's proposal to drive refused, they were able to start, and attention was concentrated
      upon Daffy's negotiation of the station approach. Marjorie turned on her brother with a smile
      of warm affection.
"How are you, old Theodore?"
"I'm all right, old Madge."
"Mummy?"
"Every one's all right," said Theodore; "if it
       wasn't for that damned infernal net——"
"Ssssh!" cried both sisters together.
"He says it," said Theodore.
Both sisters conveyed a grave and relentless disapproval.
"Pretty bit of road," said Marjorie. "I like that little house at the corner."
A pause and the eyes of the sisters met.
"He's here," said Daffy.
Marjorie affected ignorance.
"Who's here?"
"Il vostro senior Miraculoso."
"Just as though a fellow couldn't understand your kiddy little Italian," said Theodore,
      pulling Toupee's ear.
"Oh well, I thought he might be," said Marjorie, regardless of her brother.
"Oh!" said Daffy. "I didn't know——"
Both sisters looked at each other, and then both glanced at Theodore. He met Marjorie's eyes
      with a grimace of profound solemnity.
"Little brothers," he said, "shouldn't know. Just as though they didn't! Rot! But let's
      change the subject, my dears, all the same. Lemme see. There are a new sort of flea on Toupee,
      Madge, that he gets from the hens."
"Is a new sort," corrected Daffy. "He's horrider than ever, Madge. He leaves his
      soap in soak now to make us think he has used it. This is the village High Street. Isn't it
      jolly?"
"Corners don't bite people," said Theodore, with a critical eye to the driving.
Marjorie surveyed the High Street, while Daffy devoted a few moments to Theodore.
The particular success of the village was its
       brace of chestnut trees which, with that noble disregard of triteness which is
      one of the charms of villages the whole world over, shadowed the village smithy. On either
      side of the roadway between it and the paths was a careless width of vivid grass protected by
      white posts, which gave way to admit a generous access on either hand to a jolly public house,
      leering over red blinds, and swinging a painted sign against its competitor. Several of the
      cottages had real thatch and most had porches; they had creepers nailed to their faces, and
      their gardens, crowded now with flowers, marigolds, begonias, snapdragon, delphiniums, white
      foxgloves, and monkshood, seemed almost too good to be true. The doctor's house was pleasantly
      Georgian, and the village shop, which was also a post and telegraph office, lay back with a
      slight air of repletion, keeping its bulging double shop-windows wide open in a manifest
      attempt not to fall asleep. Two score of shock-headed boys and pinafored girls were drilling
      upon a bald space of ground before the village school, and near by, the national emotion at
      the ever-memorable Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria had evoked an artistic drinking-fountain
      of grey stone. Beyond the subsequent green—there were the correctest geese thereon—the village
      narrowed almost to a normal road again, and then, recalling itself with a start, lifted a
      little to the churchyard wall about the grey and ample church. "It's just like all the
      villages that ever were," said Marjorie, and gave a cry of delight when Daffy, pointing to the
      white gate between two elm trees that led to the vicarage, remarked: "That's us."
In confirmation of which statement, Sydney and Rom, the two sisters next in succession to
      Marjorie, and with a strong tendency to be twins in spite of the
       year between them, appeared in a state of vociferous incivility opening the way
      for the donkey-carriage. Sydney was Sydney, and Rom was just short for Romola—one of her
      mother's favourite heroines in fiction.
"Old Madge," they said; and then throwing respect to the winds, "Old Gargoo!" which was
      Marjorie's forbidden nickname, and short for gargoyle (though surely only Victorian Gothic,
      ever produced a gargoyle that had the remotest right to be associated with the neat brightness
      of Marjorie's face).
She overlooked the offence, and the pseudo-twins boarded the cart from behind, whereupon the
      already overburthened donkey, being old and in a manner wise, quickened his pace for the house
      to get the whole thing over.
"It's really an avenue," said Daffy; but Marjorie, with her mind strung up to the Carmel
      standards, couldn't agree. It was like calling a row of boy-scouts Potsdam grenadiers. The
      trees were at irregular distances, of various ages, and mostly on one side. Still it was a
      shady, pleasant approach.
And the vicarage was truly very interesting and amusing. To these Londoners accustomed to
      live in a state of compression, elbows practically touching, in a tall, narrow fore-and-aft
      stucco house, all window and staircase, in a despondent Brompton square, there was an effect
      of maundering freedom about the place, of enlargement almost to the pitch of adventure and
      sunlight to the pitch of intoxication. The house itself was long and low, as if a London house
      holidaying in the country had flung itself asprawl; it had two disconnected and roomy
      staircases, and when it had exhausted itself completely as a house, it turned to the right and
      began again as rambling, empty stables, coach house, cart sheds, men's bedrooms up ladders,
      and outhouses of the most various kinds.
       On one hand was a neglected orchard, in the front of the house was a bald,
      worried-looking lawn area capable of simultaneous tennis and croquet, and at the other side a
      copious and confused vegetable and flower garden full of roses, honesty, hollyhocks, and
      suchlike herbaceous biennials and perennials, lapsed at last into shrubbery, where a
      sickle-shaped, weedy lagoon of uncertain aims, which had evidently, as a rustic bridge and a
      weeping willow confessed, aspired to be an "ornamental water," declined at last to ducks. And
      there was access to the church, and the key of the church tower, and one went across the
      corner of the lawn, and by a little iron gate into the churchyard to decipher inscriptions, as
      if the tombs of all Buryhamstreet were no more than a part of the accommodation relinquished
      by the vicar's household.
Marjorie was hurried over the chief points of all this at a breakneck pace by Sydney and
      Rom, and when Sydney was called away to the horrors of practice—for Sydney in spite of
      considerable reluctance was destined by her father to be "the musical one"—Rom developed a
      copious affection, due apparently to some occult æsthetic influence in Marjorie's silvery-grey
      and green, and led her into the unlocked vestry, and there prayed in a whisper that she might
      be given "one good hug, just one"—and so they came out with their arms about each
      other very affectionately to visit the lagoon again. And then Rom remembered that Marjorie
      hadn't seen either the walnut-tree in the orchard, or the hen with nine chicks....
Somewhere among all these interests came tea and Mrs. Pope.
Mrs. Pope kissed her daughter with an air of having really wanted to kiss her half an hour
      ago,
       but of having been distracted since. She was a fine-featured, anxious-looking
      little woman, with a close resemblance to all her children, in spite of the fact that they
      were markedly dissimilar one to the other, except only that they took their ruddy colourings
      from their father. She was dressed in a neat blue dress that had perhaps been hurriedly
      chosen, and her method of doing her hair was a manifest compromise between duty and pleasure.
      She embarked at once upon an exposition of the bedroom arrangements, which evidently involved
      difficult issues. Marjorie was to share a room with Daffy—that was the gist of it—as the only
      other available apartment, originally promised to Marjorie, had been secured by Mr. Pope for
      what he called his "matutinal ablutions, videlicet tub."
"Then, when your Aunt Plessington comes, you won't have to move," said Mrs. Pope with an air
      of a special concession. "Your father's looking forward to seeing you, but he mustn't be
      disturbed just yet. He's in the vicar's study. He's had his tea in there. He's writing a
      letter to the Times answering something they said in a leader, and also a private
      note calling attention to their delay in printing his previous communication, and he wants to
      be delicately ironical without being in any way offensive. He wants to hint without actually
      threatening that very probably he will go over to the Spectator altogether if they do
      not become more attentive. The Times used to print his letters punctually, but
      latterly these automobile people seem to have got hold of it.... He has the window on the lawn
      open, so that I think, perhaps, we'd better not stay out here—for fear our voices might
      disturb him."
"Better get right round the other side of the
       church," said Daffy.
"He'd hear far less of us if we went indoors," said Mrs. Pope.

The vicarage seemed tight packed with human interest for Marjorie and her mother and
      sisters. Going over houses is one of the amusements proper to her sex, and she and all three
      sisters and her mother, as soon as they had finished an inaudible tea, went to see the bedroom
      she was to share with Daffy, and then examined, carefully and in order, the furniture and
      decoration of the other bedrooms, went through the rooms downstairs, always excepting and
      avoiding very carefully and closing as many doors as possible on, and hushing their voices
      whenever they approached the study in which her father was being delicately ironical without
      being offensive to the Times. None of them had seen any of the vicarage people at
      all—Mr. Pope had come on a bicycle and managed all the negotiations—and it was curious to
      speculate about the individuals whose personalities pervaded the worn and faded furnishings of
      the place.
The Popes' keen-eyed inspection came at times, I think, dangerously near prying. The ideals
      of decoration and interests of the vanished family were so absolutely dissimilar to the London
      standards as to arouse a sort of astonished wonder in their minds. Some of the things they
      decided were perfectly hideous, some quaint, some were simply and weakly silly. Everything was
      different from Hartstone Square. Daffy was perhaps more inclined to contempt, and Mrs. Pope to
      refined amusement and witty appreciation than Marjorie. Marjorie felt there was something in
      these people that she didn't begin to
       understand, she needed some missing clue that would unlock the secret of their
      confused peculiarity. She was one of those people who have an almost instinctive turn for
      decoration in costume and furniture; she had already had a taste of how to do things in
      arranging her rooms at Bennett College, Oxbridge, where also she was in great demand among the
      richer girls as an adviser. She knew what it was to try and fail as well as to try and
      succeed, and these people, she felt, hadn't tried for anything she comprehended. She couldn't
      quite see why it was that there was at the same time an attempt at ornament and a disregard of
      beauty, she couldn't quite do as her mother did and dismiss it as an absurdity and have done
      with it. She couldn't understand, too, why everything should be as if it were faded and
      weakened from something originally bright and clear.
All the rooms were thick with queer little objects that indicated a quite beaver-like
      industry in the production of "work." There were embroidered covers for nearly every article
      on the wash-hand-stand, and mats of wool and crochet wherever anything stood on anything;
      there were "tidies" everywhere, and odd little brackets covered with gilded and varnished fir
      cones and bearing framed photographs and little jars and all sorts of colourless, dusty little
      objects, and everywhere on the walls tacks sustained crossed fans with badly painted flowers
      or transfer pictures. There was a jar on the bedroom mantel covered with varnished postage
      stamps and containing grey-haired dried grasses. There seemed to be a moral element in all
      this, for in the room Sydney shared with Rom there was a decorative piece of lettering which
      declared that—
"Something attempted, something done,
Has earned a night's repose."

There were a great number of texts that set Marjorie's mind stirring dimly with intimations
      of a missed significance. Over her own bed, within the lattice of an Oxford frame, was the
      photograph of a picture of an extremely composed young woman in a trailing robe, clinging to
      the Rock of Ages in the midst of histrionically aggressive waves, and she had a feeling,
      rather than a thought, that perhaps for all the oddity of the presentation it did convey
      something acutely desirable, that she herself had had moods when she would have found
      something very comforting in just such an impassioned grip. And on a framed, floriferous card,
      these incomprehensible words: Thy Grace is Sufficient for Me. seemed to be
      saying something to her tantalizingly just outside her range of apprehension.
Did all these things light up somehow to those dispossessed people—from some angle she
      didn't attain? Were they living and moving realities when those others were at home again?
The drawing-room had no texts; it was altogether more pretentious and less haunted by the
      faint and faded flavour of religion that pervaded the bedrooms. It had, however, evidences of
      travel in Switzerland and the Mediterranean. There was a piano in black and gold, a little out
      of tune, and surmounted by a Benares brass jar, enveloping a scarlet geranium in a pot. There
      was a Japanese screen of gold wrought upon black, that screened nothing. There was a framed
      chromo-lithograph of Jerusalem hot in the sunset, and another of Jerusalem cold under a
      sub-tropical
       moon, and there were gourds, roses of Jericho, sandalwood rosaries and kindred
      trash from the Holy Land in no little profusion upon a what-not. Such books as the room had
      contained had been arranged as symmetrically as possible about a large, pink-shaded lamp upon
      the claret-coloured cloth of a round table, and were to be replaced, Mrs. Pope said, at their
      departure. At present they were piled on a side-table. The girls had been through them all,
      and were ready with the choicer morsels for Marjorie's amusement. There was "Black Beauty,"
      the sympathetic story of a soundly Anglican horse, and a large Bible extra-illustrated with
      photographs of every well-known scriptural picture from Michael Angelo to Doré, and a book of
      injunctions to young ladies upon their behaviour and deportment that Rom and Sydney found
      particularly entertaining. Marjorie discovered that Sydney had picked up a new favourite
      phrase. "I'm afraid we're all dreadfully cynical," said Sydney, several times.
A more advanced note was struck by a copy of "Aurora Leigh," richly underlined in pencil,
      but with exclamation marks at some of the bolder passages....
And presently, still avoiding the open study window very elaborately, this little group of
      twentieth century people went again into the church—the church whose foundations were laid in
       A.D. 912—foundations of rubble and cement that included flat Roman bricks from a
      still remoter basilica. Their voices dropped instinctively, as they came into its shaded quiet
      from the exterior sunshine. Marjorie went a little apart and sat in a pew that gave her a
      glimpse of the one good stained-glass window. Rom followed her, and perceiving her mood to be
      restful, sat a yard away. Syd began a whispered dispute
       with her mother whether it wasn't possible to try the organ, and whether Theodore
      might not be bribed to blow. Daffy discovered relics of a lepers' squint and a holy-water
      stoup, and then went to scrutinize the lettering of the ten commandments of the Mosaic law
      that shone black and red on gold on either side of the I.H.S. monogram behind the
      white-clothed communion table that had once been the altar. Upon a notice board hung about the
      waist of the portly pulpit were the numbers of hymns that had been sung three days ago. The
      sound Protestantism of the vicar had banished superfluous crosses from the building; the Bible
      reposed upon the wings of a great brass eagle; shining blue and crimson in the window, Saint
      Christopher carried his Lord. What a harmonized synthesis of conflicts a country church
      presents! What invisible mysteries of filiation spread between these ancient ornaments and
      symbols and the new young minds from the whirlpool of the town that looked upon them now with
      such bright, keen eyes, wondering a little, feeling a little, missing so much?
It was all so very cool and quiet now—with something of the immobile serenity of death.

When Mr. Pope had finished his letter to the Times, he got out of the window of the
      study, treading on a flower-bed as he did so—he was the sort of man who treads on
      flower-beds—partly with the purpose of reading his composition aloud to as many members of his
      family as he could assemble for the purpose, and so giving them a chance of appreciating the
      nuances of his irony more fully than if they saw it just in cold print without the advantage
      of his
       intonation, and partly with the belated idea of welcoming Marjorie. The law
      presented a rather discouraging desolation. Then he became aware that the church tower frothed
      with his daughters. In view of his need of an audience, he decided after a brief doubt that
      their presence there was unobjectionable, and waved his MS. amiably. Marjorie flapped a
      handkerchief in reply....
The subsequent hour was just the sort of hour that gave Mr. Pope an almost meteorological
      importance to his family. He began with an amiability that had no fault, except, perhaps, that
      it was a little forced after the epistolary strain in the study, and his welcome to Marjorie
      was more than cordial. "Well, little Madge-cat!" he said, giving her an affectionate but sound
      and heavy thump on the left shoulder-blade, "got a kiss for the old daddy?"
Marjorie submitted a cheek.
"That's right," said Mr. Pope; "and now I just want you all to advise me——"
He led the way to a group of wicker garden chairs. "You're coming, mummy?" he said, and
      seated himself comfortably and drew out a spectacle case, while his family grouped itself
      dutifully. It made a charming little picture of a Man and his Womankind. "I don't often
      flatter myself," he said, "but this time I think I've been neat—neat's the word for it."
He cleared his throat, put on his spectacles, and emitted a long, flat preliminary note,
      rather like the sound of a child's trumpet. "Er—'Dear Sir!'"
"Rom," said Mrs. Pope, "don't creak your chair."
"It's Daffy, mother," said Rom.
"Oh, Rom!" said Daffy.
Mr. Pope paused, and looked with a warning eye
       over his left spectacle-glass at Rom.
"Don't creak your chair, Rom," he said, "when your mother tells you."
"I was not creaking my chair," said Rom.
"I heard it," said Mr. Pope, suavely.
"It was Daffy."
"Your mother does not think so," said Mr. Pope.
"Oh, all right! I'll sit on the ground," said Rom, crimson to the roots of her hair.
"Me too," said Daffy. "I'd rather."
Mr. Pope watched the transfer gravely. Then he readjusted his glasses, cleared his throat
      again, trumpeted, and began. "Er—'Dear Sir,'"
"Oughtn't it to be simply 'Sir,' father, for an editor?" said Marjorie.
"Perhaps I didn't explain, Marjorie," said her father, with the calm of great
      self-restraint, and dabbing his left hand on the manuscript in his right, "that this is a
       private letter—a private letter."
"I didn't understand," said Marjorie.
"It would have been evident as I went on," said Mr. Pope, and prepared to read again.
This time he was allowed to proceed, but the interruptions had ruffled him, and the gentle
      stresses that should have lifted the subtleties of his irony into prominence missed the words,
      and he had to go back and do his sentences again. Then Rom suddenly, horribly, uncontrollably,
      was seized with hiccups. At the second hiccup Mr. Pope paused, and looked very hard at his
      daughter with magnified eyes; as he was about to resume, the third burst its way through the
      unhappy child's utmost effort.
Mr. Pope rose with an awful resignation. "That's enough," he said. He regarded the
      pseudo-twin vindictively. "You haven't the self-control of a child
       of six," he said. Then very touchingly to Mrs. Pope: "Mummy, shall we try a game
      of tennis with the New Generation?"
"Can't you read it after supper?" asked Mrs. Pope.
"It must go by the eight o'clock post," said Mr. Pope, putting the masterpiece into his
      breast pocket, the little masterpiece that would now perhaps never be read aloud to any human
      being. "Daffy, dear, do you mind going in for the racquets and balls?"
The social atmosphere was now sultry, and overcast, and Mr. Pope's decision to spend the
      interval before Daffy returned in seeing whether he couldn't do something to the net, which
      was certainly very unsatisfactory, did not improve matters. Then, unhappily, Marjorie, who had
      got rather keen upon tennis at the Carmels', claimed her father's first two services as
      faults, contrary to the etiquette of the family. It happened that Mr. Pope had a really very
      good, hard, difficult, smart-looking serve, whose only defect was that it always went either
      too far or else into the net, and so a feeling had been fostered and established by his wife
      that, on the whole, it was advisable to regard the former variety as a legitimate extension of
      a father's authority. Naturally, therefore, Mr. Pope was nettled at Marjorie's ruling, and his
      irritation increased when his next two services to Daffy perished in the net. ("Damn that net!
      Puts one's eye out.") Then Marjorie gave him an unexpected soft return which he somehow
      muffed, and then Daffy just dropped a return over the top of the net. (Love-game.) It was then
      Marjorie's turn to serve, which she did with a new twist acquired from the eldest Carmel boy
      that struck Mr. Pope as un-English. "Go on," he said concisely. "Fifteen love."
She was gentle with her mother and they got their
       first rally, and when it was over Mr. Pope had to explain to Marjorie that if she
      returned right up into his corner of the court he would have to run backwards very fast and
      might fall over down the silly slope at that end. She would have to consider him and the
      court. One didn't get everything out of a game by playing merely to win. She said "All right,
      Daddy," rather off-handedly, and immediately served to him again, and he, taken a little
      unawares, hit the ball with the edge of his racquet and sent it out, and then he changed
      racquets with Daffy—it seemed he had known all along she had taken his, but he had preferred
      to say nothing—uttered a word of advice to his wife just on her stroke, and she, failing to
      grasp his intention as quickly as she ought to have done, left the score forty-fifteen. He
      felt better when he returned Marjorie's serve, and then before she could control herself she
      repeated her new unpleasant trick of playing into the corner again, whereupon, leaping back
      with an agility that would have shamed many a younger man, Mr. Pope came upon disaster. He
      went spinning down the treacherous slope behind, twisted his ankle painfully and collapsed
      against the iron railings of the shrubbery. It was too much, and he lost control of himself.
      His daughters had one instant's glimpse of the linguistic possibilities of a strong man's
      agony. "I told her," he went on as if he had said nothing. "Tennis!"
For a second perhaps he seemed to hesitate upon a course of action. Then as if by a great
      effort he took his coat from the net post and addressed himself houseward, incarnate Grand
      Dudgeon—limping.
"Had enough of it, Mummy," he said, and added some happily inaudible comment on Marjorie's
      new style of play.
The evening's exercise was at an end.
      
The three ladies regarded one another in silence for some moments.
"I will take in the racquets, dear," said Mrs. Pope.
"I think the other ball is at your end," said Daffy....
The apparatus put away, Marjorie and her sister strolled thoughtfully away from the
      house.
"There's croquet here too," said Daffy. "We've not had the things out yet!"....
"He'll play, I suppose."
"He wants to play."...
"Of course," said Marjorie after a long pause, "there's no reasoning with Dad!"

Character is one of England's noblest and most deliberate products, but some Englishmen have
      it to excess. Mr. Pope had.
He was one of that large and representative class which imparts a dignity to national
      commerce by inheriting big businesses from its ancestors. He was a coach-builder by birth, and
      a gentleman by education and training. He had been to City Merchant's and Cambridge.
Throughout the earlier half of the nineteenth century the Popes had been the princes of the
      coach-building world. Mr. Pope's great-grandfather had been a North London wheelwright of
      conspicuous dexterity and integrity, who had founded the family business; his son, Mr. Pope's
      grandfather, had made that business the occupation of his life and brought it to the pinnacle
      of pre-eminence; his son, who was Marjorie's grandfather, had displayed a lesser enthusiasm,
       left the house at the works for a home ten miles away and sent a second son into
      the Church. It was in the days of the third Pope that the business ceased to expand, and began
      to suffer severely from the competition of an enterprising person who had originally supplied
      the firm with varnish, gradually picked up the trade in most other materials and accessories
      needed in coach-building, and passed on by almost imperceptible stages to delivering the
      article complete—dispensing at last altogether with the intervention of Pope and Son—to the
      customer. Marjorie's father had succeeded in the fulness of time to the inheritance this
      insurgent had damaged.
Mr. Pope was a man of firm and resentful temper, with an admiration for Cato, Brutus,
      Cincinnatus, Cromwell, Washington, and the sterner heroes generally, and by nature a little
      ill-used and offended at things. He suffered from indigestion and extreme irritability. He
      found himself in control of a business where more flexible virtues were needed. The Popes
      based their fame on a heavy, proud type of vehicle, which the increasing luxury and triviality
      of the age tended to replace by lighter forms of carriage, carriages with diminutive and
      apologetic names. As these lighter forms were not only lighter but less expensive, Mr. Pope
      with a pathetic confidence in the loyalty of the better class of West End customer, determined
      to "make a stand" against them. He was the sort of man to whom making a stand is in itself a
      sombre joy. If he had had to choose his pose for a portrait, he would certainly have decided
      to have one foot advanced, the other planted like a British oak behind, the arms folded and
      the brows corrugated,—making a stand.
Unhappily the stars in their courses and the general improvement of roads throughout the
      country
       fought against him. The lighter carriages, and especially the lighter carriages
      of that varnish-selling firm, which was now absorbing businesses right and left, prevailed
      over Mr. Pope's resistance. For crossing a mountain pass or fording a river, for driving over
      the scene of a recent earthquake or following a retreating army, for being run away with by
      frantic horses or crushing a personal enemy, there can be no doubt the Pope carriages remained
      to the very last the best possible ones and fully worth the inflexible price demanded.
      Unhappily all carriages in a civilization essentially decadent are not subjected to these
      tests, and the manufactures of his rivals were not only much cheaper, but had a sort of
      meretricious smartness, a disingenuous elasticity, above all a levity, hateful indeed to the
      spirit of Mr. Pope yet attractive to the wanton customer. Business dwindled. Nevertheless the
      habitual element in the good class customer did keep things going, albeit on a shrinking
      scale, until Mr. Pope came to the unfortunate decision that he would make a stand against
      automobiles. He regarded them as an intrusive nuisance which had to be seen only to be
      disowned by the landed gentry of England. Rather than build a car he said he would go out of
      business. He went out of business. Within five years of this determination he sold out the
      name, good will, and other vestiges of his concern to a mysterious buyer who turned out to be
      no more than an agent for these persistently expanding varnish makers, and he retired with a
      genuine grievance upon the family accumulations—chiefly in Consols and Home Railways.
He refused however to regard his defeat as final, put great faith in the approaching
      exhaustion of the petrol supply, and talked in a manner that should have made the Automobile
      Association uneasy, of
       devoting the rest of his days to the purification of England from these
      aggressive mechanisms. "It was a mistake," he said, "to let them in." He became more frequent
      at his excellent West End club, and directed a certain portion of his capital to largely
      indecisive but on the whole unprofitable speculations in South African and South American
      enterprises. He mingled a little in affairs. He was a tough conventional speaker, rich in
      established phrases and never abashed by hearing himself say commonplace things, and in
      addition to his campaign against automobiles he found time to engage also in quasi-political
      activities, taking chairs, saying a few words and so on, cherishing a fluctuating hope that
      his eloquence might ultimately win him an invitation to contest a constituency in the
      interests of reaction and the sounder elements in the Liberal party.
He had a public-spirited side, and he was particularly attracted by that mass of modern
      legislative proposals which aims at a more systematic control of the lives of lower class
      persons for their own good by their betters. Indeed, in the first enthusiasm of his
      proprietorship of the Pope works at East Purblow, he had organized one of those benevolent
      industrial experiments that are now so common. He felt strongly against the drink evil, that
      is to say, the unrestricted liberty of common people to drink what they prefer, and he was
      acutely impressed by the fact that working-class families do not spend their money in the way
      that seems most desirable to upper middle-class critics. Accordingly he did his best to
      replace the dangerous freedoms of money by that ideal of the social reformer, Payment in Kind.
      To use his invariable phrase, the East Purblow experiment did "no mean service" to the cause
      of social reform. Unhappily it came to an end through a
       prosecution under the Truck Act, that blot upon the Statute Book, designed, it
      would appear, even deliberately to vitiate man's benevolent control of his fellow man. The
      lessons to be drawn from that experience, however, grew if anything with the years. He rarely
      spoke without an allusion to it, and it was quite remarkable how readily it could be adapted
      to illuminate a hundred different issues in the hospitable columns of the
      Spectator....

At seven o'clock Marjorie found herself upstairs changing into her apple-green frock. She
      had had a good refreshing wash in cold soft water, and it was pleasant to change into thinner
      silk stockings and dainty satin slippers and let down and at last brush her hair and dress
      loiteringly after the fatigues of her journey and the activities of her arrival. She looked
      out on the big church and the big trees behind it against the golden quiet of a summer evening
      with extreme approval.
"I suppose those birds are rooks," she said.
But Daffy had gone to see that the pseudo-twins had done themselves justice in their muslin
      frocks and pink sashes; they were apt to be a little sketchy with their less accessible
      buttons.
Marjorie became aware of two gentlemen with her mother on the lawn below.
One was her almost affianced lover, Will Magnet, the humorous writer. She had been doing her
      best not to think about him all day, but now he became an unavoidable central fact. She
      regarded him with an almost perplexed scrutiny, and wondered vividly why she had been so
      excited and pleased by his attentions during the previous summer.
Mr. Magnet was one of those quiet, deliberately
       unassuming people who do not even attempt to be beautiful. Not for him was it to
      pretend, but to prick the bladder of pretence. He was a fairish man of forty, pale, with a
      large protuberant, observant grey eye—I speak particularly of the left—and a face of quiet
      animation warily alert for the wit's opportunity. His nose and chin were pointed, and his lips
      thin and quaintly pressed together. He was dressed in grey, with a low-collared silken shirt
      showing a thin neck, and a flowing black tie, and he carried a grey felt hat in his joined
      hands behind his back. She could hear the insinuating cadences of his voice as he talked in
      her mother's ear. The other gentleman, silent on her mother's right, must, she knew, be Mr.
      Wintersloan, whom Mr. Magnet had proposed to bring over. His dress betrayed that modest gaiety
      of disposition becoming in an artist, and indeed he was one of Mr. Magnet's favourite
      illustrators. He was in a dark bluish-grey suit; a black tie that was quite unusually broad
      went twice around his neck before succumbing to the bow, and his waistcoat appeared to be of
      some gaily-patterned orange silk. Marjorie's eyes returned to Mr. Magnet. Hitherto she had
      never had an opportunity of remarking that his hair was more than a little attenuated towards
      the crown. It was funny how his tie came out under his chin to the right.
What an odd thing men's dress had become, she thought. Why did they wear those ridiculous
      collars and ties? Why didn't they always dress in flannels and look as fine and slender and
      active as the elder Carmel boy for example? Mr. Magnet couldn't be such an ill-shaped man. Why
      didn't every one dress to be just as beautiful and splendid as possible?—instead of wearing
      queer things!
"Coming down?" said Daffy, a vision of sulphur-yellow,
       appearing in the doorway.
"Let them go first," said Marjorie, with a finer sense of effect. "And Theodore. We
      don't want to make part of a comic entry with Theodore, Daffy."
Accordingly, the two sisters watched discreetly—they had to be wary on account of Mr.
      Magnet's increasingly frequent glances at the windows—and when at last all the rest of the
      family had appeared below, they decided their cue had come. Mr. Pope strolled into the group,
      with no trace of his recent debacle except a slight limp. He was wearing a jacket of
      damson-coloured velvet, which he affected in the country, and all traces of his Grand Dudgeon
      were gone. But then he rarely had Grand Dudgeon except in the sanctities of family life, and
      hardly ever when any other man was about.
"Well," his daughters heard him say, with a witty allusiveness that was difficult to follow,
      "so the Magnet has come to the Mountain again—eh?"
"Come on, Madge," said Daffy, and the two sisters emerged harmoniously together from the
      house.
It would have been manifest to a meaner capacity than any present that evening that Mr.
      Magnet regarded Marjorie with a distinguished significance. He had two eyes, but he had that
      mysterious quality so frequently associated with a bluish-grey iris which gives the effect of
      looking hard with one large orb, a sort of grey searchlight effect, and he used this eye ray
      now to convey a respectful but firm admiration in the most unequivocal manner. He saluted
      Daffy courteously, and then allowed himself to retain Marjorie's hand for just a second longer
      than was necessary as he said—very simply—"I am very pleased indeed to meet you
      again—very."
A slight embarrassment fell between them.
"You are staying near here, Mr. Magnet?"
      
"At the inn," said Mr. Magnet, and then, "I chose it because it would be near you."
His eye pressed upon her again for a moment.
"Is it comfortable?" said Marjorie.
"So charmingly simple," said Mr. Magnet. "I love it."
A tinkling bell announced the preparedness of supper, and roused the others to the
      consciousness that they were silently watching Mr. Magnet and Marjorie.
"It's quite a simple farmhouse supper," said Mrs. Pope.

There were ducks, green peas, and adolescent new potatoes for supper, and afterwards stewed
      fruit and cream and junket and cheese, bottled beer, Gilbey's Burgundy, and home-made
      lemonade. Mrs. Pope carved, because Mr. Pope splashed too much, and bones upset him and made
      him want to show up chicken in the Times. So he sat at the other end and rallied his
      guests while Mrs. Pope distributed the viands. He showed not a trace of his recent umbrage.
      Theodore sat between Daffy and his mother because of his table manners, and Marjorie was on
      her father's right hand and next to Mr. Wintersloan, while Mr. Magnet was in the middle of the
      table on the opposite side in a position convenient for looking at her. Both maids waited.
The presence of Magnet invariably stirred the latent humorist in Mr. Pope. He felt that he
      who talks to humorists should himself be humorous, and it was his private persuasion that with
      more attention he might have been, to use a favourite form of expression, "no mean jester."
      Quite a lot of little
       things of his were cherished as "Good" both by himself and, with occasional
      inaccuracies, by Mrs. Pope. He opened out now in a strain of rich allusiveness.
"What will you drink, Mr. Wintersloan?" he said. "Wine of the country, yclept beer, red wine
      from France, or my wife's potent brew from the golden lemon?"
Mr. Wintersloan thought he would take Burgundy. Mr. Magnet preferred beer.

"I've heard there's iron in the Beer,
And I believe it,"
 misquoted Mr. Pope, and nodded as it were to the marker to score. "Daffy and Marjorie
      are still in the lemonade stage. Will you take a little Burgundy to-night, Mummy?"
Mrs. Pope decided she would, and was inspired to ask Mr. Wintersloan if he had been in that
      part of the country before. Topography ensued. Mr. Wintersloan had a style of his own, and
      spoke of the Buryhamstreet district as a "pooty little country—pooty little hills, with a
      swirl in them."
This pleased Daffy and Marjorie, and their eyes met for a moment.
Then Mr. Magnet, with a ray full on Marjorie, said he had always been fond of Surrey. "I
      think if ever I made a home in the country I should like it to be here."
Mr. Wintersloan said Surrey would tire him, it was too bossy and curly, too flocculent; he
      would prefer to look on broader, simpler lines, with just a sudden catch in the breath in
      them—if you understand me?
Marjorie did, and said so.
"A sob—such as you get at the break of a pinewood
       on a hill."
This baffled Mr. Pope, but Marjorie took it. "Or the short dry cough of a cliff," she
      said.
"Exactly," said Mr. Wintersloan, and having turned a little deliberate close-lipped smile on
      her for a moment, resumed his wing.
"So long as a landscape doesn't sneeze" said Mr. Magnet, in that irresistible dry
      way of his, and Rom and Sydney, at any rate, choked.
"Now is the hour when Landscapes yawn," mused Mr. Pope, coming in all right at the end.
Then Mrs. Pope asked Mr. Wintersloan, about his route to Buryhamstreet, and then Mr. Pope
      asked Mr. Magnet whether he was playing at a new work or working at a new play.
Mr. Magnet said he was dreaming over a play. He wanted to bring out the more serious side of
      his humour, go a little deeper into things than he had hitherto done.
"Mingling smiles and tears," said Mr. Pope approvingly.
Mr. Magnet said very quietly that all true humour did that.
Then Mrs. Pope asked what the play was to be about, and Mr. Magnet, who seemed disinclined
      to give an answer, turned the subject by saying he had to prepare an address on humour for the
      next dinner of the Literati. "It's to be a humourist's dinner, and they've made me
      the guest of the evening—by way of a joke to begin with," he said with that dry smile
      again.
Mrs. Pope said he shouldn't say things like that. She then said "Syd!" quietly but sharply
      to Sydney, who was making a disdainful, squinting face at Theodore, and told the parlourmaid
      to clear the plates
       for sweets. Mr. Magnet professed great horror of public speaking. He said that
      whenever he rose to make an after-dinner speech all the ices he had ever eaten seemed to come
      out of the past, and sit on his backbone.
The talk centered for awhile on Mr. Magnet's address, and apropos of Tests of Humour Mr.
      Pope, who in his way was "no mean raconteur," related the story of the man who took the salad
      dressing with his hand, and when his host asked why he did that, replied: "Oh! I thought it
      was spinach!"
"Many people," added Mr. Pope, "wouldn't see the point of that. And if they don't see the
      point they can't—and the more they try the less they do."
All four girls hoped secretly and not too confidently that their laughter had not sounded
      hollow.
And then for a time the men told stories as they came into their heads in an easy,
      irresponsible way. Mr. Magnet spoke of the humour of the omnibus-driver who always dangled and
      twiddled his badge "by way of a joke" when he passed the conductor whose father had been
      hanged, and Mr. Pope, perhaps, a little irrelevantly, told the story of the little boy who was
      asked his father's last words, and said "mother was with him to the end," which particularly
      amused Mrs. Pope. Mr. Wintersloan gave the story of the woman who was taking her son to the
      hospital with his head jammed into a saucepan, and explained to the other people in the
      omnibus: "You see, what makes it so annoying, it's me only saucepan!" Then they came back to
      the Sense of Humour with the dentist who shouted with laughter, and when asked the reason by
      his patient, choked out: "Wrong tooth!" and then Mr. Pope reminded them of the heartless
      husband who, suddenly informed that his
       mother-in-law was dead, exclaimed "Oh, don't make me laugh, please, I've got a
      split lip...."

The conversation assumed a less anecdotal quality with the removal to the drawing-room. On
      Mr. Magnet's initiative the gentlemen followed the ladies almost immediately, and it was Mr.
      Magnet who remembered that Marjorie could sing.
Both the elder sisters indeed had sweet clear voices, and they had learnt a number of those
      jolly songs the English made before the dull Hanoverians came. Syd accompanied, and Rom sat
      back in the low chair in the corner and fell deeply in love with Mr. Wintersloan. The three
      musicians in their green and sulphur-yellow and white made a pretty group in the light of the
      shaded lamp against the black and gold Broadwood, the tawdry screen, its pattern thin
      glittering upon darkness, and the deep shadows behind. Marjorie loved singing, and forgot
      herself as she sang.

"I love, and he loves me again,
Yet dare I not tell who;
For if the nymphs should know my swain,
I fear they'd love him too," she sang, and Mr. Magnet could not conceal the
      intensity of his admiration.
Mr. Pope had fallen into a pleasant musing; several other ripe old yarns, dear delicious old
      things, had come into his mind that he felt he might presently recall when this unavoidable
      display of accomplishments was overpast, and it was with one of them almost on his lips that
      he glanced across at his guest.
       He was surprised to see Mr. Magnet's face transfigured. He was sitting forward,
      looking up at Marjorie, and he had caught something of the expression of those blessed boys
      who froth at the feet of an Assumption. For an instant Mr. Pope did not understand.
Then he understood. It was Marjorie! He had a twinge of surprise, and glanced at his own
      daughter as though he had never seen her before. He perceived in a flash for the first time
      that this troublesome, clever, disrespectful child was tall and shapely and sweet, and indeed
      quite a beautiful young woman. He forgot his anecdotes. His being was suffused with pride and
      responsibility and the sense of virtue rewarded. He did not reflect for a moment that Marjorie
      embodied in almost equal proportions the very best points in his mother and his mother-in-law,
      and avoided his own more salient characteristics with so neat a dexterity that from top to
      toe, except for the one matter of colour, not only did she not resemble him but she scarcely
      even alluded to him. He thought simply that she was his daughter, that she derived from him,
      that her beauty was his. She was the outcome of his meritorious preparations. He recalled all
      the moments when he had been kind and indulgent to her, all the bills he had paid for her; all
      the stresses and trials of the coach-building collapse, all the fluctuations of his
      speculative adventures, became things he had faced patiently and valiantly for her sake. He
      forgot the endless times when he had been viciously cross with her, all the times when he had
      pished and tushed and sworn in her hearing. He had on provocation and in spite of her mother's
      protests slapped her pretty vigorously, but such things are better forgotten; nor did he
      recall how bitterly he had opposed the college education which
       had made her now so clear in eye and thought, nor the frightful shindy, only
      three months since, about that identical green dress in which she now stood delightful. He
      forgot these petty details, as an idealist should. There she was, his daughter. An immense
      benevolence irradiated his soul—for Marjorie—for Magnet. His eyes were suffused with a not
      ignoble tenderness. The man, he knew, was worth at least thirty-five thousand pounds, a
      discussion of investments had made that clear, and he must be making at least five thousand a
      year! A beautiful girl, a worthy man! A good fellow, a sound good fellow, a careful fellow
      too—as these fellows went!
Old Daddy would lose his treasure of course.
Well, a father must learn resignation, and he for one would not stand in the way of his
      girl's happiness. A day would come when, very beautifully and tenderly, he would hand her over
      to Magnet, his favourite daughter to his trusted friend. "Well, my boy, there's no one in all
      the world——" he would begin.
It would be a touching parting. "Don't forget your old father, Maggots," he would say. At
      such a moment that quaint nickname would surely not be resented....
He reflected how much he had always preferred Marjorie to Daffy. She was brighter—more like
      him. Daffy was unresponsive, with a touch of bitterness under her tongue....
He was already dreaming he was a widower, rather infirm, the object of Magnet's and
      Marjorie's devoted care, when the song ceased, and the wife he had for the purpose of reveries
      just consigned so carelessly to the cemetery proposed that they should have a little game that
      every one could play at. A number of pencils and slips of paper appeared in her hands.
       She did not want the girls to exhaust their repertory on this first occasion—and
      besides, Mr. Pope liked games in which one did things with pencils and strips of paper. Mr.
      Magnet wished the singing to go on, he said, but he was overruled.
So for a time every one played a little game in which Mr. Pope was particularly proficient.
      Indeed, it was rare that any one won but Mr. Pope. It was called "The Great Departed," and it
      had such considerable educational value that all the children had to play at it whenever he
      wished.
It was played in this manner; one of the pseudo twins opened a book and dabbed a finger on
      the page, and read out the letter immediately at the tip of her finger, then all of them began
      to write as hard as they could, writing down the names of every great person they could think
      of, whose name began with that letter. At the end of five minutes Mr. Pope said Stop! and then
      began to read his list out, beginning with the first name. Everybody who had that name crossed
      it out and scored one, and after his list was exhausted all the surviving names on the next
      list were read over in the same way, and so on. The names had to be the names of dead
      celebrated people, only one monarch of the same name of the same dynasty was allowed, and Mr.
      Pope adjudicated on all doubtful cases. It was great fun.
The first two games were won as usual by Mr. Pope, and then Mr. Wintersloan, who had been a
      little distraught in his manner, brightened up and scribbled furiously.
The letter was D, and after Mr. Pope had rehearsed a tale of nine and twenty names,
      Mr. Wintersloan read out his list in that curious voice of his which suggested nothing so much
      as some mobile drink glucking out of the neck of a bottle held upside down.
"Dahl," he began.
      
"Who was Dahl?" asked Mr. Pope.
"'Vented dahlias," said Mr. Wintersloan, with a sigh. "Danton."
"Forgot him," said Mr. Pope.
"Davis."
"Davis?"
"Davis Straits. Doe."
"Who?"
"John Doe, Richard Roe."
"Legal fiction, I'm afraid," said Mr. Pope.
"Dam," said Mr. Wintersloan, and added after a slight pause: "Anthony van."
Mr. Pope made an interrogative noise.
"Painter—eighteenth century—Dutch. Dam, Jan van, his son. Dam, Frederich van. Dam, Wilhelm
      van. Dam, Diedrich van. Dam, Wilhelmina, wood engraver, gifted woman. Diehl."
"Who?"
"Painter—dead—famous. See Düsseldorf. It's all painters now—all guaranteed dead, all good
      men. Deeds of Norfolk, the aquarellist, Denton, Dibbs."
"Er?" said Mr. Pope.
"The Warwick Claude, you know. Died 1823."
"Dickson, Dunting, John Dickery. Peter Dickery, William Dock—I beg your pardon?"
Mr. Pope was making a protesting gesture, but Mr. Wintersloan's bearing was invincible, and
      he proceeded.
In the end he emerged triumphant with forty-nine names, mostly painters for whose fame he
      answered, but whose reputations were certainly new to every one else present. "I can go on
      like that," said Mr. Wintersloan, "with any letter," and turned that hard little smile full on
      Marjorie. "I didn't see how to do it at first. I just cast about.
       But I know a frightful lot of painters. No end. Shall we try again?"
Marjorie glanced at her father. Mr. Wintersloan's methods were all too evident to her. A
      curious feeling pervaded the room that Mr. Pope didn't think Mr. Wintersloan's conduct
      honourable, and that he might even go some way towards saying so.
So Mrs. Pope became very brisk and stirring, and said she thought that now perhaps a charade
      would be more amusing. It didn't do to keep on at a game too long. She asked Rom and Daphne
      and Theodore and Mr. Wintersloan to go out, and they all agreed readily, particularly Rom.
      "Come on!" said Rom to Mr. Wintersloan. Everybody else shifted into an audience-like group
      between the piano and the what-not. Mr. Magnet sat at Marjorie's feet, while Syd played a kind
      of voluntary, and Mr. Pope leant back in his chair, with his brows knit and lips moving,
      trying to remember something.
The charade was very amusing. The word was Catarrh, and Mr. Wintersloan, as the
      patient in the last act being given gruel, surpassed even the children's very high
      expectations. Rom, as his nurse, couldn't keep her hands off him. Then the younger people
      kissed round and were packed off to bed, and the rest of the party went to the door upon the
      lawn and admired the night. It was a glorious summer night, deep blue, and rimmed warmly by
      the afterglow, moonless, and with a few big lamp-like stars above the black still shapes of
      trees.
Mrs. Pope said they would all accompany their guests to the gate at the end of the avenue—in
      spite of the cockchafers.
Mr. Pope's ankle, however, excused him; the cordiality of his parting from Mr. Wintersloan
      seemed
       a trifle forced, and he limped thoughtfully and a little sombrely towards the
      study to see if he could find an Encyclopædia or some such book of reference that would give
      the names of the lesser lights of Dutch, Italian, and English painting during the last two
      centuries.
He felt that Mr. Wintersloan had established an extraordinarily bad precedent.

Marjorie discovered that she and Mr. Magnet had fallen a little behind the others. She would
      have quickened her pace, but Mr. Magnet stopped short and said: "Marjorie!"
"When I saw you standing there and singing," said Mr. Magnet, and was short of breath for a
      moment.
Marjorie's natural gift for interruption failed her altogether.
"I felt I would rather be able to call you mine—than win an empire."
The pause seemed to lengthen, between them, and Marjorie's remark when she made it at last
      struck her even as she made it as being but poorly conceived. She had some weak idea of being
      self-depreciatory.
"I think you had better win an empire, Mr. Magnet," she said meekly.
Then, before anything more was possible, they had come up to Daffy and Mr. Wintersloan and
      her mother at the gate....
As they returned Mrs. Pope was loud in the praises of Will Magnet. She had a little
      clear-cut voice, very carefully and very skilfully controlled, and she dilated on his modesty,
      his quiet helpfulness
       at table, his ready presence of mind. She pointed out instances of those
      admirable traits, incidents small in themselves but charming in their implications. When
      somebody wanted junket, he had made no fuss, he had just helped them to junket. "So modest and
      unassuming," sang Mrs. Pope. "You'd never dream he was quite rich and famous. Yet every book
      he writes is translated into Russian and German and all sorts of languages. I suppose he's
      almost the greatest humorist we have. That play of his; what is it called?—Our Owd
       Woman—has been performed nearly twelve hundred times! I think that is the most wonderful
      of gifts. Think of the people it has made happy."
The conversation was mainly monologue. Both Marjorie and Daffy were unusually
      thoughtful.

Marjorie ended the long day in a worldly mood.
"Penny for your thoughts," said Daffy abruptly, brushing the long firelit rapids of her
      hair.
"Not for sale," said Marjorie, and roused herself. "I've had a long day."
"It's always just the time I particularly wish I was a man," she remarked after a brief
      return to meditation. "Fancy, no hair-pins, no brushing, no tie-up to get lost about, no
      strings. I suppose they haven't strings?"
"They haven't," said Daffy with conviction.
She met Marjorie's interrogative eye. "Father would swear at them," she explained. "He'd
      naturally tie himself up—and we should hear of it."
"I didn't think of that," said Marjorie, and stuck out her chin upon her fists. "Sound
      induction."
      
She forgot this transitory curiosity.
"Suppose one had a maid, Daffy—a real maid ... a maid who mended your things ... did your
      hair while you read...."
"Oh! here goes," and she stood up and grappled with the task of undressing.
