
CHAPTER III.
THE boat went on into the darkness under the willow banks, past the great Calvary,
      whose lanthorn was just lit and glimmered through the gloom.
She knew by heart the old familiar way; and the water was as safe to her as the broadest,
      straightest road at noonday. She loved it best thus; dusky: half seen; muttering on through
      the silence; full of the shadows of the clouds and of the boughs; black as a fresh dug grave
      where some ruined wall leaned over it; broken into liitle silvery gleams where it caught the
      light from a saint’s shrine or a smith’s forge.
By day a river is but the highway of men; it is but a public bridge betwixt the country and
      the town; but at night it grows mystical, silent, solitary, unreal, with the sound of the sea
      in its murmurings and the peace of death in its calm; at night, through its ceaseless
      whisperings, there always seem to arise echoes from all the voices of the drowned multitudes
      of the ocean whence it comes, and from all the voices of the living multitudes of the city
      whither it goes.
It was quite dark when she reached the landing steps; the moon was just rising above the
      sharp gables of the mill‐house, and a lanthorn was moving up and down behind the budded boughs
      as Claudis Flamma went to and fro in his wood‐yard.
At the jar of the boat against the steps he peered through the branches, and greeted her
      with a malignant reprimand. He timed her services to the minute; and here had been a full
      half‐day of the spring weather wasted, and lost to him. He drove her indoors with sharp
      railing and loud reproaches; not waiting for an answer, but heaping on her the bitterest terms
      of reviling that his tongue could gather.
In the kitchen a little low‐burning lamp lit dully the poverty and dreariness of the place,
      and shed its orange rays on the ill‐tempered, puckered, gloomy face of the old woman Pitchou
      sitting at her spindle; there was a curious odour of
       sun‐dried herbs and smoke‐dried fish that made the air
      heavy and pungent; the great chimney yawned black and fireless; a starveling cat mewed
      dolorously over an empty platter; under a tawdry‐coloured print of the Flight into Egypt,
      there hung on a nail three dead blackbirds, shot as they sang the praises of the spring; on a
      dresser, beside a little white basin of holy water, there lay a grey rabbit, dead likewise,
      with limbs broken and bleeding from the trap in which it had writhed helpless all through the
      previous night.
The penury, dulness, and cruelty, the hardness, barrenness, and unloveliness of this life in
      which she abode had never struck her with a sense so sharp as that which now fell on her;
      crossing the threshold of this dreary place after the shadows of the night, the beauty of the
      gods, the voice of praise, the eyes of Arslàn.
She came into the room, bringing with her the cool fragrance of damp earth, wet leaves, and
      wild flowers; the moisture of the evening was on her clothes and hair; her bare feet sparkled
      with the silvery spray of dew; her eyes had the look of blindness yet of lustre that the night
      air lends; and on her face there was a mingling of puzzled pain and of rapturous dreaming
      wonder, which new thought and fresh feeling had brought there to break up its darkness into
      light.
The old woman, twirling a flaxen thread upon her wheel, looked askance at her, and
      mumbled—“like mother, like child.” The old man, catching up the lamp, held it against her
      face, and peered at her under his grey bent brows.
“A whole day wasted!” he swore for the twentieth time, in his teeth. “Beast! What hast thou
      to say for thyself?”
The old dogged ferocity gathered over her countenance, chasing away the softened perplexed
      radiance that had been newly awakened there.
“I say nothing,” she answered.
“Nothing! nothing!” he echoed after her. “Then we will find a way to make thee speak.
      Nothing!—when three of the clock should have seen thee back hither at latest, and five hours
      since then have gone by without account. You have spent it in brawling and pleasure—in shame
      and iniquity—in vice and in violence, thou creature of sin!”

“Since you know, why ask?”
She spoke with steady contemptuous calm. She disdained to seek refuge from his fury by
      pleading the injuries that the townsfolk had wrought her; and of the house by the river, she
      would not have spoken though they had killed her. The storm of his words raged on
      uninterrupted.
“Five hours, five mortal hours, stolen from me, your lawful work left undone that you may
      riot in some secret abomination that you dare not to name. Say where you have been, what you
      have done, you spawn of hell, or I will wring your throat as I wring a sparrow’s!”
“I have done as I chose.”
She looked him full in the eyes as she spoke, with the look in her own that a bull’s have
      when he lowers his head to the charge and attack.
“As you choose! Oh‐ho! You would speak as queens speak—you—a thing less than
      the worm and the emmet. As you choose—you!—who have not a rag on your back, not a crust of rye
      bread, not a leaf of salad to eat, not a lock of hay for your bed, that is not mine—mine—mine.
      As you choose. You!—you thing begotten in infamy; you slave; you beggar; you
      sloth! You are nothing—nothing less than the blind worm that crawls in the sand. You have the
      devil that bred you in you, no doubt; but it shall go hard if I cannot conquer him when I
      bruise your body and break your will.”
As he spoke he seized her to strike her; in his hand he already gripped an oak stick that he
      had brought in with him from his timber‐yard, and he raised it to rain blows on her, expecting
      no other course than the dumb, passive, scornful submission with which she had hitherto
      accepted whatsoever he had chosen to do against her.
But in lieu of the creature, silent and stirless, who before had stood to receive his lashes
      as though her body were of bronze or wood, that felt not, a leonine and superb animal sprang
      up in full rebellion. She started out of his grasp, her lithe form springing from his seizure
      as a willow bough that has been bent to earth springs back, released, into the air.
She caught the staff in both her hands, wrenched it by a sudden gesture from him, and flung
      it away to the farther end of the chamber; then she turned on him as a hart turns brought to
      bay.

Her supple body was erect like a young pine; her eyes flushed with a lustre he had never
      seen in them; the breath came hard and fast through her dilated nostrils; her mouth curled and
      quivered.
“Touch me again!” she cried aloud, while her voice rang full and imperious through the
      stillness. “Touch me again; and by the heaven and hell you prate of, I will kill you!”
So sudden was the revolt, so sure the menace, that he old man dropped his hands and stood
      and gazed at her aghast and staring; not recognizing the mute, patient, dog‐like thing that he
      had beaten at will, in this stern, fearless, splendid, terrible creature, who faced him in all
      the royalty of wrath, in all the passion of insurrection.
He could not tell what had altered her, what had wrought this transformation, what had
      changed her as by sorcery; he could not tell that what had aroused a human soul in her had
      been the first human voice that she had listened to in love; he could not tell that her body
      had grown sacred to her because a stranger had called her beautiful, and that her life for the
      first time had acquired a worth and dignity in her sight because one man had deemed it
      fair.
He could not tell; he could only see that for the first time his slave had learned
      somewhere, and in some wise, what freedom meant; and had escaped him. This alone he saw; and,
      seeing it, was startled and afraid.
She waited, watching him some moments, with cold eyes of disdain, in which a smouldering
      fire slept, ready to burst into an all‐devouring flame.
There was not a sound in the place; the woman spinning stopped her wheel, wondering in a
      half‐stupid, savage fashion; the lean cat ceased its cries; there was only the continual swish
      of the water in the sluices under the wall without, and the dull ticking of the old Black
      Forest clock, that kept a fitful measure of the days and nights in its cracked case of painted
      wood, high up, where the thyme, and the sage, and the onions hung among the twisted
      rafters.
Folle‐Farine stood still, her left hand resting on her hip, her lips curved scornfully and
      close, her face full of passion, which she kept as still as the dead birds hanging on the
      wall; whilst all the time the tawny smoky hues of the oil‐
       lamp were wavering with an odd fantastic play over her head
      and limbs.
Before this night, she had always taken every blow and stripe patiently, without vengeance,
      without effort, as she saw the mule and the dog, the horse and the ox, take theirs in their
      pathetic patience, in their noble fortitude. She had thought that such were her daily portion
      as such as was the daily bread she broke.
But now, since she had awakened with the smile of the gods upon her, now, she felt that
      sooner than endure again that indignity, that outrage, she would let her tyrant kill her in
      his hate, if so he chose, and cast her body to the mill‐stream, moaning through the trees
      beneath the moon; the water, at least, would bear her with it, tranquil and undefiled, beneath
      the old grey walls and past the eyes of Arslàn.
There was that in her look which struck dumb the mouth, and held motionless the arm, of
      Claudis Flamma.
Caustic, savage, hard as his own ash staff though he was, he was for the moment paralysed
      and unmanned. Some vague sense of shame stirred heavily in him; some vague remembrance passed
      over him, that, whatsoever else she might be, she had been once borne in his daughter’s bosom,
      and kissed by his daughter’s lips, and sent to him by a dead woman’s will, with a dead woman’s
      wretchedness and loneliness as her sole birth‐gifts.
He passed his hands over his eyes with a blinded gesture, staring hard at her in the dusky
      lamplight.
He was a strong and bitter old man, made cruel by one great agony, and groping his way
      savagely through a dark, hungry, superstitious, ignorant life. But in that moment he no more
      dared to touch her than he would have dared to tear down the leaden Christ from off its
      crucifix, and trample it under foot, and spit on it.
He turned away, muttering in his throat, and kicking the cat from his path, while he struck
      out the light with his staff.
“Get to thy den,” he said, with a curse. “We are a‐bed too late. To‐morrow I will deal with
      thee.”
She went without a word out of the dark kitchen and up the ladder‐like stairs, up to her
      lair in the roof. She said nothing; it was not in her nature to threaten twice, or twice
       protest; but in her heart she knew that neither the next
      day, nor any other day, should that which Arslàn had called “beauty,” be stripped and struck
      whilst life was in her to preserve it by death from that indignity.
From the time of her earliest infancy, she had been used to bare her shoulders to the lash,
      and take the stripes as food and wages; she had no more thought to resist them than the brave
      hound, who fears no foe on earth, has to resist his master’s blows; the dull habits of a
      soulless bondage had been too strong on her to be lightly broken, and the resignation of the
      loyal beasts that were her comrades, had been the one virtue that she had learnt to
      follow.
But no at length she had burst her bonds, and had claimed her freedom.
She had tasted the freshness of liberty, and the blood burned like fire in her face as she
      remembered the patience and the shame of the years of her slavery.
There was no mirror in her little lair in the gabled eaves; all the mirror she had ever
      known had been that which she had shared with the water‐lilies, when together she and they had
      leaned over the smooth dark surface of the mill‐pond. But the moon streamed clearly through
      the one unshuttered window, a moon full and clear, and still cold; the spring‐tide moon, from
      which the pale primroses borrow those tender hues of theirs, which never warm or grow deeper,
      however golden be the sun that my shine.
Its colourless crescent went sailing past the little square lattice hole in the wall; masses
      of gorgeous cloud, white and black, swept by in a fresh west wind; the fresh breath of a
      spring night chased away the heat and languor of the day; the smell of all the blossoms of the
      spring rose up from wood and orchard; the cool, drowsy murmuring of the mill‐stream beneath
      was the only sound on the stillness, except when now and then there came the wild cry of a
      mating owl.
The moonbeams fell about her where she stood; and she looked down on her smooth skin, her
      glistening shoulders, her lustrous and abundant hair, on which the wavering light played and
      undulated. The most delicious gladness that a woman’s life can know was in tumult in her,
      conflicting with the new and deadly sense of shame and ignorance. She learned that she was
      beautiful, at the same time that
       she awoke to the knowledge of her dumb, lifeless, slavish
      inferiority to all other human beings.
“Beautiful!” she muttered to herself, “only as a poppy as a snake, as a night moth are
      beautiful—beautiful—and without fragrance, or sweetness, or worth!”
And her heart was heavy, even amidst all its pleasure and triumph, heavy with a sense of
      utter ignorance and utter worthlessness.
The poppy was snapped asunder as a weed, the snake was shunned and cursed for his poison,
      the night moth was killed because his nature had made him dwell in the darkness; none of the
      three might have any fault in truth in them; all of the three might have only the livery of
      evil, and no more; might be innocent, and ask only to breathe and live for a little brief
      space in their world, which men called God’s world.
Yet were they condemned by men, and slain, being what they were, although God made them.
Even so she felt, without reasoning, had it been, and would it be with herself.
