
CHAPTER II.
AS the night fell, Folle‐Farine, alone, steered herself down the water through the
      heart of the town, where the buildings were oldest, and where on either side there loomed
      through the dusk, carved on the black timbers, strange masks of satyr and of faun, of dragon
      and of griffin, of fiend and of martyr.
She sat in the clumsy empty market‐boat, guiding the tiller rope with her foot.
The sea flowing in stormily upon the coast sent the tide of the river inland with a swift
      impetuous current, to which its sluggish depths were seldom stirred. The oars rested unused in
      the bottom of the boat; she glided down the stream without exertion of her own, quietly,
      easily, dreamily.
She had come from a long day’s work, lading and unlading timber and grain for her
      taskmaster, and his fellow farmers, at the river wharf at the back of the town, where the
      little sea‐trawlers and traders, with their fresh salt smell and their brown sails crisp from
      fierce sea winds, gathered for traffic with the corn barges and the egg‐boats of the land.
Her day’s labour was done, and she was repaid for it by the free effortless backward passage
      home through the shadows of the water‐streets; where in the overhanging buildings, ever and
      anon, some lantern swinging on a cord from side to side, or some open casement arched above a
      gallery, showed the dark sad wistful face of some old creature kneeling in prayer before a
      crucifix, or the gold ear‐rings of some laughing girl leaning down with the first frail
      violets of the year fragrant in her bodice.
The cold night had brought the glow of wood‐fires in many of the dwellings of that poor and
      picturesque quarter; and showed many a homely interior through the panes of the oriel and
      lancet windows, over which brooded sculptured figures seraph‐winged, or carven forms helmeted
      and leaning on their swords.
In one of them there was a group of young men and
       maidens gathered round the wood nut‐burning, the lovers
      seeking each other’s kiss as the kernels broke the shells; in another, some rosy curly
      children played at soldiers with the cuirass and sabre which their grandsire had won in the
      army of the empire; in another, before a quaint oval old‐fashioned glass, a young girl all
      alone made trial of her wedding wreath upon her fair forehead, and smiled back on her own
      image with a little joyous laugh that ended in a sob; in another, a young bearded workman
      carved ivory beside his hearth, whilst his old mother sat knitting in a high oak chair; in
      another, a sister of charity, with a fair Madonna’s face, bent above a little pot of home‐bred
      snowdrops, with her tears dropping on the white heads of the flowers, whilst the sick man, of
      whom she had charge, slept and left her a brief space for her own memories, her own pangs, her
      own sickness, which was only of the heart—only—and therefore hopeless.
All these Folle‐Farine saw, going onward in the boat on the gloom of the water below.
She did not envy them; she rather, with her hatred of them, scorned them. She had been
      freeborn, though now she was a slave; the pleasures of the home and hearth she envied no more
      that she envied the imprisoned bird its seed and water, its mate and song, within the close
      cage bars.
Yet they had a sort of fascination for her. She wondered how they felt, these people who
      smiled and span, and ate and drank, and sorrowed and enjoyed, and were in health and disease,
      at feast and at funeral, always together, always bound in one bond of a common humanity; these
      people, whose God on the cross never answered them; who were poor, she knew; who toiled early
      and late; who were heavily taxed; who fared hardly and scantily; yet who for the main part
      contrived to be mirthful and content, and to find some sunshine in their darkened hours, and
      to cling to one another, and in a way be glad.
Just above her was the corner window of a very ancient house, encrusted with blazonries and
      carvings. It had been a prince‐bishop’s palace; it was now the shared shelter of half a score
      of lace weavers and of ivory workers, each family in their chamber, like a bee in its
      cell.
As the boat floated under one of the casements, she saw
       that it stood open; there was a china cup filled with
      house‐born primroses on the broad sill; there was an antique illuminated Book of Hours lying
      open beside the flowers; there was a strong fire‐light shining from within; there was an old
      woman asleep and smiling in her dreams beside the hearth; by the open book was a girl, leaning
      out into the chill damp night, and looking down the street as though in search for some
      expected and thrice‐welcome guest.
She was fair to look at, with dark hair twisted under her towering white cap, and a
      peach‐like cheek and throat, and her arms folded against her blue ’kerchief crossed upon her
      chest.
Into the chamber, unseen by her, a young man stole across the shadows, and came unheard
      behind her and bent his head to hers, and kissed her ere she knew that he was there. She
      started with a little happy cry and pushed him away with pretty provocation; he drew her into
      his arms and into the chamber; he shut‐to the lattice, and left only a dusky reflection from
      within shining through the panes made dark by age and dust.
Folle‐Farine had watched them; as the window closed her head dropped, she was stirred with a
      mournful, passionate, contemptuous wonder; what was this love that was about her everywhere,
      and yet with which she had no share? She only thought of it with haughtiest scorn; and
      yet—
There had come a great darkness on the river, a surly roughness in the wind; the shutters
      were now closed in many of the houses of the water‐street, and their long black shadows fell
      across the depth that severed them, and met and blended in the twilight.
The close of this day was stormy; the wind blew the river swiftly; the heavy raw mists were
      setting in from the sea as the night descended. She did not heed these; she liked the wild
      weather best; she loved the rush of a chill wind amongst her hair, and the moisture of blown
      spray upon her face; she loved the manifold phantasies of the clouds, and the melodies of the
      blast coming over the sands and the rushes. She loved the swirl and rage of the angry water,
      and the solitude that closed in round her with the darkness.
The boat passed onward through the now silent town; only in one other place the light glowed
      through the un‐
       shuttered lattices that were ruddy and emblematic with the
      paintings of the Renaissance. It was the window of the gardener’s wife.
At that season there could bloom neither saxifrage nor carnation; but some green‐leaved
      winter shrub with rosy laden berries had replaced them, and made a shining frame all round the
      painted panes.
The fair woman was within; her delicate head rose out of the brown shadows round, with a
      lamp burning above it and a little oval mirror before. Into the mirror she was gazing with a
      smile, whilst with both hands about her throat she clasped some strings of polished shells
      brought to her from the sea.
“How white and how warm and how glad she is!” thought Folle‐Farine, looking upward; and she
      rowed in the gloom through the sluggish water with envy at her heart.
She was growing harder, wilder, worse, with every day; more and more like some dumb fierce
      forest beast, that flees from every step and hates the sound of every voice.
Since the night that they had pricked her for a witch, the people had been more cruel to her
      than ever; they cast bitter names at her as she went by; they hissed and hooted her as she
      took her mule through their villages, or passed them on the road with her back bent under some
      load of faggots, or of winter food; once or twice they stoned her, and chance alone had saved
      her from injury.
For it was an article of faith in all the hamlets round that she had killed old Manon Dax.
      The Flandrins said so, and they were good pious people who would not lie. Every dusky evening
      when the peasantry, through the doors of their cabins, saw the gleam of her bright red girdle
      and the flash of her hawk’s eyes, where she plodded on through the mist on her tyrant’s
      errands, they crossed themselves and told each other for the hundredth time the tale of her
      iniquities over their pan of smoking chestnuts.
It had hardened her tenfold; it had made her brood on sullen dreams of a desperate
      vengeance.
Marcellin, too, was gone; his body had been eaten by the quicklime in the common ditch, and
      there was not even a voice so stern as his to bid her a good morrow. He had been a harsh man,
      of dark repute and bitter tongue; but in
       his way he had loved her; in his way, with the eloquence
      that had remained to him, and by the strange stories that he had told her of that wondrous
      time wherein his youth had passed, when men had been as gods and giants, and women either
      horrible as the Medusa or sublime as the Iphigenia, he had done something to awaken her mind;
      to arouse her hopes; to lift her up from the torpor of toil, the lusts of hatred, the ruinous
      apathy of despair. But he was dead; and she was alone; and was abandoned utterly to
      herself.
She mourned for him with a passionate pain that was all the more despairing, because no
      sound of it could ever pass her lips to any creature.
To and fro continually she went by the road on which he had died alone; by the heap of
      broken stones, by the wooden crucifix, by the high hedge and the cornlands beyond. Every time
      she went the blood beat in her brain, the tears swelled in her throat; she hated with a hatred
      that consumed her, and was ready to ripen into any deadly deed, the people who had shunned him
      in his life, and in his death derided and insulted him, and given him such burial as they gave
      the rotten carcass of some noxious beast.
Her heart was ripe for any evil that should have given her vengeance; a dull cold sense of
      utter desolation and isolation was always on her; the injustice of the people began to turn
      her blood to gall, her courage into cruelty; there began to come upon her the look of those
      who brood upon a crime.
It was, in truth, but the despairing desire to live that stirred within her; to know, to
      feel, to roam, to enjoy, to suffer still, if need be; but to suffer something else than the
      endless toil of the field‐ox and tow‐horse, something else than the unavenged blow that pays
      the ass and the dog for their services.
The desire to be free grew upon her with all the force and fury inherited from her father’s
      tameless and ever‐wandering race; if a crime could have made her free she would have seized
      it.
She was in the prison of a narrow and hated fate; and from it she looked out on the desert
      of an endless hate, which stretched around her without one blossom of love, one well‐spring of
      charity, rising in its deathlike waste.
The dreamy imaginations, the fantastic pictures that had
       been so strong in her in her early years, were still there,
      though distorted by ignorance and inflamed by despair. Though, in her first poignant grief for
      him, she had envied Marcellin his hard‐won rest, his grave in the public ditch of the town, it
      was not in her to desire to die. She was too young, too strong, too restless, too impatient,
      and her blood of the desert and the forest was too hot.
What she wanted was to live. Live as the great moor bird did that she had seen float one day
      over these pale, pure, blue skies, with its mighty wings outstretched in the calm grey
      weather; which came none knew whence, and which went none knew whither; which poised silent
      and stirless against the clouds; then called with a sweet wild love‐note to its mate, and
      waited for him as he sailed in from the misty shadows where the sea lay; and with him rose yet
      higher and higher in the air; and passed westward, cleaving the fields of light, and so
      vanished;—a queen of the wind, a daughter of the sun; a creature of freedom, of victory, of
      tireless movement, and of boundless space, a thing of heaven and liberty.
* * * * *
The evening became night; a night rough and cold almost as winter.
There was no boat but hers upon the river, which ran high and strong. She left the lights of
      the town behind her, and came into the darkness of the country. Now and then the moon shone a
      moment through the storm wrack, here and there a torch glimmered, borne by some wayfarer over
      a bridge.
There was no other light.
The bells of the cathedral chiming a miserere, sounded full of woe behind her in the still
      sad air.
There stood but one building between her and her home, a square strong tower built upon the
      edge of the stream, of which the peasants told many tales of horror. It was of ancient date,
      spacious, and very strong. Its upper chambers were used as a granary by the farm‐people who
      owned it; the vaulted hall was left unused by them, partly because the river had been known to
      rise high enough to flood the floor; partly because legend had bequeathed to it a ghastly
      repute of spirits of murdered men who haunted it.
No man or woman in all the country round dared venture
       to it after nightfall; it was all that the stoutest would
      do to fetch and carry grain there at broad day; and the peasant who, being belated, rowed his
      market‐boat past it when the moon was high, moved his oar with one trembling hand, and with
      the other crossed himself unceasingly.
To Folle‐Farine it bore no such terror.
The unconscious pantheism breathed into her earliest thoughts, with the teachings of
      Phratos, made her see a nameless mystical and always wondrous beauty in every blade of grass
      that fed on the dew, and with the light, rejoiced; in every bare brown stone that flashed to
      gold in bright brook waters, under a tuft of weed; in every hillside stream that leaping and
      laughing sparkled in the sun; in every wind that wailing went over the sickness of the weary
      world.
For such a temper, no shape of the day or the night, no mystery of life or of death can have
      terror; it can dread nothing, because every created thing has in it a divine life and an
      eternal mystery.
As she and the boat passed out into the loneliness of the country, with fitful moon gleams
      to light its passage, the weather and the stream grew wilder yet.
There were on both sides strips of the silvery inland sands, beds of tall reeds, and the
      straight stems of poplars, ghost‐like in the gloom. The tide rushed faster; the winds blew
      more strongly from the north; the boat rocked, and now and then was washed with water, till
      its edges were submerged.
She stood up in it, and gave her strength to its guidance; it was all that she could do to
      keep its course straight, and steer it so that it should not grate upon the sand, nor be blown
      into the tangles of the river reeds. For herself she had no care, she could swim like any
      cygnet; and, for her own sport, had spent hours in water at all seasons. But she knew that to
      Claudis Flamma the boat was an honoured treasure, since to replace it would have cost him many
      a hard‐earned and well loved piece of money.
As she stood thus upright in the little tossing vessel, against the darkness and the winds,
      she passed the solitary building; it had been placed so low down against the shore that its
      front walls, strong of hewn stone, and deep bedded in the soil, were half submerged in the
      dense growth of
       the reeds and of the willowy osiers which grew up and
      brushed the great arched windows of its haunted hall. The lower half of one of the seven
      latticed windows had been blown wide open; a broad square casement, braced with iron bars,
      looking out upon the river, and lighted by a sickly glimmer of the moon.
Her boat was swayed close against the wall, in a sudden lurch, caused by a fiercer gust of
      wind and higher wave of the strong tide; the rushes entangled it; it grounded on the sand;
      there was no chance, she knew, of setting it afloat again without her leaving it to gain a
      footing on the sand, and use her force to push it off into the current.
She leaped out without a moment’s thought amongst the rushes, with her kirtle girt up close
      above her knees. She sank to her ankles in the sand, and stood to her waist in the water.
But she was almost as light and sure of foot as a moor‐gull, when it lights upon the
      treacherous mosses of a bog; and standing on the soaked and shelving bank, she thrust herself
      with all her might against her boat, dislodged it, and pushed it out once more afloat.
She was about to wade to it and spring into it, before the stream had time to move it
      farther out, when an owl flew from the open window behind her. Unconsciously she turned her
      head to look whence the bird had come.
She saw the wide dark square of the opened casement; the gleam of a lamp within the
      cavern‐like vastness of the vaulted hall. Instinctively she paused, drew closer, and forgot
      the boat.
The stone sills of the seven windows were level with the topmost sprays of the tall reeds an
      the willowy underwood; they were, therefore, level with herself. She saw straight in; saw, so
      far as the pale uncertain fusion of moon and lamp rays showed them, the height and width of
      this legend‐haunted place; vaulted and pillared with timber and with stone; dim and lonely as
      a cathedral crypt, and with the night‐birds flying to and fro in it, as in a ruin, seeking
      their nests in its rafters and in the capitals of its columns.
No fear, but a great awe fell upon her. She let the boat drift on its way unheeded; and
      stood there at gaze like a forest doe.
She had passed this grain tower with every day or night
       that she had gone down the river upon the errands of her
      taskmaster; but she had never looked within it once, holding the peasants’ stories and terrors
      in the cold scorn of an intrepid courage.
Now, when she looked, she for the first time believed—believed that the dead lived and
      gathered there.
White, shadowy, countless shapes loomed through the gloom, all motionless, all noiseless,
      all beautiful, with the serene yet terrible loveliness of death.
In their midst burned a lamp; as the light burns night and day in the tombs of the kings of
      the east.
Her colour paled, her breath came and went, her body trembled like a leaf; yet she was not
      afraid. An ecstasy of surprise and faith smote the dull misery of her life. She saw at last
      another world than the world of toil in which she had laboured without sigh and without hope,
      as the blinded ox laboured in the brick‐field, treading his endless circles in the endless
      dark, and only told that it was day by blows.
She had no fear of them—these, whom she deemed the dwellers of the lands beyond the sun,
      could not be more cruel to her than had been the sons of men. She yearned to them, longed for
      them; wondered with rapture and with awe if these were the messengers of her father’s kingdom;
      if these would have mercy on her, and take her with them to their immortal homes—whether of
      heaven or of hell, what mattered it?
It was enough to her that it would not be of earth.
She raised herself upon the ledge above the rushes, poised herself lightly as a bird, and
      with deft soundless feet dropped safely on the floor within, and stood in the midst of that
      enchanted world. Stood motionless, gazing upwards with rapt eyes, and daring barely to draw
      breath with any audible sigh, lest she should rouse them, and be driven from their presence.
      The flame of the lamp, and the moonlight, reflected back from the foam of the risen waters,
      shed a strange, pallid, shadowy light on all the forms around her.
“They are the dead, surely,” she thought, as she stood amongst them; and she stayed there
      with her arms folded on her breast to still its beating, lest any sound should anger them and
      betray her; a thing lower than the dust—a mortal amidst this great immortal host.

The mists and the shadows between her eyes and them parted them as with a sea of dim and
      subtle vapour, through which they looked white and implacable as a summer cloud, when it seems
      to lean and touch the edge of the world in a grey, quiet dawn.
They were but the creations of an artist’s classic dreams, but to her they seemed to thrill,
      to move, to sigh, to gaze on her; to her, they seemed to live with that life of the air, of
      the winds, of the stars, of silence and solitude, and all the nameless liberties of death, of
      which she dreamed when, shunned, and cursed, and hungered, she looked up to the skies at night
      from a sleepless bed.
They were indeed the dead: the dead of that fair time when all the earth was young, and men
      communed with their deities, and loved them, and were not afraid. When their gods were with
      them in their daily lives; and when in every breeze that curled the sea, in every cloud that
      darkened in the west, in every water‐course that leaped and sparkled in the sacred cedar
      groves, in every bee‐sucked blossom of wild thyme that grew purple by the marble temple steps,
      the breath and the glance of the gods were felt, the footfall and the voice of the gods were
      heard.
They were indeed the dead: the dead who—dying earliest, whilst yet the earth was young
      enough to sorrow for its heroic lives, to embalm them, to remember them, and to count them
      worthy of lament—perished in their bodies, but lived for ever immortal in the traditions of
      the world.
From every space of the sombre chamber some one of these gazed on her through the mist.
Here the silver dove of Argos winged her way through the iron jaws of the dark sea‐gates;
      here the white Io wandered, in exile and unresting, for ever scourged on by the sting in her
      flesh, as a man by the genius in him.
Here the glad god whom all the woodlands loved, played in the moonlight, on his reeds, to
      the young stags that couched at his feet in golden beds of daffodils and asphodel. Here over a
      darkened land the great Demeter moved, bereaved and childless, bidding the vine be barren, and
      the fig trees stay fruitless, and the seed of the sown furrows lie strengthless to multiply
      and fill the sickles with the ripe increase.

Here the women of Thebes danced upon Cithæron in the mad moonless nights, under the cedars,
      with loose hair on the wind, and bosoms that heaved and brake through their girdles of
      fawnskin. Here at this labour, in Pheræ, the sun‐god toiled as a slave; the highest wrought as
      the lowest; while wise Hermes stood by and made mirth of the kingship that had bartered the
      rod of dominion for the mere music which empty air could make in a hollow reed.
Here, too, the brother gods stood, Hypnos and Oneiros, and Thanatos; their bowed heads
      crowned with the poppy and moonwort, the flowering fern, and the amaranth, and, pressed to
      their lips, a white rose, in the old sweet symbol of silence; fashioned in the same likeness,
      with the same winged feet which yet fall so softly, that no human ears hear their coming; the
      gods that most of all have pity on men, the gods of the Night and of the Grave.
These she saw; not plainly, but through the wavering shadows, and the halo of the vapours
      which floated, dense and silvery as smoke, in from the misty river.
Their lips were dumb, and for her they had no name nor story, and yet they spoke to her with
      familiar voices. She knew them, she knew that they were gods, and yet were dead; and in the
      eyes of the forest‐god, who piped upon his reeds, she saw the eyes of Phratos look on her with
      their tender laughter and their unforgotten love.
Just so had he looked so long ago—so long!—in the deep woods at moonrise, when he had played
      to the bounding fawns, to the leaping waters, to the listening trees, to the sleeping
      flowers.
They had called him an outcast—and lo!—she found him a god.
She sank on her knees, and buried her face in her hands, and wept—wept with grief for the
      living lost for ever, wept with joy that the dead for ever lived.
Tears had rarely sprung to her proud rebellious eyes; she deemed them human things, things
      of weakness and of shame; she had thrust them back and bitten her lips till the blood came, in
      a thousand hours of pain, rather than that men should be able to see them and exult. The
      passion had its way for once, and spent itself, and passed; she rose trembling and pale; with
      her eyes wet and dimmed in
       lustre, like stars that shine through rain. She looked
      around her fearfully.
She thought that the gods might rise in wrath against her, even as mortals did, for daring
      to be weary of her life.
As she rose, she saw for the first time before the cold hearth the body of a man.
It was stretched straightly out on the stone floor; the chest was bare; upon the breast the
      right hand was clenched close and hard; the limbs were in profound repose; the head was lit by
      the white glimmer from the moon; the face was calm and colourless, and full of sadness.
In the dim strange light it looked white as marble, colossal as a statue, in that
      passionless rest, that dread repose.
Instinctively she drew nearer to him; breathless and allured she bent forward and looked
      closer on his face.
He was a god, like all the rest, she thought; but dead—not as they were dead, with eyes that
      still rejoiced in the light of cloudless suns, and with lips that still smiled with a serene
      benignity and an eternal love,—but dead, as mortals die, without hope, without release, with
      their breath frozen on their tired lips, and bound on their hearts eternally the burden of
      their sin and woe.
She leaned down close by his side, and looked on him—sorrowful, because, he alone of all the
      gods was stricken there, and he alone had the shadow of mortality upon him.
Looking thus she saw that his hands were clenched upon his chest, as though their latest
      effort had been to tear the bones asunder, and wrench out a heart that ached beneath them; she
      saw that this was not a divine, but a human form,—dead indeed as the rest were, but dead by a
      man’s death of assassination, or disease, or suicide, or what men love to call the “act of
      heaven,” whereby they mean the self‐sown fruits of their own faults and follies.
Had the gods slain him—being a mortal—for his entrance there?
Marcellin in legends had told of her of such things.
He was human; with a human beauty; which yet white was cold and golden, full of serenity and
      sadness, was like the sun‐god’s yonder, and very strange to her whose eyes
       had only rested on the sunburnt, pinched, and rugged faces
      of the populace around her.
That beauty allured her; she forgot that he had against her the crime of that humanity which
      she hated. He was too her like some noble forest beast, some splendid bird of prey, struck
      down by a bolt from some murderous bow, strengthless and senseless, yet majestic even in its
      fall.
“The gods slew him because he dared to be too like to themselves,” she thought, “else he
      could not be so beautiful,—he,—only a man, and dead?”
The dreamy intoxication of fancy had deadened her to all sense of time or fact. The
      exaltation of nerve and brain made all fantastic phantasies seem possible to her as truth.
Herself, she was strong; and desolate no more, since the eyes of the immortals had smiled on
      her, and bade her welcome there; and she felt an infinite pity on him, inasmuch as with all
      his likeness to them he yet, having incurred their wrath, lay helpless there as any broken
      reed.
She bent above him her dark rich face, with a soft compassion on it; she stroked the pale
      heavy gold of his hair, with fingers brown and lithe, but infinitely gentle; she fanned the
      cold pain of his forehead, with the breath of her rose‐like mouth; she touched him, stroked
      him, gazed on him, as she would have caressed and looked on the velvet hide of the stag, the
      dappled plumage of the hawk, the white leaf of the lily.
A subtle, vague pleasure stole on her, a sharp sweet sorrow moved her,—for he was beautiful,
      and he was dead.
“If they would give him back his life?” she thought; and she looked for the glad forest god
      playing on his reed amidst the amber asphodels, he who had the smile and the glance of
      Phratos. But she could see his face no more.
The wind rose, the moon was hidden, all was dark save the flicker of the flame of the lamp;
      the storm had broken and the rain fell: she saw nothing now but the bowed head of Thanatos,
      holding the rose of silence to his lips.
On her ear there seemed to steal a voice from the darkness, saying:
“One life alone can ransom another. Live immortal with us; or for that dead man—perish.”
She bowed her head where she knelt in the darkness; the
       force of an irresistible fate seemed upon her; that
      sacrifice which is at once the delirium and divinity of her sex had entered into her.
She was so lowly a thing; a creature so loveless and cursed; the gods, if they took her in
      pity, would soon scorn her as men had scorned; whilst he whom they had slain there—though so
      still, so white and mute, so powerless,—he looked a king amongst men, though the gods for his
      daring had killed him.
“Let him live!” she murmured. “As for me,—I am nothing—nothing. Let me die as the Dust
      dies—what matter?”
The wind blew the flame of the lamp into darkness; the moon still shone through the storm on
      to the face of Thanatos.
He alone heard. He—the only friend who, come he early or late, fails no living thing at the
      last.
He alone remained, and waited for her: he, whom alone of all the gods—for this man’s
      sake—she chose.
