
CHAPTER II.
IN the days of his youngest youth, in the old drunken days that were dead, this old
      stone‐breaker Marcellin had known such life as it is given to few men to know—a life of the
      soul and the senses; a life of storm and delight; a life mad with blood and wine; a life of
      divinest dreams; a life when women kissed them, and bade them slay; a life when mothers
      blessed them and bade them die; a life, strong, awful, splendid, unutterable; a life seized at
      its fullest and fiercest and fairest, out of an air that was death, off an earth that was
      hell.
When his cheeks had had a boy’s bloom and his curls a boy’s gold he had seen a nation in
      delirium; he had been one of the elect of a people; he had uttered the words that burn, and
      wrought the acts that live; he had been of the Thousand of Marsala; and he had been of the
      avengers in Thermidor: he had raised his flute‐like voice from the tribune, and he had cast in
      his vote for the death of a king; passions had been his playthings, and he had toyed with life
      as a child with a match; he had beheld the despised enthroned in power, and desolation left
      within kings’ palaces; he too had been fierce, and glad, and cruel, and gay, and drunken, and
      proud, as the whole land was; he had seen the white beauty of the royal women bare in the
      hands of the mob, and the throats that princes had caressed kissed by the broad steel knife;
      he had had his youth in a wondrous time, when all men had been gods or devils, and all women
      martyrs or furies.
And now,—he broke stones to get daily bread, and those who passed him by cursed him,
      saying:
“This man slew a king.”
For he had outlived his time, and the life that had been golden and red at its dawn was now
      grey and pale as the ashes of a fire grown cold; for in all the list of the world’s weary
      errors there is no mistake so deadly as age.
Years before, in such hot summer weather as this, against which the Church had prayed, the
      old man, going homewards to his little cabin amidst the fields, had met a little
       child coming straight towards him in the full crimson glow
      of the setting sun, and with the flame of the poppies all around her.
He hardly knew why he looked at her, but when he had once looked his eyes rested there.
She had the hues of his youth about her; in that blood‐red light, amongst the blood‐red
      flowers, she made him think of women’s forms that he had seen in all their grace and their
      voluptuous loveliness clothed in the red garment of death, and standing on the dusky red of
      the scaffold as the burning mornings of the summers of slaughter had risen over the land.
The child was all alone before him in that intense glow as of fire; above her there was a
      tawny sky, flushed here and there with purple; around her stretched the solitary level of the
      fields burnt yellow as gold by the long mouths of heat. There were stripes on her shoulders
      blue and black from the marks of a thong.
He looked at her, and stopped her, why he hardly knew, except that a look about her, beaten
      but yet unsubdued, attracted him. He had seen the look of yore in the years of his youth, on
      the faces of the nobles he hated.
“Have you been hurt?” he asked her in his harsh, strong voice. She put her heavy load of
      faggots down and stared at him.
“Hurt?” She echoed the word stupidly. No one ever thought she could be hurt; what was done
      to her was punishment and justice.
“Yes. Those stripes—they must be painful?”
She gave a gesture of assent with her head, but she did not answer.
“Who beat you?” he pursued.
A cloud of passion swept over her beat face.
“Flamma.”
“You were wicked?”
“They said so.”
“And what do you do when you are beaten?”
“I shut my mouth.”
“For what?”
“For fear they should know it hurt me—and be glad.”
Marcellin leaned on his elm stick, and fastened on her his keen passionless eyes with a look
      which, for him who
       shunned and was shunned by all his kind, was almost
      sympathy.
“Come to my hut,” he said to her. “I know a herb that will take the fret and the ache out of
      your bruises.”
The child followed him passively, half stupidly; he was the first creature that had ever
      bidden her go with him, and this rough pity of his was sweet to her, with an amazing
      incredible balm in it which only those can know who see raised against them every man’s hand,
      and hear on their ears the mockery of all the voices of their world.
Under reviling, and contempt, and constant rejection, she had become savage as a trapped
      hawk, wild as an escaped panther; but to him she was obedient and passive, because he had
      spoken to her without a taunt and without a curse, which until now had been the sole two forms
      of human speech that she had heard.
His little hut was in the midst of those spreading cornfields, set where two pathways
      crossed each other, and stretched down the gentle slope of the cultured lands to join the
      great highway—a hut of stones and plaited rushes, with of roof of thatch, where the old
      republican, hardy of frame and born of a toiling race, dwelt in solitude, and broke his scanty
      bitter bread without lament, if without content.
He took some leaves of a simple herb that he knew, soaked them with water, and bound them on
      her shoulders, not ungently, though his hand was so rough with labour, and, as men said, had
      been so often red with carnage.
Then he gave her a draught of goat’s milk, sweet and fresh, from a wooden bowl; shared with
      her the dry black crusts that formed his only evening meal; bestowed on her a gift of a rare
      old scarlet scarf of woven wools and eastern broideries, one of the few relics of his buried
      life; lifted the faggots on her back, so that she could carry them with greater ease; and set
      her on her homeward way.
“Come to me again,” he said, briefly, as she went across the threshold.
The child bent her head in silence, and kissed his hand quickly and timidly, like a grateful
      dog that is amazed to have a caress, and not a blow.
“After a forty years’ vow I have broken it; I have pitied a human thing,” the old man
      muttered as he stood in his
       doorway looking after her shadow as it passed small and dark
      across the scarlet light of the poppies.
“They call him vile, and they say that he slew men,” thought the child, who had long known
      his face, though he had never noted hers; and it seemed to her that all mercy lay in her
      father’s kingdom—which they called the kingdom of evil. The cool moist herbs slaked the heat
      of her bruises; and the draught of milk had slaked the thirst of her throat.
“Is evil good?” she asked in her heart as she went through the tall red poppies.
And from that evening thenceforward Folle‐Farine and Marcellin cleaved to one another, being
      outcasts from all others.
