
CHAPTER III.
WHEN she awoke she was no longer in the open air by the roadside, with the grey of
      the falling night about her, and the wet leaves for her bed. She was in a white painted
      chamber, sweet with many roses, hung with deep hues of violet, filled with gold and colour and
      sculpture and bronze, duskily beautiful and dimly lighted by a great wood fire that glowed
      upon andirons of brass.
On the wall nearest her hung all alone a picture,—a picture of a girl asleep in a scarlet
      blaze of poppies, above her head a purple butterfly, and on her breast the Red Mouse of the
      Brocken.
Opposite to it beside the hearth, watching her with his small brilliant eyes, and quite
      motionless, sat the old man Sartorian, who had kept his faith with her, though the gods had
      not kept theirs.
And the picture and the reality grew confused before her, and she knew not which was herself
      and which her painted likeness, nor which was the little red mouse that gibbered among the red
      flowers, and which the little old man who sat watching her with the fire gleams bright in his
      eyes; and it seemed to her that she and the picture were one, and he and the mouse were one
      likewise; and she moaned and leaned her head on her hands and tried to think.
The heat of the chamber and the strong nourishment which they had poured down her throat
      when she was insensible of anything they did to her, had revived the life in her. Memory and
      sense returned slowly to her; what first awakened her was her one passionate desire, so
      intense that it became an instinct stifling every other, to go on her way to the city that had
      flashed in its golden glory on her sight one moment, only the next to disappear into the
      eternal night.
“Paris!” she muttered mechanically, as she lifted her face with a hopeless bewildered
      prayer.
“Tell me the way to Paris,” she muttered instinctively, and she tried to rise and walk, not
      well knowing what she did.
The old man laughed a little silently.

“A‐h‐h‐. Women are the only peaches that roll of their own accord from the wall to the
      wasp’s nest.”
At the sound of his voice her eyes opened wide upon him; she knew his face again.
“Where am I?” she asked him with a sharp terror in her voice.
“In my house,” he said simply. “I drove by you when you lay on the roadside. I recognised
      you. When people dream of immortality they generally die in a ditch. You would have died of a
      single night out there. I sent my people for you. You did not wake. You have slept here five
      hours.”
“Is this Rioz?” She could not comprehend, a horror seized her lest she should have strayed
      from Paris back into her mother’s province.
“No. It is another home of mine;’ smaller, but choicer may be. Who has cut your hair
      close?”
She shuddered and turned paler with the memory of that ghastly prison‐house.
“Well; I am not sure but that you are handsomer,—almost. A sculptor would like you more
      now,—what a head you would make for an Anteros, or an Icarus, or a Hyacinthus. Yes—you are
      best so. You have been ill?”
She could not answer; she only stared at him blankly, with sad, mindless, dilated eyes.
“A little gold,” she muttered; “a little gold.”
He looked at her awhile, then rose and went and sent his handwomen, who took her to an inner
      chamber, and bathed and attended her with assiduous care; she was stupefied and knew not what
      they did.
They served her tenderly. They bathed her tired limbs and laid her as gently as though she
      were some wounded royal captive upon a couch of down.
She had no force to resist. Her eyes were heavy, and her senses were obscured. The potence
      of the draught which they had forced through her lips, when she had been insensible, acted on
      her as an anodyne. She sank back unconsciously, and she slept again, all through the night and
      half the day that followed.
Through all the hours she was conscious at intervals of the fragrance of flowers, of the
      gleams of silver and gold, of the sounds of distant music, of the white calm gaze of
       marble fauns and dryads, who looked on her from amidst the
      coolness of hanging foilage. She who had never rested on any softer couch than her truss of
      hay or heap of bracken, dreamed that she slept on roses. The fragrance of innumerable flowers
      breathed all around her. A distant music came through the silence on her drowsy ear. For the
      first time in her life of toil and pain she knew how exquisite a pleasure mere repose can
      be.
At noon she awoke, crying aloud that the Red Mouse claimed her soul from Thanatos.
When her vision cleared, and her dream passed away, the music, the flowers, the colour, the
      coolness, were all real around her. She was lying on a couch as soft as the rose‐beds of
      Sybaris. About her were the luxuries and the graces amidst which the rich dwell. Above her
      head, from a golden height, a painted Eros smiled.
The light, on to which her startled eyes opened, came to her veiled through soft, rosy hues;
      the blossom of flowers met her everywhere, glided lattices and precious stones, and countless
      things for which she knew neither the name nor use, and wondrous plants, with birds like
      living blossoms on the wing above them, and the marble heads of women, rising cold and pure
      above the dreamy shadows—all the colour, and the charm, and the silence, and the grace of the
      life that is rounded by wealth was around her.
She lay silent and breathless awhile, with wide open eyes, motionless from the languor of
      her weakness and the confusion of her thoughts, wondering dully, whether she belonged to the
      hosts of the living or the dead. She was in a small sleeping chamber, in a bed like the cup of
      a lotus; there was perfect silence round her, except for the faint far‐off echo of some music;
      a drowsy subtle fragrance filled the air, the solemn measure of a clock’s pendulum deepened
      the sense of stillness; for the first time in her life she learned how voluptuous a thing the
      enjoyment of simple rest can be. All her senses were steeped in it, lulled by it, magnetised
      by it; and, so far as every thought was conscious to her, she thought that this was
      death—death amidst the fields of asphodel, and in the eternal peace of the realm of
      Thanatos.
Suddenly her eyes fell on a familiar thing, a little picture close at hand, the picture of
      herself amidst the poppies.

She leapt from the bed, and fell before it, and clasped it in her arms, and wept over it and
      kissed it, because it had been the work of his hand, and prayed to the unknown gods to make
      her suffer all things in his stead, and to give him the desire of his soul. And the Red Mouse
      had no power on her, because of her great love.
She arose from that prayer with her mind clear, and her nerves strung; she remembered all
      that had chanced to her.
“Where are my clothes?” she muttered to the serving‐women who watched beside her. “It is
      broad day;—I must go on;—to Paris.”
They craved her to wear the costly and broidered stuffs strewn about her; masterpieces of
      many an eastern and southern loom; but she put them all aside in derision and impatience,
      drawing around her with a proud loving action the folds of her own poor garments.
      Weather‐stained, torn by bush and briar, soaked with night dew, and discoloured by the dye of
      many a crushed flower and bruised berry of the fields and woods, she yet would not have
      exchanged these poor shreds of woven flax and goats’ wool against imperial roves, for poor
      though they were, they were the symbols of her independence and her liberty.
The women tended her gently, and pressed on her many rare and fair things, but she would not
      have them; she took a cup of milk, and passed out into the larger chamber.
She was troubled and bewildered, but she had no fear; for she was too innocent, too wearied,
      and too desperate with that deathless courage, which having borne the worst that fate can do,
      can know no dread.
She stood with her arms folded on her breast, drawing together the tattered folds of the
      tunic, gazing at the luxury, and the blended colour of the room. So softly, that she never
      heard his footfall, the old man entered behind her, and came to the hearth, and looked on her. 
“You are better?” he asked. “Are you better, Folle‐Farine.”
She looked up, and met the eyes of Sartorian. They smiled again on her with the smile of the
      Red Mouse.
The one passion which consumed her was stronger than any fear or any other memory: she only
      though—this man must know?

She sprang forward and grasped his arm with both hands, with the seizure of a tigress; her
      passionate eyes searched his face; her voice came hard and fast.
“What have you done?—is he living or dead?—you must know?”
His eyes still smiled:
“I gave him his golden key;—how he should use it, that was not in our bond. But, truly, I
      will make another bond with you any day, Folle‐Farine.”
She shuddered, and her hands dropped from their hold.
“You know nothing?” she murmured.
“Of your Norse‐god? nay, nothing. An eagle soars too high for a man’s sight to follow, you
      know—oftentimes.”
And he laughed his little soft laugh.
The eagle often soared so high—so high—that the icy vapours of the empyrean froze them dead,
      and they dropped to earth a mere, bruised, helpless, useless mass:—he knew.
She stood stunned and confused: her horror of Sartorian was struggling into life through the
      haze in which all things of the past were still shrouded to her dulled remembrance—all things
      save her love.
“Rest awhile,” he said, gently. “Rest; and we may—who knows?—learn something of your
      northern god. First; tell me of yourself. I have sought for tidings of you vainly.”
Her eyes glanced round her on every side.
“Let me go,” she muttered.
“Nay—a moment yet. You are not well.”
“I am well.”
“Indeed. Then wait a moment.”
She rested where he motioned; he looked at her in smiling wonder.
She leaned on one of the cushioned couches, calm, motionless, negligent, giving no sign that
      she saw the chamber round her to be any other than the wooden barn or thatched cattle‐sheds of
      the old mill‐house; her feet were crossed, her limbs were folded in that exquisite repose
      which is inborn in races of the East; the warmth of the room, and the long hours of sleep had
      brought the natural bloom to her face, the natural lustre to her eyes, which earlier fatigue
      and long illness had banished.
He surveyed her with that smile which she had resented
       on the day when she had besought pity of him for Arslàn’s
      sake.
“Do you not eat?” was all he said.
“Not here.”
He laughed his low humorous laugh that displeased her so bitterly, though it was soft of
      tone.
“And all those silks, and stuffs, and laces—do they please you no better?”
“They are not mine.”
“Pooh! do you not know yet? A female thing, as beautiful as you are, makes hers everything
      she looks upon?”
“That is a fine phrase.”
“And an empty one you think. On my soul! no. Everything you see here is yours, if it please
      you.”
She looked at him with dreaming perplexed eyes.
“What do you want of me?” she said, suddenly.
“Nay—why ask? All men are glad to give to women with such a face as yours.”
She laughed a little; with the warmth, the rest, the wonder, the vague sense of some unknown
      danger, her old skill and courage rose. She knew that she had promised to be grateful always
      to this man; otherwise,—oh, God!—how she could have hated him, she thought!
“Why?” she answered, “why? Oh, only this: when I bought a measure of pears for Flamma in the
      market‐place, the seller of them would sometimes pick me out a big yellow bon‐chrétien, soft
      as butter, sweet as sugar, and offer it to me for myself. Well, when he did that, I always
      knew that the weight was short, or the fruit rotten. This is a wonderful pear you would give
      me; but is your measure false?”
He looked at her with a curious wonder and admiration; he was angered, humbled, incensed,
      and allured, and yet he was glad; she looked so handsome thus with the curl on her quiet lips,
      and her spirited head fit for a bronze cast of Atalanta.
He was an old man; he could bear to pause and rightly appreciate the charm of scorn, the
      spur of irony, the goad of hatred. He knew the full value of its sharp spears to the
      wonder‐blooming aloe.
He left the subject for a happier moment, and seating
       himself, opened his hands to warm them by the wood fire,
      still watching her with that smile, which for its very indulgence, its very banter, she
      abhorred.
“You lost your Norse‐god as I prophesied?” he asked carelessly.
He saw her whole face change as with a blow, and her body bend within itself as a young tree
      bends under a storm.
“He went when you gave him the gold,” she said below her breath.
“Of course he went. You would have him set free,” he said, with the little low laugh still
      in his throat. “Did I not say you must dream of nothing else if once you had him freed. You
      would be full of faith; and unbar your eagle’s prison‐house, and then, because he took wing
      through the open‐door, you wonder still. That is not very wise, Folle‐Farine.”
“I do not wonder,” she said, with fierce effort stifling her misery. “He had a right to do
      as he would: have I said any otherwise?”
“No. You are very faithful still, I see. Yet, I cannot think that you believed my prophecy,
      or you—a woman had never been so strong. You think I can tell you of his fate? Nay, on my soul
      I know nothing. Men do not speak his name. He may be dead;—you shrink? So! can it matter so
      much? He is dead to you. He is a great man, but he is a fool. Half his genius would give him
      the fame he wants with much greater swiftness than the whole ever will. The world likes
      talent, which serves it. It hates genius, which rules it. Men would adore his technical
      treatment, his pictorial magnificence, his anatomical accuracy; but they will always be in awe
      of his intensity of meaning, of his marvellous fertility, of his extraordinary mingling of the
      chilliest of idealism, and the most unsparing of sensualities,—but I talk idly. Let us talk of
      you; see, I chose your likeness, and he let me have it—did you dream that he would part with
      it so lightly?”
“Why not? He had a million things more beautiful?”
He looked at her keenly. He could measure the superb force of this unblenching and mute
      courage.
“In any other creature such an humility would be an hypocrisy. But it is not so in you. Why
      will you carry
       yourself as in an enemy’s house? Will you not even break
      your fast with me? Nay, that is sullen, that is barbaric. Is there nothing that can please
      you? See here,—all women love these; the gipsy as well as the empress. Hold them a
      moment.”
She took them; old oriental jewels lying loose in an agate cup on a table near; there were
      amongst them three great sapphires, which in their way were priceless, from their rare size
      and their perfect colour.
Her mouth laughed with its old scorn. She, who had lost life, soul, earth, heaven, to be
      consoled with the glass beads of a bauble! This man seemed to her more foolish than any
      creature that had ever spoken on her ear.
She looked, then laid them—indifferently—down.
“Three sparrow’s eggs are as big and almost as blue, among the moss in any month of
      May!”
He moved them away, chagrined.
“How do you intend to live?” he asked drily.
“It will come as it comes,” she answered with the fatalism and composure that ran in her
      eastern blood.
“What have you done up to this moment since you left my house at Rioz?”
She told him, briefly; she wanted to hide that she had suffered aught, or had been in any
      measure coldly dealt with, and she spoke with the old force of a happier time, seeking rather
      to show how well it was with her that she should thus be free, and have no law save her own
      will, and knew that none lived who could say to her, “Come hither,” or “go there.”
Almost she duped him, she was so brave. Not quite. His eyes had read the souls and senses of
      women for half a century; and none had ever deceived him. As he listened to her he knew well
      that under her desolation and her solitude her heart was broken—though not her courage.
But he accepted her words as she spoke them. “Perhaps you are wise to take your fate so
      lightly,” he said to her. “But, do you know that it is a horrible thing to be alone and
      penniless and adrift, and without a home or a friend, when one is a woman and young?”
“It is worse when one is a woman, and old; but who pities it then?” she said with the curt
      and caustic meaning that had first allured him in her.

“And a woman is so soon old!” he added with as subtle a significance.
She shuddered a little; no female creature that is beautiful and vigorous and young can
      coldly brook to look straight at the doom of age; death is far less appalling, because death
      is uncertain, mystical, and may still have beauty.
“What do you intend to do with yourself?” he pursued.
“Intend! It is for the rich ‘to intend,’ the poor must take what chances.”
She spoke calmly, leaning down on one of the cushioned benches by the hearth, resting her
      chin on her hand; her brown slender feet were crossed one over another, her eye‐lids were
      heavy from weakness and the warmth of the room; the soft dim light played on her tenderly; he
      looked at her with a musing smile.
“No beautiful woman need ever be poor,” he said, slowly spreading out the delicate palms of
      his hands to the fire; “and you are beautiful—exceedingly.”
“I know!” she gave a quick gesture of her head, tired, insolent, indifferent; and a terrible
      darkness stole over her face; what matter how beautiful she might be, she had no beauty in her
      own sight, for the eyes of Arslàn had dwelt on her, cold, calm, unmoved, whilst he had said,
      “I would love you—if I could.”
“You know your value,” Sartorian said drily. “Well then, why talk of poverty and of your
      future together? they need never be companions in this world.”
She rose and stood before him in the rosy glow of the fire that bathed her limbs until they
      glowed like jade and porphyry.
“No beautiful woman need be poor—no—no beautiful woman need be honest, I dare say.”
He smiled, holding his delicate palms to the warmth of his hearth.
“Your lover drew a grand vision of Barabbas. Well—we choose Barabbas still, just as
      Jerusalem chose; only now, our Barabbas is most often a woman. Why do you rise? It is a wet
      day, out there, and, for the spring time, cold.”
“Is it?”
“And you have been ill?”

“So they say.”
“You will die of cold and exposure.”
“So best.”
“Wait a moment. In such weather I would not let a dog stir.”
“You would if the dog chose to go.”
“To a master who forsook it—for a kick and a curse?”
Her face burned; she hung her head instinctively. She sank down again on the seat which she
      had quitted. The old horror of shame which she had felt by the water side under the orchards
      bent her strength under this man’s unmerciful passion. She knew that he had her secret, and
      the haughty passion and courage of her nature writhed under his taunt of it.
“To refuse to stay is uncouth,” he said to her.
“I am uncouth, no doubt.”
“And it is ungrateful.”
“I would not be that.”
“Ungrateful! I did what you asked of me. I unloosed your Othyr of Art to spend his strength
      as he will, in essaying to raise a storm blast which shall have force enough to echo through
      the endless tunnels of the time to come.”
“You gave him a handful of gold pieces for that!”
“Ah! if you thought that I should offer him the half of my possessions you were
      disappointed, no doubt. But you forgot that ‘that’ would not sell in the world, as yet, for a
      handful of wheat.”
She touched the three sapphires.
“Are your blue stones of less worth, because I, being ignorant, esteem them no more value
      than three sparrows’ eggs in the hedge?”
“My poor jewels! Well, stay here to‐night, you need rest, shelter, and warmth; and to‐morrow
      you shall go as poor as you came, if you wish. The world is very hard. The world is always
      winter—to the poor,” he added, carelessly, resting his keen far‐reaching eyes upon her.
Despite herself she shuddered; he recalled to her that the world was close at hand—the world
      in which she would be houseless, friendless, penniless, alone.
“A hard world, to those who will not worship its gods,” he repeated, musingly. “And you
      astray in it, you poor barbarian, with your noble madness, and your blindness of
       faith and of passion. Do you know what it is to be
      famished, and have none to hear your cries?”
“Do I know?” her voice suddenly gathered strength and scorn, and rang loud on the stillness.
      “Do you? The empty dish, the chill stove, the frozen feet, the long nights, with
      the roof dripping rain, the sour berries and hard roots that mock hunger, the mud floors, with
      the rats fighting to get first at your bed, the bitter black months, whose saints’ days are
      kept by new pains, and whose holy days are feasted by fresh diseases. Do I know?
      Do you?”
He did not answer her; he was absorbed in his study of her face; he was thinking how she
      would look in Paris in some theatre’s spectacle of Egypt, with anclets of dull gold and a
      cymar of dead white, and behind her a sea of palms and a red and sullen sky.
“What a fool he must have been,” he thought, as his eyes went from her to the study of her
      sleeping in the poppies. “What a fool, he left his lantern of Aladdin behind him.”
“You remember unlovely things,” he said aloud. “No, I do not know them; and I should not
      have supposed that you, who did, could so much have cared to know them more, or could have
      clung to them as the only good; as you now seem to do. You cannot love such hardships?”
“I have never known luxuries; and I do not wish to know them.”
“Then you are no woman,—what is your idea of the most perfect life?”
“I do not know—to be always in the open air and to be quite free, and for ever to see the
      sun.”
“Not a low ideal. You must await the Peruvian Paradise. Meanwhile there is a day spring that
      represents the sun not ill; we call it Wealth.”
“Ah!” she could not deride this god, for she knew it was the greatest of them all; when the
      rod of riches had been lost, had not the Far‐Striking King himself been brought low and bound
      down to a slave’s drudgery?
The small, keen, elfin, satiric face bent on her did not change from its musing study, its
      slow vigilant smile; holding her under the subtle influence of his gaze, Sartorian began to
      speak,—speak as he could at choice, with accents sweet as silver, slow words persuasive as
      sorcery. With the terse,
       dainty, facile touches of a master, he placed before her
      that world of which she knew no more than any one of the reeds that blew by the sands of the
      river.
He painted to her that life of all others, which was in most vital contrast and unlikeliness
      to her own; the life of luxury, of indolence, of carelessness, of sovereignty, of endless
      pleasure, and supreme delight; he painted to her the years of a woman rich, caressed,
      omnipotent, beautiful, supreme, with all the world before her from which to choose her lovers,
      her playthings, her triumphs, her victories, her cruelties, and her seductions.
He painted the long cloudless invigorating day of such a favourite of fortune, with its
      hours winged by love and its laughter rhymed to music, and its wishes set to gold; the same
      day for the same woman, whether it were called of Rome or of Corinth, of Byzantium or of
      Athens, of Babylon or of Paris, and whether she herself were hailed hetaira or imperatrix. He
      drew such things as the skill of his words and the deep knowledge of his many years enabled
      him, in language which aroused her even from the absorption of her wretchedness, and stirred
      her dull disordered thoughts to a movement of restless discontent, and of strange
      wonder—Arslàn had never spoken to her thus.
He let his words dwell silently on her mind, awhile: then suddenly he asked her,
“Such lives are; do you not envy them?”
She thought—“envy them? she? what could she envy save the eyes that looked on Arslàn’s
      face?” “What were the use?” she said aloud; “all my life I have seen that all things are for
      others; nothing is for me.”
“Your life is but just opening. Henceforth you shall see all things for you, instead.”
She flashed her eyes upon him.
“How can that be?”
“Listen to me; you are alone in the world, Folle‐Farine?”
“Alone; yes.”
“You have not a coin to stand a day between you and hunger?”
“Not one.”
“You know of no roof that will shelter you for so much as a night?”

“Not one.”
“You have just left a public place of pestilence?”
“Yes.”
“And you know that everyone’s hand is against you because you are nameless and bastard, and
      come of a proscribed people, who are aliens alike in every land?”
“I am Folle‐Farine; yes.”
For a moment he was silent. The simple, pathetic acceptance of the fate that made her
      name—merely because hers—a symbol of all things despised, and desolate, and forsaken, touched
      his heart and moved him to a sorrowful pity. But the pity died, and the cruelty remained alive
      behind it.
He bent on her the magnetic power of his bright, sardonic, meaning eyes.
“Well—be Folle‐Farine still. Why not? But let Folle‐Farine mean no longer a beggar, an
      outcast, a leper, a thing attainted, proscribed, and for ever suspected; but let it mean on
      the ear of every man that hears it the name of the most famous, the most imperious, the most
      triumphant, the most beautiful woman of her time; a woman of whom the world says, ‘Look on her
      face and die—you have lived enough.’”
Her breath came and went as she listened: the blood in her face flushed and paled; she
      trembled violently, and her whole frame seemed to dilate and strengthen and vibrate with the
      electric force of that subtlest temptation.
“I!” she murmured brokenly.
“Yes, you. All that I say to you shall be: homeless, tribeless, nameless, nationless,
      thought you stand there now, Folle‐Farine.”
The wondrous promise swept her fancy for the moment on the strong current of its imagery, as
      a river sweeps a leaf. This empire hers?—hers?—when all mankind had driven and derided her and
      shunned her sight and touch, and cursed and flouted her, and barely thought her worthy to be
      called “thou dog!”
He looked at her and smiled, and bent towards the warmth of the fire.
“All that I say you shall be; and—the year is all winter for the poor, Folle‐Farine.”
The light on her face faded; a sudden apprehension
       tightened at her heart; on her face gathered the old fierce
      deadly antagonism which constant insult and attack had taught her to assume on the first
      instant of menace as her only buckler.
She knew not what evil threatened; but vaguely she felt that treason was close about
      her.
“If you do not mock me,” she said slowly, “if you do not—how will you make me what you
      promise?”
“I will show the world to you, you to the world; your beauty will do the rest.”
The darkness and the perplexed trouble deepened on her face; she rose and stood and looked
      at him, her teeth shut together with a quick sharp ring, her straight proud brows drew
      together in stormy silence; all the tigress in her was awoke and rising ready to spring; yet
      amidst that dusky passion, that withering scorn of doubt, there was an innocent pathetic
      wonder, a vague desolation and disappointment, that were childlike and infinitely sad.
“This is a wondrous pear you offer me!” she said bitterly. “And so cheap?—it must be rotten
      somewhere.”
“It is golden. Who need ask more?”
And he laughed his little low laugh in his throat.
Then, and then only, she understood him.
With a sudden unconscious instinctive action her hand sought her knife, but the girdle was
      empty; she sprang erect, her face on fire with a superb fury, her eyes blazing, like the eyes
      of a wild beast’s by night, a magnificence of scorn and rage upon her quivering features.
Her voice rang clear and hard and cold as ring the blows of steel.
“I ask more,—that I should pluck it with clean hands, and eat of it with pure lips. Strange
      quibble for a beggar,—homeless, penniless, tribeless, nationless? So you think, no doubt. But
      we who are born outlawed are born free,—and do not sell our freedom. Let me go.”
He watched her with a musing smile, a dreamy calm content; all this tempest of her scorn,
      all this bitterness of her disdain, all this whirlwind of her passion and her suffering,
      seemed but to beguile him more and make him surer of her beauty, of her splendour, of her
      strength.
“She would be a great creature to show to the world,” he thought, as he drooped his head and
      watched her through
       his half‐closed eyelids, as the Red Mouse watched the
      sleeper in the poppies. “Let you go?” he said with that slow ironic smile—“let
      you go? Why should I let you go—Folle‐Farine?”
“Why? Why? To save your own life—if you are wise.”
He laughed in his throat again.
“Ah, ah! It is never wise to threaten, Folle‐Farine. I do not threaten. You are foolish; you
      are unreasonable; and that is the privilege of a woman. I am not angered at it. On the
      contrary; it adds to your charm. You are a beautiful, reckless, stubborn, half mad, half
      savage creature. Passion and liberty become you,—become you like your ignorance and ferocity.
      I would not for worlds that you should change them.”
“Let me go,” she cried, across his words.
“Oh fool! the winter will be hard,—and you are bare of foot,—and you have not a crust!”
“Let me go.”
“Ah! Go?—to beg your way to Paris, and to creep through the cellars and the hospitals till
      you can see your lover’s face, and to crouch a moment at his feet to hear him mutter a curse
      on you in payment for your pilgrimage; and then to slit your throat or his—in your despair,
      and lie dead in all your loveliness in the common ditch.”
“Let me go, I say!”
“Or else, more like, come back to me in a week’s time and say, ‘I was made but now I am
      wise. Give me the golden pear. What matter a little speck? What is golden may be rotten; but
      to all lips it is sweet.”
“Let me go!”
She stood at bay before him, pale in her scorn of rage, her right hand clenched against her
      breast, her eyes breathing fire, her whole attitude instinct with the tempest of contempt and
      loathing, which she held down thus, passive and almost wordless, because she once had promised
      never to be thankless to this man.
He gazed at her and smiled, and thought how beautiful that chained whirlwind of her passions
      looked; but he did not touch her nor even go nearer to her. There was a dangerous gleam in her
      eyes that daunted him. Moreover
       he was patient, humorous, gentle, cruel, wise—all in one;
      and he desired to tame and to beguile her, and to see her slowly drawn into the subtle
      sweetness of the powers of gold; and to enjoy the yielding of each moral weakness one by one,
      as the southern boy slowly pulls limb from limb, wing from wing, of the cicada.
“I will let you go—surely,” he said, with his low grim laugh. “I keep no woman prisoner
      against her will. But think one moment longer, Folle‐Farine. You will take no gift at my
      hands?”
“None.”
“You want to go,—penniless as you are?”
“I will go so; no other way.”
“You will fall ill on the road afresh.”
“That does not concern you.”
“You will starve.”
“That is my question.”
“You will have to herd with the street dogs.”
“Their bite is better than your welcome.”
“You will be suspected,—most likely imprisoned. You are an outcast.”
“That may be.”
“You will be driven to public charity.”
“Not till I need a public grave.”
“You will have never a glance of pity, never a look of softness, from your northern god; he
      has no love for you, and he is in his grave most likely. Icarus falls—always.”
For the first time she quailed as though struck by a sharp blow; but her voice remained
      inflexible and serene.
“I can live without love or pity, as I can without home or gold. Once for all,—let me
      go.”
“I will let you go,” he said slowly, as he moved a little away. “I will let you go in seven
      days’ time. For seven days you shall do as you please; eat, drink, be clothed, be housed, be
      feasted, be served, be beguiled—as the rich are. You shall taste all these things that gold
      gives, and which you, being ignorant, dare rashly deride and refuse. If when seven days end
      you still choose, you shall go, and as poor as you came. But you will not choose, for you are
      woman, Folle‐Farine!”
Ere she knew his intent he had moved the panel and drawn it behind him, and left her
      alone,—shut in a trap
       like the birds that Claudis Flamma had netted in his
      orchards.
That night, when the night without was quite dark, she knelt down before the study of the
      poppies, and kissed it softly, and prayed to the unknown God, of whom none had taught her in
      anywise, yet whose light she still had found, and followed in a dim wondering imperfect
      fashion, as a little child lost in the twilight of some pathless wood, pursues in trembling
      the gleam of some great still planet looming far above her through the leaves.
When she arose from her supplication, her choice was already made.
And the Red Mouse had no power on her, because of her great love.
