
CHAPTER I.
NOT the wheat itself; not even so much as the chaff; only the dust from the corn.
      The dust which no one needs or notices; the mock farina which flies out from under the two
      revolving circles of the grindstones; the impalpable cloud which goes forth to gleam golden in
      the sun a moment, and then is scattered; on the wind; into the water; up in the sunlight; down
      in the mud: what matters? who cares?
Only the dust: a mote in the air; a speck in the light; a black spot in the living daytime;
      a colourless atom in the immensity of the atmosphere, borne up one instant to gleam against
      the sky, dropped down the next to lie in a fetid ditch.
Only the dust: the dust that flows out from between the grindstones, grinding exceeding hard
      and small, as the religion which calls itself Love avers that its God does grind the
      world.
“It is a nothing, less than nothing. The stones turn; the dust is born; it has a puff of
      life; it dies. Who cares? No one. Not the good God; not any man; not even the devil. It is a
      thing even devil‐deserted. Ah, it is very like you,” said the old miller, watching the
      mill‐stones.
Folle‐Farine heard—she had heard a hundred times,—and held her peace.

Folle‐Farine: the dust; only the dust.
As good a name as any other for a nameless creature. The dust; sharp‐winnowed and rejected
      of all, as less worthy than even the shred husks and the shattered stalks.
Folle‐Farine,—she watched the dust fly in and out all day long from between the grindstones.
      She only wondered why, if she and the dust were thus kindred and namesakes, the wind flew away
      with the dust so mercifully, and yet never would fly away with her.
The dust was carried away by the breeze, and wandered wherever it listed. The dust had a
      sweet short summer‐day life of its own ere it died. If it were worthless, it at least was
      free. It could lie in the curl of a green leaf, or on the white breast of a flower. It could
      mingle with the golden dust in a lily, and almost seem to be one with it. It could fly with
      the thistledown, and with the feathers of the dandelion, on every roving wind that blew.
In a vague, dreamy fashion, the child wondered why the dust was so much better dealt with
      than she was.
“Folle‐Farine! Folle—Folle—Folle—Farine!” the other children hooted after her, echoing the
      name by which the grim humour of her bitter‐tongued taskmaster had called her. She had got
      used to it, and answered to it as others to their birth‐names.
It meant that she was a thing utterly useless, absolutely worthless; the very refuse of the
      winnowings of the flail of fate. But she accepted that too, so far as she understood it; she
      only sometimes wondered in a dull fierce fashion why, if she and the dust were sisters, the
      dust had its wings whilst she had none.
All day long the dust flew in and out and about as it liked, through the open doors, and
      among the tossing boughs, and through the fresh cool mists, and down the golden shafts of the
      sunbeams; and all day long she stayed in one place and toiled, and was first beaten and then
      cursed, or first cursed and then beaten,—which was all the change that her life knew. For
      herself, she saw no likeness betwixt her and the dust; for that escaped from the scourge and
      flew forth, but she abode under the flail always.
Nevertheless, Folle‐Farine was all the name she knew.
The great black wheel churned and circled in the brook water, and lichens and ferns and
      mosses made lovely all the
       dark, shadowy, silent place; the red mill roof gleamed in the
      sun, under a million summer leaves; the pigeons came and went all day in and out of their
      holes in the wall; the sweet scents of ripening fruits in many orchards filled the air; the
      great grindstones turned and turned and turned, and the dust floated forth to dance with the
      gnat and to play with the sunbeam.
Folle‐Farine sat aloft, on the huge wet timbers above the wheel, and watched with her great
      sorrowful eyes, and wondered again, after her own fashion, why her namesake had thus liberty
      to fly forth whilst she had none.
Suddenly a shrill screaming voice broke the stillness savagely.
“Little devil!” cried the miller, “go fetch me those sacks, and carry them within, and pile
      them; neatly, do you hear? Like the piles of stone in the road.”
Folle‐Farine swung down from the timbers in obedience to the command, and went to the heap
      of sacks that lay outside the mill; small sacks, most of them; all of last year’s flour.
There was an immense gladiolus growing near, in the mill‐garden, where they were; a tall
      flower all scarlet and gold, and straight as a palm, with bees sucking into its bells, and
      butterflies poising on its stem. She stood a moment looking at its beauty; she was scarce any
      higher than its topmost bud, and was in her way beautiful, something after its fashion. She
      was a child of six or eight years, with limbs moulded like sculpture, and brown as the brook
      water; great lustrous eyes, half savage and half soft; a mouth like a red pomegranate bud, and
      straight dark brows—the brows of the friezes of Egypt.
Her only clothing was a little short white linen kirtle, knotted around her waist, and
      falling to her knees; and her skin was burned, by exposure to the sun, to a golden brown
      colour, though in texture it was soft as velvet, and showed all the veins like glass. Standing
      there in the deep grass, with the scarlet flower against her, and purple butterflies over her
      head, an artist would have painted her and called her by a score of names, and described for
      her some mystical or noble fate: as Anteros, perhaps, or as the doomed son of Procne, or as
      some child born to the Forsaken in the savage forest of Naxos, or conceived by Persephone, in
      the eternal
       night of hell, whilst still the earth lay black and barren
      and fruitless, under the ban and curse of a bereaved maternity.
But here she had only one name, Folle‐Farine; and here she had only to labour drearily and
      stupidly, like the cattle of the field, and without their strength, and with barely so much
      even as their scant fare and begrudged bed.
The sunbeams that fell on her might find out that she had a beauty which ripened and grew
      rich under their warmth, like that of a red flower bud or a golden autumn fruit. But nothing
      else ever did. In none of the eyes that looked on her had she any sort of loveliness. She was
      Folle‐Farine; a little wicked beast that only merited at best a whip and a cruel word, a
      broken crust and a malediction; a thing born of the devil, and out of which the devil needed
      to be scourged incessantly.
The sacks were all small; they were the property of the peasant proprietors of the district:
      the department of Calvados. But though small they were heavy in proportion to her age and
      power. She lifted one, although with effort, yet with the familiarity of an accustomed action:
      poised it on her back, clasped it tight with her round slender arms, and carried it slowly
      through the open door of the mill. That one put down upon the bricks, she came for a second,—a
      third,—a fourth,—a fifth,—a sixth, working doggedly, patiently and willingly, as a little
      donkey works.
The sacks were in all sixteen; before the seventh she paused.
It was a hot day in the late summer: she was panting and burning with exertion; the bloom in
      her cheeks had deepened to scarlet; she stood a moment, resting, bathing her face in the sweet
      coolness of a white tall tuft of lilies.
The miller looked round where he worked, amongst his beans and cabbages, and saw.
“Little mule! Little beast!” he cried. “Would you be lazy—you!—who have no more right to
      live at all than an eft, or a stoat, or a toad!”
And as he spoke he came towards her. He had caught up a piece of rope with which he had been
      about to tie his beans to a stake, and he struck the child with it. The
       sharp cord bit the flesh cruelly, curling round her bare
      chest and shoulders, and leaving a livid mark.
She quivered a little, but she said nothing; she lifted her head and looked at him, and
      dropped her hands to her sides. Her eyes glowed fiercely; her red curling lips shut tight; her
      straight brows drew together.
“Little devil! Will you work now?” said the miller. “Do you think you are to stand in the
      sun and smell at flowers—you! Pouf‐f‐f!”
Folle‐Farine did not move.
“Pick up the sacks this moment, little brute,” said the miller. “If you stand still a second
      before they are housed, you shall have as many stripes as there are sacks left untouched. Oh,
      hè: do you hear?”
She heard, but she did not move.
“Do you hear,” he pursued. “As many strokes as there are sacks, little wretch. Now—I will
      give you three moments to choose. One!”
Folle‐Farine still stood mute and immovable, her head erect, her arms crossed on her chest.
      A small, slender, bronze‐hued, half‐nude figure amongst the ruby hues of the gladioli and the
      pure snow‐like whiteness of the lilies.
“Two!”
She stood in the same attitude, the sacks lying untouched at her feet, a purple‐winged
      butterfly lighting one her head.
“Three!”
She was still mute; still motionless.
He seized her by the shoulder with one hand, and with the other lifted the rope.
It curled round her breast and back, again and again and again; she shuddered, but she did
      not utter a single cry. He struck her the ten times; with the same number of strokes as there
      remained sacks uncarried. He did not exert any great strength, for had he used his uttermost
      he would have killed her, and she was of value to him; but he scourged her with a merciless
      exactitude in the execution of his threat, and the rope was soon wet with drops of her bright
      young blood.
The noonday sun fell golden all around; the deep sweet peace of the silent country reigned
      everywhere; the pigeons fled to and fro in and out of their little arched homes; the
       millstream flowed on, singing a pleasant song; now and then a
      ripe apricot dropped with a low sound on the turf; close about was all the radiance of summer
      flowers; of heavy rich roses, of yellow lime tufts, of sheaves of old‐fashioned comely phlox,
      and all the delicate shafts of the graceful lilies. And in the warmth the child shuddered
      under the scourge; against the light the black rope curled like a serpent darting to sting;
      among the sun‐fed blossoms there fell a crimson stain.
But never a word had she uttered. She endured to the tenth stroke in silence.
He flung the cord aside amongst the grass. “Daughter of devils!—what strength the devil
      gives!” he muttered.
Folle‐Farine said nothing. Her face was livid, her back bruised and lacerated, her eyes
      still glanced with undaunted scorn and untamed passion. Still she said nothing; but, as his
      hand released her, she darted as noiselessly as a lizard to the water’s edge, set her foot on
      the lowest range of the woodwork, and in a second leaped aloft to the highest point, and
      seated herself astride on that crossbar of timber on which she had been throned when he had
      summoned her first, above the foam of the churning wheels, and in the deepest shadow of
      innumerable leaves.
Then she lifted up a voice as pure, as strong, as fresh as the voice of a mavis in May time,
      and sang, with reckless indifference, a stave of song in a language unknown to any of the
      people of that place; a loud fierce air, with broken words of curious and most dulcet melody,
      which rang loud and defiant, yet melancholy, even in their rebellion, through the foliage, and
      above the sound of the loud mill water.
“It is a chaunt to the foul fiend,” the miller muttered to himself. “Well, why does he not
      come and take his own; he would be welcome to it.” And he went and sprinkled holy water on his
      rope, and said an ave or two over it to exorcise it.
Every fibre of her childish body ached and throbbed; the stripes on her shoulders burned
      like flame; her little brain was dizzy; her little breast was black with bruises; but still
      she sang on, clutching the timber with her hands to keep her from falling into the foam below,
      and flashing her proud eyes down through the shade of the leaves.

“Can one never cut the devil out of her?” muttered the miller, going back to his work
      amongst the beans.
After a while the song ceased; the pain she suffered stifled her voice despite herself; she
      felt giddy and sick, but she sat there still in the shadow, holding on by the jutting
      woodwork, and watching water foam and eddy below.
The hours went away; the golden day died; the greyness of evening stole the glow from the
      gladioli and shut up the buds of the roses; the lilies gleamed but the whiter in the dimness
      of twilight; the vesper chimes were rung from the cathedral two leagues away over the
      fields.
The miller stopped the gear of the mill; the grindstones and the water‐wheels were set at
      rest; the peace of the night came down; the pigeons flew to roost in their niches; but the
      sacks still lay uncarried on the grass, and a spider had found time to spin his fairy ropes
      about them.
The miller stood on his threshold, and looked up at her where she sat aloft in the dusky
      shades of the leaves.
“Come down and carry these sacks, little brute,” he said. “If not—no supper for you
      to‐night.”
Folle‐Farine obeyed him and came down from the huge pile, slowly, her hands crossed behind
      her back, her head erect, her eyes glancing like the eyes of a wild hawk.
She walked straight past the sacks, across the dew‐laden turf, through the tufts of the
      lilies, and so silently into the house.
The entrance wa a wide kitchen, paved with blue and white tiles, clean as a watercress,
      filled with the pungent odour of dried herbs, and furnished with brass pots and pans, with
      walnut presses, with pinewood tressels, and with strange little quaint pictures and images of
      saints. On one of the tressels were set a jug of steaming milk, some rolls of black bread, and
      a big dish of stewed cabbages. At the meal there was already seated a lean, brown, wrinkled,
      careworn old serving woman, clad in the blue kirtle and the white head gear of Normandy.
The miller stayed the child at the threshold.
“Little devil—not a bit nor drop to‐night if you do not carry the sacks.”
Folle‐Farine said nothing, but moved on, past the food on the board, past the images of the
      saints, past the high lancet
       window, through which the moonlight had begun to stream, and
      out at the opposite door.
There she climbed a steep winding stairway on to which that door had opened, pushed aside a
      little wooden wicket, entered a loft in the roof, loosened the single garment that she wore,
      shook it off from her, and plunged into the fragrant mass of daisied hay and of dry orchard
      mosses which served her as a bed. Covered in these, and curled like a dormouse in its nest,
      she clasped her hands above her head, and sought to forget in sleep her hunger and her wounds.
      She was well used to both.
Below there was a crucifix, with a bleeding God upon it: there was a little rudely
      sculptured representation of the Nativity; there was a wooden figure of St. Christopher; a
      portrait of the Madonna, and many other symbols of the church. But he child went to her bed
      without a prayer on her lips, and with a curse on her head, and bruises on her body.
Sleep, for once, would not come to her. She was too hurt and sore to be able to lie without
      pain: the dried grasses, so soft to her usually, were like thorns beneath the skin that still
      swelled and smarted from the stripes of the rope. She was feverish; she tossed and turned in
      vain; she suffered too much to be still; she sat up and stared with her passionate wistful
      eyes, at the leaves that were swaying against the square casement in the wall, and the
      moonbeam that shone so cold and bright across her bed.
She listened, all her sense awake, to the noises of the house. There were not many: a cat’s
      mew, a mouse’s scratch, the click‐clack of the old woman’s step, the shrill monotony of the
      old man’s voice, these were all. After a while even these ceased; the wooden shoes clattered
      up the wooden stairs, the house became quite still; there was only in the silence the endless
      flowing murmur of the water breaking against the motionless wheels of the mill.
Neither man nor woman had come near to bring her anything to eat or drink. She had heard
      them muttering their prayers before they went to rest, but no hand unlatched her door. She had
      no disappointment, because she had had no hope. She had rebellion, because Nature had grafted
      it in her; but she went no further. She did not know what it was to hope. She was only a young
      wild
       animal, well used to blows, and drilled by them, but not
      tamed.
As soon as the place was silent, she got out of her nest of grass, slipped on her linen
      skirt, and opened her casement—a small square hole in the wall, and merely closed by a loose
      deal shutter, with a hole cut in it, scarcely bigger than her head. A delicious sudden rush of
      summer air met her burning face; a cool cluster of foliage hit her a soft blow across the eyes
      as the wind stirred it. They were enough to allure her.
Like any other young cub of the woods, she had only two instincts—air and liberty.
She thrust herself out of the narrow window with the agility that only is born of frequent
      custom, and got upon the shelving thatch of a shed which sloped a foot or so below, slid down
      the roof, and swung herself by the jutting bricks of the outhouse wall on to the grass. The
      house dog, a brindled mastiff, that roamed loose all night about the mill, growled and sprang
      at her; then, seeing who she was, put up his gaunt head and licked her face, and turned again
      to resume the rounds of his vigilant patrol.
Ere he went, she caught and kissed him, closely and fervently, without a word. The mastiff
      was the only living thing that did not hate her; she was grateful, in a passionate, dumb,
      unconscious fashion. Then she took to her feet, ran, as swiftly as she could, along the margin
      of the water, and leaped like a squirrel into the wood, on whose edge the mill stood.
Once there she was content.
The silence, the shadows, the darkness where the trees stood thick, the pale quivering
      luminance of the moon, the mystical eërie sounds that fill a woodland by night, all which
      would have had terror for tamer and happier creatures of her years, had only for her a vague
      entranced delight. Nature had made her without one pulse of fear; and she had remained too
      ignorant to have been ever taught it.
It was still warm with all the balmy breath of midsummer: there were heavy dews everywhere;
      here and there on the surface of the water, there gleamed the white closed cups of the lotus;
      through the air there passed, now and then, the soft, grey, dim body of a night‐bird on the
       wing; the wood, whose trees were pines, and limes, and
      maples, was full of a deep dreamy odour; the mosses that clothed many of the branches hung,
      film‐like, in the wind in lovely coils and web‐like phantasies.
Around stretched the vast country, dark and silent, as in a trance, the stillness only
      broken by some faint note of a sheep’s bell, some distant song of a mule‐driver passing
      homeward.
The child strayed onward through the trees, insensibly soothed, and made glad, she knew not
      why, by all the dimness and the fragrance round her.
She stood up to her knees in the shallow freshets that every now and then broke up through
      the grasses: she felt the dews, shaken off the leaves above, fall deliciously upon her face
      and hair; she filled her hands with the night‐blooming marvel‐flower, and drank in its
      sweetness as though it were milk and honey; she crouched down and watched her own eyes look
      back at her from the dark gliding water of the river.
Then she threw herself on her back upon the mosses—so cool and moist that they seemed like
      balm upon the bruised hot skin—and lay there looking upward at the swift mute passage of the
      flitting owls, at the stately flights of the broad‐winged moths, at the movement of the swift
      brown bats, at the soft trembling of the foliage in the breeze, at the great clouds slowly
      sailing across the brightness of the moon. All these things were infinitely sweet to her with
      the sweetness of freedom, of love, of idleness, of rest, of all things which her life had
      never known; so dumbly may the young large‐eyed antelope feel the beauty of the forest in the
      hot lull of tropic nights, when the speed of the pursuer has relaxed, and the aromatic breath
      of the panther is no more against its flank.
She lay there long, quite motionless, tracing, with a sort of voluptuous delight, all
      movements in the air, all changes in the clouds, all shadows in the leaves. All the immense
      multitude of ephemeral life which, unheard in the day, fills the earth with innumerable
      whispering voices after the sun has set, now stirred in every herb and under every bough
      around her.
The silvery ghost‐like wing of an owl touched her forehead once. A little dormouse ran
      across her feet. Strange
       shapes floated across the cold white surface of the water.
      Quaint things, hairy, filmy‐winged, swam between her and the stars. But none of these things
      had terror for her; they were things of the night, with which she felt vaguely the instinct of
      kinship.
She was only a little wild beast, they said, the offspring of darkness, and vileness, and
      rage and disgrace. And yet, in a vague imperfect way, the glories of the night, its mysterious
      charm and solemn beauty, its melancholy and lustrous charm, quenched the fierceness in her
      dauntless eyes, and filled them with dim wondering tears, and stirred the half‐dead soul in
      her to some dull pain, some nameless ecstacy, that were not merely physical.
And then, in her way, being stung by these, and moved, she knew not why, to a strange sad
      sense of loneliness and shame, and knowing no better she prayed.
She raised herself on her knees, and crossed her hands upon her chest, and prayed after the
      fashion that she had seen men and women and children pray at roadside shrines and crosses;
      prayed aloud, with a little beating breaking heart, like the young child she was.
“Oh Devil! if I be indeed thy daughter, stay with me; leave me not alone: lend me thy
      strength and power, and let me inherit of thy kingdom. Give me this, oh great Lord, and I will
      praise thee and love thee always.”
She prayed in all earnestness, in all simplicity, in broken, flattering language; knowing no
      better; knowing only that she was alone on the earth and friendless, and very hungry and in
      sore pain, whilst this mighty unknown King of the dominion of darkness, whose child she ever
      heard she was, had lost her, or abandoned her; and reigned afar in some immortal world
      oblivious of her misery.
The silence of the night alone gave back the echo of her own voice. She waited breathless
      for some answer, for some revelation, some reply; there only came the pure cold moon, sailing
      straight from out a cloud, and striking on the waters.
She rose sadly to her feet, and went back along the shining course of the stream, through
      the grasses and the mosses, and under the boughs, to her little nest under the eaves.
As she left the obscurity of the wood and passed into the fuller light, her bare feet
      glistening, and her shoulders wet with the showers of dew, a large dark shape flying down the
       wind smote her with his wings upon the eyes, lighted one
      moment on her head, and then swept onward lost in shade. At that moment, likewise, a radiant
      golden globe flashed to her sight, dropped to her footsteps, and shone an instant in the
      glisten from the skies.
It was but a great goshawk seeking for its prey; it was but a great meteor fading and
      falling at its due appointed hour; but to the heated, savage, dreamy fancy of the child it
      seemed an omen, an answer, a thing of prophecy, a spirit of air; nay, why not Him himself?
In legends, which had been the only lore her ears had ever heard, it had been often told he
      took such shapes as this.
“If he should give me his kingdom!” she thought; and her eyes flashed alight; her heart
      swelled; her cheeks burned. The little dim untutored brain could not hold the thought long or
      close enough to grasp, or sift, of measure it; but some rude rich glory, impalpable,
      unutterable, seemed to come to her and bathe her in its heat and colour. She was his
      offspring, so they all told her; why not, then, also his heir?
She felt, as felt the goatherd or the charcoal‐burner in those legends she had fed on, who
      was suddenly called from poverty and toil, from hunger and fatigue, from a fireless hearth,
      and a bed of leaves, to inherit some fairy empire, to ascend to some region of the gods.
Like one of these, hearing the summons to some great unknown imperial power smite all his
      poor pale barren life to splendour, so Folle‐Farine, standing by the water’s side in the light
      of the moon, desolate, ignorant, brute‐like, felt elected to some mighty heritage unseen of
      men. If this were waiting for her in the future, what matter, now, were stripes or wounds or
      woe?
She smiled a little, dreamily, like one who beholds fair visions in his sleep, and stole
      back over the starlit grass, and swung herself upward by the tendrils of ivy, and crouched
      once more down in her nest of mosses.
And either the courage of the spirits of darkness, or the influence of instincts dumb but
      nascent, was with her; for she fell asleep in her little loft in the roof as though she were a
      thing cherished of heaven and earth, and dreamed happily all through the hours of the
      slowly‐rising dawn:
       her bruised body and her languid brain and her aching heart
      all stilled and soothed, and her hunger and passion and pain forgotten; with the
      night‐blooming flowers still clasped in her hands, and on her closed mouth a smile.
For she dreamed of her Father’s kingdom, a kingdom which no man denies to the creature that
      has beauty and youth, and is poor and yet proud, and is of the sex of its mother.
