
CHAPTER XX
Wogan went from the parlour and climbed out of the house by the rope-ladder. He left it
     hanging at the window and walked up the glimmering road, a ribbon of ghostly white between dim
     hills. It was then about half-past twelve of the night, and not a feather of cloud stained the
     perfection of the sky. It curved above his head spangled like a fair lady's fan, and
     unfathomably blue like Clementina's eyes when her heart stirred in their depths. He reached the
     little footway and turned into the upward cleft of the hills. He walked now into the thick
     night of a close-grown clump of dwarf-oaks, which weaved so dense a thatch above his head that
     he knocked against the boles. The trees thinned, he crossed here and there a dimpled lawn in
     the pure starshine, he traversed a sparse grove of larches in the dreamy twilight, he came out
     again upon the grassy lip of a mountain torrent which henceforth kept him company, and which,
     speaking with many voices, seemed a friend trying to catch his mood. For here it leaped over an
     edge of rock, and here in a tiny waterfall, and splashed into a pellucid pool, and the
     reverberating noise filled the dell with a majestic din; there it ran smoothly kissing its
     banks with a
      murmur of contentment, embosoming the stars; beyond, it chafed hoarsely between
     narrow walls; and again half a mile higher up it sang on shallows and evaded the stones with a
     tinkling laugh. But Wogan was deaf to the voices; he mounted higher, the trees ceased, he came
     into a desolate country of boulders; and the higher he ascended, the more heavily he walked. He
     stopped and washed his face and hands clean of blood-stains in the stream. Above him and not
     very far away was the lonely hut.
He came upon it quite suddenly. For the path climbed steeply at the back, and slipping from
     the mouth of a narrow gully he stood upon the edge of a small plateau in the centre of which
     stood the cabin, a little house of pinewood built with some decoration and elegance. One
     unglazed window was now unshuttered, and the light from a lantern streamed out of it in a
     yellow fan, marking the segment of a circle upon the rough rocky ground and giving to the dusk
     of the starshine a sparkle of gold. Through the window Wogan could see into the room. It was
     furnished simply, but with an eye to comfort. He saw too the girl he had dared to bear off from
     the thick of a hostile town. She was lying upon a couch, her head resting upon her folded arms.
     She was asleep, and in a place most solitary. Behind the cabin rose a black forest of pines,
     pricking the sky with their black spires, and in front of it the ground fell sharply to the
     valley, in which no light gleamed; beyond the valley rose the dim hills again. Nor was there
     any sound
      except the torrent. The air at this height was keen and fresh with a smell of
     primeval earth. Wogan hitched his cloak about his throat, and his boots rang upon the rock. The
     Princess raised her head; Wogan walked to the door and stood for a little with his hand upon
     the latch. He lifted it and entered. Clementina looked at him for a moment, and curiously. She
     had no questions as to how his struggle with the Governor of Trent's emissaries had fared.
     Wogan could understand by some unspoken sympathy that that matter had no place in her thoughts.
     She stood up in an attitude of expectation.
"It grows towards morning?" said she.
"In two hours we shall have the dawn," he replied; and there was a silence between them.
"You found this cabin open?" said Wogan.
"The door was latched. I loosed a shutter. The night is very still."
"One might fancy there were no others alive but you and me across all the width of the
     world."
"One could wish it," she said beneath her breath, and crossed to the window where she stayed,
     breathing the fresh night. The sigh, however, had reached to Wogan's ears. He took his pistols
     from his belt, and to engage his thoughts, loaded the one which had been fired at him. After a
     little he looked up and saw that Clementina's eyes dwelt upon him with that dark steady look,
     which held always so much of mystery and told always one thing plainly, her lack of fear. And
     she said suddenly,—

"There was trouble at Peri. I climbed from the window. I had almost forgotten. As I ran down
     the road past the open court, I saw a little group of men gathered about the foot of the
     staircase! I was in two minds whether to come back and load your pistols or to obey you. I
     obeyed, but I was in much fear for you. I had almost forgotten, it seems so long ago. Tell me!
     You conquered; it is no new thing. Tell me how!"
She did not move from the window, she kept her eyes fixed upon Wogan while he told his story,
     but it was quite clear to him that she did not hear one half of it. And when he had done she
     said,—
"How long is it till the morning?"
Wogan had spun his tale out, but half an hour enclosed it, from the beginning to the end. He
     became silent again; but he was aware at once that silence was more dangerous than speech, for
     in the silence he could hear both their hearts speaking. He began hurriedly to talk of their
     journey, and there could be no more insidious topic for him to light upon. For he spoke of the
     Road, and he had already been given a warning that to the romance of the Road her heart turned
     like a compass-needle to the north. They were both gipsies, for all that they had no Egyptian
     blood. That southward road from Innspruck was much more than a mere highway of travel between a
     starting-place and a goal, even to these two to whom the starting-place meant peril and the
     goal the first opportunity of sleep.

"Even in our short journey," said Clementina, "how it climbed hillsides angle upon angle, how
     it swept through the high solitudes of ice where no trees grow, where silence lives; how it
     dropped down into green valleys and the noise of streams! And it still sweeps on, through dark
     and light, a glimmer at night, a glare in the midday, between lines of poplars, hidden amongst
     vines, through lighted cities, down to Venice and the sea. If one could travel it, never
     retracing a step, pitching a tent by the roadside when one willed! That were freedom!" She
     stopped with a remarkable abruptness. She turned her eyes out of the window for a little. Then
     again she asked,—
"How long till morning?"
"But one more hour."
She came back into the room and seated herself at the table.
"You gave me some hint at Innspruck of an adventurous ride from Ohlau," and she drew her
     breath sharply at the word, as though the name with all its associations struck her a blow,
     "into Strasbourg. Tell me its history. So will this hour pass."
He told her as he walked about the room, though his heart was not in the telling, nor hers in
     the hearing, until he came to relate the story of his escape from the inn a mile or so beyond
     Stuttgart. He described how he hid in the garden, how he crossed the rich level of lawn to the
     lighted window, how to his surprise he was admitted without a question
      by an old bookish gentleman—and thereupon he ceased so suddenly that Clementina
     turned her head aside and listened.
"Did you hear a step?" she asked in a low voice.
"No."
And they both listened. No noise came to their ears but the brawling of the torrent. That,
     however, filled the room, drowning all the natural murmurs of the night.
"Indeed, one would not hear a company of soldiers," said Clementina. She crossed to the
     window.
"Yet you heard my step, and it waked you," said Wogan, as he followed her.
"I listened for it in my sleep," said she.
For a second time that night they stood side by side looking upon darkness and the spangled
     sky. Only there was no courtyard with its signs of habitation. Clementina drew herself away
     suddenly from the sill. Wogan at once copied her example.
"You saw—?" he began.
"No one," said she, bending her dark eyes full upon him. "Will you close the shutter?"
Wogan drew back instinctively. He had a sense that this open window, though there was no one
     to spy through it, was in some way a security. Suppose that he closed it! That mere act of
     shutting himself and her apart, though it gave not one atom more of privacy, still had a
     semblance of giving it. He was afraid. He said,—
"There is no need. Who should spy on us? What would it matter if we were spied upon?"

"I ask you to close that shutter."
From the quiet, level voice he could infer nothing of the thought behind the request; and her
     unwavering eyes told him nothing.
"Why?"
"Because I am afraid, as you are," said she, and she shivered. "You would not have it shut. I
     am afraid while it stays open. There is too much expectation in the night. Those great black
     pines stand waiting; the stars are very bright and still, they wait, holding their breath. It
     seems to me the whirl of the earth has stopped. Never was there a night so hushed in
     expectation;" and these words too she spoke without a falter or a lifting note, breathing
     easily like a child asleep, and not changing her direct gaze from Wogan's face. "I am afraid,"
     she continued, "of you and me. I am the more afraid;" and Wogan set the shutter in its place
     and let the bar fall. Clementina with a breath of relief came back to her seat at the
     table.
"How long is it till dawn?" she said.
"We have half an hour," said Wogan.
"Well, that old man—Count von Ahlen, you said—received you, heaped logs upon his fire,
     stanched your wounds, and asked no questions. Well? You stopped suddenly. Tell me all!"
Wogan looked doubtfully at her and then quickly seated himself over against her.
"All? I will. It will be no new thing to you;" and as Clementina raised her eyes curiously to
     his,
      he met her gaze and so spoke the rest looking at her with her own direct
     gaze.
"Why did he ask no question, seeing me disordered, wounded, a bandit, for all he knew, with a
     murder on my hands? Because thirty years before Count Philip Christopher von Königsmarck had
     come in just that same way over the lawn to the window, and had sat by that log-fire and
     charmed the old gentleman into an envy by his incomparable elegance and wit."
"Königsmarck!" exclaimed the girl. She knew the history of that brilliant and baleful
     adventurer at the Court of Hanover. "He came as you did, and wounded?"
"The Princess Sophia Dorothea was visiting the Duke of Würtemberg," Wogan explained, and
     Clementina nodded.
"Count Otto von Ahlen, my host," he continued, "had a momentary thought that I was
     Königsmarck mysteriously returned as he had mysteriously vanished; and through these thirty
     years' retention of his youth, Count Otto could never think of Königsmarck but as a man young
     and tossed in a froth of passion. He would have it to the end that I had escaped from such
     venture as had Königsmarck; he would have it my wounds were the mere offset to a love well
     worth them; he would envy me. 'Passion,' said he, 'without passion there can be no
     great thing.'"
"And the saying lived in your thoughts," cried Clementina. "I do not wonder. 'Without passion
      there can be no great thing!' Can books teach a man so much?"
"Nay, it was an hour's talk with Königsmarck which set the old man's thoughts that way; and
     though Königsmarck talked never so well, I would not likely infer from his talk an eternal and
     universal truth. Count Otto left me alone while he fetched me food, and he left me in a
     panic."
"A panic?" said Clementina, with a little laugh. "You!"
"Yes. That first mistake of me for Königsmarck, that insistence that my case was
     Königsmarck's—"
"There was a shadow of truth in it—even then?" said Clementina, suddenly leaning across the
     table towards him. Wogan strove not to see the light of her joy suddenly sparkling in her
     eyes.
"I sat alone, feeling the ghost of Königsmarck in the room with me," he resumed quickly, and
     his voice dropped, and he looked round the little cabin. Clementina looked round quickly too.
     Then their eyes met again. "I heard his voice menacing me. 'For love of a queen I lived. For
     love of a queen I died most horribly; and it would have gone better with the queen had she died
     the same death at the same time—'" And Clementina interrupted him with a cry which was
     fierce.
"Ah, who can say that, and know it for the truth—except the Queen? You must ask her in her
     prison at Ahlden, and that you cannot do. She has her memories maybe. Maybe she has built
     herself within these thirty years a world of thought so
      real, it makes her gaolers shadows, and that prison a place of no account, save
     that it gives her solitude and is so more desirable than a palace. I can imagine it;" and then
     she stopped, and her voice dropped to the low tone which Wogan had used.
"You looked round you but now and most fearfully. Is Königsmarck's spirit here?"
"No," exclaimed Wogan; "I would to God it were! I would I felt its memories chilling me as
     they chilled me that night! But I cannot. I cannot as much as hear a whisper. All the heavens
     are dumb," he cried.
"And the earth waits," said Clementina.
She did not move, neither did Wogan. They both sat still as statues. They had come to the
     great crisis of their destiny. A change of posture, a gesture, an assumed expression which
     might avert the small, the merely awkward indiscretions of the tongue, they both knew to be
     futile. It was in the mind of each of them that somehow without their participation the truth
     would out that night; for the dawn was so long in coming.
"All the way up from Peri," said Wogan, suddenly, "I strove to make real to myself the
     ignominy, the odium, the scandal."
"But you could not," said Clementina, with a nod of comprehension, as though that inability
     was a thing familiar to her.
"When I reached the hut, and saw that fan of light spreading from the window, as it spread
     over the lawn beyond Stuttgart, I remembered Otto von
      Ahlen and his talk of Königsmarck. I tried to hear the menaces."
"But you could not."
"No. I saw you through the window," he cried, "stretched out upon that couch, supple and
     young and sweet. I saw the lamplight on your hair, searching out the gold in its dark brown. I
     could only remember how often I have at nights wakened and reached out my hands in the vain
     dream that they would meet in its thick coils, that I should feel its silk curl and nestle
     about my fingers. There's the truth out, though it's a familiar truth to you ever since I held
     you in my arms beneath the stars upon the road to Ala."
"It was known to me a day before," said she; "but it was known to you so long ago as that
     night in the garden."
"Oh, before then," cried Wogan.
"When? Let the whole truth be known, since we know so much."
"Why, on that first day at Ohlau."
"In the great hall. I stood by the fire and raised my head, and our eyes met. I do
     remember."
"But I had no thought ever to let you know. I was the King's man-at-arms, as I am now;" and
     he burst into a harsh laugh. "Here's madness! The King's man-at-arms dumps him down in the
     King's chair! I had a thought to live to you, if you understand, as a man writes a poem to his
     mistress, to make my life the poem, an unsigned poem that you would never read, and yet
     unsigned, unread,
      would make its creator glad and fill his days. And here's the poem!" and at that
     a great cry of terror leaped from Clementina's lips and held them both aghast.
Wogan had risen from his seat; with a violent gesture he had thrown back his cloak, and his
     coat beneath was stained and dark with blood. Clementina stood opposite to him, all her quiet
     and her calmness gone. There was no longer any mystery in her eyes. Her bosom rose and fell;
     she pointed a trembling hand towards his breast.
"You are hurt. Again for love of me you are hurt."
"It is not my wound," he answered. "It is blood I spilt for you;" he took a step towards her,
     and in a second she was between his arms, sobbing with all the violence of passion which she
     had so long restrained. Wogan was wrung by it. That she should weep at all was a thought
     strange to him; that he should cause the tears was a sorrow which tortured him. He touched her
     hair with his lips, he took her by the arms and would have set her apart; but she clung to him,
     hiding her face, and the sobs shook her. Her breast was strained against him, he felt the
     beating of her heart, a fever ran through all his blood. And as he held her close, a queer
     inconsequential thought came into his mind. It shocked him, and he suddenly held her off.
"The blood upon my coat is wet," he cried. The odium, the scandal of a flight which would
     make her name a byword from London to Budapest, that
      he could envisage; but that this blood upon his coat should stain the dress she
     wore—no! He saw indeed that the bodice was smeared a dark red.
"See, the blood stains you!" he cried.
"Why, then, I share it," she answered with a ringing voice of pride. "I share it with you;"
     and she smiled through her tears and a glowing blush brightened upon her face. She stood before
     him, erect and beautiful. Through Wogan's mind there tripped a procession of delicate ladies
     who would swoon gracefully at the sight of a pricked finger.
"That's John Sobieski speaking," he exclaimed, and with an emphasis of despair, "Poland's
     King! But I was mad! Indeed, I blame myself."
"Blame!" she cried passionately, her whole nature rising in revolt against the word. "Are we
     to blame? We are man and woman. Who shall cast the stone? Are you to blame for that you love
     me? Who shall blame you? Not I, who thank you from my heart. Am I to blame? What have we hearts
     for, then, if not to love? I have a thought—it may be very wrong. I do not know. I do not
     trouble to think—that I should be much more to blame did I not love you too. There's the word
     spoken at the last," and she lowered her head.
Even at that moment her gesture struck upon Wogan as strange. It occurred to him that he had
     never before seen her drop her eyes from his. He had an intuitive fancy that she would never do
     it but as a deliberate token of submission. Nor was
      he wrong. Her next words told him it was her white flag of surrender.
"I believe the spoken truth is best," she said simply in a low voice which ever so slightly
     trembled. "Unspoken and yet known by both of us, I think it would breed thoughts and humours we
     are best without. Unspoken our eyes would question, each to other, at every meeting; there
     would be no health in our thoughts. But here's the truth out, and I am glad—in whichever way
     you find its consequence."
She stood before him with her head bent. She made no movement save with her hands, which
     worked together slowly and gently.
"In whichever way—I—?" repeated Wogan.
"Yes," she answered. "There is Bologna. Say that Bologna is our goal. I shall go with you to
     Bologna. There is Venice and the sea. Bid me go, then; hoist a poor scrap of a sail in an open
     boat. I shall adventure over the wide seas with you. What will you do?"
Wogan drew a long breath. The magnitude of the submission paralysed him. The picture which
     she evoked was one to blind him as with a glory of sunlight. He remained silent for a while.
     Then he said timidly,—
"There is Ohlau."
The girl shivered. The name meant her father, her mother, their grief, the disgrace upon her
     home. But she answered only with her question,—
"What will you do?"

"You would lose a throne," he said, and even while he spoke was aware that such a plea had
     not with her now the weight of thistledown.
"You would become the mock of Europe,—you that are its wonder;" and he saw the corner of her
     lip curve in a smile of scorn.
"What will you do?" she asked, and he ceased to argue. It was he who must decide; she willed
     it so. He turned towards the door of the hut and opened it. As he passed through, he heard her
     move behind, and looking over his shoulder, he saw that she leaned down upon the table and
     kissed the pistol which he had left loaded there. He stepped out of the cabin and closed the
     door behind him.
The dark blue of the sky had faded to a pure and pearly colour; a colourless grey light
     invaded it; the pale stars were drowning; and all about him the trees shivered to the morning.
     Wogan walked up and down that little plateau, torn by indecision. Inside the sheltered cabin
     sat waiting the girl, whose destiny was in his hands. He had a sentence to speak, and by it the
     flow of all her years would be irrevocably ordered. She had given herself over to him,—she,
     with her pride, her courage, her endurance. Wogan had seen too closely into her heart to bring
     any foolish charge of unmaidenliness against her. No, the very completeness of her submission
     raised her to a higher pinnacle. If she gave herself, she did so without a condition or a
     reserve, body and bone, heart and soul. Wogan knew amongst the women of his time many who made
      their bargain with the world, buying a semblance of esteem with a double payment
     of lies. This girl stood apart from them. She loved, therefore she entrusted herself simply to
     the man she loved, and bade him dispose of her. That very simplicity was another sign of her
     strength. She was the more priceless on account of it. He went back into the hut. Through the
     chinks of the shutter the morning stretched a grey finger; the room was filled with a vaporous
     twilight.
"We travel to Bologna," said he. "I will not have you wasted. Other women may slink into
     kennels and stop their ears—not you. The King is true to you. You are for the King."
As she had not argued before, she did not argue now. She nodded her head and fastened her
     cloak about her throat. She followed him out of the hut and down the gorge. In the northeast
     the sky already flamed, and the sun was up before they reached the road. They walked silently
     towards Peri, and Wogan was wondering whether in her heart she despised him when she
     stopped.
"I am to marry the King," said she.
"Yes," said Wogan.
"But you?" she said with her brows in a frown; "there is no compulsion on you to
     marry—anyone."
Wogan was relieved of his fears. He broke into a laugh, to which she made no reply. She still
     waited frowning for his answer.
"No woman," he said, "will ride on my black
      horse into my city of dreams. You may be very sure I will not marry."
"No. I would not have you married."
Wogan laughed again, but Clementina was very serious. That she had no right to make any such
     claim did not occur to her. She was merely certain and resolved that Wogan must not marry. She
     did not again refer to the matter, nor could she so have done had she wished. For a little
     later and while they were not yet come to Peri, they were hailed from behind, and turning about
     they saw Gaydon and O'Toole riding after them. O'Toole had his story to tell. Gaydon and he had
     put the courier to bed and taken his clothes and his money, and after the fellow had waked up,
     they had sat for a day in the bedroom keeping him quiet and telling the landlord he was very
     ill. O'Toole finished his story as they came to Peri. They went boldly to the Cervo Inn, where
     all traces of the night's conflict had been removed, and neither Wogan nor the landlady thought
     it prudent to make any mention of the matter; they waited for Misset and his wife, who came the
     next day. And thus reunited they passed one evening into the streets of Bologna and stopped at
     the Pilgrim Inn.

