
CHAPTER XXII
Wogan was guided through the streets to the mouth of a blind alley, at the bottom of which
     rose a high garden wall, and over the wall the smoking chimneys of a house among the tops of
     many trees freshly green, which shivered in the breeze and shook the sunlight from their
     leaves. This alley, from the first day when the Princess came to lodge in the house, had worn
     to Wogan a familiar air; and this morning, as he pondered dismally whether, after all, those
     laborious months since he had ridden hopefully out of Bologna to Ohlau were to bear no fruit,
     he chanced to remember why. He had passed that alley at the moment of grey dawn, when he was
     starting out upon this adventure, and he had seen a man muffled in a cloak step from its mouth
     and suddenly draw back as his horse's hoofs rang in the silent street, as though to elude
     recognition. Wogan wondered for a second who at that time had lived in the house; but he was
     admitted through a door in the wall and led into a little room with French windows opening on a
     lawn. The garden seen from here was a wealth of white blossoms and yellow, and amongst them
     Clementina paced alone, the richest and the whitest blossom of them all. She
      was dressed simply in a white gown of muslin and a little three-cornered hat of
     straw; but Wogan knew as he advanced towards her that it was not merely the hat which threw the
     dark shadow on her face.
She took a step or two towards him and began at once without any friendly greeting in a cold,
     formal voice,—
"You have received a letter this morning from his Majesty?"
"Yes, your Highness."
"Why does the King linger in Spain?"
"The expedition from Cadiz—"
"Which left harbour a week ago. Well, Mr. Wogan," she asked in biting tones, "how does that
     expedition now on the high seas detain his Majesty in Spain?"
Wogan was utterly dumfounded. He stood and gazed at her, a great trouble in his eyes, and his
     wits with that expedition all at sea.
"Is your Highness sure?" he babbled.
"Oh, indeed, most sure," she replied with the hardest laugh which he had ever heard from a
     woman's lips.
"I did not know," he said in dejection, and she took a step nearer to him, and her cheeks
     flamed.
"Is that the truth?" she asked, her voice trembling with anger. "You did not know?"
And Wogan understood that the real trouble with her at this moment was not so much the King's
     delay in Spain as a doubt whether he himself had played with her and spoken her false. For if
     he was proved
      untrue here, why, he might have been untrue throughout, on the stairway at
     Innspruck, on the road to Ala, in the hut on the bluff of the hills. He could see how harshly
     the doubt would buffet her pride, how it would wound her to the soul.
"It is the truth," he answered; "you will believe it. I pledge my soul upon it. Lay your hand
     in mine. I will repeat it standing so. Could I speak false with your hand close in mine?"
He held out his hand; she did not move, nor did her attitude of distrust relent.
"Could you not?" she asked icily.
Wogan was baffled; he was angered. "Have I ever told you lies?" he asked passionately, and
     she answered, "Yes," and steadily looked him in the face.
The monosyllable quenched him like a pail of cold water. He stood silent, perplexed, trying
     to remember.
"When?" he asked.
"In the berlin between Brixen and Wellishmile."
Wogan remembered that he had told her of his city of dreams. But it was plainly not to that
     that she referred. He shrugged his shoulders.
"I cannot remember."
"You told me of an attack made upon a Scottish town, what time the King was there in the year
     '15. He forced a passage through nine grenadiers with loaded muskets and escaped over the
     roof-tops, where he played a game of hide-and-seek among the chimneys. Ah, you remember the
     story now. There
      was a chain, I remember, which even then as you told of it puzzled me. He threw
     the chain over the head of one of those nine grenadiers, and crossing his arms jerked it tight
     about the man's neck, stifling his cry of warning. 'What chain?' I asked, and you answered,—oh,
     sir, with a practised readiness,—'The chain he wore about his neck.' Do you remember that? The
     chain linked your hand-locks, Mr. Wogan. It was your own escape of which you told me. Why did
     you ascribe your exploits to your King?"
"Your Highness," he said, "we know the King, we who have served him day in and day out for
     years. We can say freely to each other, 'The King's achievements, they are to come.' We were in
     Scotland with him, and we know they will not fail to come. But with you it's different. You did
     not know him. You asked what he had done, and I told you. You asked for more. You said,
     'Amongst his throng of adventurers, each of whom has something to his credit, what has he, the
     chief adventurer?'"
"Well, sir, why not the truth in answer to the question?"
"Because the truth's unfair to him."
"And was the untruth fair to me?"
Mr. Wogan was silent.
"I think I understand," she continued bitterly; "you thought, here's a foolish girl, aflame
     for knights and monsters overthrown. She cries for deeds, not statecraft. Well, out of your
     many, you
      would toss her one, and call it the King's. You could afford the loss, and she,
     please God, would be content with it." She spoke with an extraordinary violence in a low,
     trembling voice, and she would not listen to Wogan's stammered interruption.
"Very likely, too, the rest of your words to me was of a piece. I was a girl, and girls are
     to have gallant speeches given to them like so many lollipops. Oh, but you have hurt me beyond
     words. I would not have thought I could have suffered so much pain!"
That last cry wrung Wogan's heart. She turned away from him with the tears brimming in her
     eyes. It was this conjecture of hers which he had dreaded, which at all costs he must
     dispel.
"Do not believe it!" he exclaimed. "Think! Should I have been at so much pains to refrain
     from speech, if speech was what I had intended?"
"How should I know but what that concealment was part of the gallantry, a necessary preface
     to the pretty speeches?"
"Should I have urged your rescue on the King had I believed you what you will have it that I
     did,—a mere witless girl to be pampered with follies?"
"Then you admit," she cried, "you urged the King."
"Should I have travelled over Europe to search for a wife and lit on you? Should I have
     ridden to Ohlau and pestered your father till he yielded? Should I have ridden across Europe to
     Strasbourg? Should I have endangered my friends in the rush
      to Innspruck? No, no, no! From first to last you were the chosen woman."
The vehemence and fire of sincerity with which he spoke had its effect on her. She turned
     again towards him with a gleam of hopefulness in her face, but midway in the turn she
     stopped.
"You spoke to me words which I have not forgotten," she said doubtfully. "You said the King
     had need of me. I will be frank, hoping that you will match my frankness. On that morning when
     we climbed down the gorge, and ever since I cheered myself with that one thought. The King had
     need of me."
"Never was truer word spoken," said Wogan, stoutly.
"Then why is the King in Spain?"
They had come back to the first question. Wogan had no new answer to it. He said,—
"I do not know."
For a moment or two Clementina searched his eyes. It seemed in the end that she was satisfied
     he spoke the truth. For she said in a voice of greater gentleness,—
"Then I will acquaint you. Will you walk with me for half a mile?"
Wogan bowed, and followed her out of the garden. He could not think whither she was leading
     him, or for what purpose. She walked without a word to him, he followed without a question, and
     so pacing with much dignity they came to the steps of a great house. Then Clementina
     halted.

"Sir," said she, "can you put a name to the house?"
"Upon my word, your Highness, I cannot."
"It is the Caprara Palace," said she, suddenly, and suddenly she bent her eyes upon Wogan.
     The name, however, conveyed no meaning whatever to him, and his blank face told her so clearly.
     She nodded in a sort of approval. "No," she said, relenting, "you did not know."
She mounted the steps, and knocking upon the door was admitted by an old broken serving-man,
     who told her that the Princess Caprara was away. It was permitted him, however, to show the
     many curiosities and treasures of the palace to such visitors as desired it. Clementina did
     desire it. The old man led her and her companion to the armoury, where he was for spending much
     time and breath over the trophies which the distinguished General Caprara had of old rapt from
     the infidels. But Clementina quickly broke in upon his garrulity.
"I have a great wish to see the picture gallery," said she, and the old man tottered onwards
     through many shrouded and darkened rooms. In the picture gallery he drew up the blinds and then
     took a wand in his hand.
"Will you show me first the portrait of Mlle. de Caprara?" said Clementina.
It was a full-length portrait painted with remarkable skill. Maria Vittoria de Caprara was
     represented in a black dress, and the warm Italian colouring of her face made a sort of glow in
     the
      dark picture. Her eyes watched you from the canvas with so life-like a glance you
     had a thought when you turned that they turned after you. Clementina gazed at the picture for a
     long while, and the blood slowly mounted on her neck and transfused her cheeks.
"There is a face, Mr. Wogan,—a passionate, beautiful face,—which might well set a seal upon a
     man's heart. I do not wonder. I can well believe that though to-day that face gladdens the
     streets of Rome, a lover in Spain might see it through all the thick earth of the Pyrenees.
     There, sir, I promised to acquaint you why the King lingered in Spain. I have fulfilled that
     promise;" and making a present to the custodian, she walked back through the rooms and down the
     steps to the street. Wogan followed her, and pacing with much dignity they walked back to the
     little house among the trees, and so came again into the garden of blossoms.
The anger had now gone from her face, but it was replaced by a great weariness.
"It is strange, is it not," she said with a faltering smile, "that on a spring morning,
     beneath this sky, amongst these flowers, I should think with envy of the snows of Innspruck and
     my prison there? But I owe you a reparation," she added. "You said the King had need of me. For
     that saying of yours I find an apt simile. Call it a stone on which you bade me set my foot and
     step. I stepped, and found that your stone was straw."
"No, madam," cried Wogan.

"I had a thought," she continued, "you knew the stone was straw when you commended it to me
     as stone. But this morning I have learned my error. I acquit you, and ask your pardon. You did
     not know that the King had no need of me." And she bowed to him as though the conversation was
     at an end. Wogan, however, would not let her go. He placed himself in front of her, engrossed
     in his one thought, "She must marry the King." He spoke, however, none the less with sincerity
     when he cried,—
"Nor do I know now—no, and I shall not know."
"You have walked with me to the Caprara Palace this morning. Or did I dream we walked?"
"What your Highness has shown me to-day I cannot gainsay. For this is the first time that
     ever I heard of Mlle. de Caprara. But I am very sure that you draw your inference amiss. You
     sit in judgment on the King, not knowing him. You push aside the firm trust of us who know him
     as a thing of no account. And because once, in a mood of remorse at my own presumption, I
     ascribed one trivial exploit—at the best a success of muscle and not brain—to the King which
     was not his, you strip him of all merit on the instant." He saw that her face flushed. Here, at
     all events, he had hit the mark, and he cried out with a ringing confidence,—
"Your stone is stone, not straw."
"Prove it me," said she.
"What do you know of the Princess Caprara at
      the end of it all? You have told me this morning all you know. I will go bail if
     the whole truth were out the matter would take a very different complexion."
Again she said,—
"Prove that to me!" and then she looked over his shoulder. Wogan turned and saw that a
     servant was coming from the house across the lawn with a letter on a salver. The Princess
     opened the letter and read it. Then she turned again to Wogan.
"His Eminence the Cardinal fixes the marriage in Bologna here for to-day fortnight. You have
     thus two weeks wherein to make your word good."
Two weeks, and Wogan had not an idea in his head as to how he was to set about the business.
     But he bowed imperturbably.
"Within two weeks I will convince your Highness," said he, and for a good half-hour he
     sauntered with her about the garden before he took his leave.

