

CHAPTER XII
THE ship on which Daphne travelled had covered about half her course. On a certain
      June evening Mrs. Floyd, walking up and down the promenade deck, found her attention divided
      between two groups of her fellow-travellers—one taking exercise on the same deck as herself;
      the other, a family party, on the steerage deck, on which many persons in the first class
      paused to look down with sympathy as they reached the dividing rail aft.
The group on the promenade deck consisted of a lady and gentleman, and a boy of seven. The
      elders walked rapidly, holding themselves stiffly erect, and showing no sign of acquaintance
      with anyone on board. The child dragged himself wearily along behind them, looking sometimes
      from side to side at the various people passing by, with eyes no less furtive than his
      mother's. She was a tall and handsome woman, with extravagantly marine clothes and much false
      hair. Her companion, a bulky and ill-favoured man, glanced superciliously at the ladies in the
      deck chairs, bestowing always a more attentive scrutiny
       than usual on a very pretty girl, who was lying reading
      midway down, with a white lace scarf draped round her beautiful hair and the harmonious oval
      of her face. Daphne, watching him, remembered that she had seen him speaking to the girl—who
      was travelling alone—on one or two occasions. For the rest, they were a notorious couple. The
      woman had been twice divorced, after misdoings which had richly furnished the newspapers; the
      man belonged to a financial class with which reputable men of business associate no more than
      they are obliged. The ship left them severely alone; and they retaliated by a manner clearly
      meant to say that they didn't care a brass farthing for the ship.
The group on the steerage deck was of a very different kind. It was made up of a consumptive
      wife, a young husband and one or two children. The wife's malady, recently declared, had led
      to their being refused admission to the States. They had been turned back from the emigrant
      station on Ellis Island, and were now sadly returning to Liverpool. But the courage of the
      young and sweet-faced mother, the devotion of her Irish husband, the charm of her dark-eyed
      children, had roused much feeling in an idle ship, ready for emotion. There had been a
      collection for them among the passengers; a Liverpool shipowner, in the
       first class, had promised work to the young man on landing;
      the mother was to be sent to a sanatorium; the children cared for during her absence. The
      family made a kind of nucleus round which whatever humanity—or whatever imitation of it—there
      was on board might gather and crystallise. There were other mournful cases indeed to be
      studied on the steerage deck, but none in which misfortune was so attractive.
As she walked up and down, or sat in the tea-room catching fragments of the conversation
      round her, Daphne was often secretly angered by the public opinion she perceived, favourable
      in the one case, hostile in the other. How ignorant and silly it was—this public opinion! As
      to herself, she was soon aware that a few people on board had identified her and communicated
      their knowledge to others. On the whole, she felt herself treated with deference. Her own
      version of her story was clearly accepted, at least by the majority; some showed her an
      unspoken but evident sympathy, while her wealth made her generally interesting. Yet there were
      two or three in whom she felt or fancied a more critical attitude; who looked at her coolly,
      and seemed to avoid her. Bostonian Pharisees, no doubt!—ignorant of all those great expansions
      of the female destiny that were going forward.

The fact was—she admitted it—that she was abnormally sensitive. These moral judgments, of
      different sorts, of which she was conscious, floating as it were in the life around her, which
      her mind isolated and magnified, found her smarting and sore, and would not let her be. Her
      irritable pride was touched at every turn; she hardly knew why. She was not to be judged by
      anybody; she was her own defender and her own judge. If she was no longer a symbolic and
      sympathetic figure—like that young mother among her children—she had her own claims. In the
      secrecy of the mind she fiercely set them out.
The days passed, however, and as she neared the English shores her resistance to a pursuing
      thought became fainter. It was, of course, Boyson's astonishing appeal to her that had let
      loose the Avenging Goddesses. She repelled them with scorn; yet all the same they hurtled
      round her. After all, she was no monster. She had done a monstrous thing in a sudden brutality
      of egotism; and a certain crude state of law and opinion had helped her to do it, had confused
      the moral values and falsified her conscience. But she was not yet brutalised. Moreover, do
      what she would, she was still in a world governed by law; a world at the heart of which broods
      a power austere and immutable; a power which man did not make,
       which, if he clash with it, grinds him to powder. Its
      manifestations in Daphne's case were slight, but enough. She was not happy, that certainly was
      clear. She did not suppose she ever would be happy again. Whatever it was—just, heroic, or the
      reverse—the action by which she had violently changed her life had not been a success,
      estimated by results. No other man had attracted her since she had cast Roger off; her youth
      seemed to be deserting her; she saw herself in the glass every morning with discontent, even a
      kind of terror; she had lost her child. And in these suspended hours of the voyage, when life
      floats between sky and sea, amid the infinity of waves, all that she had been doing since the
      divorce, her public “causes” and triumphs, the adulations with which she had been surrounded,
      began to seem to her barren and futile. No, she was not happy; what she had done had not
      answered; and she knew it.
One night, a night of calm air and silvery sea, she hung over the ship's side, dreaming
      rather miserably. The ship, aglow with lights, alive with movement, with talk, laughter and
      music, glided on between the stars and the unfathomable depths of the mid-Atlantic. Nothing,
      to north and south, between her and the poles; nothing but a few feet of iron and
       timber between her and the hungry gulfs in which the
      highest Alp would sink from sight. The floating palace, hung by Knowledge above Death, just
      out of Death's reach, suggested to her a number of melancholy thoughts and images. A touch of
      more than Arctic cold stole upon her, even through this loveliness of a summer night; she felt
      desperately unhappy and alone.
From the saloon came a sound of singing 
“An die Lippen wollt' ich pressen
Deine kleine weisse Hand,
Und mit Thränen sie benetzen
Deine kleine weisse Hand.”
 The tears came to her eyes. She remembered that she, too, had once felt the surrender
      and the tenderness of love.
Then she brushed the tears away, angry with herself and determined to brood no more. But she
      looked round her in vain for a companion who might distract her. She had made no friends on
      board, and though she had brought with her a secretary and a maid, she kept them both at arm's
      length, and they never offered their society without an invitation.
What was she going to do? And why was she making this journey?
Because the injustice and absurdity of
       English law had distorted and besmirched her own perfectly
      legitimate action. They had given a handle to such harsh critics as Alfred Boyson. But she
      meant somehow to put herself right; and not only herself, but the great cause of woman's
      freedom and independence. No woman, in the better future that is coming, shall be forced
      either by law or opinion to continue the relations of marriage with a man she has come to
      despise. Marriage is merely proclaimed love; and if love fails, marriage has no further
      meaning or raison d'être: it comes, or should come,
      automatically to an end. This is the first article in the woman's charter, and without it
      marriage itself has neither value nor sanctity. She seemed to hear sentences of this sort, in
      her own voice, echoing about windy halls, producing waves of emotion on a sea of strained
      faces—women's faces, set and pale, like that of Madeleine Verrier. She had never actually made
      such a speech, but she felt she would like to have made it.
What was she going to do? No doubt Roger would resent her coming—would probably refuse to
      see her, as she had once refused to see him. Well, she must try and act with dignity and
      common sense; she must try and persuade him to recognise her good faith, and to get him to
      listen to what she proposed. She had her plan for Roger's reclamation, and was already
       in love with it. Naturally, she had never meant permanently
      to hurt or injure Roger! She had done it for his good as well as her own. Yet even as she put
      this plea forward in the inner tribunal of consciousness, she knew that it was false.
“You have murdered a life!” Well, that was what prejudiced and hide-bound
      persons like Alfred Boyson said, and no doubt always would say. She could not help it; but for
      her own dignity's sake, that moral dignity in which she liked to feel herself enwrapped, she
      would give as little excuse for it as possible.
Then, as she stood looking eastward, a strange thought struck her. Once on that farther
      shore and she would be Roger's wife again—an English subject, and Roger's wife. How
      ridiculous, and how intolerable! When shall we see some real comity of nations in these
      matters of international marriage and divorce?
She had consulted her lawyers in New York before starting; on Roger's situation first of
      all, but also on her own. Roger, it seemed, might take certain legal steps, once he was aware
      of her being again on English ground. But, of course, he would not take them. “It was never me
      he cared for—only Beatty!” she said to herself with a bitter perversity. Still the thought of
      returning within the range of
       the old obligations, the old life, affected her curiously.
      There were hours, especially at night, when she felt shut up with thoughts of Roger and
      Beatty—her husband and her child—just as of old.
How, in the name of justice, was she to blame for Roger's illness? Her irritable thoughts
      made a kind of grievance against him of the attack of pneumonia which she was told had injured
      his health. He must have neglected. himself in some foolish way. The strongest men are the
      most reckless of themselves. In any case, how was it her fault?
One night she woke up suddenly, in the dawn, her heart beating tumultuously. She had been
      dreaming of her meeting—her possible meeting—with Roger. Her face was flushed, her memory
      confused. She could not recall the exact words or incidents of the dream, only that Roger had
      been in some way terrible and terrifying.
And as she sat up in her berth, trying to compose herself, she recalled the last time she
      had seen him at Philadelphia—a painful scene—and his last broken words to her, as he turned
      back from the door to speak them:—
“As to Beatty, I hold you responsible! She is my child, no less than yours. You shall answer
      to me! Remember that!”
Answer to him? Beatty was dead—in
       spite of all that love and science could do. Involuntarily
      she began to weep as she remembered the child's last days; the little choked cry, once or
      twice, for “Daddy!” followed, so long as life maintained its struggle, by a childish anger
      that he did not come. And then the silencing of the cry, and the last change and settling in
      the small face, so instinct already with feeling and character, so prophetic of the woman to
      be.
A grief, of course, never to be got over; but for which she, Daphne, deserved pity and
      tenderness, not reproaches. She hardened herself to meet the coming trial.
She arrived in London in the first week of July, and her first act was to post a letter to
      Herbert French, addressed to his East-End vicarage, a letter formally expressed and merely
      asking him to give the writer “twenty minutes' conversation on a subject of common interest to
      us both.” The letter was signed “Daphne Floyd,” and a stamped envelope addressed to “Mrs.
      Floyd” was enclosed. By return of post she received a letter from a person unknown to her, the
      curate, apparently, in charge of Mr. French's parish. The letter informed her that her own
      communication had not been forwarded, as Mr. French had gone away for a holiday after a threat
      of nervous breakdown
       in consequence of overwork; and business letters and
      interviews were being spared him as much as possible. “He is, however, much better, I am glad
      to say, and if the subject on which you wish to speak to him is really urgent, his present
      address is Prospect House, St. Damian's, Ventnor. But unless it is urgent it would be a
      kindness not to trouble him with it until he returns to town, which will not be for another
      fortnight.”
Daphne walked restlessly up and down her hotel sitting-room. Of course the matter was
      urgent. The health of an East-End clergyman—already, it appeared, much amended—was not likely
      to seem of much importance to a woman of her temperament, when it stood in the way of her
      plans.
But she would not write, she would go. She had good reason to suppose that Herbert French
      would not welcome a visit from her; he might indeed very easily use his health as an excuse
      for not seeing her. But she must see him.
By mid-day she was already on her way to the Isle of Wight. About five o'clock she arrived
      at Ventnor, where she deposited maid and luggage. She then drove out alone to St. Damian's, a
      village a few miles north, through a radiant evening. The twinkling sea was alive with craft
      of all sizes, from the great
       liner leaving its trail of smoke along the horizon, to the
      white-sailed yachts close upon the land. The woods of the Undercliff sank softly to the blues
      and purple, the silver streaks and gorgeous shadows of the sea floor. The lights were broad
      and rich. After a hot day, coolness had come and the air was delightful.
But Daphne sat erect, noticing nothing but the relief of the lowered temperature after her
      hot and tiresome journey. She applied herself occasionally to natural beauty, as she applied
      herself to music or literature; but it is not to women of her type that the true passion of
      it—“the soul's bridegroom”—comes. And she was absorbed in thinking how she should open her
      business to Herbert French.
Prospect House turned out to be a detached villa standing in a garden, with a broad view of
      the Channel. Daphne sent her carriage back to the inn and climbed the steep drive which led up
      to the verandahed house. The front garden was empty, but voices—voices, it seemed, of
      children—came from behind the house where there was a grove of trees.
“Is Mr. Herbert French at home?” she asked of the maid who answered her bell.
The girl looked at her doubtfully.
“Yes, ma'am—but he doesn't see visitors yet. Shall I tell Mrs. French? She's in the garden
      with the children.”

“No, thank you,” said Daphne, firmly. “It's Mr. French I have come to see, and I am sure
      that he will wish to see me. Will you kindly give him my card? I will come in and wait.”
And she brushed past the maid, who was intimidated by the visitor's fashionable dress and by
      the drooping feathers of her Paris hat, in which the sharp olive-skinned face with its
      magnificent eyes was picturesquely framed. The girl gave way unwillingly, showed Mrs. Floyd
      into a small study looking on the front garden, and left her.
“Elsie!” cried Herbert French, springing from the low chair in which he had been lounging in
      his shirt-sleeves with a book when the parlour-maid found him, “Elsie!”
His wife, who was at the other end of the lawn, playing with the children, the boy on her
      back and a pair of girl twins clinging to her skirts, turned in astonishment and hurried back
      to him.
“Mrs. Floyd?” They both looked at the card in bewilderment. “Who is it? Mrs. Floyd?”
Then French's face changed.
“What is this lady like?” he asked peremptorily of the parlour-maid.
“Well, sir, she's a dark lady, dressed very smart—”

“Has she very black eyes?”
“Oh, yes, sir!”
“Young?”
The girl promptly replied in the negative, qualifying it a moment afterwards by a perplexed
      “Well, I shouldn't say so, sir.”
French thought a moment.
“Thank you. I will come in.”
He turned to his wife with a rapid question, under his breath. “Where is Roger?”
Elsie stared at him, her colour paling.
“Herbert!—it can't—it can't—”
“I suspect it is—Mrs. Barnes,” said French slowly. “Help me on with my coat, darling. Now
      then, what shall we do?”
“She can't have come to force herself on him!” cried his wife passionately.
“Probably she knows nothing of his being here. Did he go for a walk?”
“Yes, towards Sandown. But he will be back directly.”
A quick shade of expression crossed French's face, which his wife knew to mean that whenever
      Roger was out by himself there was cause for anxiety. But the familiar trouble was immediately
      swallowed up in the new and pressing one.
“What can that woman have come to say?” he asked, half of himself, half of his wife, as he
      walked slowly back to the house. Elsie had
       conveyed the children to their nurse, and was beside
      him.
“Perhaps she repents!” The tone was dry and short; it flung a challenge to misdoing.
“I doubt it! But Roger?” French stood still, pondering. “Keep him, darling—intercept him if
      you can. If he must see her, I will come out. But we mustn't risk a shock.”
They consulted a little in low voices. Then French went into the house and Elsie came back
      to her children. She stood thinking, her fine face, so open-browed and purely lined, frowning
      and distressed.
“You wished to see me, Mrs. Barnes?”
French had closed the door of the study behind him and stood without offering to shake hands
      with his visitor, coldly regarding her.
Daphne rose from her seat, reddening involuntarily.
“My name is no longer what you once knew it, Mr. French. I sent you my card.”
French made a slight inclination and pointed to the chair from which she had risen.
“Pray sit down. May I know what has brought you here?”
Daphne resumed her seat, her small hands fidgeting on her parasol.

“I wished to come and consult with you, Mr. French. I had heard a distressing account of—of
      Roger, from a friend in America.”
“I see,” said French, on whom a sudden light dawned. “You met Boyson at Niagara—that I
      knew—and you are here because of what he said to you?”
“Yes, partly.” The speaker looked round the room, biting her lip, and French observed her
      for a moment. He remembered the foreign vivacity and dash, the wilful grace of her youth, and
      marvelled at her stiffened, pretentious air, her loss of charm. Instinctively the saint in him
      knew from the mere look of her that she had been feeding herself on egotisms and falsehoods,
      and his heart hardened. Daphne resumed:
“If Captain Boyson has given you an account of our interview, Mr. French, it was probably a
      one-sided one. However, that is not the point. He did distress me
      very much by his account, which I gather came from you—of—of Roger, and although, of course,
      it is a very awkward matter for me to move in, I still felt impelled for old times' sake to
      come over and see whether I could not help you—and his other friends—and, of course, his
      mother—”
“His mother is out of the question,” interrupted French. “She is, I am sorry to say, a
      helpless invalid.”
“Is it really as bad as that? I hoped for
       better news. Then I apply to you—to you chiefly. Is there
      anything that I could do to assist you, or others, to—”
“To save him?” French put in the words as she hesitated.
Daphne was silent.
“What is your idea?” asked French, after a moment. “You heard, I presume, from Captain
      Boyson that my wife and I were extremely anxious about Roger's ways and habits; that we cannot
      induce him, or, at any rate, we have not yet been able to induce him, to give up drinking;
      that his health is extremely bad, and that we are sometimes afraid that there is now some
      secret in his life of which he is ashamed?”
“Yes,” said Daphne, fidgeting with a book on the table. “Yes, that is what I heard.”
“And you have come to suggest something?”
“Is there no way by which Roger can become as free as I now am!” she said suddenly, throwing
      back her head.
“By which Roger can obtain his divorce from you—and marry again? None, in English law.”
“But there is—in Colonial law.” She began to speak hurriedly and urgently. “If Roger were to
      go to New Zealand, or to Australia, he could, after a time, get a divorce for desertion.
       I know he could—I have inquired. It doesn't seem to be
      certain what effect my action—the American decree, I mean—would have in an English colony. My
      lawyers are going into it. But at any rate there is the desertion. And then”—she grew more
      eager—“if he married abroad—in the Colony—the marriage would be valid. No one could say a word
      to him when he returned to England.”
French looked at her in silence. She went on—with the unconscious manner of one accustomed
      to command her world, to be the oracle and guide of subordinates:—
“Could we not induce him to go? Could you not? Very likely he would refuse to see me; and,
      of course, he has, most unjustly to me, I think, refused to take any money from
      me. But the money might be provided without his knowing where it came from. A young doctor
      might be sent with him—some nice fellow who would keep him amused and look after him. At
      Heston he used to take a great interest in farming. He might take up land. I would pay
      anything—anything! He might suppose it came from some friend.”
French smiled sadly. His eyes were on the ground. She bent forward.
“I beg of you, Mr. French, not to set yourself against me! Of course”—she drew herself up
      proudly—“I know what you must think
       of my action. Our views are different, irreconcilably
      different. You probably think all divorce wrong. We think, in America, that a marriage which
      has become a burden to either party is no marriage, and ought to cease. But that, of
      course”—she waved a rhetorical hand—“we cannot discuss. I do not propose for a moment to
      discuss it. You must allow me my national point of view. But surely we can, putting all that
      aside, combine to help Roger?”
“To marry again?” said French, slowly. “It can't, I fear, be done—what you propose—in the
      time. I doubt whether Roger has two years to live.”
Daphne started.
“Roger!—to live?” she repeated, in horror. “What is really the matter? Surely nothing more
      than care and a voyage could set right?”
French shook his head.
“We have been anxious about him for some time. That terrible attack of septic pneumonia in
      New York, as we now know, left the heart injured and the lungs weakened. He was badly nursed,
      and his state of mind at the time—his misery and loneliness—left him little chance. Then the
      drinking habit, which he contracted during those wretched months in the States, has been of
      course sorely against him. However, we hoped against hope
       —Elsie and I—till a few weeks ago. Then someone, we don't
      know who, made him go to a specialist, and the verdict is—phthisis; not very advanced, but
      certain and definite. And the general outlook is not favourable.”
Daphne had grown pale.
“We must send him away!” she said imperiously. “We must! A voyage, a good doctor, a dry
      climate, would save him, of course they would! Why, there is nothing necessarily fatal now in
      phthisis! Nothing! It is absurd to talk as though there were.”
Again French looked at her in silence. But as she had lost colour, he had gained it. His
      face, which the East End had already stamped, had grown rosy, his eyes sparkled.
“Oh, do say something! Tell me what you suggest?” cried Daphne.
“Do you really wish me to tell you what I suggest?”
Daphne waited, her eyes first imploring, then beginning to shrink. He bent forward and
      touched her on the arm.
“Go, Mrs. Barnes, and ask your husband's forgiveness! What will come of it I do not know.
      But you, at least, will have done something to set yourself right—with God.”
The Christian and the priest had spoken; the low voice in its intensity had seemed to ring
      through the quiet sun-flooded room.
       Daphne rose, trembling with resentment and antagonism.
“It is you, then, Mr. French, who make it impossible for me to discuss—to help. I shall have
      to see if I can find some other means of carrying out my purpose.”
There was a voice outside. Daphne turned.
“Who is that?”
French ran to the glass door that opened on to the verandah, and, trying for an ordinary
      tone, waved somebody back who was approaching from without. Elsie came quickly round the
      corner of the house, calling to the newcomer.
But Daphne saw who it was and took her own course. She, too, went to the window, and,
      passing French, she stepped into the verandah.
“Roger!”
A man hurried through the dusk. There was an exclamation, a silence. By this time French was
      on the lawn, his wife's quivering hand in his. Daphne retreated slowly into the study and
      Roger Barnes followed her.
“Leave them alone,” said French, and putting an arm round his wife he led her resolutely
      away, out of sound and sight.
Barnes stood silent, breathing heavily and leaning on the back of a chair. The western
       light from a side window struck full on him. But Daphne,
      the wave of excitement spent, was not looking at him. She had fallen upon a sofa, her face was
      in her hands.
“What do you want with me?” said Roger at last. Then, in a sudden heat, “By God, I never
      wished to see you again!”
Daphne's muffled voice came through her fingers:
“I know that. You needn't tell me so!”
Roger turned away.
“You'll admit it's an intrusion?” he said fiercely. “I don't see what you and I have got to
      do with each other now.”
Daphne struggled for self-control. After all, she had always managed him in the old days.
      She would manage him now.
“Roger—I—I didn't come to discuss the past. That's done with. But—I heard things about
      you—that—”
“You didn't like?” he laughed. “I'm sorry, but I don't see what you have to do with
      them.”
Daphne's hand fidgeted with her dress, her eyes still cast down.
“Couldn't we talk without bitterness? Just for ten minutes? It was from Captain Boyson that
      I heard—”
“Oh, Boyson, was that it? And he got his information from French—poor old Herbert.
       Well, it's quite true. I'm no longer fit for your—or his—or
      anybody's society.”
He threw himself into an armchair, calmly took a cigarette out of a box that lay near, and
      lit it. Daphne at last ventured to look at him. The first and dominant impression was of
      something shrunken and diminished. His blue flannel suit hung loose on his shoulders and
      chest, his athlete's limbs. His features had been thinned and graved and scooped by fever and
      broken nights; all the noble line and proportion was still there, but for one who had known
      him of old the effect was no longer beautiful but ghastly. Daphne stared at him in dismay.
He on his side observed his visitor, but with a cooler curiosity. Like French he noticed the
      signs of change, the dying down of brilliance and of bloom. To go your own way, as Daphne had
      done, did not seem to conduce to a woman's good looks.
At last he threw in a dry interrogation:
“Well?”
“I came to try and help you,” Daphne broke out, turning her head away, “to ask Mr. French
      what I could do. It made me unhappy—”
“Did it?” He laughed again. “I don't see why. Oh, you needn't trouble yourself. Elsie and
      Herbert are awfully good to me.
       They're all I want, or at any rate,” he hesitated a moment,
      “they're all I shall want—from now on. Anyway, you know there'd be something
      grotesque in your trying your hand at reforming me.”
“I didn't mean anything of the kind!” she protested, stung by his tone. “I—I wanted to
      suggest something practical—some way by which you might—release yourself from me—and also
      recover your health.”
“Release myself from you?” he repeated. “That's easier said than done. Did you mean to send
      me to the Colonies—was that your idea?”
His smile was hard to bear. But she went on, choking, yet determined:
“That seems to be the only way—in English law. Why shouldn't you take it? The voyage, the
      new climate, would probably set you up again. You need only be away a short time.”
He looked at her in silence a moment, fingering his cigarette.
“Thank you,” he said at last, “thank you. And I suppose you offered us money? You told
      Herbert you would pay all expenses? Oh, don't be angry! I didn't mean anything uncivil. But,”
      he raised himself with energy from his lounging position, “at the same time, perhaps you ought
      to know that I would sooner die a thousand times over than take a single silver sixpence that
      belonged to you!”

Their eyes met, his quite calm, hers sparkling with resentment and pain.
“Of course I can't argue with you if you meet me in that tone,” she said passionately. “But
      I should have thought—”
“Besides,” he interrupted her, “you say it is the only way. You are quite mistaken. It is
      not the only way. As far as freeing me goes, you could divorce me to-morrow—here—if you liked.
      I have been unfaithful to you. A strange way of putting it—at the present moment—between you
      and me! But that's how it would appear in the English courts. And as to the ‘cruelty’—that
      wouldn't give you any trouble!”
Daphne had flushed deeply. It was only by a great effort that she maintained her composure.
      Her eyes avoided him.
“Mrs. Fairmile?” she said in a low voice.
He threw back his head with a sound of scorn.
“Mrs. Fairmile! You don't mean to tell me, Daphne, to my face, that you ever believed any of
      the lies—forgive the expression—that you, and your witnesses, and your lawyers, told in the
      States—that you bribed those precious newspapers to tell?”
“Of course I believed it!” she said fiercely. “And as for lies, it was you who began
      them.”

“You believed that I had betrayed you with Chloe Fairmile?” He raised himself
      again, fixing his strange deep-set gaze upon her.
“I never said—”
“No! To that length you didn't quite go. I admit it. You were able to get your way without
      it.” He sank back in his chair again. “No, my remark had nothing to do with Chloe. I have
      never set eyes on her since I left you at Heston. But—there was a girl, a shop-girl, a poor
      little thing, rather pretty. I came across her about six months ago—it doesn't matter how. She
      loves me, she was awfully good to me, a regular little brick. Some day I shall tell Herbert
      all about her—not yet—though, of course, he suspects. She'd serve your purpose, if you thought
      it worth while. But you won't—”
“You're—living with her—now?”
“No. I broke with her a fortnight ago, after I'd seen those doctors. She made me see them,
      poor little soul. Then I went to say goodbye to her, and she,” his voice shook a little, “she
      took it hard. But it's all right. I'm not going to risk her life, or saddle her with a dying
      man. She's with her sister. She'll get over it.”
He turned his head towards the window, his eyes pursued the white sails on the darkening
      blue outside.
“It's been a bad business, but it wasn't
       altogether my fault. I saved her from someone else, and she
      saved me, once or twice, from blowing my brains out.”
“What did the doctors say to you?” asked Daphne, brusquely, after a pause.
“They gave me about two years,” he said, indifferently, turning to knock off the end of his
      cigarette. “That doesn't matter.” Then, as his eyes caught her face, a sudden animation sprang
      into his. He drew his chair nearer to her and threw away his cigarette. “Look here, Daphne,
      don't let's waste time. We shall never see each other again, and there are a number of things
      I want to know. Tell me everything you can remember about Beatty that last six months—and
      about her illness, you understand—never mind repeating what you told Boyson, and he told me.
      But there's lots more, there must be. Did she ever ask for me? Boyson said you couldn't
      remember. But you must remember!”
He came closer still, his threatening eyes upon her. And as he did so, the dark presence of
      ruin and death, of things damning and irrevocable, which had been hovering over their
      conversation, approached with him—flapped their sombre wings in Daphne's face. She trembled
      all over.
“Yes,” she said, faintly, “she did ask for you.”

“Ah!” He gave a cry of delight. “Tell me—tell me at once—everything—from the beginning!”
And held by his will, she told him everything—all the piteous story of the child's last
      days—sobbing herself; and for the first time making much of the little one's signs of
      remembering her father, instead of minimising and ignoring them, as she had done in the talk
      with Boyson. It was as though for the first time she were trying to stanch a wound instead of
      widening it.
He listened eagerly. The two heads—of the father and mother—drew closer; one might have
      thought them lovers still, united by tender and sacred memories.
But at last Roger drew himself away. He rose to his feet.
“I'll forgive you much for that!” he said with a long breath. “Will you write it for me—some
      day—all you've told me?”
She made a sign of assent.
“Well, now, you mustn't stay here any longer. I suppose you've got a carriage? And we
      mustn't meet again. There's no object in it. But I'll remember that you came.”
She looked at him. In her nature the great deeps were breaking up. She saw him as she had
      seen him in her first youth. And, at last, what she had done was plain to her.

With a cry she threw herself on the floor beside him. She pressed his hand in hers.
“Roger, let me stay! Let me nurse you!” she panted. “I didn't understand. Let me be your
      friend! Let me help! I implore—I implore you!”
He hesitated a moment, then he lifted her to her feet decidedly, but not unkindly.
“What do you mean?” he said, slowly. “Do you mean that you wish us to be husband and wife
      again? You are, of course, my wife, in the eye of English law, at this moment.”
“Let me try and help you!” she pleaded again, breaking into bitter tears. “I didn't—I didn't
      understand!”
He shook his head.
“You can't help me. I—I'm afraid I couldn't bear it. We mustn't meet. It—it's gone too
      deep.”
He thrust his hands into his pockets and walked away to the window. She stood helplessly
      weeping.
When he returned he was quite composed again.
“Don't cry so,” he said, calmly. “It's done. We can't help it. And don't make yourself too
      unhappy about me. I've had awful times. When I was ill in New York—it was like hell. The pain
      was devilish, and I wasn't used to being alone, and nobody caring
       a damn, and everybody believing me a cad and a bully. But I
      got over that. It was Beatty's death that hit me so hard, and that I wasn't there. It's that,
      somehow, I can't get over—that you did it—that you could have had the heart. It would always
      come between us. No, we're better apart. But I'll tell you something to comfort you. I've
      given up that girl, as I've told you, and I've given up drink. Herbert won't believe it, but
      he'll find it is so. And I don't mean to die before my time. I'm going out to Switzerland
      directly. I'll do all the correct things. You see, when a man knows he's going to
      die—well,” he turned away, “he gets uncommonly curious as to what's going to come next.”
He walked up and down a few turns. Daphne watched him.
“I'm not pious—I never was. But after all, the religious people profess to know something
      about it, and nobody else does. Just supposing it were true?”
He stopped short, looking at her. She understood perfectly that he had Beatty in his
      mind.
“Well, anyhow, I'm going to live decently for the rest of my time—and die decently. I'm not
      going to throw away chances. And don't trouble yourself about money. There's enough left to
      carry me through. Good-bye, Daphne!” He held out his hand to her.

She took it, still dumbly weeping. He looked at her with pity.
“Yes, I know, you didn't understand what you were doing. But you see, Daphne, marriage is—”
      he sought rather painfully for his words, “it's a big thing. If it doesn't make us, it ruins
      us; I didn't marry you for the best of reasons, but I was very fond of you—honour bright! I
      loved you in my way, I should have loved you more and more. I should have been a decent fellow
      if you'd stuck to me. I had all sorts of plans; you might have taught me anything. I was a
      fool about Chloe Fairmile, but there was nothing in it, you know there wasn't. And now it's
      all rooted up and done with. Women like to think such things can be mended, but they
      can't—they can't, indeed. It would be foolish to try.”
Daphne sank upon a chair and buried her face in her hands. He drew a long and painful
      breath. “I'm afraid I must go,” he said waveringly. “I—I can't stand this any longer.
      Good-bye, Daphne, good-bye.”
She only sobbed, as though her life dissolved in grief. He drew near to her, and as she
      wept, hidden from him, he laid his hand a moment on her shoulder. Then he took up his hat.
“I'm going now,” he said in a low voice. “I shan't come back till you have gone.”

 

She heard him cross the room, his steps in the verandah. Outside, in the summer dark, a
      figure came to meet him. French drew Roger's arm into his, and the two walked away. The
      shadows of the wooded lane received them.
A woman came quickly into the room.
Elsie French looked down upon the sobbing Daphne, her own eyes full of tears, her hands
      clasped.
“Oh, you poor thing!” she said, under her breath. “You poor thing!” And she knelt down
      beside her and folded her arms round her.
So from the same heart that had felt a passionate pity for the victim, compassion flowed out
      on the transgressor. For where others feel the tragedy of suffering, the pure in heart realise
      with an infinitely sharper pain the tragedy of guilt.
