

CHAPTER II
A SUDDEN hush had fallen upon Mount Vernon. From the river below came the distant
      sounds of the steamer, which, with its crowds safe on board, was now putting off for
      Washington. But the lawns and paths of the house, and the formal garden behind it, and all its
      simple rooms upstairs and down, were now given back to the spring and silence, save for this
      last party of sightseers. The curator, after his preliminary lecture on the verandah, took
      them within; the railings across the doors were removed; they wandered in and out as they
      pleased.
Perhaps, however, there were only two persons among the six now following the curator to
      whom the famous place meant anything more than a means of idling away a warm afternoon.
      General Hobson carried his white head proudly through it, saying little or nothing. It was the
      house of a man who had wrenched half a continent from Great Britain; the English Tory had no
      intention whatever of bowing the knee. On the other hand, it was the house of a soldier and a
      gentleman, representing old English traditions, tastes, and manners.
       No modern blatancy, no Yankee smartness anywhere. Simplicity
      and moderate wealth, combined with culture,—witness the books of the library,—with
      land-owning, a family coach, and church on Sundays: these things the Englishman understood.
      Only the slaves, in the picture of Mount Vernon's past, were strange to him.
They stood at length in the death-chamber, with its low white bed, and its balcony
      overlooking the river.
“This, ladies, is the room in which General Washington died,” said the curator, patiently
      repeating the familiar sentence. “It is, of course, on that account sacred to every true
      American.”
He bowed his head instinctively as he spoke. The General looked round him in silence. His
      eye was caught by the old hearth, and by the iron plate at the back of it, bearing the letters
      G.W. and some scroll work. There flashed into his mind a vision of the December evening on
      which Washington passed away, the flames flickering in the chimney, the winds breathing round
      the house and over the snow-bound landscape outside, the dying man in that white bed, and
      around him, hovering invisibly, the generations of the future.
The General's patriotic mind was not alloyed by any harassing sense of humour; he therefore
       firmly reminded himself that no Englishman had a right to
      think of Washington as anything better than a traitor to his king and country; yet he admitted
      that it was perhaps natural that Americans should consider him a great man.
The French window beside the bed was thrown open, and these privileged guests were invited
      to step on to the balcony. Daphne Floyd was handed out by young Barnes. They hung over the
      white balustrade together. An evening light was on the noble breadth of river; its surface of
      blue and gold gleamed through the boughs of the trees which girdled the house; blossoms of
      wild cherry, of dogwood, and magnolia sparkled amid the coverts of young green.
Roger Barnes remarked, with sincerity, as he looked about him, that it was a very pretty
      place, and he was glad he had not missed it. Miss Floyd made an absent reply, being in fact
      occupied in studying the speaker. It was, so to speak, the first time she had really observed
      him; and, as they paused on the balcony together, she was suddenly possessed by the same
      impression as that which had mollified the General's scolding on board the steamer. He was
      indeed handsome, the young Englishman!—a magnificent figure of a man, in height and breadth
      and general proportions; and in addition, as it seemed to her, possessed of an absurd and
      superfluous beauty of feature. What does
       a man want with such good looks? This was perhaps the girl's
      first instinctive feeling. She was, indeed, a little dazzled by her new companion, now that
      she began to realise him. As compared with the average man in Washington or New York, here was
      an exception—an Apollo!—for she too thought of the Sun-god. Miss Floyd could not remember that
      she had ever had to do with an Apollo before; young Barnes, therefore, was so far an event, a
      sensation. In the opera-house she had been vaguely struck by a handsome face. But here, in the
      freedom of outdoor dress and movement, he seemed to her a physical king of men; and, at the
      same time, his easy manner—which, however, was neither conceited nor ill-bred—showed him
      conscious of his advantages.
As they chatted on the balcony she put him through his paces a little. He had been, it
      seemed, at Eton and Oxford; and she supposed that he belonged to the rich English world. His
      mother was a Lady Barnes; his father, she gathered, was dead; and he was travelling, no doubt,
      in the lordly English way, to get a little knowledge of the barbarians outside, before he
      settled down to his own kingdom, and the ways thereof. She envisaged a big Georgian house in a
      spreading park, like scores that she had seen in the course of motoring through England the
      year before.

 

Meanwhile, the dear young man was evidently trying to talk to her, without too much
      reference to the gilt gingerbread of this world. He did not wish that she should feel herself
      carried into regions where she was not at home, so that his conversation ran amicably on
      music. Had she learnt it abroad? He had a cousin who had been trained at Leipsic; wasn't
      teaching it trying sometimes—when people had no ear? Delicious! She kept it up, talking with
      smiles of “my pupils” and “my class,” while they wandered after the others upstairs to the
      dark low-roofed room above the death-chamber, where Martha Washington spent the last years of
      her life, in order that from the high dormer window she might command the tomb on the slope
      below, where her dead husband lay. The curator told the well-known story. Mrs. Verrier,
      standing beside him, asked some questions, showed indeed some animation.
“She shut herself up here? She lived in this garret? That she might always see the tomb?
      That is really true?”
Barnes, who did not remember to have heard her speak before, turned at the sound of her
      voice, and looked at her curiously. She wore an expression—bitter or incredulous—which,
      somehow, amused him. As they descended again to the garden he communicated his
      amusement—discreetly—to Miss Floyd.

“Did Mrs. Verrier imply that no one who was not a fool could show her grief as Mrs.
      Washington did? That it was, in fact, a sign of being a fool to regret your husband?”
“Did she say that?” asked Miss Floyd quickly.
“Not like that, of course, but—”
They had now reached the open air again, and found themselves crossing the front court to
      the kitchen-garden. Daphne Floyd did not wait till Roger should finish his sentence. She
      turned on him a face which was grave if not reproachful.
“I suppose you know Mrs. Verrier's story?”
“Why, I never saw her before! I hope I haven't said anything I oughtn't to have said?”
“Everybody knows it here,” said Daphne slowly. “Mrs. Verrier married three years ago. She
      married a Jew—a New Yorker—who had changed his name. You know Jews are not in what we call
      ‘society’ here. But Madeleine thought she could do it; she was in love with him, and she meant
      to be able to do without society. But she couldn't do without society; and presently she began
      to dine out, and go to parties by herself—he urged her to. Then, after a bit, people didn't
      ask her as much as before; she wasn't happy; and her people began to talk to him about a
      divorce—naturally they had been against her marrying him all along. He
       said—as they and she pleased. Then, one night about a year
      ago, he took the train to Niagara—of course it was a very commonplace thing to do—and two days
      afterwards he was found, thrown up by the whirlpool; you know, where all the suicides are
      found!”
Barnes stopped short in front of his companion, his face flushing.
“What a horrible story!” he said, with emphasis.
Miss Floyd nodded.
“Yes, poor Madeleine has never got over it.”
The young man still stood riveted.
“Of course Mrs. Verrier herself had nothing to do with the talk about divorce?”
Something in his tone roused a combative instinct in his companion. She, too, coloured, and
      drew herself up.
“Why shouldn't she? She was miserable. The marriage had been a great mistake.”
“And you allow divorce for that?” said the man, wondering. “Oh, of course I know every State
      is different, and some States are worse than others. But, somehow, I never came across a case
      like that—first hand—before.”
He walked on slowly beside his companion, who held herself a little stiffly.
“I don't know why you should talk in
       that way,” she said at last, breaking out in a kind of
      resentment, “as though all our American views are wrong! Each nation arranges these things for
      itself. You have the laws that suit you; you must allow us those that suit us.”
Barnes paused again, his face expressing a still more complete astonishment.
“You say that?” he said. “You!”
“And why not?”
“But—but you are so young!” he said, evidently finding a difficulty in putting his
      impressions. “I beg your pardon—I ought not to talk about it at all. But it was so odd
      that—”
“That I knew anything about Mrs. Verrier's affairs?” said Miss Floyd, with a rather
      uncomfortable laugh. “Well, you see, American girls are not like English ones. We don't
      pretend not to know what everybody knows.”
“Of course,” said Roger hurriedly; “but you wouldn't think it a fair and square thing to
      do?”
“Think what?”
“Why, to marry a man, and then talk of divorcing him because people didn't invite you to
      their parties.”
“She was very unhappy,” said Daphne stubbornly.
“Well, by Jove!” cried the young man, “she doesn't look very happy now!”

“No,” Miss Floyd admitted. “No. There are many people who think she'll never get over
      it.”
“Well, I give it up.” The Apollo shrugged his handsome shoulders. “You say it was she who
      proposed to divorce him?—yet when the wretched man removes himself, then she breaks her
      heart!”
“Naturally she didn't mean him to do it in that way,” said the girl with impatience. “Of
      course you misunderstood me entirely!—entirely!” she added with an emphasis which
      suited with her heightened colour and evidently ruffled feelings.
Young Barnes looked at her with embarrassment. What a queer, hot-tempered girl! Yet there
      was something in her which attracted him. She was graceful even in her impatience. Her slender
      neck, and the dark head upon it, her little figure in the white muslin, her dainty arms and
      hands—these points in her delighted an honest eye, quite accustomed to appraise the charms of
      women. But, by George! she took herself seriously, this little music teacher. The air of
      wilful command about her, the sharpness with which she had just rebuked him, amazed and
      challenged him.
“I am very sorry if I misunderstood you,” he said, a little on his dignity; “but I thought
      you—”

“You thought I sympathised with Mrs. Verrier? So I do; though of course I am awfully sorry
      that such a dreadful thing happened. But you'll find, Mr. Barnes, that American girls—” The
      colour rushed into her small olive cheeks. “Well, we know all about the old ideas, and we know
      also too well that there's only one life, and we don't mean to have that one spoilt. The old
      notions of marriage—your English notions,” cried the girl facing him—“make it tyranny! Why
      should people stay together when they see it's a mistake? We say everybody shall have their
      chance. And not one chance only, but more than one. People find out in marriage what they
      couldn't find out before, and so—”
“You let them chuck it just when they're tired of it?” laughed Barnes. “And what about
      the—”
“The children?” said Miss Floyd calmly. “Well, of course, that has to be very carefully
      considered. But how can it do children any good to live in an unhappy home?”
“Had Mrs. Verrier any children?”
“Yes, one little girl.”
“I suppose she meant to keep her?”
“Why, of course.”
“And the father didn't care?”
“Well, I believe he did,” said Daphne unwillingly
       willingly. “Yes, that was very sad. He was quite devoted to
      her.”
“And you think that's all right?” Barnes looked at his companion, smiling.
“Well, of course, it was a pity,” she said, with fresh impatience; “I admit it was a pity.
      But then, why did she ever marry him? That was the horrible mistake.”
“I suppose she thought she liked him.”
“Oh, it was he who was so desperately in love with her. He plagued her into doing it.”
“Poor devil!” said Barnes heartily. “All right, we're coming.”
The last words were addressed to General Hobson, waving to them from the kitchen-garden.
      They hurried on to join the curator, who took the party for a stroll round some of the fields
      over which George Washington, in his early married life, was accustomed to ride in summer and
      winter dawns, inspecting his negroes, his plantation, and his barns. The grass in these
      southern fields was already high; there were shining fruit-trees, blossom-laden, in an orchard
      copse; and the white dogwood glittered in the woods.
For two people to whom the traditions of the place were dear, this quiet walk through
      Washington's land had a charm far beyond that of the reconstructed interior of the house, Here
      were things unaltered and unalterable,
       boundaries, tracks, woods, haunted still by the figure of
      the young master and bridegroom who brought Patsy Curtis there in 1759. To the grey-haired
      curator every foot of them was sacred and familiar; he knew these fields and the records of
      them better than any detail of his own personal affairs; for years now he had lived in spirit
      with Washington, through all the hours of the Mount Vernon day; his life was ruled by one
      great ghost, so that everything actual was comparatively dim. Boyson too, a fine soldier and a
      fine intelligence, had a mind stored with Washingtoniana. Every now and then he and the
      curator fell back on each other's company. They knew well that the others were not worthy of
      their opportunity; although General Hobson, seeing that most of the memories touched belonged
      to a period before the Revolution, obeyed the dictates of politeness, and made amends for his
      taciturnity indoors by a talkative vein outside.
Captain Boyson was not, however, wholly occupied with history or reminiscence. He perceived
      very plainly before the walk was over that the General's good-looking nephew and Miss Daphne
      Floyd were interested in each other's conversation. When they joined the party in the garden
      it seemed to him that they had been disputing. Miss Daphne was flushed and a little snappish
      when spoken to; and the
       young man looked embarrassed. But presently he saw that they
      gravitated to each other, and that, whatever chance combination might be formed during the
      walk, it always ended for a time in the flight ahead of the two figures, the girl in the
      rose-coloured sash and the tall handsome youth. Towards the end of the walk they became
      separated from the rest of the party, and only arrived at the little station just in time
      before the cars started. On this occasion again, they had been clearly arguing and
      disagreeing; and Daphne had the air of a ruffled bird, her dark eyes glittering, her mouth set
      in the obstinate lines that Boyson knew by heart. But again they sat together in the car, and
      talked and sparred all the way home; while Mrs. Verrier, in a corner of the carriage, shut her
      hollow eyes, and laid her thin hands one over the other, and in her purple draperies made a
      picture à la Mélisande which was not lost upon her
      companions. Boyson's mind registered a good many grim or terse comments, as occasionally he
      found himself watching this lady. Scarcely a year since that hideous business at Niagara, and
      here she was in that extravagant dress! He wished his sister would not make a friend of her,
      and that Daphne Floyd saw less of her. Miss Daphne had quite enough bees in her own bonnet
      without adopting Mrs. Verrier's.

Meanwhile, it was the General who, on the return journey, was made to serve Miss Boyson's
      gift for monopoly. She took possession of him in a business-like way, inquiring into his
      engagements in Washington, his particular friends, his opinion of the place and the people,
      with a light-handed acuteness which was more than a match for the Englishman's instincts of
      defence. The General did not mean to give himself away; he intended, indeed, precisely the
      contrary; but, after every round of conversation, Miss Boyson felt herself more and more
      richly provided with materials for satire at the expense of England and the English tourist,
      his invincible conceit, insularity, and condescension. She was a clever though tiresome woman;
      and expressed herself best in letters. She promised herself to write a “character” of General
      Hobson in her next letter to an intimate friend, which should be a masterpiece. Then, having
      led him successfully through the rôle of the comic
      Englishman abroad, she repaid him with information. She told him, not without some secret
      amusement at the reprobation it excited, the tragic story of Mrs. Verrier. She gave him a full
      history of her brother's honourable and brilliant career; and here let it be said that the
       précieuse in her gave way to the sister, and that she
      talked with feeling. And finally she asked him with a smile
       whether he admired Miss Floyd. The General, who had in fact
      been observing Miss Floyd and his nephew with some little uneasiness during the preceding
      half-hour, replied guardedly that Miss Floyd was pretty and picturesque, and apparently a
      great talker. Was she a native of Washington?
“You never heard of Miss Floyd?—of Daphne Floyd? No? Ah, well!”—and she laughed—“I suppose I
      ought to take it as a compliment, of a kind. There are so many rich people now in this queer
      country of ours that even Daphne Floyds don't matter.”
“Is Miss Floyd so tremendously rich?”
General Hobson turned a quickened countenance upon her, expressing no more than the interest
      felt by the ordinary man in all societies—more strongly, perhaps, at the present day than ever
      before—in the mere fact of money. But Miss Boyson gave it at once a personal meaning, and set
      herself to play on what she scornfully supposed to be the cupidity of the Englishman. She
      produced, indeed, a full and particular account of Daphne Floyd's parentage, possessions, and
      prospects, during which the General's countenance represented him with great fidelity. A trace
      of recalcitrance at the beginning—for it was his opinion that Miss Boyson, like most American
      women, talked decidedly too much—gave way to close attention
       tion, then to astonishment, and finally to a very animated
      observation of Miss Floyd's slender person as she sat a yard or two from him on the other side
      of the car, laughing, frowning, or chattering with Roger.
“And that poor child has the management of it all?” he said at last, in a tone which did him
      credit. He himself had lost an only daughter at twenty-one, and he held old-fashioned views as
      to the helplessness of women.
But Cecilia Boyson again misunderstood him.
“Oh, yes!” she said, with a cool smile. “Everything is in her own hands—everything! Mrs.
      Phillips would not dare to interfere. Daphne always has her own way.”
The General said no more. Cecilia Boyson looked out of the window at the darkening
      landscape, thinking with malice of Daphne's dealings with the male sex. It had been a Sleeping
      Beauty story so far. Treasure for the winning—a thorn hedge—and slain lovers! The handsome
      Englishman would try it next, no doubt. All young Englishmen, according to her, were on the
      look-out for American heiresses. Music teacher indeed! She would have given a good deal to
      hear the conversation of the uncle and nephew when the party broke up.
The General and young Barnes made their
       farewells at the railway station, and took their way on foot
      to their hotel. Washington was steeped in sunset. The White House, as they passed it, glowed
      amid its quiet trees. Lafayette Square, with its fountains and statues, its white and pink
      magnolias, its strolling, chatting crowd, the fronts of the houses, the long vistas of
      tree-lined avenues, the street cars, the houses, the motors, all the openings and distances of
      the beautiful, leisurely place—they saw them rosily transfigured under a departing sun, which
      throughout the day had been weaving the quick spells of a southern spring.
“Jolly weather!” said Roger, looking about him. “And a very nice afternoon. How long are you
      staying here, Uncle Archie?”
“I ought to be off at the end of the week; and of course you want to get back to New York? I
      say, you seemed to be getting on with that young lady?”
The General turned a rather troubled eye upon his companion.
“She wasn't bad fun,” said the young man graciously; “but rather an odd little thing! We
      quarrelled about every conceivable subject. And it's queer how much that kind of girl seems to
      go about in America. She goes everywhere and knows everything. I wonder how she manages
      it.”
“What kind of girl do you suppose she is?”
       asked the General, stopping suddenly in the middle of
      Lafayette Square.
“She told me she taught singing,” said Roger, in a puzzled voice, “to a class of girls in
      New York.”
The General laughed.
“She seems to have made a fool of you, my dear boy. She is one of the great heiresses of
      America.”
Roger's face expressed a proper astonishment.
“Oh! that's it, is it? I thought once or twice there was something fishy—she was trying it
      on. Who told you?”
The General retailed his information. Miss Daphne Floyd was the orphan daughter of an
      enormously rich and now deceased lumber-king, of the State of Illinois. He had made vast sums
      by lumbering, and then invested in real estate in Chicago and Buffalo, not to speak of a
      railway or two, and had finally left his daughter and only child in possession of a fortune
      generally estimated at more than a million sterling. The money was now entirely in the girl's
      power. Her trustees had been sent about their business, though Miss Floyd was pleased
      occasionally to consult them. Mrs. Phillips, her chaperon, had not much influence with her;
      and it was supposed that Mrs. Verrier advised her more than anyone else.

 

“Good heavens!” was all that young Barnes could find to say when the story was told. He
      walked on absently, flourishing his stick, his face working under the stress of amused
      meditation. At last he brought out:
“You know, Uncle Archie, if you'd heard some of the things Miss Floyd was saying to me, your
      hair would have stood on end.”
The General raised his shoulders.
“I dare say. I'm too old-fashioned for America. The sooner I clear out the better. Their
      newspapers make me sick; I hate the hotels—I hate the cooking; and there isn't a nation in
      Europe I don't feel myself more at home with.”
Roger laughed his clear, good-tempered laugh. “Oh! I don't feel that way at all. I get on
      with them capitally. They're a magnificent people. And, as to Miss Floyd, I didn't mean
      anything bad, of course. Only the ideas some of the girls here have, and the way they discuss
      them—well, it beats me!”
“What sort of ideas?”
Roger's handsome brow puckered in the effort to explain. “They don't think anything's
       settled, you know, as we do at home. Miss Floyd doesn't. They think
       they've got to settle a lot of things that English girls don't trouble about
      because they're just told to do 'em, or
       not to do 'em, by the people that look after them!”
“‘Everything hatched over again, and hatched different,’” said the General, who was an
      admirer of George Eliot; “that's what they'd like, eh? Pooh! That's when they're young. They
      quiet down, like all the rest of the world.”
Barnes shook his head. “But they are hatching it over again. You meet people
      here in society you couldn't meet at home. And it's all right. The law backs them up.”
“You're talking about divorce!” said the General. “Aye! it's astounding! The tales one hears
      in the smoking-room after dinner! In Wyoming, apparently, six months' residence, and there you
      are. You prove a little cruelty, the husband makes everything perfectly easy, you say a civil
      good-bye, and the thing's done. Well, they'll pay for it, my dear Roger—they'll pay for it.
      Nobody ever yet trifled with the marriage law with impunity.”
The energy of the old man's bearing became him.
Through Roger's mind the thought flashed: “Poor dear Uncle Archie! If he'd been a New Yorker
      he'd never have put up with Aunt Lavinia for thirty years!”
They turned into their hotel, and ordered dinner in an hour's time. Roger found some
       English letters waiting for him, and carried them off to his
      room. He opened his mother's first. Lady Barnes wrote a large and straggling hand, which
      required many sheets and much postage. It might have been observed that her son looked at the
      sheets for a minute, with a certain distaste, before he began upon them. Yet he was deeply
      attached to his mother, and it was from her letters week by week that he took his marching
      orders. If she only wouldn't ride her ideas quite so hard; if she would sometimes leave him
      alone to act for himself!
Here it was again—the old story:
“Don't suppose I put these things before you on my account. No, indeed; what
      does it matter what happens to me? It is when I think that you may have to spend your whole
      life as a clerk in a bank, unless you rouse yourself now—(for you know, my dear Roger, though
      you have very good wits, you're not as frightfully clever as people have to be nowadays)—that
      I begin to despair. But that is entirely in your own hands. You have what is far
      more valuable than cleverness—you have a delightful disposition, and you are one of the
      handsomest of men. There! of course, I know you wouldn't let me say it to you in your
      presence; but it's true all the same. Any girl should be proud to marry you. There are plenty
      of rich girls in America; and if you play your
       cards properly you will make her and yourself happy. The
      grammar of that is not quite right, but you understand me. Find a nice girl—of course a
       nice girl—with a fortune large enough to put you back in your proper sphere; and
      it doesn't matter about me. You will pay my rent, I dare say, and help me through when I want
      it; but that's nothing. The point is, that I cannot submit to your career being spoilt through
      your poor father's mad imprudence. You must retrieve yourself—you must. Nobody is
      anything nowadays in the world without money; you know that as well as I do. And besides,
      there is another reason. You have got to forget the affair of last spring, to put it entirely
      behind you, to show that horrid woman who threw you over that you will make your life a
      success in spite of her. Rouse yourself, my dear Roger, and do your best. I hope by now you
      have forwarded all my introductions? You have your opportunity, and I must say
      you will be a great fool if you don't use it. Do use it my dear boy, for my sake,
      I am a very unhappy woman; but you might, if you would, bring back a little brightness to my
      life.”
After he had read the letter, young Barnes sat for some time in a brown study on the edge of
      his bed. The letter contained only one more repetition of counsels that had been dinned into
      his ears for months—almost ever since the
       financial crash which had followed his father's death, and
      the crash of another sort, concerning himself, which had come so quick upon it. His thoughts
      returned, as they always did at some hour of the day or night, to the “horrid woman.” Yes,
      that had hit him hard; the lad's heart still throbbed with bitterness as he thought of it. He
      had never felt anything so much; he didn't believe he should ever mind anything so much again.
      “I'm not one of your sentimental sort,” he thought, half congratulating himself, half in
      self-contempt. But he could not get her out of his head; he wondered if he ever should. And it
      had gone pretty far too. By Jove! that night in the orchard!—when she had kissed him and
      thrown her arms round his neck! And then to write him that letter when things were at their
      worst. She might have done the thing decently. Have treated a fellow kindly at least. Well, of
      course, it was all done with. Yes, it was. Done with!
He got up and began to pace his small room, his hands in his pockets, thinking of the night
      in the orchard. Then gradually the smart lessened, and his thoughts passed away to other
      things. That little Yankee girl had really made good sport all the way home. He had not been
      dull for a moment; she had teased and provoked him so. Her eyes, too, were wonderfully pretty,
      and her small, pointed
       chin, and her witch-like imperious ways. Was it her money,
      the sense that she could do as she liked with most people, that made her so domineering and
      masterful? Very likely. On the journey he had put it down just to a natural and very
      surprising impudence. That was when he believed that she was a teacher, earning her bread. But
      the impudence had not prevented him from finding it much more amusing to talk to her than to
      anybody else.
And, on the whole, he thought she had not disliked him, though she had said the rudest
      things to him, and he had retaliated. She had asked him, indeed, to join them in an excursion
      the following day, and to tea at the Country Club. He had meant, if possible, to go back to
      New York on the morrow. But perhaps a day or two longer—
So she had a million—the little sprite? She was and would be a handful!—with a fortune or
      without it. And possessed also of the most extraordinary opinions. But he thought he would go
      on the excursion, and to the Country Club. He began to fold his mother's letter, and put it
      back into its envelope, while a slight flush mounted in his cheeks, and the young mouth that
      was still so boyish and candid took a stiffer line.
