

THE NEW MASTERS
THE funeral was over, and Thornsett Mill was closed for the day. Fortunately the 'Spotted
     Cow' was not closed, so that the majority of the hands did not find themselves without
     resources. Added to the subtle pleasure which so many derive from drinking small beer in a
     sanded kitchen furnished with oak benches, there was to-day the excitement of discussing a
     great event, for to the average mind of Thornsett the death and burial of old Richard Ferrier
     were great events indeed. And then there appears to be something inherent in the nature of a
     funeral which produces intense and continued thirst in all persons connected, however remotely,
     with the ceremony. So John Bolt, the landlord, had his hands pretty full, and the state of the
     till was so satisfactory that it was a really praiseworthy sacrifice to the decencies of
     society for him to persist in not shortening by one fraction of an inch the respectfully long
     face which he had put on in the morning as appropriate to the occasion.
'Well, for my part, I'm sorry he's gone,' he said, drawing himself a pot of that tap which
     seemed best calculated to assist moral reflections. 'That I am! He was always a fair dealer, if
     he wasn't a giving one.'
'He was more a havin' nor a givin' one,' said old Bill  Murdoch. 'Givin' don't
     build mills, my lad, nor yet muck up two acres o' good pasture wi' bits o' flowers wi' glass
     windows all over 'em. I never seen sic foolin'.'
'Surely a man's a right to do what he will with his own,' ventured a meek-looking man, who
     had himself a few pounds laid by, and felt acutely the importance of leaving unchallenged the
     rights of property.
'I'm none so sure o' that,' remarked Bill, who had a conviction which is shared by a few more
     of us, that one's superiority shows itself naturally and unmistakably in one's never agreeing
     with any statement whatever which is advanced by anyone else.
'There'll be more flowers than ever now, if Mr Roland has his way,' said Sigley the meek.
'D'ye think, now, Sigley, he'll be like to get that where Mr Richard is?' asked Bill. 'Mr
     Roland thinks too much o' flowers and singin', and book learnin', to give much time to getten
     o' his own way.'
'Mr Roland may be this, or he may be that,' Potters, the village grocer, observed, with the
     air of one clearly stating a case, 'but he can get his way where he cares to.'
'Tha's fond o' saying words as might mean owt—or nowt, for that matter. Can't tha say what
     tha does mean?'
'Tha'd know what I mean if tha weren't too blind to see owt. How about Alice Hatfield?'
'Gently, gently,' said Bolt. 'Tha was i' the right, Potters, not to name names, but when it
     comes to namin' o' names I asks tha where's tha proof?'
Here there was a general 'movement of adhesion,' and an assenting murmur ran round, while the
     mild man repeated like an echo, 'Where's your proof?'
'Her father don't think ther's proof,' said Sigley.
'A man doesn't want to prove the bread out of his mouth, and the roof off his children.'

'John Hatfield wouldn't work for a man as had ruined his girl.'
'Hungry dogs eat dirty pudding,' remarked Potters.
'Hatfield does na' deal o' thee, Potters,' observed Murdoch, drily.
'And it would be just one if he did,' answered Potters, his large face growing crimson, 'and
     Alice was a good lass and a sweet lass till she took up wi' fine notions and told a' the lads
     as none on 'em was good enough to tie her shoon, and as she'd be a lady, and I don't know what
     all, and Mr Roland was the only gentleman as ever took any notice of her, except Mr Richard;
     and Mr Roland, he went away when she went away, and it's all as plain as the nose on your
     face.'
'Tha says too much,' said Murdoch slowly, 'for't a' to be true.'
'Now, now!' interposed Bolt. 'Enow said on all sides, I'm sure. The poor old master's gone,
     and the mill's got a holiday, and I think you'll all be better employed i' turning your
     thoughts on him as is gone than i' picking holes i' them as is to be your masters, and raking
     up yesterday's fires i' this fashion. And so I say, as I said before, I for one am sorry he's
     gone.'
'Yes; and so am I,' said Bill; 'for as long as he lived I always expected him to do summat
     for me, as worked alongside o' him when he were a lad i' Carrington's Mills, and now I know
      that chance is ower.'
'Well, he gave thee work here, and he'd always a kind word for thee.'
'Kind words spread no butties, and when he was rolling in brass, work at the usual wages was
     a' he ever give me.'
'Did'st thee ever gie him owt, lad?'
'I never had owt to give him, or anyone else for that matter.'

A general laugh arose, and Bill buried his face in his mug of beer.
'The next work-day the mill's closed'll be a wedden-day, I s'pose,' said Sigley, after a
     pause.
'Ay, and not long fust.'
'Mr Roland's always up at Aspinshaw.'
'So's Mr Richard if you come to that.'
'They can't both marry the girl.'
'No, nor I shouldn't think either of them would yet a bit. Miss Clare's only just come home
     fro' endin' her schoolin'.'
'And a gradely lass she is.'
'Ay, that's so,' cut in old Murdoch. 'She thinks a sight more o' workin'-folk nor either o'
     they boys do.'
'Where's your proof o' that, Bill?' asked Bolt, the village logician.
'Proof,' snarled Murdoch; 'don't 'ee call to mind two years agone when we had a kind o'
     strike like, and didn't she go about speakin' up for us like a good un?'
A murmur of assent mingled with the gurgling of liquor down half-a-dozen throats.
'There's one I hope she'll never take to,' Potters was beginning, but Bolt interrupted him
     with—
'Whichever has her will have a fine wife. Let's drink good luck to the new masters,
     lads.'
'Or, so to say, to oursel', for their's'll be ours,' said Sigley.
'Their bad luck'll be ours; but their good luck's their own,' said Bill Murdoch
     sententiously.
This startling economic theory meeting with no support, the original toast was drunk with a
     feeble attempt at honours.
The 'new masters' whose health had thus been unenthusiastically drunk found it hard to
     realise the peculiar position in which they found themselves.

The will was a great surprise to them both. Neither had thought that the slight breach which
     had come between them was sufficiently wide to be noticed, and the very fact of its having been
     noticed made it appear deeper and more serious than they had before considered it to be.
It was a bitter thought to Richard Ferrier that the old man's last moments should have been
     made unquiet through any conduct of his, and he reproached himself for not having concealed his
     own feelings better, and for not having watched more keenly over those of his father. The most
     crushing part of bereavement is always the consciousness that so little more thought, so little
     more tact and tenderness, would have sufficed to spare that ended life many an hour of sorrow,
     that quiet heart many a pang of pain. It is then that we would give our heart's blood for one
     hour with the beloved in which to tell them all that we might have said so easily while they
     were here. This universal longing is responsible for that deeply rooted belief in the life
     beyond the grave which causes two-thirds of human-kind to dispense with evidence and to set
     reason at nought. So long as the sons and daughters of men

Weep by silent graves alone,
so long will the priest find his penitent, the professor of modern spiritualism his
     open-mouthed dupe, and the shrine its devotee. The ages roll on, each year the old earth opens
     her bosom for our dearest, and still man—slow learner that he is—will not realise that
     (whatever may be the chances of another life in which to set right what has been here done
     amiss) in this life, which is the only one he can be sure of having, it rests with him to
     decide whether there shall be any acts of unkindness that will seem to need atonement.
The consolation which so many find in the idea of a future life was a closed door to Dick. He
     had belonged to the  'advanced' school of thought at college, and to him the gulf
     which separated him from his father was one that could never be bridged over.
Roland's grief was more absorbing than his brother's, though it was not so acute; and by its
     very nature could not be so lasting. Yet through it all he felt rather—not vexed—but grieved
     that his father should have not only divined his inmost feelings, but should have published
     them to the world by means of this will. He had an uneasy consciousness that he was made to
     appear ridiculous, and for Roland to be possibly absurd was to be certainly wretched. It was
     very irritating that two brothers could not have an occasional difference without having their
     'sparring' made the subject of a solemn legal document; and without being themselves placed in
     such a situation that the eyes of all their acquaintances must be turned expectantly on them to
     see what they would do next.
The differences arose from an only too complete agreement on one particular point. When they
     had come back from Cambridge a year before, they had found a new and interesting feature in the
     social aspect of Firth Vale. Clare Stanley had come home from the German boarding-school where
     she had spent the last three years. The young men had not seen her since she was a child, and
     now they met her in the full blossom of very pretty and sufficiently-conscious young
     womanhood.
For about two months they discussed her freely in their more sociable hours, admired her
     prodigiously, and congratulated each other on their good luck. Then came reticence; then
     occasional half-hearted sarcasms, directed against her, varied by a criticism of each other,
     the sincerity of which was beyond a doubt. For some months before the old man's death the
     rivalry that had sprung up between them had been too strong to be always kept under, even in
     his presence, and he had seen the effect, though not guessed the cause.

Strangely enough, another cause of dissension between the brothers had been also touched on
     by their critics in the tap of the Spotted Cow: Alice Hatfield. When Mrs. Ferrier had died Mrs.
     Hatfield had been foster-mother to the two boys, and during their childhood they were the
     constant playfellows of little Alice. Of course as they grew older the distance between them
     increased, but Richard was still very fond of Alice, and it was a great blow to him when one
     day, about three months after their return from college, the girl suddenly disappeared, taking
     leave of no one, and leaving no word of explanation. All that anyone could gather was that
     during a visit she had recently paid to an aunt in Liverpool she had been seen to talk more
     than once to a gentleman, and that she had left the Firth Vale Station for Manchester by an
     early train alone. But the worst of it was that Roland had that very day abruptly announced his
     intention of taking a holiday, and had gone North without any apparent object; and village
     gossip busied itself rarely with this portentous coincidence. At the end of a month Roland
     returned, looking worn and harassed. His brother asked him point blank where he had been, and
     for what. Roland indignantly denied his right to question, and flatly refused to answer. A
     quarrel ensued—the first of many, which grew more frequent as they saw more of Miss
     Stanley.
On the morning on which Mr Ferrier died, she and her father had gone to London to spend a
     month; and the time of her absence was the most peaceful the young men had known for some
     time.
Clare herself was glad to go to London, though not so glad to leave the scene of her
     conquests. One cannot blame her much for knowing that she was charming. The two Ferriers were
     the most desirable young men the country-side could offer, and no girl could have wished a
     finer pair of captives to grace her chariot-wheels. And—Aspinshaw was very dull.
