

AT MARLBOROUGH VILLA
MDEAR Clare, let me implore you to shut that book. You are becoming quite too dreadfully
     blue. I don't believe you take any interest in any of the things you used to like—even me,'
     ended Cora Quaid, with a pout. The two girls were sitting very snugly in Miss Quaid's special
     sanctum, where were enshrined her girlish treasures, her books, and the accessories of the art
     in which she hoped some day to rival Rosa Bonheur. Having had a picture admitted to the Academy
     the season before, she was more hopeful and consequently more industrious than ever. But on
     this afternoon she had not been painting. She had been sitting looking at her friend and
     thinking what a pretty picture she made with her sweet serious face and sombre crape draperies;
     but even the contemplation of one's prettiest friend will become fatiguing at last, when
     talking is one's very greatest pleasure. So Cora broke silence with the remark we have
     reported, and the silence she broke had been a very long one.
'You silly child,' Clare answered, laughing, and tossing her book on to the sofa, 'it isn't
     that at all. It is that I take an interest in all sorts of other things besides.'
'Mamma says,' remarked Miss Quaid, picking up the little red-covered pamphlet and looking at
     it with disfavour, 'that this book is not fit for any one to read.'

'I'm sorry Mrs Quaid doesn't like it,' Clare answered, 'because I like it so much. But
     perhaps I haven't studied it enough. I suppose your mamma has gone into it thoroughly.'
'Oh no, she wouldn't read it for the world.'
Clare felt Mrs Quaid's criticism to be less crushing than it might have been.
'One would have thought,' Cora went on, 'that "God and the State" would have been something
     very religious—something like Mr Gladstone, you know. A man oughtn't to call his book by a
     title that has nothing to say to the book itself. It's so misleading. Clare, I rather wonder
     Count Litvinoff should lend you such dreadful books.'
'I'm afraid Bakounin's not much like Mr Gladstone, dear, and I don't think I should care much
     about him if he were; but the title certainly has a great deal to do with the book. However,
     Bakounin has not converted me to his views. He is clever and trenchant, but—'
'I had done with that subject, my dear,' answered Miss Quaid, leaning over the arm of her
     easy-chair to look saucily into her friend's eyes, 'and had got to something much more
     interesting—the dashing Count, to wit.'
'He would be very much flattered to know that he inspires you with so much interest.'
'It is not I who am interested in him.'
'Who is interested in him?'
'Oh, neither of us—of course,' Cora answered; 'it is mamma and he who mutually attract each
     other. It is mamma he comes to see regularly three times a week. It is mamma who buries herself
     in his books and pamphlets. Seriously, Clare—how many of his books do you get through in a
     day?'
'I have read two of his books, and you have read one—"The Prophetic Vision," and you know how
     much we both liked that. As for the other—I suppose I'm not advanced  enough, but
     it doesn't seem to me to be anything like so clearly written, nor so forcible. It seems
     wonderful that the same man should have written both.'
'Perhaps it was written since he has been in exile, and he was wretched and out of sorts. By
     the way, he doesn't seem wretched now. Now, Clare,' coming and sitting down on the rug at the
     other's feet and leaning her arms on the black dress, and turning her bright mignonne
     face upward, 'I think it is only due to our ancient friendship—which, you remember, was founded
     on the noble principle, halves and no secrets, that you should confide in me. What are you
     going to do with him? How are you going to serve him?'
'Well, dear, would it be best to grill him or to serve him on toast with caviare? How would
     it look on the menu? Nihiliste à la Révolution.'
'Count Litvinoff à la married man would be more humane, perhaps. I wonder how it
     feels to be adored by a lover who has passionate eyes and a long blond moustache, who has had
     no end of adventures, has as many lives as a cat, and seems to be rolling in gold, judging by
     the bouquets he brings to—mamma.'
'If you are very anxious to know,' said Clare, smiling and smoothing the rough head at her
     knee, 'you had better try to attract him; I don't fancy you would find it difficult.'
'You don't seem to have found it so. Really and truly, Clare; do you mean to be a countess?
     Shall you refuse him?'
'He has never asked me but one thing, and that I did not refuse.'
'What a teasing girl you are! Does that mean anything or nothing?'
'Whichever you like, sweetheart.'
'Well, he deserves a better fate than to be allowed to singe his wings at the flame of your
     prettiness. You always were a flirt, Clare; and I am afraid you have not improved.'

'I don't think I have ever flirted,' Clare answered, growing suddenly grave; 'but I know I
     have been foolish enough to wish people to like me and to be interested in me. But you don't
     know how contemptible all that sort of thing seems to me now. Fancy caring about the opinion of
     people when you don't care about the people themselves.'
'Well, any one can see he's over head and ears in love with you—you nice, pretty little
     woman.'
'I hope not,' Clare answered; 'for I am not in the least in love with him.'
'Then don't you think it's a little too bad of you to encourage him as you do—reading his
     books and all that?'
'I don't know what "all that" may be, but as for the books he lends me, they don't borrow
     their interest from him. Every book I read seems to draw up a curtain and let new light into my
     mind. You can't imagine how different everything is to me since I began to read and to try to
     think. All that I have learned lately is like a new religion to me.' All the flippancy was gone
     from her voice, and in her eyes shone a new light. 'And I read all I can because I want to
     understand well enough to teach other people what I feel to be true. And oh, Cora! I
     do so want to do something to help the poor and show them their position.'
'Yes; I quite agree with you that they ought to know their position and keep in it. The
     Catechism tells us that, you know. I should think you might employ half a dozen curates. Papa
     says there are lots out of work.'
'I don't think curates are quite what are wanted. There are curates enough and to spare.
     Besides,

"The millions suffer still and grieve,
And what can helpers heal,
With old world cures they half believe
For woes they wholly feel?"'

'That sounds dreadful,' said Cora.
'Why, you used to be so fond of it!'
'Yes; but I didn't think it meant anything so wicked as that; and, what's more, I don't
     believe it does.'
'I haven't changed the words, Cora. I did not say they meant anything more than they have
     always meant. But, you see, too, don't you, what a ghastly mockery it is to send religious
     teaching to people who never had a good dinner in their lives? What a frightful system it is
     that allows all these horrors!'
'But, my dearest Clare, even if it is horrible, I don't see what you can do to alter it. Why,
     papa was saying only the other night that the social order was never so strong as now.'
'I'm in the humour for quoting, and I must keep on, I see,' said Clare, with a smile. 'Don't
     you remember?—

"Strong was its arm, each thew and bone
Seemed puissant and alive;
But, ah! its heart, its heart was stone,
And so it could not thrive."'
'Clare,' said the other affectionately, putting her arms round her friend's waist, 'you
     really oughtn't to take up these ideas. Do you know mamma says it's not natural for girls of
     our age to take such dismal views of things? You'll make yourself quite miserable if you go on
     with these books.'
'I seem to have nothing but Matthew Arnold in my head this afternoon,—

"But now the old is out of date,
The new is not yet born;
And who can be alone elate,
While the world lies forlorn?"'
'I don't see how anyone can be anything else but miserable at the thought of all the
     wretchedness there is in the world. The only thing to keep one from despairing over it would be
     to do  something, even if it were ever so little, to help forward a better time. I
     dare say your father is right, and this present state is very strong, and perhaps none of us'
     (with whom was she classing herself?) 'will live to see what we are longing for! It would be
     rather nice,' she went on meditatively, 'to have that other verse on one's grave,—

"The day I lived in was not mine,
Man gets no second day;
In dreams I saw the future shine,
But, ah! I could not stay."'
'This is too much,' cried Cora, jumping up. 'When it comes to choosing your own epitaph I
     think it's high time we gave the March winds a chance of blowing the cobwebs out of your brain.
     We'll have a run. Come along; the streets are deliciously dusty.'
Clare rose, smilingly obedient, and as she did so the room door opened slowly and admitted
     Mrs Quaid. She sank on to the sofa from which Miss Stanley had just risen.
'Such a fatiguing time I have had,' she said, with a long-drawn breath of relief, as she
     leaned back on the cushions and loosened her bonnet-strings. 'Mrs Paget was out, and of the ten
     ladies who are on our Educational Committee only two attended besides myself. Really, people
     have no energy. And then, my shopping took me so much longer than I expected—these new
     shades are so difficult to match—and at last, when I felt quite worn out, and was just going
     into Roper's for a glass of sherry and a biscuit, whoever do you think I ran across,
     treating two ragged children to buns?'
'Count Litvinoff?' from Cora.
'No—oh no. It was Mr Petrovitch, and when he saw me he hustled the poor little things out of
     the shop as though he were ashamed of them, and he stayed talking to me ever so long, and was
     quite delightful, and—Clare, my sweet, this will  please you, you were so much
     taken with him—he is coming to see us this evening. Won't that be charming?'
'I am very glad,' said Claire simply, while Cora busied herself in loosening her mother's
     cloak, and waiting on her in various little ways. 'I seemed to learn so much from him the last
     time I heard him.'
'Yes, and a friend of his is coming as well—a deliciously savage-looking Austrian, named
     Hirsch—who was there too, and who seems quite like our friend's shadow, and, as Mr Vernon is
     coming also, we shall be quite a pleasant little party, all sympathising with each other's
     feelings, and that's the great thing, you know.'
'I wonder if Count Litvinoff will look in,' mused Cora, rubbing her mother's rich sable muff
     round and round the wrong way.
'Not to-night. He is lecturing at some East-end club. What a man he is; so devoted
     to the cause. It seems so sad that he should be so very extreme in his views. Force is
     such a terrible thing, and I very much fear that he believes in that more than in the power of
     love.'
'I think he does,' answered Clare, seeing herself appealed to.
'Ah, well; we must try to convert him,' Mrs Quaid said, smiling. 'I should imagine him to be
     a most reasonable person to talk to, and not difficult to convince. I like him so much. It is
     so seldom one meets a man with just his polish of manner and strength of mind. Cora, dear, I've
     had no lunch. Just ring and order some for me. I really feel quite faint.'
At eight o'clock that evening Petrovitch stood in the softly-lighted hall of Marlborough
     Villa. He felt more interested in the coming evening than he generally was on such  occasions. Hirsch, who was with him, was very much surprised to find himself within the
     portals of one of those middle-class establishments against which he had always inveighed so
     bitterly. But Mrs Quaid's manner had overborne his determinations with its resistless flow of
     gush, and he had accepted her invitation from sheer inability to edge in a word of refusal. He
     had been in a state of mingled remorse and terror ever since, and only Petrovitch's strong
     representations to the effect that men who set themselves against Society should at least not
     fall below Society in the matter of keeping their word, had induced him to face the dreadful
     ordeal of meeting half-a-dozen well-dressed Social Reformers in a large and luxurious
     drawing-room.
It would be impossible for any human being to be quite as glad to see any other
     human being as Mrs Quaid appeared to be to see her two new friends. They came in together, and
     while Hirsch looked round on the handsome furniture with a savagely appraising glance, prompted
     equally by his Jewish blood and his Socialistic convictions, Petrovitch, having seen that Clare
     was present, delivered himself an unresisting prey to his hostess, knowing that to even her
     eloquence an end must come, and knowing, too, that sooner or later he would find himself beside
     the girl whom his paper on Socialism had seemed to impress so much, the first time he had ever
     been in that room. He had been in that room more than once since but never without seeing a
     very vivid vision of the fair face, shining eyes, and red lips, slightly parted in the interest
     of listening, the girlish figure bent forward the better to catch every word of his. It was not
     only the flattery of her undisguised interest in him which had painted for him this
     memory-picture, and had given him a constantly-recurring desire to see the original again. He
     was pretty well skilled by this time in reading the faces of his fellow-creatures, and when all
     the  thanks and congratulations of the Cleon's visitors were ringing in his ears,
     he had known perfectly well that the only heart he had touched, the only mind that had followed
     his reasoning, and the only soul that understood him, were those of the dark-eyed girl at his
     side. And the look those dark eyes had given him when he said good-night, had haunted him ever
     since.
From the seat of honour on the sofa beside Mrs Quaid, Petrovitch looked, perhaps rather
     longingly, towards the other end of the room, where Hirsch and Vernon were talking to the two
     girls.
It was unworthy weakness, perhaps, in a Friend of Humanity, but he could not help straining
     his ears to try to catch what they were saying, and wondering what subject they could be
     discussing to bring such interest into Clare's face. This effort interfered somewhat with the
     lucidity of his replies, until Mr Quaid, who had hardly spoken before, brought him up short
     with the question,—
'What do you mean, now, by Socialism?' and the Socialist, with an imperceptible shrug of the
     shoulders and a sort of 'in for a penny in for a pound' feeling, gave up trying to do two
     things at once, and plunged heart and soul into explanations, knowing quite well neither of his
     hearers would understand them.
If there is any truth in the old adage his ears should have burned, for the group at the end
     of the room were discussing nothing less than himself.
An enthusiastic remark from Vernon and sympathetic rejoinders from Clare and Cora had
     sufficed to mitigate in the Austrian that sense of being trapped by the enemy with which he had
     entered the room, for he saw that these young people had, at anyrate, one thing in common with
     him—a great respect for and interest in his Russian friend. And knowing this, his tongue was
     loosed; and his love of his friend overcoming in  some degree the difficulties
     presented to him by the English language, he began to tell tale after tale of Petrovitch's
     kindness, bravery, self-sacrifice, and nobility. His knowledge of English had improved in the
     last four months, and his hearers found it easy to understand him.
'I have only known him half a year,' he said at last; 'and in that time I know of him more
     good than of any other man in half a lifetime.'
'I've known him less time than that,' chimed in young Vernon; 'and even I can see that he's
     different to any one else. The only person I ever knew who was in the least like him is Count
     Litvinoff.'
'Thereby I see you know not well either the one or the other,' said Hirsch, with some return
     to his normal grumpiness.
'I don't agree with Mr Vernon,' put in Clare; 'the principles of Count Litvinoff and Mr
     Petrovitch may be the same, but it seems to me that the two men are utterly different.'
'Yes,' said Miss Quaid. 'Count Litvinoff has much more of the dash and "go" that one expects
     in a revolutionist. Mr Petrovitch is very solid, I should think; but Count Litvinoff is
     certainly more brilliant and sparkling.'
Hirsch smiled sardonically.
'Mademoiselle is happy in her epithets. Froth sparkles in the sunshine and the most precious
     metal is the most solid. I will tell you one thing of Petrovitch. When you can tell me such
     another of Litvinoff, I will say Mr Vernon is right—the two men are like.
'It was on your Christian festival of Christmas—in a Russian town, no matter to name it—there
     was a chase, and all the townspeople turned out of their doors for the pleasure-excitement of
     seeing it. The chased? Only a poor woman, on her way from Moscow to the Austrian frontier. Her
     crime? She was a Jewess. For this, men and boys, with savage dogs,  with sticks,
     with stones, with all that their devilish brutality told them to use against her, hunted her
     down, shouting, deriding, exulting. And she fled from them, but slowly, for she was not young.
     And those who took no part in the bloody pursuing looked on, smiling, many of them, and those
     who smiled not, with interest; men who were well born, and had not the ignorant superstition
     for whose sake we can pardon any crime to the poor. Those who hunted her were men who knew not
     their right hand from their left—thanks to their priests—and those who looked on approving were
     men of your world—"cultured," how you say?
'The poor woman fled, and still more slowly; a stone had hit her hard, and she felt already
     at the sickness of death. At a corner a tarantass across the road barred her way. Its coachman
     had stopped for the pleasure of seeing the sport. A Jewess stoned to death! The excellent
     pastime!
'She looked around; no way of escape. The driver of the tarantass raised his whip. He, too,
     would taste the pleasures of cruelty. She threw her arms up, and called upon Jehovah, whom she
     worshipped. Before the lash could fall, from within the tarantass sprang a young man, and
     snatched from the driver's hand the whip. To let it fall on her with more force? Not so. To
     sweep it full across the faces of the foremost in the crowd. He caught the despised Jewess in
     his arms, and lifted her into his carriage. The crowd—cowards as well as bullies—drew back. He
     sprang upon the seat beside the driver, seized the reins, turned the horses, and to them, too,
     used the whip—so well, that he carried away from that Russian town the saved life of a woman.
     He took her to a place of safety, and when she was strong enough sent her to join her son in
     Vienna. She was my mother. She owed her salvation from a death shameful and agonising to—'
He stopped short suddenly and glanced expressively at the  broad-shouldered
     figure at the other end of the room. Then he said,—
'Such is my friend. Your Count Litvinoff—would he so have acted?'
He looked at Vernon, but Clare answered quickly,—
'Indeed he would. Only a little while ago he risked his life, not to save life, but to save
     working men from injuring their own cause, by wild violence.'
Hirsch looked at her with mingled interest and disfavour.
'Possibly,' he said; 'it may be I misjudge him, but for me he is too brilliant.'
Cora looked at her friend, and smiled a smile which Clare interpreted easily enough as a
     reference to their conversation of that afternoon, and out of pure defiance she would probably
     have said something still more strong in Count Litvinoff's favour if the door had not opened at
     that moment to admit two very dear, very sweet, and completely unexpected
     friends of Mrs Quaid's. The advent of these two, who were dwellers in Gath, and brought in with
     them a breath of pure Philistine air, led to the rising and re-arrangement of seats, of which
     the children's game of 'General Post' is a sort of caricature.
Mrs Quaid being now completely occupied with the new arrivals, Petrovitch seized the golden
     opportunity, and when the room settled down again into repose, Clare found that he occupied the
     ottoman beside her, where Hirsch had been sitting before. Miss Quaid and young Vernon had
     gravitated towards the conservatory, for Cora was a great lover of flowers, and Eustace, while
     he liked the flowers well enough, liked her still better. Hirsch had been set going by one of
     Mr Quaid's broad-based questions, and Miss Stanley and Petrovitch were virtually alone. And
     yet, though each had wished often enough to see the other again, now that they were side by
     side it seemed to be not so easy to talk. It is always so  difficult to chatter
     about trifles when one is anxious to talk seriously, and it is difficult, almost up to the
     point of impossibility, to plunge into reasonable conversation in a room full of inconsequent
     prattle. Added to this, Petrovitch felt an unaccustomed and unaccountable shyness, and to Clare
     it was somehow less easy to ask his advice than she had thought it would have been, and than it
     had been to ask Count Litvinoff's.
She was the first to speak.
'I find you have not yet converted Mrs Quaid to all your views, Mr Petrovitch,' she said. 'I
     fear you have not been making good use of your time.'
Petrovitch did not answer; he looked at her and smiled, but it was a smile that conveyed the
     idea that, even to have succeeded in converting Mrs Quaid, would not have been making the best
     use of his time.
'I might almost have said our views,' Clare went on, determined not to let slip the
     opportunity of asking his advice on the great question of her life, 'for I have been thinking a
     great deal of all you said last time I met you here.'
'I knew you would,' he said simply.
'And I have been reading a little too. I have borrowed some books of Count Litvinoff—one or
     two of his own. You know Count Litvinoff? You have read his books, of course?'
'Yes, I know them,' he said. 'The writer is happy if he has shown your eyes the truth—more
     happy, I fear, than you will be in seeing it.'
'Oh, I don't know that it has made me unhappy, quite. I am perplexed and bewildered; but,
     however that may be, I don't owe it to Count Litvinoff, but to you; and that is why I am going
     to ask you to help me to see my way a little more clearly. I did ask Count Litvinoff what he
     thought—but—at any rate, I want to know what you think I ought to do.'

'I do not know that in your position you can do much except spread the light by telling the
     truth to every one who will receive it.'
'But I think I can do more. Do you know, I am very rich? I have—oh, ever so much a year, and
     it is all my own now, to do just what I like with.'
His eyes fell on her black dress, then they met her frank gaze, and the two looked straight
     at each other as she went on.
'The money was made by other people's losses. I know that, and I feel that the money is not
     my own. The question is, how can I best use it?'
'You asked Count Litvinoff this? May I in turn ask how he answered?'
'He thought—he said—' Clare hesitated a moment—'he declined to give me advice,' she
     finished.
Clare started at a sudden angry light that came into the eyes of the man beside her. She felt
     she had been indiscreet and even guilty. For she remembered how Litvinoff had followed his
     refusal of counsel by telling her how that there were 'men, his friends, who, if they knew that
     she had asked him for this advice, and he had refused to give it, would say he had become
     traitor, and kill him like a rat.' Suppose Petrovitch were one of these men! Clare did not wait
     for him to speak, but answered the look.
'You are angry with him,' she said. 'I had no right to tell you that, but since I have given
     you my confidence I know you will respect it, and not let it influence your conduct towards
     him.'
'Your friend is safe as far as I am concerned,' Petrovitch answered, passing his hand over
     his long beard. 'Do not be alarmed for him. You take a deep interest in his welfare—is it not
     so?'

The question was asked earnestly, and not impertinently, and Clare felt no inclination to
     resent it. There was a short silence between them, and it was manifest to them that Mrs Quaid
     was holding the Philistines enthralled by her views on education. Miss Stanley answered slowly
     and softly,—
'You know my dear father is dead now. Our acquaintance with Count Litvinoff began with his
     saving my father's life at the risk of his own, and that is not the only good deed I have known
     him do, though that alone will make me always interested in him.'
Then she told of the part he had played in the unfortunate scene at the mill, and his conduct
     lost nothing in the telling. Insensibly led on by Petrovitch's well-managed prompting in
     monosyllables she went on to what had come after, and how she had been made the means of
     changing Roland Ferrier's determination to prosecute and punish the 'hands.'
'Yes,' said Petrovitch, when she had finished, 'I know right well that he is no coward and no
     fool; and as for his not advising you, I am not sure that he was not right. I, too, will not
     advise you. There is only one thing I could tell you to do, and that I will not tell you now.
     Wait, wait, and be patient, and study; and if after a while you still ask me for advice I will
     give it to you.'
'I know what you think,' she said impulsively. 'You think I'm young and foolish, and that I
     shall be changeable. You think I have taken up these beliefs without enough thought or
     understanding. If I could only tell you ... how altered everything seems, what a splendid new
     light seems to be breaking over everything. Do you think, what you said just now, that knowing
     the truth could make me unhappy? Oh no. It is knowledge without action that makes me
     sad.'
'No, no; that is not my thought,' he answered, in a voice  that seemed to have
     caught a thrill from her own. 'Think a little longer. Whatever action you take will not lose
     strength because it is well thought, well considered. If you ever ask me again, I promise you I
     will not hesitate a moment to answer; but I would rather the answer came from you than from
     me.'
'That's one of your leading principles, isn't it? Independent thought.'
'Yes. How can people ever hope to act rightly, if they will persist in delegating other
     people to think for them?'
'But ordinary people can't thoroughly think out all subjects. One is obliged to take
     a great many of one's opinions at second-hand.'
'Well, but neither can one act in all directions—and where one has to act one should think
     first. As for taking opinions at second-hand, that is a thing you should never dare to do. If
     you are not able to think for yourself, you should have no opinions. Your English Clifford has
     told you that if you have no time to think you have no time to believe.'
'I am sure you are right. But I am sure, too, that to think for one's self means in most
     circles social ostracism; and it wants very strong convictions to make one face that.'
'Social ostracism,' answered the Socialist, with unutterable contempt in the gesture which
     accompanied his words; 'social ostracism, and by whom imposed? Look at the people around you.'
     Clare glanced nervously at Mrs Quaid. 'See how small are their aims, how trivial their
     interests, how great their love of ease, how small their love of truth; see what narrow minds
     they have, what blinded eyes; see all the good that would be in them crushed out by the very
     conventionalities which they uphold. How can we think it of any value, the opinion of such as
     these? Or if their condemnation should pain us, what a little thing is such a pain compared
     with the lifelong con sciousness of having, from the fear of it, crushed out the
     spark of truth in our own souls? What a little thing compared with eternal truth is even life
     itself! We come out of the darkness, and into that darkness must return. Is it not better,
     seeing the little time that is ours, to know that we at least have listened to the wail of
     agony that ever goes up to the deaf heavens?—that we have done what we could in our little day
     to help forward a better time for those who shall come after us, than to know that we have had
     the good opinion of "respectable people"?'
'If one could only hope that one could help it forward!' sighed Clare.
'Hope? We know it. These things will be. It is a question of the little sooner or the little
     later. There is no standing still. He that is not with us is against us. But we shall triumph
     in the end. We know that all this misery, all this sin, all this selfishness, all this
     stupidity even, are the direct result of the social milieu. It is this knowledge that
     makes us the deadly enemies of the Capitalist system, and that is why we are hated by those who
     profit by it.'
He spoke in a low voice, full of suppressed excitement. When he ended the girl drew a long
     breath. He saw the white violets on her bosom rise and fall slowly twice before he spoke again.
     Then he said, with a smile,—
'If I have not given you advice, I have at least given you a sermon. You see I already look
     upon you as one of us, or I should not have dared to outrage conventionalities by speaking in
     earnest in a drawing-room.'
'Oh, my dear Mr Petrovitch,' exclaimed Mrs Quaid, who pausing out of breath from her
     exertions in the cause of education, had caught the last dozen words, 'you are really
      too severe! I hope all of us, at anyrate, always speak in earnest, though of
     course, some of us are more earnest than others.  That delightful Count
     Litvinoff, now—so devoted, and yet so cheerful; I'm so sorry he has not come to-night.'
'He seems to be a universal favourite,' answered Petrovitch, who had risen on his hostess's
     approach, and now stood with his hand on the back of Clare's chair.
'Yes, and you who know him, of course know how well he deserves all our good opinions.' She
     glanced almost imperceptibly at Clare. Petrovitch noted the glance, and he fancied that Clare
     noted it too, and that it called up a faint blush into her face. But Mrs Quaid's drawing-room
     was discreetly lighted, and perhaps he was mistaken.
'I should never forgive myself,' the good lady went on, 'if I missed this beautiful
     opportunity of performing such a delightful task—bringing two such distinguished fellow-workers
     together. We must fix an early evening for you both to dine here. It will be charming.'
Petrovitch bowed.
As Hirsch and Petrovitch went away together, the Austrian said,—
'So, the lady who is always charmed will charm herself with making you meet him, bon grè,
      mal grè.'
'I will meet him,' the other answered, 'and that shortly. But not in that house.'
'Good,' grunted Hirsch; and the two men fell to smoking silently.
