

BACK FROM THE DEAD
THE Clare Stanley who studied Bakounin and quoted Matthew Arnold was a very different girl
     from the Clare Stanley who had in the autumn entertained the reprehensible idea of bringing to
     her feet the interesting stranger at Morley's Hotel. In looking back on that time, which she
     did with hot cheeks and uncomfortable self-condemnation, it really seemed to her that she had
     changed into another being—development, when it is rapid, being always bewildering. It would be
     interesting to know with what emotions the rose remembers being a green bud. Pleasanter ones
     perhaps than those of the woman whose new earnest sense of the intense seriousness of life
     leads her to look back—not with indulgent eyes—on the follies of her unawakened girlhood. The
     story of the sleeping beauty is an allegory with a very real meaning. Every woman's mind has
     its time of slumber, when the creed of the day is truth and the convention of the day is
     morality. The fairy prince's awakening kiss may come in the pages of a book, in the words of a
     speaker, through love, through suffering, through sorrow, through a thousand things glad or
     sad, and to some it never comes, and that is the saddest thing of all. Clare had slept, and now
     was well awake, and it was no word of Count Litvinoff's that had broken the slumbrous
     spell.
Sometimes she almost wished it had been, for she could not conceal from herself the fact that
     she had succeeded in  doing what she had desired to do, and that Count Litvinoff
      was at her feet. The position became him, certainly, but she felt a perverse
     objection to being placed on a pedestal, and a new conviction that she would rather look up to
     a lover than down at one. And yet why should she look down on him? He was cleverer than she,
     with a larger knowledge of life—had done incomparably more for the cause she had espoused. He
     was brave, handsome, and, to some extent, a martyr, and he loved her, or she thought so, which
     came to the same thing. Verily, a man with all these qualifications was hardly the sort of
     lover for a girl under the twenties to look down upon. But could she help looking down on him,
     for was he not at her feet? And that was not the place, she thought, for a man who had drawn
     the sword in such a war as she and he had entered upon. What right had a man who had taken up
     arms in that cause to lay them down, even at her feet? No, no. Her lover, if she had
     one, must be at her side—not there.
This reaction to the Count's detriment had set in on New Year's Day, when he had told her
     that he held no cause sacred enough to give her even inconvenience for the sake of it, and the
     tide was still ebbing. Litvinoff appeared quite unconscious of that fact though, for he
     continued to call on Mrs Quaid with a persistence which quite justified all Cora's
     animadversions. Miss Quaid's penetration was at fault, but the Count's was not. He was
     perfectly conscious of the change in her state of mind, and knew that his chance of being
     master of the Stanley money-bags was far less than he had thought shortly after their late
     master's death.
Suspense was the one thing Count Litvinoff could not bear—at least, he could bear it when the
     balance of probabilities was in his favour; but when the chances did not seem to be on his
     side—no. He knew perfectly well that it is hardly 'correct' to ask a girl to marry one three
     months after her  father's death; but he was not an enthusiastic devotee of
     'correctness.' He habitually posed as a despiser of conventions, and this attitude very often
     stood him in good stead, even with people who preferred the stereotyped rôles of life
     for themselves. Avowed unconventionality serves as a splendid excuse for doing all sorts of
     pleasant things which conventional people daren't do; hence perhaps its growing popularity.

'He either fears his fate too much,
Or his deserts are small,
Who dares not put it to the touch,
To gain or lose it all.'
The lines ran in Count Litvinoff's head persistently one spring morning while he sat at his
     late breakfast. As he despatched his last mouthful of grilled sardine and looked round for the
     marmalade, the servant came in with a letter.
'It really is time I struck for fortune. I do hope this is not a bill,' he said to himself as
     he took it. 'I retrench and retrench, and still they come.'
He tore it open. It was not a bill. It ran thus:—
'I shall call upon you between four and five this afternoon; I wish to see you on an
      important matter.—Petrovitch.'
'The mysterious stranger doesn't waste his words. He's almost as careful of them as the
     fellow with the dirty collar—Bursch, or Kirsch, or Hirsch, or whatever it was. The best of
     being mixed up with the revolutionary party is that such beautifully unexpected things are
     always befalling one. I wonder why he couldn't have waited till to-morrow night. It lends a
     spice to an important matter to discuss it at forbidden times and in a secret manner at the
     houses of friends. That's another of our characteristics—to plot when we're supposed to be
     talking frivol only, and to play cards or go to sleep when we're supposed  to be
     plotting. Wonder what the important matter is. The distressed lady friend again, perhaps. Well,
     before I commit myself on that matter, I'd better settle things one way or the other with
      la belle Clare. Upon my soul, I don't much care which way they are settled. If I'm
     not to shine as the county magnate and the married man at Aspinshaw, by Heaven, I'll find out
     my own little girl, and go in for virtuous retirement in the Quartier Latin. When I do
     swallow my principles they go down whole, like oysters; and if Miss Stanley doesn't care to add
     the title of "countess" to her other endowments, some one will be glad to take that and me,
     even with nothing a year to keep state upon.'
He pushed his chair back, and sat biting his moustache irresolutely, and frowning heavily at
     the breakfast-table.
'Yes,' he said at last, rising; 'I'll have a shot for it now, as I've gone so far, and I'll
     shoot as straight and as steady as I can. As for the other matter—well, Aspinshaw and the
     fruits thereof would not be a bad drug for inconvenient memories. I wonder if this is one of my
     good-looking days?' he added, moving towards the looking-glass, and scrutinising his reflection
     therein. He seemed satisfied, lighted the inevitable cigarette, and half an hour after noon was
     in Mrs Quaid's library, alone with Clare Stanley.
Mrs Quaid, he had known, would be absent on some educational errand, and Cora would be at the
     National Gallery. He knew that Miss Stanley was not averse to a quiet morning spent in
     uninterrupted reading and copying, and he had rightly thought that he should have a very fair
     chance of finding her alone. The resolution of his, which had faltered before the remembrance
     of that other face, grew strong again as he saw her, for she looked charming, and it was not in
     his nature to be indifferent to the charms of any woman, even if she were not the
     woman.
Miss Stanley had been making notes in a MS. book, and  Litvinoff noticed with a
     feeling not altogether pleasurable that 'The Prophetic Vision' and the 'Ethics of Revolution'
     both lay open on the writing-table, and that she seemed to have been comparing them one with
     the other.
'I am afraid you will hate me for interrupting your studies,' he began, apparently ignorant
     of the direction those studies had been taking, 'but when the servant told me you were alone in
     the library, I could not resist the temptation of coming in.'
'I don't at all mind being interrupted,' she answered, when he had settled himself down in a
     chair opposite to her with the air of a man who, having come in, meant to stay. 'I was just
     looking through two of your books. One of them, indeed, I almost know by heart.'
'And that is?'—carelessly, as one who is sure of the answer—
'"The Prophetic Vision."'
Somehow Count Litvinoff did not look delighted. Perhaps he wanted to talk about something
     else.
'But, oh,' she went on, 'what a long way off it all seems!'
'Yes, it does; I was an enthusiastic young rebel when I first put on the Prophet's Mantle.'
     Then, as a faint change in her face showed him that he had made a false move, he hastened to
     add, 'But it will all happen some day, you know. It is a true vision, but knocking about in the
     world has taught me that the immediately practicable is the thing to aim for.'
'Oh, no, no, no,' she said. 'Never let us lower our standard. We shall not do less noble work
     in the present for having the noblest of all goals before us.'
Then she looked at him, at his handsome, insouciant face, at the half-cynical droop
     of his mouth, at the look in his eyes—the sort of look an old cardinal who knew the Church and
     the world might turn on an enthusiastic young monk—and she  felt a sudden regret
     for that heart-warm speech of hers. What had she in common with this perfectly-dressed,
     orchid-button-holed young man? Why should she expect him to understand her? And yet had he not
     written "The Prophetic Vision"? She went on, smiling a little,—
'You must make allowances for the hopeful faith of a new convert. Perhaps when I've held my
     new belief a little longer I shall be less en l'air. But I must say I hope not.'
'Your new beliefs make you very happy, then?'
'They make me want very much to live to see what will happen. It would be terrible to die now
     before anything is accomplished. You see, I can't help believing that we shall accomplish
     something, although I know you think me very high-flown and absurd.'
'You know I think you perfect,' he said, in a very low voice, and went on hurriedly: 'But,
     for Heaven's sake, don't talk about dying; the idea is too horrible. Can't you guess why I have
     seemed not sympathetic with your new religion? I have known what it is to believe strongly, to
     work unceasingly, never to leave off hoping, and trying to show others my hope. I have known
     what it is to have no life but the life of the cause; to go through year after year still
     hoping and striving. I have known all this, and more. I have known the heart-sickness of
     waiting for a dawn that never comes. I know how one may strain every nerve, tax every power,
     kill one's body, wear out one's brain, break one's heart against the iron of things as they
     are, and when all is sacrificed, all is gone, all is suffered, have achieved nothing.
     It is from this I would save you. That you should suffer is a worse evil than any your
     suffering could remedy. The cause will have martyrs enough without you.'
'Martyrs, yes; but how can it have too many workers?' she asked, not looking at him.

'To be a worker is to be a martyr,' he answered, rising and standing near her; 'and that is
     the reason why you are the only convert I have never rejoiced over.'
'I don't know,' she was beginning when he interrupted her.
'Don't say that,' he said. 'Don't say you don't know why I can't endure the thought of your
     ever knowing anything but peace and happiness. You know it is because I love you, and my love
     for you has eaten up all my other loves. Freedom, the Revolution, my country, my own ambition,
     are all nothing to me. But if you care for the cause I can still work in it, and with
     a thousand times more enthusiasm than it ever inspired me with before, for you. That
     can be your way of helping it. Use me as your instrument. Make any use you will of me, if only
     you are safe and happy, and mine.'
His voice was low with the passion which for the moment thrilling through him made him quite
     believe his own words.
Clare had listened silently, her eyes cast down, and her nervous fingers diligently tearing
     an envelope into little bits, and when he had ended she still did not speak, but her breath
     came and went quickly.
'You,' he was beginning again, when she stretched out her hand to silence him.
'No, no,' she said; 'don't say any more—I can't bear it.'
'Does that mean that you care?'
'It means that this seems the most terrible thing that could have happened to me. That it
     should be through me that you give up the right.'
'But through you, for you, I will become anything you choose.'
'And that is the worst of all,' she said, with very real distress. 'I can ask you to do
     nothing for my sake.'
'You cannot love me, then?' he asked, as earnestly as though his happiness hung on her
     answer.

'No,' she said steadily, 'I cannot love you. I am very, very sorry—'
'Spare me your pity, at least,' he said. 'But one thing I must ask. Why did you let me see
     you again after New Year's Day? For I told you the same thing then, and you knew then that I
     loved you.'
It was true—but Clare hated him for saying it.
'I have changed so much since then,' she said slowly.
Several things both bitter and true rose to his lips. He did not give them voice, however. He
     had never in his life said an unkind thing to a woman. It occurred to him that he was accepting
     his defeat rather easily, and he looked at her to measure the chances for and against the
     possible success of another appeal. But in her face was a decision against which he knew there
     could be no appeal. He felt angry with her for refusing him—angry and unreasonably surprised;
     and then, in one of the flashes of light that made it so hard for him to understand himself, he
     saw that if she was to blame for refusing his love, he was ten thousand times more to blame for
     having sought hers, and this truth brought others with it. His real feeling, he knew, was not
     anger but relief. He made a step forward.
'You are right,' he said. 'I congratulate you on your decision. You were talking of dying
     just now. You will live long enough to know how much congratulation you merit for having to-day
     refused to give yourself to a traitor and a villain.'
'A traitor—no, no,' she said, holding out her hand.
'No,' he said, 'I am not worthy. Some day you will know that I ought never to have touched
     that hand of yours. Good-bye.'
And the door shut behind him, and Clare was left standing in the middle of the room with her
     eyes widely opened, and  her hand still outstretched. She stood there till she
     heard the front door closed, and then sank into a chair. She didn't want to go on making notes
     about 'The Prophetic Vision' any more.
The interview had not been a pleasant one, and it was not pleasant to think over. One of the
     least pleasant things in this world is a granted wish, granted after it has ceased to be
     wished. And Clare could not forget that she had desired to win this man's admiration,
     at least. She could not forget that he had saved her father's life—that he had been the first
     to speak to her of many things once unknown or unconsidered, but now a part of her very
     life—and she could not forget that when she had first thought of the possibility of his asking
     her to marry him she had not meant to refuse him. There had been much about him to
     attract her, and if she had never met Petrovitch she might have given Litvinoff, even now, a
     different answer. But in Petrovitch she found all the qualities that had fascinated her in
     Litvinoff, and all on a larger scale, and with a finer development. Litvinoff now seemed to her
     like a dissolving view of Petrovitch seen through the wrong end of a telescope. He lacked the
     definiteness of outline, the depth of tone, the intense reality of the other man. Perhaps he
     seemed more brilliant and dashing; but Hirsch's story had shown what Petrovitch was. Added to
     all this was one significant fact. She had admired in Litvinoff one quality or another, and had
     desired to attract him. To Petrovitch she herself had been attracted, not by any specific
     quality or qualities, but by himself—by the man as he was—and this attraction grew stronger
     with each meeting.
A fortnight had now passed since the second time she had seen him, and somehow or other she
     had seen him very often in that time. She knew well enough that neither Litvinoff nor
     Petrovitch had come to Marlborough Villa to see its mistress.  And she had been
     sufficiently certain about the Count's motives for his visit, but could she be certain about
     the motive which brought the elder man there so constantly? Of any effort to make him care for
     her she was not guilty. In her new frame of mind she would have felt any such attempt to be
     degrading, alike to herself and to him. And though she knew he came to see her, she could not
     be sure why he came. Was his evident interest in her only the interest of an apostle in a
     convert? A certain humility had sprung up in her, along with many other flowers of the heart,
     and she did not admit to herself that there was a chance of his interest being of another
     nature. Only, she thought, it would be the highest honour in the world and the deepest
     happiness to be the woman whom he loved. Not the less because she knew well enough that the
     woman he loved would hold the second place in his heart, and that he would not wish to hold the
     first place in hers. That, for both of them, must be filled by the goddess whom Litvinoff had
     once said he worshipped, and whom he had abjured and abandoned for her sake. She thought of
     this without a single thrill of gratified pride.
Miss Stanley sat silent for half an hour, and in that time got through more thinking than we
     could record if we wrote steadily for half a year. At the end of that time Miss Quaid came
     home.
'I hear Count Litvinoff has been here,' she said, when she entered the study. 'What is it to
     be? Am I to have a Countess Litvinoff for a friend?'
'No,' said Clare, rising and shaking off her reverie; I shall never be anything to Count
     Litvinoff.'
Which was, perhaps, a too hasty conclusion.
To the reader who has followed the fortunes of Count Litvinoff so far we need hardly mention
     the fact that as soon  as he was clear of Marlborough Villa he pulled out his
     cigar-case. It had always been a favourite theory of his that a cigar and not a mill-pond was
     the appropriate sequel to an unsuccessful love affair. Not that it had ever occurred to him as
     even remotely possible that such an experience could ever be his. Here it was, however, and he
     had one of those opportunities which always charm the thinker—that of being able to apply to
     his own case a theory invented for other people. He took a meditative turn round Regent's Park.
     It is a strange fact which we do not remember to have seen commented on by any other
     writer—that when a man comes away from an interview with a girl to whom he has been making love
     he is inevitably driven to think, not of her alone, but also of one, two, three or more of the
     other girls to whom he has from time to time made love in the remote or recent past. Such is
     the depravity of the 'natural man' that these thoughts are not generally sad ones. But
     Litvinoff's thoughts were genuinely sad. He had said to Miss Stanley that he was a traitor and
     a villain, and it had not been said for dramatic effect. He meant it. He would have given a
     good many years of any life that might lie before him to undo a few of the years that lay
     behind.
'I am not consistent enough for a villain,' he said to himself. 'I have failed in that part,
     and now I will go in for my natural rôle of a fool, and I've a sort of idea that I
     shall get on better. And the first thing to be done is to find my little one. Fool as I am,
     I've generally been able to do anything I've really set my mind on. The reason I've failed in
     my "deep-laid schemes" has been that I didn't always care whether I won or not. I can be in the
     same mind about this matter, however, for a long enough time to achieve what I want. As for
     principles, they bore me. If it hadn't been for my principles I shouldn't have got into half
     this trouble. What shall I do with myself till my mysterious friend turns up?'

After a minute's hesitation he turned into the Zoological Gardens, where he spent some
     thought on the wasting of an hour or so among the beasts, incurred the undying hatred of an
     alligator by stirring him up with the ferule of his stick, irritated the llama to the point of
     expectoration, and grossly insulted the oldest inhabitant of the monkey-house.
His luncheon was a bath bun and a glass of milk.
'A fourpenny luncheon,' he said to himself, 'is the first step in the path of virtue.'
At half-past three he got back to his lodgings, and sat down with the resolution of going
     thoroughly into his financial affairs. To that he thought he would devote an hour or two, and
     in the evening he would try to find the lost clue in Spray's Buildings. This looking into his
     finances struck him as being a business-like sort of thing to do, and quite in harmony with his
     present frame of mind.
He was soon busy at his light writing-table. Presently he drew from a drawer his banker's
     pass-book, made bulky with cancelled cheques. He groaned earnestly.
'Alas!' he said to himself, 'how sadly simple and easy it is to sign one's name on this nice
     smooth coloured paper. I suppose it's best to check these off—bankers' clerks are so dreadfully
     careless.'
A most unfounded statement, born of ignorance of business, and a desire to seem to himself as
     one who understood it. Suddenly he started, and singled out the cheque he had given to Hirsch
     in the autumn. It bore on it, as endorsement, in a bold, free handwriting, the name, 'Michael
     Petrovitch.'
'Hola!' he said; 'a namesake of mine. Stay, though. This apostle of our cause does not keep
     to one handwriting.'
He walked to the mantelpiece, and taking thence the letter he had received in the morning, he
     compared the writing.
'H'm—wonder what this means?' he said, returning to his  seat. 'The two
     writings are not the same, and yet there is something in this writing on the cheque which I
     seem to have seen before. We'll try for an explanation before he leaves this room.'
He went on steadily with his self-imposed task of comparing each cheque with the entry in the
     book. He had half done them when a ring at the front door bell made him look up.
'Aha! the mysterious Petrovitch is punctual,' he said to himself.
It was Petrovitch, though perhaps those who had seen most of him in the last few months would
     have failed to recognise him. He looked at least ten years younger. The handsome long light
     beard was gone, and he was close shaved save for a heavy drooping blond moustache.
As Count Litvinoff heard his visitor's steps upon the stairs he settled himself back in his
     chair, with an assumption of a business air, much like that of a very young lawyer about to
     receive a new client.
There was a sharp rap at the room door.
'Come in,' he said.
The door opened. He sprang to his feet, stood one moment clutching at the table before him,
     his eyes wide with something that seemed almost terror, and his whole frame rigid with
     astonishment. Then his expression changed to one of deepest love and delight. There was a crash
     of furniture, as he flung the little writing-table from him, and it fell shattered against the
     opposite wall. With a hysterical cry of 'Ah, ah, ah, Litvinoff! back from the dead!' he sprang
     across the room, threw his arms round the other's neck, and fell sobbing on his breast.
