
 I.
Long ago, before the earliest stone of the pyramids was laid, before the Bo tree of Buddha
      unrolled its first leaf, before a Japanese had painted on a temple wall the horse that every
      evening descended and trampled the rice-fields, before the ravens of Thor had eaten their
      first worm together, there lived a man of giant stature and of giant strength named Dhoya. One
      evening Fomorian galleys had entered the Bay of the Red Cataract, now the Bay of Ballah, and
      there deserted him. Though he rushed into the water and hurled great stones after them
       they were out of reach. From earliest childhood the Fomorians had held him
      captive and compelled him to toil at the oar, but when his strength had come his fits of
      passion made him a terror to all on board. Sometimes he would tear the seats of the galley
      from their places, at others drive the rowers to some corner where, trembling, they would
      watch him pacing to and fro till the passion left him. “The demons,” they said, “have made him
      their own.” So they enticed him on shore, he having on his head a mighty stone pitcher to fill
      with water, and deserted him.
When the last sail had dropped over the rim of the world he rose from where he had flung
      himself down on the sands and paced through the forests eastward. After a time he reached that
      lake among the mountains where in later times Dermot drove down four stakes and made thereon a
      platform with four flags in the centre for a hearth,
       and placed over all a roof of wicker and skins, and hid his Grania, islanded
      thereon. Still eastward he went, what is now Bulban on one side, Cope’s mountain on the other,
      until at last he threw himself at full length in a deep cavern and slept. Henceforward he made
      this cavern his lair, issuing forth to hunt the deer or the bears or the mountain oxen. Slowly
      the years went by, his fits of fury growing more and more frequent, though there was no one
      but his own shadow to rave against. When his fury was on him even the bats and owls, and the
      brown toads that crept out of the grass at twilight would hide themselves—even the bats and
      owls and the brown toads. These he had made his friends, and let them crawl and perch about
      him, for at times he would be very gentle, and they too were sullen and silent—the outcasts
      from they knew not what. But most of all, things placid and
       beautiful feared him. He would watch for hours, hidden in the leaves, to reach
      his hand out slowly and carefully at last, and seize and crush some glittering halcyon.
Slowly the years went by and human face he never saw, but sometimes, when the gentle mood
      was on him and it was twilight, a presence seemed to float invisibly by him and sigh softly,
      and once or twice he awoke from sleep with the sensation of a finger having rested for a
      moment on his forehead, and would mutter a prayer to the moon before turning to sleep
      again—the moon that glimmered through the door of his cave. “O moon,” he would say, “that
      wandereth in the blue cave, more white than the beard of Partholan, whose years were five
      hundred, sullen and solitary, sleeping only on the floor of the sea: keep me from the evil
      spirits of the islands of the lake southward beyond the mountains,
       and the evil spirits of the caves northward beyond the mountains, and the evil
      spirits who wave their torches by the mouth of the river eastward beyond the valley, and the
      evil spirits of the pools westward beyond the mountains, and I will offer you a bear and a
      deer in full horn, O solitary of the cave divine, and if any have done you wrong I will avenge
      you.”
Gradually, however, he began to long for this mysterious touch.
At times he would make journeys into distant parts, and once the mountain oxen gathered
      together, proud of their overwhelming numbers and their white horns, and followed him with
      great bellowing westward, he being laden with their tallest, well-nigh to his cave, and would
      have gored him, but, pacing into a pool of the sea to his shoulders, he saw them thunder away,
      losing him in the darkness. The place where he stood is called Pooldhoya to this day.

 So the years went slowly by, and ever deeper and deeper came his moodiness, and
      more often his fits of wrath. Once in his gloom he paced the forests for miles, now this way
      now that, until, returning in the twilight, he found himself standing on a cliff southward of
      the lake that was southward of the mountains. The moon was rising. The sound of the swaying of
      reeds floated from beneath, and the twittering of the flocks of reed-wrens who love to cling
      on the moving stems. It was the hour of votaries. He turned to the moon, then hurriedly
      gathered a pile of leaves and branches, and making a fire cast thereon wild strawberries and
      the fruit of the quicken tree. As the smoke floated upwards a bar of faint purple clouds
      drifted over the moon’s face—a refusal of the sacrifice. Hurrying through the surrounding
      woods he found an owl sleeping in the hollow of a tree, and returning cast him
       on the fire. Still the clouds gathered. Again he searched the woods. This time a
      badger was uselessly cast among the flames. Time after time he came and went, sometimes
      returning immediately with some live thing, at others not till the fire had almost burnt
      itself out. Deer, wild swine, birds, all to no purpose. Higher and higher he piled the burning
      branches, the flames and the smoke waved and circled like the lash of a giant’s whip.
      Gradually the nearer islands passed the rosy colour on to their more distant brethren. The
      reed-wrens of the furthest reed beds disturbed amid their sleep must have wondered at the red
      gleam reflected in each other’s eyes. Useless his night-long toil; the clouds covered the
      moon’s face more and more, until, when the long fire lash was at its brightest, they drowned
      her completely in a surge of unbroken mist. Raging against the fire he scattered with his
      staff the burning
       branches, and trampled in his fury the sacrificial embers beneath his feet.
      Suddenly a voice in the surrounding darkness called him softly by name. He turned. For years
      no articulate voice had sounded in his ears. It seemed to rise from the air just beneath the
      verge of the precipice. Holding by a hazel bush he leaned out, and for a moment it seemed to
      him the form of a beautiful woman floated faintly before him, but changed as he watched to a
      little cloud of vapour; and from the nearest of the haunted islands there came assuredly a
      whiff of music. Then behind him in the forest said the voice, “Dhoya, my beloved.” He rushed
      in pursuit; something white was moving before him. He stretched out his hand; it was only a
      mass of white campion trembling in the morning breeze, for an ashen morning was just touching
      the mists on the eastern mountains. Beginning suddenly to tremble with supernatural
       fear Dhoya paced homewards. Everything was changed; dark shadows seemed to come
      and go, and elfin chatter to pass upon the breeze. But when he reached the shelter of the pine
      woods all was still as of old. He slackened his speed. Those solemn pine-trees soothed him
      with their vast unsociability—many and yet each one alone. Once or twice, when in some glade
      further than usual from its kind arose some pine-tree larger than the rest, he paused with
      bowed head to mutter an uncouth prayer to that dark outlaw. But when issuing once more, as he
      neared his cave, into the region of mountain ash and hazel the voices seemed again to come and
      go, and the shadows to circle round him, and once a voice said, he imagined, in accents faint
      and soft as falling dew, “Dhoya, my beloved.” But a few yards from the cave all grew suddenly
      silent.
