<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="32">
CHAPTER XIII.
FORGIVENESS.
Three days after Mr. Hamilton's arrival, a cheerful party assembled in his wife's
      dressing-room, which, in its elegant appurtenances—signs as they were, of a most refined and
      beautiful taste—certainly deserved a higher appellation; but boudoir, Percy had always
      declared, did not harmonize at all with the old English comforts of Oakwood, and he would not
      have a French word to designate his mother's room especially. Ellen was on her sofa working;
      Edward, who she thought had only returned that morning, at her side, reading; Caroline and
      Emmeline, drawing, the one with some degree of perseverance, the other with none at all. It
      seemed as if she could not sit still, and her wild sallies, and snatches of old songs,
      repeatedly made Miss Harcourt look up from her book, and Mrs. Hamilton from her work,
      surprised.
"Emmeline, I can not draw," exclaimed Caroline, at length; "you are making the
      table as restless as yourself."
"Why can you not say it was moved by an irresistible sympathy? It is most extraordinary that
      you will still speak plain matter-of-fact, when I am doing all I can to make you
      poetical."
"But what am I to poetize on now, Emmeline?—the table, or yourself? because, at present,
      they are the only subjects under consideration, and I really can not see any thing very
      poetical in either."
"Not even in me, Lina?" archly replied Emmeline, bending down so that her face
      should come before her sister, instead of her copy, which was a very pretty, small marble
      figure. "Now, if you were not the most determined piece of prose in the world, you would find
      poetry even in my face.
"For, lo! the artist no more gazed
On features still and cold;
He stood, bewilder'd and amazed,
As living charms unfold.
"As if touch'd by yon orient ray,
The stone to life had warm'd;
For round the lip such bright smiles play,
As never sculptor form'd. 
There, Caroline, that is what you ought to have felt. If I can make poetry on my
      own face—"
"Poetry on yourself! Why, Emmeline, I thought you were repeating a verse of some old poet,
      with which I am unacquainted. I really beg your pardon. I did not know your favorite Muse had
      dubbed you follower as well as worshipper."
"Nor did I till this moment. She feared for her reputation near such a love of prose as you
      are, and so touched me with inspiration. I am exceedingly obliged to her; but even if I failed
      to make you poetical, Caroline, you might have emulated Cowper, and instead of singing the
      'Sofa,' sung the 'Table.' Indeed I think a very pretty poem might be made of it. Look at the
      variety of tasteful and useful things laid on a table—and there it stands in the midst of
      them, immovable, cold, insensible just like one on whom we heap favors upon favors, and who
      remains so wrapped in self, as to be utterly indifferent to all. Now, Caroline, put that into
      rhyme, or blank verse, if you prefer it; it is a new idea, at least."
"So new," replied her sister, laughing, "that I think I will send it to Percy, and request
      him to turn it into a Greek or Latin ode; it will be so much grander than my English version.
      You have so astonished mamma, Emmeline, by your mad mood, that she has actually put down her
      work."
"I am so glad!" replied Emmeline, springing to her mother's side; "I like other people to be
      as idle as myself."
"But there is a medium in all things, young lady," answered her mother, half-gravely, half
      in Emmeline's own tone; "and I rather think your conscience is telling you, that it is not
      quite right to desert one Muse for another, as you are doing now."
"Oh, but my drawing must wait till her Muse inspires me again. Poetry does not always come,
      and her visits are so delightful!"
"Then I am afraid you will think me very harsh, Emmeline; but delightful as they are, I must
      not have them always encouraged. If you encourage the idea of only working when the fit of
      inspiration comes upon you—in plain words, only when you feel inclined—you will fritter life
      away without one solid thought or acquirement. You think now, perhaps, habituated as you are
      to employment, that this is impossible; but you are just of an age to demand very strict
      watchfulness over yourself to prevent it. Now that you are emerging from the routine of
      childhood's lessons, and too old to be compelled to do that which is right, and—rendering your
      task of control more difficult—more susceptible to poetry, and what you term inspiration, than
      ever, you must try and infuse a little of Caroline's steady, matter-of-fact into your poetry,
      instead of almost despising it, as so cold and disagreeable. Now, do not look so very sad, and
      so very serious, love, and jump at the conclusion that I am displeased, because I speak
      seriously. I love your joyousness far too dearly to check it, or wish you to do so, especially
      in your own family; but just as you have learned the necessity of, and evinced so well and so
      feelingly, control in emotions of sorrow, my Emmeline, so I am quite sure you will trust my
      experience, and practice control, even in the pleasant inspiration of poetry and joy."
Emmeline sat very quiet for several minutes; she was just in that mood of extreme hilarity
      which renders control excessively difficult, and causes the least check upon it to be felt as
      harsh and unkind, and almost to bring tears. She was not too perfect to escape from feeling
      all this, even though the person who had caused it was the mother she so dearly loved; but she
      did not give way to it. A few minutes' hard struggle, and the momentary temper was so
      conquered, that, with an even more than usually warm kiss, she promised to think quite
      seriously on all her mother said; and, an effort far more difficult, was just as joyous as
      before.
"I have made so many mistakes in my drawing, mamma, I really do not think I can go on with
      it to-day; do let me help you, I will take such pains with my work, it shall be almost as neat
      as yours; and then, though my fingers are employed, at least I may go on talking."
Mrs. Hamilton assented, telling her she might talk as much as she pleased, with one of those
      peculiar smiles of approval which ever made Emmeline's heart throb, for they always told her,
      that the thoughts and feelings, and secret struggle with temper, which she imagined must be
      known only to herself, her mother by some mysterious power had discovered, and rewarded.
"Edward what are you so deep in?—'Fragments of Voyages and Travels'—I thought it was
      something much deeper than that by the deep attention you are giving it. You should
      dip in oceans, not in fragments of water, Ned."
"I did not feel inclined for the exertion," he replied, smiling.
"Do you know," she continued, "when I first read that book, which I did merely because I had
      a lurking sort of affection for a handsome cousin of mine who was a sailor, I was so charmed
      with the tricks you all played in the cockpit, that I was seized with a violent desire to don
      a middy's dress, and come after you; it would have made such a pretty story, too; but I did
      not think mamma and papa would quite approve of it, so I desisted. Should I not make a very
      handsome boy, Edward?"
"So handsome," he replied, again smiling, "that I fear you would not have preserved your
      incognita half an hour, especially with those flowing curls."
"My dear Emmeline, do tell me, what has made you in this mood?" asked Ellen; "last week you
      were so sad, and the last three days you have been—"
"Wild enough to frighten you, Ellen; ah, if you did but know the reason."
"You had better satisfy her curiosity, Emmy," said Mrs. Hamilton, so meaningly, that
      Emmeline's ready mind instantly understood her. "Tell her all that did occur in that awful
      storm three days ago, as poetically and lengthily as you like; no one shall interrupt you, if
      you will only be very careful not to exaggerate or alarm."
Edward gave up his seat to his cousin, and Emmeline launched at once into a most animated
      description of the storm and the shipwreck, and the rescue; cleverly contriving so to hide all
      names, as to elude the least suspicion of either the preserved or the preserver having any
      thing to do with herself, Ellen becoming so exceedingly interested, as to lose sight of the
      question which at first had struck her, what this could have to do with Emmeline's wild
      spirits.
"You do not mean to say it was his own father he saved?" she said, as her cousin paused a
      minute to take breath; "your tale is becoming so like a romance, Emmy, I hardly know how to
      believe it."
"I assure you it is quite true; only imagine what my young hero's feelings must have been,
      and those of the family, to whom he gave back a husband and a father!"
"I should think them so intense, so sacred, as to be hardly joy at first, and scarcely
      possible to be imagined, even by your vivid fancy, Emmy."
"I don't know, Ellen, but I think I can imagine them; you may shake your head, and
      look wise, but I will prove that I can by-and-by. But what do you think of my hero?"
"That I should like to know him, and admire him quite as much as you can desire—and who told
      you all this?"
"One of the principal actors in the scene?"
"What, has your penchant for any thing out of the common way reached Dartmouth, and
      old Collins brought you the tale?"
"No," replied Emmeline, laughing; "guess again."
"William Grey?"
"No."
"One of the rescued crew who may know my aunt?"
"Wrong again, Ellen."
"Then I can not guess, Emmeline; so pray tell me."
"You are very silly, Ellen; were not Mr. Howard and Edward both at Dartmouth at the time?
      why did you not guess them? Not that I had it from either."
"Edward!" repeated Ellen, "did he know any thing about it?"
"More than any one else dearest," answered Mrs. Hamilton, cautiously, but fondly; "put all
      Emmeline's strange tale together, and connect it with my happiness the other morning, and I
      think your own heart will explain the rest."
"More especially with this speaking witness," continued Emmeline playfully putting back
      Edward's hair, that Ellen might see the scar. She understood it in a moment, and clasping her
      arms round her brother's neck, as he knelt by her, tried hard to prevent emotion, but could
      not, and burst into tears.
"Tears, my little Ellen; I said I would only be greeted with smiles," exclaimed a rich, deep
      voice close beside her, and before she had time to fear his presence, she felt herself clasped
      with all a father's fondness in her uncle's arms; her head resting on his shoulder, and his
      warm kiss on her cheek.
"Edward!" was the only word she could speak.
"Do not fear for him, my dear Ellen; true repentance and a firm resolution to amend are all
      I ask, and if his future conduct really prove them, the errors of his youth shall be
      forgotten, as if they had never been."
"And—and—"
"I know all you would say, my dear child. I did think there could be no excuse, no
      palliation, for your sin; but even if I still wish the temptation had been resisted, you have
      indeed suffered for it, more than the harshest judgment could desire; let it be forgotten as
      entirely and as fully as it is forgiven."
In a very few minutes Ellen's composure was so fully restored, and her heavy dread so
      subsided, that the relief seemed to her almost a dream. Could it be possible that it was the
      relative she had pictured as so harsh and stern, and pitiless to youthful error, who had drawn
      a chair close by her sofa, and caressingly holding her hand in his, and looking so kindly, so
      earnestly, in her altered face, was trying to amuse her by telling her so many entertaining
      things about Feroe and Mr. Morton, and his voyage home, and alluding to her brother's courage,
      and prudence, and skill, in such terms as almost brought the tears again? Mr. Hamilton was
      inexpressibly shocked at the change which mental and bodily suffering had wrought in his
      niece. There is always something peculiarly touching, and appealing to the best emotions, in
      youthful sorrow or suffering of any kind; and her trial had been such an aggravated
      one—combining such agonized remorse, for an act, which the harshest judgment, knowing all
      points of the case, could scarcely pronounce as other than involuntary, with the most heroic,
      but perfectly unconscious self-sacrifice, and not only terror for her brother's fate, but an
      almost crushing sense of misery for his faults, that the pallid face, and frame so delicately
      fragile, had still deeper claims for sympathy and cherishing than even when caused by ordinary
      illness. The loss of her unusually luxuriant hair, except the soft bands which shaded her
      face, visible under the pretty little lace cap, made her look much younger than she really
      was, and so delicately transparent had become her complexion, that the blue veins were clearly
      traceable on her forehead, and throat, and hands; the dark, soft lash seemed longer than
      before, as it swept the pale cheek, the brow more penciled, and the eye, whether in
      imagination, from her friends knowing all she had endured, or in reality, was so expressive of
      such deep, quiet feeling, that the whole countenance was so altered and so improved, that it
      seemed as if the heavy, sallow child was rapidly changing into one of those sweet, lovable,
      heart-attracting girls, who, without any actual beauty, can never be passed unnoticed.
At Ellen's request, Mrs. Hamilton had, as soon as she was strong enough, read with her,
      morning and evening, the devotional exercises which were read below to the assembled family.
      Mrs. Hamilton soon perceived, and with no little pain, that Ellen shrunk from the idea of
      being well enough to rejoin them, in actual suffering. Here again was an effect of that same
      vivid imagination, of whose existence, until the late events, in one so quiet, seemingly so
      cold, Mrs. Hamilton had not the least idea of. Ellen had been so long accustomed to be silent
      as to her feelings, in fact, carefully to conceal them, that much as she might wish and intend
      to be unreserved, her aunt feared it would cause her some difficulty to be so, and she could
      not hope to succeed in controlling imagination, unless she were. That night, however, Ellen's
      unreserved confidence gave her hope. When the devotional exercises, in which she had joined
      with even more than usual earnestness and fervor, were concluded, she said, with almost
      Emmeline's confidence, as she laid her hand on her aunt's—
"I am so very, very happy to-night, dear aunt, that I am afraid I do not think enough of
      what is past. I did so dread my uncle's return—so tremble at what his sentence would be on
      Edward and myself, that even your kindness would not remove the weight; and now, that I have
      found it all so groundless, and he is so kind—so indulgent, I am so relieved, that I fear I
      must have thought more of his anger than the anger of God. My sin remains the same in His
      sight, though you and uncle Hamilton have so fully forgiven it, and—and—I do not think I ought
      to feel so happy."
"Indeed, my dear Ellen, I think you may. Our Heavenly Father is still more merciful than
      man, as Mr. Howard so clearly proved to you, in the long conversation you had with him. We
      know, by His Holy Word, that all he asks is sincere repentance for sin, and a firm conviction
      that in Him only we are made sufficiently righteous for our penitence to be accepted. I
      believe, Ellen, that His forgiveness was yours, long before I could give you mine, for He
      could read your heart, and saw the reason of your silence, and all the remorse and suffering,
      which, from the appearances, against you, I might not even guess; and that, in His
      compassionating love and pity, He permitted your increased trial; ordaining even the failure
      of the relief to Edward, to convince you, that, not even in such a fearful case as yours,
      might error, however involuntary, prosper. I can trace His loving providence even in the fact
      of your finding one more note than you wanted, that discovery might thence come, which,
      without such a seeming chance, was, humanly speaking, impossible. He has shown compassion and
      love for you and Edward, in the very sufferings He ordained. So do not check your returning
      happiness, fearing it must be unacceptable to Him. Try to trace all things, either of joy or
      sorrow, to Him. Associate Him with your every thought, and believe me, my own Ellen, your very
      happiness will both draw you nearer to Him, and be an acceptable offering in his sight."
Ellen listened eagerly, gratefully; she felt as if, with every word Mrs. Hamilton said, the
      film of doubt and vague fancies was dissolving from her mind, and, after a short pause, she
      said—
"Then you do not think, aunt Emmeline, my inability to pray for so long a time, was a proof
      that God had utterly forsaken me? It made me still more wretched, for I thought it was a sure
      sign that I was so irredeemably wicked, He had left me to the devices of my own heart, and
      would never love or have mercy on me again. Even after you had quite forgiven me, and proved
      to me my promise was a mistaken one and not binding, I still felt the difficulty to pray, and
      it was so painful."
"Such inability is very often so entirely physical, my dear Ellen, that we must not think
      too much about it. Our simple duty is to persevere, however little satisfactory our devotions;
      and put our firm trust in our heavenly Father, that He will heal us, and permit His
      countenance so to shine upon us again, as to derive comfort from our prayers. Your
      inability before your illness was the natural consequence of Mr. Howard's severe
      representations, which he has since assured me, he never would have used, if he could have had
      the least idea of the cause of your silence. You, my poor child, were suffering too much, from
      a complete chaos of conflicting feelings and duties, to be able to realize this, and I am not
      at all astonished, that when you most yearned for the comfort of prayer and trust, the thought
      that by your silence you were failing in your duty to me and so disobeying God, should utterly
      have prevented it. Since your severe illness the inability has been entirely physical. As
      strength and peace return, you will regain the power, and realize all its comfort. Try, and
      under all feelings trust in and love God, and do not be too much elated, when you can think
      seriously and pray joyfully, nor too desponding when both fail you. In our present state,
      physical causes alone, so often occasion these differences of feeling in hours of
      devotion, that if we thought too much about them, we should constantly think wrong, and be
      very miserable. Try and prove your desire to love and serve God, in your daily
      conduct and secret thoughts, my Ellen, and you will be able to judge of your
      spiritual improvement by action and feeling, far more truly and justly than
      by the mood in which you pray."
The earnestness of truth and feeling was always so impressed on Mrs. Hamilton's manner,
      whenever she addressed her youthful charge, that her simplest word had weight. Happy indeed is
      it when youth—that season of bewildering doubt and question, and vivid, often mistaken
      fancies, and too impetuous feeling—has the rich blessing of such affectionate counsels, such a
      friend. Why will not woman rise superior to the petty employments and feelings too often alone
      attributed to her, and endeavor to fit herself for such a thrice blessed mission; and by
      sympathy with young enjoyments—young hopes—young feelings, so attract young affections, that
      similar counsels, similar experiences, may so help and guide, that the restless mind and eager
      heart quiesce into all the calm, deep, beautiful characteristics, which so shine forth in the
      true English wife—the true English mother!
A fortnight after Mr. Hamilton's arrival, Ellen was well enough to go down stairs for part
      of the day, and even to read and write a little. She was so very anxious to recommence her
      studies, which for many months had been so painfully neglected, that it was a great trial to
      her, to find her head was not yet strong enough for the necessary application. There were
      many, very many privations and trials, attendant on convalescence after so severe an illness,
      known only to Ellen's own heart, and to her aunt's quick sympathy; and she very quickly
      learned in them the meaning of Mrs. Hamilton's words regarding religion in conduct and
      feeling, as well as in prayer. She tried never to murmur, or dwell on the wish for pleasures
      which were denied her, but to think only on the many blessings which surrounded her. It was
      not an easy task so to conquer natural feeling, especially as the trial and its conquest was
      often known only to herself; but the earnest wish, indeed, to become holy in daily conduct, as
      well as in daily prayer, never left her mind, and so enabled her at length fully to obtain
      it.
If Mrs. Hamilton had wanted evidence of her husband's public as well as domestic worth, she
      would have had it fully now. His danger and his preservation once known, letters of regard and
      congratulation poured upon him, and Montrose Grahame made a journey down to Oakwood expressly
      to welcome back, and express his individual gratitude for his friend's safety to his youthful
      preserver. But Edward so shrunk from praise or admiration, that his uncle, rejoicing at the
      feeling, would not press him, as he had first intended, to accompany him to Oxford, where he
      went to see his sons. Percy rated him soundly in a letter for not coming. Herbert seemed, as
      if he could only think of his father's danger, and thank God for his safety, and for
      permitting Edward to be the means. So great was the desire of Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton to
      re-assemble all their happy family once more, before Edward left them, that the young men made
      an exception to their general rule, and promised to spend Easter week at home. It was early in
      March, and anticipated by the home party with the greatest delight.
</div></body></text></TEI>