<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="3">
CHAPTER III.
RETROSPECTION.—THE LOWLY SOUGHT.—THE HAUGHTY FOILED.
In order clearly to understand the allusions of the previous chapters, and the circumstances
      which had formed the different characters of Mrs. Hamilton and Mrs. Fortescue, it will be
      necessary to take a retrospective glance on their early lives. Should it be uninteresting to
      the more youthful of our readers, we will beg them to proceed at once to "Traits of
      Character," but to their elder relatives, we hope the matter will prove of sufficient interest
      to obtain perusal.
Emmeline and Eleanor Manvers were the daughters of Lord Delmont, a nobleman whose title and
      rank were rather burdensome than otherwise, from the want of sufficient means to keep them up
      as inclination and position warranted. Lady Delmont, whose energetic yet gentle character
      would have greatly ameliorated the petty vexations of her husband, died when Emmeline was only
      seven, Eleanor five, and Charles, her only boy an infant of but three years old. A widow lady,
      Mrs. Harcourt by name, had been selected by Lady Delmont, in her last illness, as instructress
      and guardian of her daughters. Her wishes, always laws to her doating husband, were promptly
      fulfilled, and Mrs. Harcourt, two months after her friend's death, assumed the arduous and
      responsible duties for which her high character well fitted her.
With Emmeline, though there were naturally some faults to correct, an indolence and weakness
      to overcome, and apparently no remarkable natural aptitude for acquirement, her task was
      comparatively easy, for her pupil had the capabilities, not only of affection but of
      reverence, to a very great extent, and once loving and respecting Mrs. Harcourt, not a command
      was neglected nor a wish unfulfilled. Eleanor, on the contrary, though so gifted that teaching
      might have been a complete labor of love—by self-will, violent passions, and a most determined
      want of veneration, even, of common respect, a resolute opposition from her earliest years to
      the wishes of Mrs. Harcourt, because she was merely a governess, so much her inferior in rank,
      rendered the task of education one of the most difficult and painful that can be
      conceived—increased from the injudicious partiality of Lord Delmont. It was not indeed the
      culpable negligence and dislike which Eleanor afterward displayed toward her own, but
      originating in the fancy that Mrs. Harcourt was unjust, and Emmeline was her favorite. Lord
      Delmont was one of those unfortunately weak, irresolute characters, that only behold the
      surface of things, and are therefore utterly incapable of acting either with vigor or
      judgment. When he did venture into the precincts of his daughters' apartments, he generally
      found Eleanor in sobs and tears, and Emmeline quietly pursuing her daily duties. That Mrs.
      Harcourt often entreated his influence with her younger pupil, to change her course of
      conduct, he never remembered longer than the time her expostulations lasted. Once or twice
      indeed he did begin to speak seriously, but Eleanor would throw her arms round his neck and
      kiss him, call him every endearing name, and beg him not to look so much like grave, cross
      Mrs. Harcourt, or she should think she had indeed no one to love her; and her beautiful eyes
      would swell with tears, and her voice quiver, so that her gratified father would forget all
      his reproof, and give her some indulgence to make up for the injustice and harshness she
      encountered in the school-room. Her power once thus experienced, of course, was never
      resigned. Her father's appearance in their study was always the signal for her tears, which
      she knew would confirm all his ideas of Mrs. Harcourt's unjust partiality.
And this idea was strengthened as they grew older, and masters for various accomplishments
      somewhat lightened Mrs. Harcourt's actual labors. Emmeline's steady application, and moderate
      abilities were lost sight of in the applause always elicited by her younger sister; whose
      natural gifts alike in music, languages, and drawing had full play, directly she was released,
      even in part, from the hated thralldom of her governess.—Lord Delmont had been accustomed to
      hear Eleanor's beauty extolled, and now the extraordinary versatility and brilliancy of her
      talents became the theme of every tongue. Professors are naturally proud of a pupil who does
      them more than justice, and Miss Eleanor Manvers was in consequence held up in very many
      families, whom Lord Delmont only casually knew, and spoken of by very many again to him,
      knowing his weak point, and thus seeking to curry favor. Mrs. Harcourt was the only one from
      whom he never heard Eleanor's praises, and the only one, who spoke in praise of Emmeline. It
      must then be willful blindness on her part; and the father felt indignant, but in spite of
      himself had too much real respect for her, individually, to do more than redouble his
      indulgence to Eleanor. Emmeline could not complain of her father's neglect, for he was both
      kind and affectionate to her; but she did sometimes wish she could be quite sure that he loved
      her as much as her sister; and her deep affections, unsuspected by her father, rejected and
      laughed at by Eleanor, twined themselves closer and closer round Mrs. Harcourt, and her
      brother Charles, on whom she actually doted, and who returned her affection with one quite as
      fond and warm as a happy, laughter-loving, frank-hearted boy had it in his power to bestow;
      yet even his holidays were times of as much suffering as joy to his sister, from the violent
      quarrels which were continually taking place between him and Eleanor. Emmeline, happy in
      herself and Mrs. Harcourt's companionship, could endure Eleanor's determined supremacy, and,
      except where her conscience disapproved, yielded to her. But this could not be expected from
      Charles, who, despite his elder sister's gentle entreaties, would stand up for what he called
      her rights, and declare that, when he was at home, Miss Eleanor should not lord it over the
      whole family. Eleanor would of course quarrel first with him and then appeal to her father,
      who without hearing the case would give her right, and harshly condemn Charles, whose high
      spirit revolted; and unable to bear with his father's weakness of character, as he ought to
      have done, would answer disrespectfully; and words succeeded words till Charles in a desperate
      passion would seek Emmeline's chamber, and his father, though he actually deeply loved and was
      very proud of his son, wished that the holidays were over, and Charles safe again at
      school.
Trifling as domestic disputes may seem in description, they never fail in their painful
      reality to banish all lasting happiness. Emmeline could bear that her father should prefer
      Eleanor to herself, but that he should be unjust to her darling Charles, and that Charles
      should increase this evil by dispute and self-will, tried her severely, and obliged her often
      and often to fly to the solitude of her own chamber, lest her temper also should fail, and, to
      defend her brother, she should forget her duty to her father. But with her, Mrs. Harcourt's
      lessons had indeed been blessed. The spirit of true, heartfelt piety, which she had sought to
      instill into her youthful charge, even more by the example of her daily life than by precepts,
      had become Emmeline's, young as she still was, and enabled her not only to bear up against the
      constant petty annoyances of her home, but the heavy trial sustained in the death of Mrs.
      Harcourt, just as she was looking forward to her entrance into the gay world, under her
      maternal guardianship, and her parting with her brother, who, not two months afterward, left
      her to fulfill his darling wish of going to sea.
At eighteen, then, Emmeline Manvers became the mistress of her father's establishment, and
      had to encounter alone, not only the suffering of bereavement—in which, though Lord Delmont
      sincerely respected Mrs. Harcourt, he could not sympathize, and at which, after the first
      shock and momentary remorse for her own conduct to so true a friend, Eleanor, if she did not
      actually rejoice, felt so very greatly relieved as to be irritated and angry at Emmeline's
      quiet sorrow—but the separation from her brother and all the cares and disagreeables of such
      strict economy at home, as would permit the sustaining a proper position in society, so that
      the necessity of economy should not even be suspected. It was this regard of appearances which
      so chafed and pained Emmeline's upright and independent spirit. Not that Lord Delmont, even
      for appearances, would go beyond his income; but still there were obliged concealments and
      other petty things which his daughter could not bear. Mrs. Harcourt's trial—a widow, compelled
      not only to teach for a subsistence, but to part with her only child, who had been adopted by
      a married sister, living in Italy—appeared to Emmeline's ideas of truth and honor preferable
      to appearing richer than they really were. But on this subject, even less than on any other,
      she knew there was no chance of sympathy, and so she devoted all the energies of her matured
      and well-regulated mind to correcting the evil as much as it lay in her individual power; and
      in the year which her earnest entreaties prevailed on her father to permit her remaining in
      quiet retirement, before she entered the world, Lord Delmont was astonished at the greater
      comfort and increase of dignity which pervaded his establishment. He never had chosen Mrs.
      Harcourt to interfere with his household concerns, believing that he conducted them himself,
      when in reality he was completely governed by his housekeeper and steward. Mrs. Harcourt's
      penetration had seen and regretted this, and had endeavored so to guide and instruct Emmeline,
      that when she became old enough to claim her right as mistress, the evil should be remedied.
      Could she have looked down on the child of her love, she would indeed have rejoiced at the
      beautiful fruition of her labors. Lord Delmont was not astonished and delighted only, a
      feeling of respect toward his gentle, his truthful child entered his heart, such as he had
      experienced toward none, save her mother. Emmeline would indeed have thought all her toils
      repaid, could she have known this, but the very feeling prevented the display of that
      caressing affection he still lavished on Eleanor, and the tears of his elder girl often fell
      thick and fast from the painful longing for one similar caress, one evidence on his part,
      that, though neither so beautiful, nor talented, nor engaging as Eleanor, she could yet
      minister to his comfort and increase his happiness.
But Emmeline's strong feeling of religion, while it enabled her to bear up against care and
      the constant and most painful feeling of loneliness, rendered the trial of beholding her
      sister's willful course of error, if possible, still more severe. She knew that all her
      affectionate counsels were worse than useless, that though Eleanor could be even caressingly
      affectionate when it served her purpose, would even listen to her at the moment of suffering
      from some too hasty impulse, she had no lasting influence. And this became more and more
      evident as Eleanor became the almost constant companion of the Marchioness Lascelles, their
      only female relative. It was the evil influence of this lady which had so increased Eleanor's
      natural repugnance to Mrs. Harcourt's gentle sway, that for full two years before the latter's
      death the flattery of Lady Lascelles and Eleanor's passionate entreaties had prevailed on Lord
      Delmont to permit his daughter being more with her than with her sister and governess. Lady
      Lascelles was a woman of the world, utterly heartless, highly distinguished, and supremely
      fashionable. At her house all the ton of the beau monde congregated, and scandal, frivolity,
      and esprît were the prevailing topics, diversified with superficial opinions of the
      literature, arts, and politics of the day, and various sentimental episodes, which the lady of
      the house endured for the sake of variety. Here Eleanor, even at fourteen, was made a popular
      idol; her extreme beauty, her vivacity, her talents, her sharpness of repartee, all were
      admired, extolled, and encouraged. At seventeen she was introduced and initiated into all the
      mysteries of an ultra-fashionable life, and very speedily added to her other accomplishments
      all the arts of a finished and heartless coquette.
With Lady Lascelles for her chaperon, it was not very surprising that Emmeline Manvers
      shrunk in pain and dread from her introduction into society; but yet she knew her social
      duties too well to refuse, and, by an affectation of superior sanctity, which of course would
      have been the charge leveled against her, throw a sneer upon those holy feelings and spiritual
      principles which had become part of her very being. She entered into society, but the
      isolation to a heart like hers of the coteries of Lady Lascelles and her friends, was indeed
      most painful, and aggravated by the constant dread which the contemplation of Eleanor's
      reckless career could not but occasion.
But Emmeline's trial of loneliness was happily not of very long duration. At a ball, which
      was less exclusive than the assemblages of Lady Lascelles, the attention of both sisters was
      attracted to a young nan, by name Arthur Hamilton—Eleanor, from his distinguished appearance
      and extreme reserve, Emmeline, by the story attached to his name. His father had so
      distinguished himself in the amelioration of the peasantry and working classes in various
      parts of England, in addition to various services of a private and confidential nature from
      the home government to the courts abroad, that a viscountcy was offered to his acceptance. The
      message from royalty reached him on his death-bed, and though, from the faint and flickering
      accents with which he replied to the intended honor, it seemed as if he declined it, it was
      attributed to the natural feelings of a dying man, seeing the utter nothingness of earthly
      honors, and the title was generously proposed to his son. But Arthur Hamilton had not been the
      pupil and friend of his father in vain. With a calm dignity and uncompromising independence,
      he declared that he had neither claim nor heirship to the reward of his father's services;
      that he believed his parent would himself have refused it, preferring the honorable
      distinction of being an untitled English gentleman, to the unvalued honor of a newly-created
      lordship. He respectfully thanked the government for the honor they intended, but decisively
      refused it—that his dearest inheritance was his father's name.
Of course this most extraordinary decision was canvassed again and again in the fashionable
      world, meeting there with very little appreciation, because it sprang from much higher
      feelings than the world could comprehend. By many he was imagined very little removed from
      insane—by others as actuated by some ulterior motive, which would be sure to display itself
      some day—by all regarded with curiosity—by some few with earnest, quiet, heartfelt admiration:
      and of this number was not only Emmeline Manvers, but her father; who, though weak and
      yielding, was not worldly, and could admire honorable independence, even while some of his
      friends succeeded in persuading him that in this case it nearly reached romance.
Arthur Hamilton was a star creating a sensation; it signified little to Eleanor Manvers why
      or wherefore, but she fully resolved to conquer him and chain him, as she had already done
      innumerable others, victim to her charms. His very reserve deepened her ardent longing, and
      the difficulty only strengthened her resolution, but she tried in vain; for the first time she
      was completely and entirely foiled, and she disliked him accordingly—a dislike increasing to
      actual abhorrence—when the truth at length forced itself upon her, that he admired, conversed
      with, evidently sought the society of her sister, whom she chose to charge with deceit and
      underhand dealing, with all the violence of angry passion and mortified defeat.
Emmeline bore the storm calmly, for her conscience perfectly acquitted her. She was not
      indeed indifferent to Arthur Hamilton, but she had tried hard to prevent the ascendency of
      affection, for she had heard that he still mourned the loss of a beloved one to whom he had
      been for many years engaged. And deep was her thankful joy, and unexpected indeed the
      intensity of her happiness, when six months after their first introduction he related to her
      the heavy trial of his early life, and concluded by asking her if she could indeed accept a
      heart which had so loved another, but which was now entirely her own, and happier than he had
      once believed it ever could be. The very frankness of his avowal increased the feelings of
      reverence and regard he had already inspired, and to the great delight, and no little pride of
      Lord Delmont, his elder daughter, who had been by Lady Lascelles' coterie so overlooked and
      neglected, who had been by many for years considered a mere foil to the beauty and talent of
      her younger sister, was united before she was twenty, to a man who—however his high principles
      might have excited laughter as high-flown romance, his unbending integrity and dislike of the
      pleasures and amusements, but too often the sole pursuit of the wealthy, exposed him to the
      charge of severity and eccentricity—was yet sought, and his connection deemed a most desirable
      partie by all and every family who had marriageable daughters.
</div></body></text></TEI>