<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg EBook of Home Influence, by Grace
     Aguilar</title><author>Aguilar, Grace (1816-1847)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1847</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="8">
CHAPTER II.
THREE ENGLISH HOMES, AND THEIR INMATES.
If more than the preceding conversation were needed to reveal the confidence and love with
      which Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton were regarded by their children, the delight, the unrestrained
      expressions of affection, with which by every one of the young party they were received, would
      have evinced it still more clearly. Herbert was very speedily on his favorite seat, a low
      stool at his mother's feet. Emmeline, for that one half hour at least, assumed her still
      unresigned privilege, as the youngest and tiniest, to quietly slip in her lap; Percy was
      talking to his father, making Edward perfectly at home, saying many kind words to Ellen, and
      caressing his mother, all almost at the same moment. Caroline was close to her father, with
      her arm round his neck; and Miss Harcourt was kindly disrobing Ellen from her many wraps, and
      making her lie quietly on a sofa near her aunt; who, even in that moment of delightful reunion
      with her own, had yet time and thought, by a few judicious words, to remove the undefinable,
      but painful sensation of loneliness, which was creeping over the poor child as she gazed on
      her bright, happy-looking cousins; and thought if to her own mother Edward's beauty and
      happiness had made him so much more beloved than herself, what claim could she have on her
      aunt? Ellen could not have said that such were the thoughts that filled her eyes with tears,
      and made her heart so heavy; she only knew that much as she had loved her aunt during the
      journey, her kiss and kind words at that moment made her love her more than ever.
Never had there been a happier meal at Oakwood than the substantial tea which was speedily
      ready for the travelers. So much was there to hear and tell: Percy's wild sallies; Caroline's
      animated replies (she had now quite recovered her temper); Herbert's gentle care of Ellen, by
      whom he had stationed himself (even giving up to her his usual seat by his mother); Emmeline's
      half shy, half eager, efforts to talk to her cousins; Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton's earnest
      interest, all combined, long before the meal was concluded, to make Edward feel perfectly at
      his ease, and very happy, and greatly to remove Ellen's unacknowledged dread. The time passed
      so quickly, that there was a general start when the prayer bell sounded, though it was nearly
      two hours after the usual time.
"Are you prepared for to-night, my boy?" Mr. Hamilton asked of Herbert, as they rose to
      adjourn to the library, where, morning and evening, it had been the custom of the Hamilton
      family for many generations, to assemble their whole household for family devotion.
"Yes, papa; I was not quite sure whether you would arrive to-night."
"Then I will not resume my office till to-morrow, Herbert, that I may have the gratification
      of hearing you officiate," replied his father, linking his son's arm in his, and
      affectionately glancing on the bright blush that rose to the boy's cheek.
There was a peculiar sweetness in Herbert Hamilton's voice, even in speaking; and as he read
      the service of the lessons for the evening, adding one or two brief explanations when
      necessary, and more especially when reading, or rather praying, the beautiful petitions
      appropriated to family worship, there was an earnest solemnity of tone and manner, presenting
      a strange contrast, yet beautiful, combining with the boyish form and youthful face, on which
      the lamp, suspended over the reading-desk shed such a soft and holy light. The occasional
      prayer which was added to the usual evening service, was always chosen by the reader; and Mr.
      and Mrs. Hamilton were surprised and affected at the earnestness with which their almost angel
      boy selected and read over one peculiarly bearing on the events of that evening; the
      introduction of their orphan relatives, for compassion and blessing on them, and grace for
      increased kindness and forbearance in their intercourse with one another—Miss Harcourt, his
      brother and sisters, knew well to what he alluded, and all but one responded with earnestness
      and truth. Caroline could not enter into Herbert's feelings even at that moment: it was a
      great effort to prevent a feeling of irritation, believing that he directly pointed at her,
      and determining that as neither he nor any one else had any right to interfere with her
      private thoughts, and that they could do harm to none while confined to her own breast, she
      resolved not to overcome them, and so could not join with any fervor in the prayer.
To Edward all was strange. While the graces of his body and mind had been most sedulously
      cultivated, he had never been taught even the public ordinances of religion, much less its
      inward spirit. His mother had often and often felt a pang of reproach, at thus neglecting that
      which an inward voice would whisper was most essential; but she was wont to silence the pang
      by the determined idea, that she was neither worthy nor able to give him such solemn lessons,
      and that it would come by instinct to him in after years. There was time enough for him to
      think of such things. He had been now and then to church, but it was a mere form, regarded as
      a weary duty, from which he escaped whenever he could. The present scene, then, completely
      bewildered him. He had always fancied himself superior to any of the boys he had associated
      with; but as he looked at and listened to Herbert, who seemed at most only two years older
      than himself, he became sensible of a very strange and disagreeable, but a very decided
      feeling of inferiority: and then, too, it was so incomprehensible the servants all joining
      them, a class of people whom in India he had been taught so to consider his inferiors, that
      even to speak with them was a species of degradation; and he was destined to be still more
      surprised, for before they left the library, he heard his aunt and uncle address them all, and
      say a few kind words, and make inquiries after their families to each.
To Ellen that evening service recalled some of Mr. Myrvin's instructions, and seemed to help
      her to realize those new thoughts and feelings, which she had learned, for the first time, in
      Wales. Her father had, indeed, the last year of his life tried to give her some ideas of
      religion; but having only so very lately begun to think seriously himself, he felt diffident
      and uncertain of his own powers, and so left an impression more of awe toward the subject than
      of love, which to a disposition such as Ellen's was unfortunate.
A very short time sufficed for Percy and Emmeline to introduce their cousins to all the
      delights and mysteries of their dear old home: and Oakwood Hall was really a place for
      imagination to revel in. It was a large castelated mansion, fraught with both the associations
      of the past, and the comforts of the present. The injuries which the original mansion had
      received during the civil war of Charles I., had, when the family returned at the Restoration,
      caused much of the old house to be pulled down, and replaced with larger rooms, and greater
      conveniences for a modern dwelling-house, retaining, however, quite sufficient of the past to
      throw interest around it.
The wings were still flanked with turrets, which were Percy's and Emmeline's delight; and
      the many stair-cases, leading into all sorts of nooks and corners—and the small and most
      uncomfortable rooms, because some of them happened to be hung with tapestry, and had those
      small narrow windows sunk in deep recesses—were pronounced by both far more enjoyable than the
      beautiful suite of rooms forming the center of the mansion, and the dwelling of the family.
      These were only saved from being disagreeably modern—Percy would declare—by their beautiful
      richly-polished oaken panels, and by the recesses which the large windows still formed, making
      almost a room by themselves. The hall, too, with its superb sweep of staircase and broad
      carved oaken balustrade, leading to a gallery above, which opened on the several sleeping
      apartments, and thus permitting the full height of the mansion, from base to roof, to be
      visible from the hall. Tho doors visible in the gallery opened mostly on dressing-rooms, or
      private sitting-rooms, which led to the large, airy sleeping-rooms, to which the servants had
      access by back stair-cases leading from their hall; and so leaving the oaken staircase and
      gallery entirely to the use of the family, and of many a game of noisy play had that gallery
      been the scene. There had been a beautiful little chapel adjoining the mansion, but it was
      mercilessly burned to the ground by the infatuated Puritans, and never restored; the venerable
      old church of the village henceforth serving the family of the hall.
Situated on the banks of the Dart, whose serpentine windings gave it the appearance of a
      succession of most lovely lakes, Nature had been so lavish of her beauties in the garden and
      park, especially in the magnificent growth of the superb oaks, from which the estate took its
      name, that it was not much wonder Mrs. Hamilton, always an intense lover of nature, should
      have become so attached to her home, as never to feel the least inclination to leave it. She
      did not wish her girls to visit London till a few months before Caroline was old enough to be
      introduced, to give them then finishing masters; and to that time she of course always looked,
      as demanding from her part of the year to be spent in town. The career of Eleanor, the
      recollections of the frivolity and error into which her own early youth had been thrown, had
      given her not only a distaste, but an actual dread of London for her girls, till such
      principles and associations had been instilled which would enable them to pass through the
      ordeal of successive seasons without any change of character or feeling. Her sons, since their
      tenth year, had more than once accompanied their father to the metropolis; but though these
      visits were always sources of enjoyment, especially to Percy, they never failed to return with
      unabated affection to their home, and to declare there was no place in England like it.
Mr. Hamilton, though in neither profession nor business, was far from being an idle man. His
      own estate was sufficiently large, and contained a sufficient number of dependents, for whose
      mortal and immortal welfare he was responsible, to give him much employment; and in addition
      to this, the home interests and various aspects of his country were so strongly entwined with
      his very being—that, though always refusing to enter Parliament, he was the prompter and
      encourager of many a political movement, having for its object amelioration of the poor, and
      improvement of the whole social system; closely connected with which, as he was, they gave him
      neither public fame nor private emolument. He acted in all things from the same single-hearted
      integrity and high honor which caused him to refuse the title proffered to his father. Her
      husband's connection with many celebrated characters, and her own correspondence, and
      occasional visits from her friends to Oakwood, prevented Mrs. Hamilton's interest from too
      complete concentration in her home, as, in her first retirement, many feared. She had, too,
      some friends near her, whose society gave her both pleasure and interest; and many
      acquaintances who would have visited more than she felt any inclination for, had she not had
      the happy power of quietly pursuing her own path, and yet conciliating all.
The Rev. William Howard had accepted Mr. Hamilton's eagerly-proffered invitation to become
      his rector, and undertake the education of his boys, from very peculiar circumstances. He had
      been minister of a favorite church in one of the southern towns, and master of an
      establishment for youths of high rank, in both which capacities he had given universal
      satisfaction. The reprehensible conduct of some of his pupils, carried on at first so secretly
      as to elude his knowledge, at length became so notorious as to demand examination. He had at
      first refused all credence, but when proved, by the confused replies of all, and half
      confession of some, he briefly and emphatically laid before them the enormity of their
      conduct, and declared that, as confidence was entirely broken between them, he would resign
      the honor of their education, refusing to admit them any longer as members of his
      establishment. In vain the young men implored him to spare them the disgrace of such an
      expulsion; he was inexorable.
This conduct, in itself so upright, was painted by the smarting offenders in such colors,
      that Mr. Howard gradually but surely found his school abandoned, and himself so
      misrepresented, that a spirit less self-possessed and secure in its own integrity must have
      sunk beneath it. But he had some true friends, and none more active and earnest than Mr.
      Hamilton. A very brief residence at Oakwood Rectory removed even the recollection of the
      injustice he had experienced; and he himself, as pastor and friend, proved a treasure to high
      and low. Ten other youths, sons of the neighboring gentry, became his pupils, their fathers
      gladly following in Mr. Hamilton's lead.
About a mile and a half across the park was Moorlands, the residence of Lady Helen Grahame,
      whose name had been so often mentioned by the young Hamiltons. Her husband Montrose Grahame,
      had been Arthur Hamilton's earliest friend, at home, at college, and in manhood. Lady Helen
      the youngest daughter of a marquis, had been intimate with Emmeline and Eleanor Manvers from
      childhood, and had always admired and wished to resemble the former, but always failed, she
      believed, from being constituted so differently; others might have thought from her utter want
      of energy and mental strength. The marriage at first appeared likely to be a happy one, but it
      was too soon proved the contrary. Grahame was a man of strict, perhaps severe principles; his
      wife, though she never did any thing morally wrong, scarcely knew the meaning of the word.
      Provoked with himself for his want of discrimination, in imagining Lady Helen so different to
      the being she really was; more than once discovering she did not speak the exact truth, or act
      with the steady uprightness he demanded, his manner became almost austere; and, in
      consequence, becoming more and more afraid of him, Lady Helen sunk lower and lower in his
      esteem.
Two girls and a boy were the fruits of this union. Lady Helen had made a great many
      excellent resolutions with regard to their rearing and education, which she eagerly confided
      to Mrs. Hamilton, but when the time of trial came, weakness and false indulgence so
      predominated, that Grahame, to counteract these evil influences, adopted a contrary extreme,
      and, by a system of constant reserve and severity, became an object of as much terror to his
      children as he was to his wife. But he did not pursue this conduct without pain, and never did
      he visit Oakwood without bitter regret that his home was not the same.
Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton had often tried to alter the aspect of affairs at Moorlands; the
      former, by entreating Grahame to be less severe; the latter, by urging Lady Helen to a firmer
      mode of conduct. But those friendly efforts were as yet entirely useless. Grahame became a
      member of Parliament, which took his family to London for five or six months in the year—a
      particularly agreeable change to Lady Helen, who then associated with her sisters, whose
      families were conducted much on the same fashion as her own, but unfortunately only increasing
      the discomfort of Moorlands when they returned to it. And this was the more to be regretted,
      from the fact that both Grahame and his wife were full of good intentions, and had the one
      been more yielding, and the other more firm, there might have been no small share of happiness
      for both.
But heavy as Lady Helen thought her trial in the want of her husband's confidence and love,
      and which she had greatly brought upon herself, it was light in comparison with that of Mrs.
      Greville, another near neighbor and valued friend of Mrs. Hamilton. She had loved and married
      a man whose winning manners and appearance, and an ever-varying flow of intelligent
      conversation, had completely concealed, till too late, his real character. Left at a very
      early age his own master, with a capital estate and large fortune; educated at a very large
      public school, at which he learned literally nothing but vice, and how effectually to conceal
      it; courted and flattered wherever he went, he became vain, overbearing, and extravagant; with
      no pursuit but that of gambling in all its varieties, even hunting and shooting could not be
      thoroughly enjoyed without some large bets depending on the day's sport: his thoughts from
      boyhood were so completely centered in self, that he had affection for nothing else. He had
      indeed fancied he loved Jessie Summers, when he had so successfully wooed her; but the
      illusion was speedily dispelled, and repeatedly he cursed his folly for plaguing himself with
      a wife. His first child, too, was a girl and that annoyed him still more; and when, the next
      year, a boy was granted, he certainly rejoiced, but it was such rejoicing as to fill his
      wife's heart with an agony of dread; for he swore he would make his boy as jovial a spirit as
      himself, and that her namby-pamby ideas should have nothing to do with him.
It was indeed a difficult and painful task Mrs. Greville had to perform. Though her husband
      would spend weeks and even months at a time away, the impressions she so earnestly and
      prayerfully sought to instill into her son's heart were, or appeared to be, completely
      destroyed by her husband's interference the whole time of his sojourn at his home. It was his
      pleasure to thwart her every plan, laugh at her fine notions, make a mockery of all that was
      good, and holy, and self denying; and all in the presence of his children; succeeding in
      making Alfred frequently guilty of disrespect and unkindness, but failing entirely with Mary,
      who, though of such a fragile frame and gentle spirit that her father's visits almost always
      caused her a fit of illness, so idolized her suffering but never murmuring mother, that she
      only redoubled her attention and respect whenever she saw her more tried than usual. This
      conduct, of course, only made her an object, equally with her mother, of her father's sneers
      and taunts, but she bore it with the true spirit of a martyr. Suffering was doing for her what
      Herbert Hamilton was naturally—making her spiritual and thoughtful far beyond her years, and
      drawing her and Herbert together with such a bond of mutual reverence and sympathy, that to
      talk to him was her greatest consolation, and to endeavor to lessen her sorrows one of his
      dearest pleasures.
Alfred was not naturally an evil-disposed boy, and when his father was from home seldom
      failed either in respect or obedience. Mrs. Greville possessed the rather rare combination of
      extreme submissiveness with a natural dignity and firmness, which enabled her to retain the
      reverence and sympathy of her friends and her household, without once stooping to receive
      their pity. It was generally supposed by those who did not know her personally, that she was
      one of those too soft and self-denying characters who bring on themselves the evils they
      deplore; but this in Mrs. Greville's case was a very great mistake. It was impossible to
      associate even casually with her, without feeling intuitively that she suffered deeply, but
      the emotion such conviction called was respect alone.
As anxious and as earnest a parent as Mrs. Hamilton herself, Mrs. Greville failed not to
      inculcate the good in both her children, and still more forcibly, when they became old enough
      to observe, by example than by precept. But with Alfred there must have been an utter
      hopelessness as to the fruit of her anxious labors, had she not possessed that clinging,
      single-hearted trust which taught her that no difficulty should deter from a simple duty, and
      that nothing was too hard for Him who—if He saw that she shrunk not from the charge and
      responsibility which, in permitting her to become a mother, he had given, and did all she
      could to counteract those evil influences, for the removal of which she had no power—would, in
      His own good time, reward, if not on earth—with Him in Heaven; and so untiringly, as
      unmurmuringly, she struggled on.
</div></body></text></TEI>