
CHAPTER X.
A week had passed over the Teapot, and, sitting in the back-parlour with Mary, who was busy
     sewing, Richard Jones dived deep into his books, and cast up his accounts. He allowed for rent,
     for expenditure, for household, for extras, then his face, brimful of ill-disguised exultation,
     he said to his daughter: "Well, Mary, dear, 'taint much to boast of, but for a first week, you
     see, 'taint amiss, either. I find, all expenses covered, one pound ten net profit. Now, you
     know, that makes, first, fifty-two pound a-year; then half of fifty-two, twenty-six; add
     twenty-six to fifty-two, seventy-eight—seventy-eight pound a-year, net-profit. Well, it stands
     to reason and common sense, that as I go on, my business will go on improving too; in short,
     put it at the lowest—I hate exaggeration—well put it at the lowest, and I may say that by next
     Michaelmas, we shall have a neat hundred."
"Law! father, can't you say a hundred and fifty at once," peevishly interrupted Mary.
Mary's will was law.
"Well, I really think I can say a hundred and fifty," ingenuously replied Richard Jones,
     "now, with a hundred and fifty pound for the first year, and just five per cent, as increase of
     profit for the second."
"I'm sure it'll be ten per cent," again interrupted Mary, who, from hearing her father, had
     caught up some of the money terms of this money-making world.
"Well, I should not wonder if it would not," replied her docile papa. "We'll suppose it, at
     least; well that'd be fifteen pound to add to the hundred and fifty, or, rather, to the three
     hundred, and then for the next year it would be—let me see! Ah!" and he scratched his head. "I
     think I am getting into what they call compound interest, and, to say the truth, I never was a
     very quick arithmetician. At all events, it is pretty clear that at the end of ten years, we
     shall stand at the head of something like fifteen hundred pound, and a flourishing house of
     business," he added, glancing towards the shop—"a flourishing house of business," he continued,
     complacently passing his Angers through his hair.
Awhile he mused, then suddenly he observed: "Mary, my dear, hadn't you better go to bed?"
     Mary now slept at home. "You have to get up early, you know."
"Yes; but I ain't going to," she tartly replied. "It gives me a pain in my side," she
     added.
"Then you shall not get up early," authoritatively said Mr. Jones. "I'll not allow my
     daughter to work herself to death for no Miss Grays."
"I don't think I shall go at all to-morrow," composedly resumed Mary. "I don't like
     dress-making—it don't agree with me."
Mr. Jones had at first looked startled, but this settled the question.
"If dress-making don't agree with you, not another stitch shall you put in," he said, half
     angrily. "I think myself you don't look half so well as you used to, and though Miss Gray is as
     nice a person as one need wish to meet, I think she might have perceived it before this; but
     interest blinds us all—every one of us," he added, with a philosophic sigh over the weaknesses
     of humanity.
"I know what Jane will be sure to say," observed Mary; "but I don't care."
"I should think not! Law! bless you, child, I have got quite beyond troubling my poor brains
     with what other people thinks; and if I choose to keep my daughter at home now that I can
     afford to do so, why shouldn't I? It's a hard case, if, when a man's well off and comfortable,
     and getting on better and better every day—it's a hard case, indeed, if he can't keep his only
     child with him."
This matter decided, Mary went up to her room; her father remained by the fireside, looking
     at the glowing coals, and dreaming to his heart's content.
"If I go on prospering so," he thought, "why should I not take—in time, of course—some smart
     young fellow to help me in the shop? It stands to reason that customers like to be served
     quickly. Law, bless you! they hate waiting," he added, thoughtfully, addressing the fire, and
     giving it a poke, by way of comment, "the ladies always hate it. But, as I was saying, why
     shouldn't I take some smart young man, and he, of course— why, I know what he'd do—why, he'd
     fall in love with Mary, of course— and why shouldn't he?" inquired Jones, warming with his
     subject "Was I not a poor fellow once, and did I not marry my master's daughter?"
Mr. Jones gave the fire another poke. In the burning coals he saw a pleasing vision rise. He
     saw his shop full of customers; he served with slow dignity, assisted by a "tight, brisk young
     fellow," busy as a bee, active as a deer, for it was Saturday night, and the fair maids and
     matrons of the vicinity were all impatient. Then from Saturday it was Sunday; the shop was
     closed, the street was silent. Young Thomson was brushing his coat in the yard and whistling;
     Mary was upstairs dressing; another five minutes, and she comes down in straw bonnet lined with
     pink, clean printed muslin frock, mousseline-de-laine shawl, brown boots and blue parasol. The
     happy father saw them going off together with delighted eyes and brimful heart Then other
     visions follow; one of a wedding breakfast at which Mr. Jones sings a song, and another of half
     a dozen grandchildren, all tugging at his skirts, whilst he solemnly rocks the baby, and as
     solemnly informs the infant: "that he had done as much for its mother once."
Peace be with such dreams whenever they come to the poor man's hearth!
A little surprised at not seeing Mary as usual on the following morning, and thinking she
     might be unwell, Rachel Gray sent Jane to enquire. Jane soon returned, her face brimful of
     news.
"Well," said Rachel, "how is Mary?"
"Law bless you Miss, Mary's well enough."
"Why did she not come then?"
"She does not like dress-making no more."
And Jane sat down, and took up her work, and became deeply absorbed in a sleeve trimming.
     Rachel reddened and looked pained. She liked Mary; the pale, sickly child reminded her strongly
     of her own lost sister, and though she could allow for the natural tartness with which Jane had
     no doubt fulfilled her errand, yet she knew that Jane was true, and that as she represented it,
     the matter must be.
For a while she suspended her work, sadly wondering at the causeless ingratitude of a child
     whom she had treated with uniform kindness and indulgence, then she tried to dismiss the matter
     from her mind; but she could not do so, and when dusk came round, her first act, as soon as she
     laid by her work, was to slip out unperceived—for Mrs. Gray, highly indignant with Mr. Jones
     and his daughter, would certainly have opposed her—and go as far as the Teapot.
Mr. Jones was serving a customer. He did not recognize Rachel as she entered the shop, and
     hastily called out:
"Mary—Mary come and serve the lady."
"It's only me, Mr. Jones," timidly said Rachel.
"Walk in, Miss Gray," he replied, slightly embarrassed, "walk in, you'll find Mary in the
     back parlour, very glad to see you, Miss Gray."
Much more sulky than glad looked Mary, but of this Rachel took no notice; she sat down by the
     side of the young girl, and, as if nothing had occurred, spoke of the Teapot and its prospects.
     To which discourse Mary gave replies pertinaciously sullen.
"Mary!" at length said Rachel, "why did you not come to work to day, were you unwell?"
This simple question obtaining no reply, Rachel repeated it; still Mary remained silent, but
     when a third time Rachel gently said: "Mary what was it ailed you?"
Mary began to cry.
"Well, well, what's the matter?" exclaimed her father looking in, "you ain't been scolding my
     little Mary have you. Miss Gray?"
"I!" said Rachel, "no, Mr. Jones, I only asked her why she did not come this morning?"
"Because I would not let her," he replied, almost sharply, "dress-making don't agree with my
     Mary, Miss Gray, and you know I told you from the first, that if her health wouldn't allow it,
     she was not to stay."
And a customer calling him back to the shop, he left the parlour threshold. Rachel rose.
"Good-night, Mary," she gently said; "if you feel stronger, and more able to work, you may
     come back to me."
Mary did not reply.
"Good-night, Mr. Jones," said Rachel, passing through the shop.
"Good-night, Miss Gray," he replied, formally. "My best respects to Mrs. Gray, if you
     please."
When people have done an insolent and ungrateful thing, they generally try to persuade
     themselves that it was a spirited, independent sort of thing; and so now endeavoured to think
     Richard Jones and his daughter— but in vain. To both still came the thought: "Was this the
     return to make to Rachel Gray for all her kindness?"
The conscience of Mr. Jones, little used to such reflections, made him feel extremely uneasy;
     and if that of Mary was not quite so sensitive, the dull routine of the paternal home added
     much force to the conclusion "that she had much better have stayed with Miss Gray." Mary was
     too childish, and had ever been too much indulged to care for consistency. At the close of a
     week, she therefore declared that she wished to go back to Miss Gray, and did not know why her
     father had taken her away.
"I—I—my dear!" said Richard Jones, confounded at the accusation, "you said getting up early
     made your side ache."
"So it did; but I could have got up late, and gone all the same, only you wouldn't let me;
     you kept me here to mind the shop. I hate the shop. Teapot and all!" added Mary, busting into
     tears.
Jones hung down his head—then shook it
"Oh! my little Mary—my little Mary!" he exclaimed, ruefully; and he felt as if he could hare
     cried himself, to see the strange perversity of this spoiled child, "who turned upon him," as
     he internally phrased it, and actually upbraided him with his over-indulgence.
A wiser father would never have thus indulged a pettish daughter, and never have humbled
     himself as, to please his little Mary, Richard Jones now did. That same day, he went round to
     Rachel Gray's; he had hoped that she might be alone in the little parlour; but no, there sat,
     as if to increase his mortification, Mrs. Gray, stiff and stern, and Jane smiling grimly.
     Rachel alone was the same as usual. Jones scratched his head, coughed, and looked foolish; but
     at length he came out with it:
"Would Miss Gray take back his daughter, whose health a week's rest had much improved—much
     improved," he added, looking at Rachel doubtfully.
Mrs. Gray drew herself up to utter a stern "No," but for once the mild Rachel checked and
     contradicted her mother, and said:
"Yes, Mr. Jones, with great pleasure. You may send her to-day, if you like. She has missed
     us, and we have missed her."
"Thank you, Miss Gray—thank you," said Jones, hurriedly rising to leave.
"Give Mary my kind love," whispered Rachel, as she let him out.
But Jones had not heard her. Very slowly, and with his hands in his pockets, he walked down
     the street. He had not grown tired of Mary's company; why had Mary grown tired of his? "It's
     natural, I suppose," he thought, "it's natural;" and when he entered the shop, where Mary sat
     sulking behind the counter, and he told her that she might go back to Miss Gray's, and when he
     saw her face light up with pleasure, he forgot that, though natural, it was not pleasant.
"You may go to-day," he added, smiling.
At once, Mary flew upstairs to her room. In less than five minutes, she was down again, and
     merely nodding to her father as she passed through the shop, off she went, with the light,
     happy step of youth.
"It's natural," he thought again, "it's very natural," but he sighed.
Mrs. Gray took in high dudgeon the consent her daughter had given to the return of Mary
     Jones. She scarcely looked at that young lady the whole day, and when she was gone, and Jane
     had retired to her little room, and mother and daughter sat together, Rachel got a lecture.
"You have no spirit," indignantly said Mrs. Gray. "What! after the little hussy behaving so
     shamefully, you take her back for the asking!"
"She is but a child," gently observed Rachel.
"But her father ain't a child, is he?"
Rachel smiled.
"Indeed, mother, he is not much better," she replied.
"I tell you, that you ain't got a bit of spirit," angrily resumed Mrs. Gray. "The little
     imperent hussy! to think of playing her tricks here! And do you think I'm agoing to stand
     that?" added Mrs. Gray, warming with her subject; "no, that I ain't! See if I don't turn her
     out of doors to-morrow morning."
"Oh! mother, mother, do not!" cried Rachel, alarmed at the threat; "think that she is but a
     child, after all. And, oh, mother!" she added with a sigh, "have you never noticed how like she
     is to what our own little Jane once was?"
Mrs. Gray remained mute. She looked back in the past for the image of her lost child. She saw
     a pale face, with blue eyes and fair hair, like Mary's. Never before had the resemblance struck
     her; when it came, it acted with overpowering force on a nature which, though rugged, and
     stern, and embittered by age and sorrows, was neither cold nor forgetful.
One solitary love, but ardent and impassioned, had Sarah Gray known, in her life of
     three-score and ten—the love of a harsh, but devoted mother for an only child. For that child's
     sake had its father, whom she had married more for prudential reasons than for motives of
     affection, become dear to her heart. He was the father of her Jane. For that child's sake, had
     she, without repining, borne the burden of Rachel. Rachel was the sister of her Jane. Never
     should Rachel want, whilst she had heart and hands to work, and earn her a bit of bread.
But when this much-loved child, after ripening to early youth, withered and dropped from the
     tree of life; when she was laid to sleep in a premature grave, all trace of the holy and
     beautiful tenderness which gives its grace to womanhood, seemed to pass away from the bereaved
     mother's heart. She became more harsh, more morose than she had ever been, and had it been
     worth the world's while to note or record it, of her too it might have been said, as it was of
     England's childless King, "that from one sad day she smiled no more." And now, when she heard
     Rachel, when in her mind she compared the living with the dead, strength, pride, fortitude
     forsook her, her stern features worked, her aged bosom heaved, passionate tears flowed down her
     wrinkled cheek.
"Oh! my darling—my lost darling!" she cried, in broken accents, "would I could have died for
     thee! would thou wert here to-day! would my old bones filled thy young grave!"
And she threw her apron over her face, and moaned with bitterness and anguish.
"Mother, dear mother, do not, pray do not!" cried Rachel, distressed and alarmed at so
     unusual a burst of emotion. After a while, Mrs. Gray unveiled her face. It was pale and
     agitated; but her tears had ceased. For years they had not flowed, and until her dying day,
     they flowed no more.
"Rachel," she said, looking in her step-daughter's face, "I forgive you. You have nearly
     broken my heart. Let Mary come, stay, and go; but talk to me no more of the dead. Rachel, when
     my darling died," here her pale lips quivered, "know that I rebelled against the Lord—know that
     I did not give her up willingly, but only after such agony of mind and heart as a mother goes
     through when she sees the child she has borne, reared, cherished, fondled, lying a pale, cold
     bit of earth before her! And, therefore, I say, talk no more to me about the dead, lest my
     rebellious heart should rise again, and cry out to its Maker: 'Oh God! oh God! why didst thou
     take her from me!'"
Mrs. Gray rose to leave the room. On the threshold, she turned back to say in a low, sad
     voice:
"The child may come to-morrow, Rachel."
