
CHAPTER XXII.
Once more Rachel was alone. Once more solitude and the silence of the quiet street, shrouded
     her in.
A new life now began for Rachel Gray. Like a plant long bent by adverse winds, she slowly
     recovered elasticity of spirit, and lightness of heart. What she might have been, but for the
     gloom of her youth, Rachel never was; but as the dark cloud, which had long hung over her,
     rolled away, as she could move, speak, eat, and think unquestioned in her little home, a gleam
     of sunshine, pale but pure, shone over her life with that late-won liberty. Her speech became
     more free, her smile was more frequent, her whole manner more open and cheerful.
Rachel lived, however, both by taste and by long habit, in great retirement, and saw but few
     people. Indeed, almost her only visitors were Richard Jones and Madame Rose. The little
     Frenchwoman now and then dropped in, looked piteously at Thomas Gray, shrugged her shoulders,
     nodded, winked, and did everything to make herself understood, but talk English; and Rachel
     listened to her, and laughed gaily at the strange speech and strange ways of her little
     friend.
Richard Jones was a still more frequent visitor. He came to receive, not to give sympathy.
     The society of Rachel Gray was to him a want of his life, for to her alone he could talk of
     Mary; he spoke and she listened, and in listening gave the best and truest consolation. Now and
     then, not often, for Rachel felt and knew that such language frequently repeated wearies the
     ear of weak humanity, she ventured to soothe his grief with such ailments as she could think
     of. And her favorite one, one which she often applied to herself and her own troubles was: "We
     receive blessings from the hand of God, shall we not also take sorrow when it pleases Him to
     inflict it?"
"Very true. Miss Gray, very true," humbly assented Richard Jones.
Of his present position he never spoke, unless when questioned by Rachel, and when he did so,
     it was to say that "Saunders and his wife were very kind to him, very kind. And I am quite
     happy, Miss Gray," he would add, "quite happy."
And thus like a hidden stream flowed on the life of Rachel Gray, silent, peaceful and very
     still. It slept in the shadow of the old grey street, in the quiet shelter of a quiet home,
     within the narrow circle of plain duties. Prayer, Love, Meditation and Thought graced it daily.
     It was humble and lowly in the eyes of man; beautiful and lovely in the sight of God.
And thus quiet and happy years had passed away, and nothing had arrested their monotonous
     flow.
It was evening, Rachel and her father were alone in the little parlour. Thomas Gray was still
     a childish old man, bereft of knowledge and of sense. Yet now, as Rachel helped him to his
     chair, and settled him in it, something, a sort of light seemed to her to pass athwart the old
     man's face, and linger in his dull eyes.
"Father!" she cried, "do you know me?"
In speech he answered not, but it seemed to her that in his look she read conscious kindness.
     She pressed his hand, and it appeared to press hers in return; she laid her cheek to his, and
     it did not seem lifeless or cold. Then, again she withdrew from him and said:
"Father, do you know me?"
He looked at her searchingly and was long silent: at length he spoke, and in a low but
     distinct voice, said: "Rachel."
In a transport of joy, Rachel sank at his feet and sobbing clasped her arms around him.
"Never mind, Rachel," he said, "never mind."
"Father, father," she cried, "you know me, say you know me."
But she asked too much, it was but a dawn of intelligence that had returned; never was the
     full day to shine upon earth.
"Never mind, Rachel," he said again, "never mind."
But though the first ardour of her hopes was damped, her joy was exquisite and deep. Her
     father knew her, he had uttered her name with kindness, in his feeble and imperfect and
     childish way, he loved her! What more then was needed by one who like the humble lover recorded
     by the Italian poet, had ever
"Desired much, hoped little, nothing asked."
Somewhat late that same evening, Richard Jones knocked at Rachel's door. As she opened to him
     the light she held shone on her face, and though he was not an observant man, he was struck
     with her aspect. There was a flush on her cheek, a light in her eyes, a smile on her lips, a
     radiance and a joy in Rachel's face which Richard Jones had never seen there before. He looked
     at her inquiringly, but she only smiled and showed him in.
And now, reader, one last picture before we part.
It is evening, as you know, and three are sitting in the little parlour of Rachel Gray. An
     autumn evening it is, somewhat chill with a bright fire burning in the grate, and lighting up
     with flickering flame the brown furniture and narrow room. And of these three who sit there,
     one is a grey, childish old man in an arm-chair; another, a man who is not old, but whose hair
     has turned prematurely white with trouble and sorrow; the third is a meek, thoughtful woman
     with a book on her knees, who sits silently brooding over the words her lips have uttered; for
     she has been reading how the Lord gives and how the Lord takes away, and how we yet must bless
     the name of the Lord.
The good seed of these words has not been shed on a barren soil. As Richard Jones sits and
     dreams of his lost darling, he also dreams of their joyful meeting some day on the happier
     shore, and perhaps now that time has passed over his loss and that its first bitterness has
     faded away, perhaps he confesses with humble and chastened heart, that meet and just was the
     doom which snatched from him his earthly idol, and, for a while, took away the too dearly loved
     treasure of his heart.
And Rachel Gray, too, has her thoughts. As she looks at her father, and whilst thankful for
     what she has obtained, as she yet longs, perhaps, for the full gift she never can possess; if
     her heart feels a pang, if repining it questions and says: "Oh! why have I not too a father to
     love and know me, not imperfectly, but fully—completely," a sweet and secret voice replies:
     "You had set your heart on human love, and because you had set your heart upon it, it was not
     granted to you. Complain not, murmur not, Rachel, if thou hast not thy father upon earth,
     remember that thou hast thy Father in Heaven!"
THE END.
PRINTED BY BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ.
