
 CHAPTER XV. 
A TETE-A-TETE WALK — LIVELY IF NOT INSTRUCTIVE CONVERSATION — THE RICH VISITING THE
				POOR — MISPLACED CONFIDENCE — INNOCENT SIN.

				The fashionable and luxurious Sir Matthew Dowling was not usually
				an early riser, but on the morning of the day which followed Martha's visit to
				Hoxley-lane, he almost outdid the lark. His attorney having been sent for from
				Ashleigh with all speed within an hour after he had received his daughter's report,
				all things regarding the procuring indentures had been made easy, and he found
				himself when he waked in the morning, in every sense ready for action.
Great, and very awful is the power of wealth in a bad man's hands; for scarcely is
				there any barrier which the law can raise for the protection of those who have it
				not, sufficiently strong to save them at all times and seasons, from the aggressions
				of those who have it. How Mr. Cantabury, the attorney of Sir Matthew Dowling,
				contrived to to get his part of the business executed so speedily, it would be
				difficult to say; but certain it is, that considerably before the knight's usual
				hour of breakfast on the following morning this active friend and agent, arrived at
				the lodge with documents, which only wanted the signature of the parties concerned,
				to render them of sufficient power to bind little Michael during the next eleven
				years of his life as apprentice to Mr. Elgood Sharpton, for the purpose of
					learning the business of a stocking-weaver .
The name of Deep Valley, by which Mr. Elgood Sharpton's factory was universally
				known, was not mentioned, but instead of this he was described as Elgood Sharpton
				Esq., of Thistledown House, Derbyshire, a designation most satisfactorily proving
				his honourable station, and, of course, his high respectability.
Sir Matthew perused the document, smiled, nodded his approval, replaced the red tape
				with which it had been tied, and lodged it in his coat-pocket, saying kindly to the
				judicious attorney as he did so, "Cantabury! we must get you made coroner at the
				next vacancy — or if we miss that, something or other else that may suit you, my
				good fellow. You deserve to be taken care of, and you shall."
Mr. Cantabury expressed his gratitude and departed; whereupon Martha was again
				summoned to the presence of her father.
"What a capital good girl you are, Martha," said the knight, affectionately patting
				her cheek, "always up and about before any of the rest are out of their beds — I
				tell you what, Martha, you and I will have our breakfast comfortably together
				without waiting for any of them, and then I will walk down with you myself to see
				Michael's mother, and settle with her about the little fellow's destination."
 Proud and happy was Martha made by this invitation, and gaily did  she
				sally forth, when the cheerful meal was ended, for the rare pleasure of a
				tête-à-tête walk with the great man. Nothing could exceed Sir Matthew's good humour,
				he chatted, and joked, and talked of taking them all on a trip to Paris, and in
				short was hardly silent for a single moment. But amidst all this communicative
				confidential gossip, he never said a word more concerning the business they were
				upon. 
Once or twice Martha began to say something intended to preface an inquiry as to the
				local destination of Michael, but some lively sally from her father always turned
				the conversation into another channel, till at length they entered the gloomy region
				of Hoxley-lane; after which, neither of them spoke again till Martha said — "This is
				the house, papa. — But I believe we had better go in the back way. Shall I step in
				first and say that you are coming?"
"No, no, my dear, there is no occasion to be so ceremonious, we will go in
				together."
Martha then lifted the latch, and they did go in together, causing the sick woman to
				start as if she had seen a spectre. It was nearly three years since Mrs. Armstrong
				had last found herself in the overpowering presence of Sir Matthew Dowling; and the
				belief that this visit was for the express purpose of receiving her thanks,
				increased the embarrassment so startling a condescension was calculated to
				produce.
Martha saw her colour change from pale to red, and then to pale again, and gently
				approaching her, said, "Mrs. Armstrong, my father, Sir Matthew Dowling, is come
				himself to talk with you about little Michael."
"It is very — condescending, miss," murmured the poor woman, "and I'm very grateful
				for this, and all favours."
"Very good, very good," said the knight, in return — not, however, looking very
				steadily in her face. "This young lady, who I suppose you know is Miss Martha
				Dowling, my daughter, paid you a visit yesterday, I believe, and spoke to you, did
				she not, about your little boy?"
"Yes, sir," was the concise reply.
"And you approved, she tells me, of his being put to a good trade."
"In course, sir, I can't but approve, and be thankful for his being put in the way to
				help himself, and his poor crippled brother, too, when I am gone — but — I hope no
				offence, sir, I'd be right glad to know your honour's pleasure as to the place where
				he is to be."
"And that is a little more than I can tell you, my good woman," replied Sir Matthew,
				in a friendly familiar tone. "I can tell you where his master that is to be, lives.
				That," he continued, drawing the indentures out of his pocket, "that we shall find
				written down here — But he is one of the first in his line, and a capital trade it
				is, I promise you, so that he has got work-shops, I believe, in half-a-dozen places.
				However, I'll make it my business to learn whereabouts Michael is to be, and let you
				know."
As he said this, Sir Matthew opened the instrument and busied himself in unscrewing
				the top of his neat little portable ink-bottle.

"Then if it is all the same to you sir," replied the widow Armstrong, in rather an
				unsteady voice, "I should like well to know where it would be, before I put my hand
				to the binding him."
Martha looked up, more than half afraid that such cautious acceptance of the
				important service offered, might offend her hot-tempered father; but equally to her
				surprise and satisfaction she perceived that his countenance instead of expressing
				any thing of the kind, wore a look of more than usual good-humour, as he replied,
				beginning at the same time to replace the red tape round the papers. "That shall be
				just as it pleases you, my good woman, we won't say any thing more about it, just
				yet." Then turning to Martha, he said, in a sort of half-whisper. "I can't stay now,
				Martha, we must go, dear, because I expect to find some one waiting for me at home.
				But we must not deceive the poor dear woman either. She ought to know, Martha that
				this is a chance I may not have again, God knows when, if ever. Can't you explain to
				her, my dear, that this is a sort of thing that by no means happens every day.
				Sometime ago I had an opportunity of doing this gentleman a good turn about one of
				his principal hands for whom he was greatly interested — for he is like a father to
				them all, and he promised then to return it whenever I had any thing of the same
				sort at heart. So now, I have written to him about this boy, and he has answered me
				as kind as possible; only he tells me that he has got such quantities of
				applications from the people round him, that when he has a vacancy among the bound
				hands, he can't keep it open, and that he must have yes or no at once. I am afraid,
				therefore, that we must give it up, my dear."
This was "soft soder," as the inimitable Slick calls it; and the poor doubting,
				trembling, helpless bit of human nature, lying on the bed from whence she knew full
				well she should never rise, did not listen to it unmoved. She felt, as he intended
				she should, her heavy responsibility, and looked up into the face of Martha in a
				manner that very speakingly asked for counsel.
The good girl understood the appeal, and frankly answered it. "You hear what my
				father says, Mrs. Armstrong," said she, leaning over the poor invalid.
"Yes, miss, I do," replied the anxious woman, "and, God help me! — I feel as weak and
				ignorant as a baby about what I ought to say in return."
"I don't know how that can be," said the innocent Martha a little reproachfully. "You
				know exactly how the case stands, and must certainly be able to judge what you think
				it right to do under these circumstances."
"I hope excuse, miss, if I seem over mothersome and foolish about him," replied the
				poor widow in a deprecating tone, "but he's a precious boy to me, and the binding
				him, comes upon me unawares like."
 "Well then, there's nothing more to be said, I think," said Martha withdrawing
				herself from the bed. "It seems a matter of feeling, papa, and I don't think we
				ought to battle against it, for it is very  likely she would be unhappy
				if we persuaded her, let it turn out as it would." 
Instead of answering, Sir Matthew suddenly wheeled round, and looked out of the
				window, as if the bit of stony mould extending ten feet deep to the ditch that
				fenced it, contained something of peculiar interest and curiosity. During this
				interval, which lasted about a minute, the widow Armstrong again fixed her eyes upon
				the face of Martha, with an appealing look that seemed to implore assistance from
				her judgment, while it evidently expressed confidence in her kindness. When Sir
				Matthew again permitted his countenance to be visible to them, it expressed nothing
				but indifference; but Martha thought it was such an easy good-natured sort of
				indifference that there could be no danger in bringing him back to the subject, even
				though he said as he turned round, "Come, my dear Martha, I cannot stay another
				moment, I do assure you."
"I am quite ready, papa," she replied; "but don't you think it is almost a pity to
				let such an opportunity be lost for poor Michael?"
"Certainly it is, my dear," he replied in the most good-humoured accent imaginable.
				"But what would you have me do, my dear child? Depend upon it there is no real
				charity in assisting people against their will, or in a manner in any way contrary
				to their inclinations. You know perfectly well, that it was my real and sincere wish
				that this good woman's child should be well provided for. An opportunity for doing
				this, better far than I could have hoped for, is now proposed but evidently does not
				meet her wishes. Unfortunately I must send the answer by to-day's post, and surely
				you would not recommend me to accept this situation for the boy, excellent as it is,
				against his mother's will?"
"No papa — only it seems to me that Mrs. Armstrong has not quite made up her mind
				about it; and I thought perhaps that a few minutes' consideration might enable her
				to perceive how great a loss it would be to Michael were she to refuse it."
"Well, Martha!" returned the knight with a sort of jocose sigh, and at the same time
				seating himself on one of the widow's treasured rush-bottomed chairs, "I would
				rather make the person I expect wait at Dowling Lodge for an hour, than either
				disappoint you kind heart, or hurry this good woman into saying any thing that she
				does not really mean. What does the little fellow himself say about it?"
"He's grateful and thankful, sir, for what is offered to him, and willing he is to
				accept it. — 'Tis only my poor weak sick heart that has got no courage left in it.
				You think, miss, he had better take it?" she added, turning her anxious eyes upon
				Martha.
For a moment Martha felt a repugnance to the taking upon herself, as it were, the
				responsibility of the transaction, but an exclamation from her father settled the
				business at once.
"Poor soul!" said he. "How natural is this weakness! Give her, by your advice, the
				strength she wants, Martha — it is the most valuable gift you can bestow!"
 "Indeed papa is very right, Mrs. Armstrong," said Martha cheerfully. 
				"Michael will never forgive me if I let you throw away this golden opportunity." 
"And I am sure I should never forgive myself if I threw away for him any thing that
				you could call so, my dear young lady, — I know full well all you have done for him,
				and been to him, and to doubt your judgment, would be a sin indeed. So if you
				please, miss, I am quite ready to sign."
Had Sir Matthew Dowling wanted any strengthening of the motives which actuated the
				deed he was about to perpetrate, he would have found it in this speech. The phrase,
				"I know what you have been to him," requiring no very forced interpretation, in
				order to suggest to him that it was probable she knew what he had been to him also.
				However, he felt no inclination to disturb the business which was proceeding so
				satisfactorily, and therefore again smiled very kindly as he said, "I am sure nobody
				can find fault with your conduct in this business, Mrs. Armstrong. It has been
				exactly what it ought to be, and the better I think of you, the more anxious I feel
				to ensure this excellent situation for your boy. But stay a moment, I came down here
				in such a hurry, that I forgot the necessity of having a witness. Wait here for a
				moment, Martha, and I dare say I shall find some of Mrs. Armstrong's neighbours who
				may not only be able to witness these indentures, but also to give her their opinion
				upon the advantage of them."
So saying the knight arose, and walked out of the room; but, before an anxious
				inquiry from the poor woman about the possibility of writing to her boy could be
				answered by Martha, he returned again, followed by Parsons and another overlooker
				from one of his own factories, whom he found accidentally close to the
				premises.
"Here is a bit of good luck for us, Martha," said Sir Matthew, as he entered, "I
				should have been sadly put to it for time, if I had had to run about till I could
				find a man who knew how to write his name. I have asked two fellows already, but
				they both said, 'No.' — There is one comfort for you, at any rate, Mrs. Armstrong,
				your boy will never be in such a state of ignorance as that."
Sir Matthew as he spoke, again untied the paper, and dipping a pen which had been
				stuck within his coat sleeve into the ink-bottle, he gave both pen and paper into
				the hands of Martha, saying, "There dear, you will hold it for her better than I
				shall — only make haste! — I hate to break an appointment."
Martha received the paper, and without a moment's delay, laid it before the pale and
				trembling woman, placing at the same time the pen in her right hand, and indicating
				with her own finger the place, to which Sir Matthew had pointed, as that where her
				signature should be.
The poor woman received both submissively; and after a moment's pause, looked up once
				more into the face of Martha who was bending over her. A kind and encouraging smile
				sat upon her plain but expressive features, and without further hesitation, the
				widow Armstrong signed her name.

"Here Parsons, sign away!" said Sir Matthew gaily, as he withdrew the document from
				the bed. The ready servant obeyed, and his fellow-driver followed his example,
				without waiting for any further instructions.
"Now then, Martha, let us be off!" cried the knight, moving towards the door as he
				pocketed the papers. But stopping suddenly before he opened it he said, "By the way,
				Parsons, as chance has brought you here, we may as well make use of you about
				getting a few necessaries for our little stocking-weaver. We must trust to you to
				get whatever may be wanted. He may take the clothes he has worn at the lodge, for
				Sundays, but of course they would not be suitable for him to work in."
"Very well, Sir Matthew, I will see about it," replied the important overlooker.
"I must have no time lost, if you please," rejoined his master rather sharply; "for
				Mr. Elgood Sharpton mentioned in his letter, that he should be having some of his
				people passing this way who might take charge of him, and I am sure I can't say when
				they may happen to call. So go directly into the town, Parsons, and buy whatever you
				think the boy may want. I dare say this will be very nearly the last expense, Mrs.
				Armstrong," he added, "that I shall be put to for him, and I assure you that I shall
				pay it very willingly."
With these words he left the room, and martha pronouncing a short but kind farewell,
				followed him. Soon after she had overtaken him, and again passed her arm through
				his, she was startled by a violent burst of laughter, and on looking back, perceived
				at no great distance behind them, Parsons and his companion, taking their way over a
				style that led by a short cut to Brookford factory. It was from them the hearty
				laugh had proceeded.
