
 CHAPTER X. 
MORE WILFULNESS ON THE PART OF THE HEIRESS — PRIVATE THE-ATRICALS — FAILURE OF A
				YOUNG PERFORMER, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES — PHILOSOPHICAL BREAKFAST-TABLE — A MORNING'S
				EXCURSION.

				No sooner did Miss Brotherton enter the room where she had left her
				old friend, who was still tranquilly enjoying the perfumed air which visited her
				through the open window as she sat knitting before it, than throwing her bonnet on
				one side, she began to examine, and cross-examine her as follows:
"Pray, Mrs. Tremlett, do you know any thing about the factory people that work in all
				these great ugly buildings round about Ashleigh?"
Mrs. Tremlett looked up at her for a moment before she replied, and then said, "I
				know very little about them, Miss Mary, — not much more than you do, I believe."
"I have just been thinking, Mrs. Tremlett, how exceedingly wrong it is that I should
				be so profoundly ignorant on the subject."
"Wrong? — I don't see any thing wrong, my dear, in your not knowing what you was
				never told."
"I have been wrong in never wishing to be told; but, in truth, I have never thought
				upon the subject, and I have been very wrong in this. That silly body, Lady,
				Clarissa, said a few words to-day, which — quite unlike the usual effect of what she
				utters, made a great impression upon me. Speaking of the children who work in these
				factories, nurse Tremlett, she said theirs was a very different way of life from
				that of the children whose parents, from father to son, have worked for a dozen
				generations on the lands of the same family. There could not be the same sort of
				family feeling and attachment, she said. But why should there not, Mrs. Tremlett?
				These people work on, I dare say, from generation to generation, and yet, God help
				them, poor souls! — from the hour of my birth to the present day, I am never heard
				any body talk of attachment to them. Can you explain this difference to me? I do not
				at all understand it; but I am quite certain it cannot be right. Why do not we know
				something about our poor people, as the people with landed estates do about
				theirs?"
"Upon my word, my dear, you have asked me a question not over and above easy to
				answer — that is to say, as to its being right. But it is easy enough too, in
				another way, for I may say plain and and straight, without any fear of blundering,
				that the thing is impossible."
"What thing is impossible, Mrs. Tremlett?"
"Why that the factory people should be noticed by the gentle-folks, and treated in
				the same way as labourers that work the land."

"You are too wise a woman, Mrs. Tremlett," replied Mary, "to assert so positively,
				what you did not know to be true; therefore I will take it for granted, that it is
				impossible for people working in a factory to be treated in the same way as people
				working on a farm. And now, seeing, God help me! that I am most frightfully
				ignorant, I must beg you to tell me what it is that causes this extraordinary
				dissimilarity between the different classes of the labouring poor?"
"My dear child, it would hardly be decent to enter into all the reasons. Country
				folks, that is the field-labourers I mean, are just as likely to be good and
				virtuous, as their betters, and so they are for every thing that I have ever seen to
				the contrary. But it is altogether a different thing with the factory people. By
				what I can hear, for of course I never went among them, they are about the worst set
				of creatures that burden God's earth. The men are vicious, and the women desolate,
				taking drams often, and often when they ought to buy food; and so horridly dirty and
				unthrifty that it is a common saying, you may know a factory-girl as far as you can
				see her. So I leave you to judge, Miss Mary, whether such ladies as visit the
				cottages of the poor peasantry, could have any thing to say to such as these."
Mary uttered no reply, but sat for many minutes with eyes steadfastly fixed upon the
				carpet. At length she raised them again to the face of her companion, and said, "It
				is then among such people as these, that children, almost babies — for such is the
				one I have just seen — are often employed?"
"Often, my dear? They are always employed with them. And there's no particular
				hardship in that you know, because these very men and women are the parents of the
				children, and so they could not be separated any how."
"What a dreadful class of human beings, then, must these factory people form! Is it
				not considered as a great misfortune, Mrs. Tremlett, to the whole country?"
"Why as to that, my dear Miss Mary, there's many will tell you that it is the finest
				thing in the world for the places where the great factories are established, because
				they give employment to so many thousands of men, women, and even the very smallest
				children that can stand, almost. But you must not ask me, my dear, what I think
				about that, for of course I am no fair judge at all. I, that spent my childhood in
				playing among the hairbells, raking up little cooks of hay for the hardest work I
				was put to, and going to school to read, write, and sew, like the child of decent
				Christian parents in a civilized country — I can hardly pass fair judgment on goings
				on so very different. But I have heard, my dear, for I believe these things are
				talked of more in the servants' halls than among the great manufacturers themselves,
				especially when the ladies are by, — I have heard that a great many of the learned
				gentlemen in parliament say, that the whole system is a blessing to the
				country."
"Then your account of it must be a very false one, nurse Tremlett," said the young
				heiress severely.

"I only speak after much that I have heard, and a little that I have seen," replied
				the old woman meekly. "However, my dear, dear Miss Brotherton," she added, "if you
				will take an old servant's advice, who loves you very dearly, you will just make up
				your mind, neither to talk, nor to think any more upon the subject. I am quite sure
				that it will give you no pleasure, and it does not seem possible to me that you
				should do any good; for you know, my dear, that you have nothing at all to do with
				any of the factories now, any more than Lady Clarissa herself. Will you promise to
				take my advice, my dear child, and think no more about it?"
"On the contrary, Mrs. Tremlett," replied the young lady; "I am perfectly determined
				that for some time to come I will think of nothing else."

 Mary Brotherton kept her word. During the whole time that the Dowling Lodge
				theatricals were in preparation, while every other young heart in the neighbourhood,
				male or female, was eagerly anticipating the fête , hers was fixed
				steadfast and immoveable upon the mysterious subject that had seized upon it. That
				man was born to labour, that he was condemned to live by the sweat of his brow, she
				knew from high authority; and though under the social compacts which civilization
				has led to, some portion of every race have found the means of performing the
				allotted task vicariously, she felt not called upon to say that the arrangement was
				a bad one. It was by no means difficult to conceive why it was so, nor why of
				necessity it ever must be so. She felt, as all must do, who reflect on the subject,
				that if all distinctions were by some accident suddenly removed, and the entire
				organization of society to begin de novo , each man standing precisely on
				the same level as his neighbour, the earth would not complete one revolution round
				the sun, ere the equality would be violated. "Strength will be lord of imbecility."
				And when nature made one man more active, more intelligent, or more powerful of
				frame than another, she made the law in which originated inequality of condition.
				That, as time rolled on, and mankind became bound together nation by nation,
				substituting the conventional distinctions of civilized society for those derived
				from individual strength, — that when this happened, occasional anomalies should
				appear in the arrangement, seemed inevitable, and of necessity to be ensured. That
				it was inevitable, she conceived to be pretty nearly proved by the fact that no
				single authentic record makes mention of a nation in which hereditary distinction of
				some kind or other did not exist. Nor did it seem desirable that when the prowess,
				the wit, the wisdom, or the toil of an individual had endowed him with wealth beyond
				his fellows, he should be denied the dear privilege of endowing withal the children
				he loved, instead of leaving it at his death to be struggled for, and borne away by
				the most crafty or the most strong. All this, Mary Brotherton, in her little wisdom
				of twenty-two years and a half,  could without difficulty reason upon
				and understand. But that among those whom fate or fortune had doomed to labour, some
				should be cherished, valued, honoured by the masters who received and paid their
				industry, while "other some" were doomed, under the same compact of labour and
				payment, to the scorn, avoidance, and contempt of the beings whose wealth and
				greatness proceeded from their toil, was an enigma she could in no wise comprehend. 
"There must be something wrong," argued the young girl, as day by day she paced her
				gravel walks in solitary meditation; "there must be something deeply, radically
				wrong in a system that leads to such results. I may perhaps be silly enough to look
				with something approaching envy at the noble who traces his thirty descents unbroken
				from the venerable ancestor, whose valour won in a hard-fought field the distinction
				he still bears on his armorial coat, yet when I look round upon what the industry of
				my father — the only one of his race whose name I ever heard — when I contemplate
				what one man's industry can bequeath to his child, I feel that there is no very
				substantial cause for complaining of hereditary inferiority of condition. Nay, were
				I one of the peasants of whom the Lady Clarissa and nurse Tremlett speak, I can well
				enough believe that I might live and die contented with a life of healthful and
				respected toil. But to exist in the condition of these outcast labourers — to be
				thrust out, as it were, beyond the pale that surrounds and protects society — to
				live like the wretch, smitten by the witches' curse, 'a man forbid,' must be hard to
				bear. Children, young creatures still wearing the stamp of heaven fresh upon their
				brows, are, as it seems, amongst these wretched ones. I will find out why this is
				so, or be worried to death by Sir Matthew Dowling and his fellow great ones in the
				attempt."
Towards the end of the month which preceded the grand display expected at Dowling
				Lodge, Mr. Osmond Norval requested permission to submit his composition to Miss
				Brotherton's perusal; a compliment she graciously consented to receive, being
				desirous, before she witnessed its performance, of learning all she could respecting
				Sir Matthew's rather mysterious adoption of the factory-boy, and also of the poor
				child's equally mysterious sufferings under the benevolent process that was
				performing on him.
The little drama, therefore, which for obvious classical reasons the poet denominated
				"A Masque," reached her hands enveloped in delicately-scented paper. But all she
				learned thereby was, that Mr. Norval had thought proper to entitle it, "Gratitude
				and Goodness," or, "The Romance of Dowling Lodge," and to prelude it by a sonnet to
				be spoken by himself as prologue, in which a modest allusion was made to Milton's
				composition of Comus for the use of the Bridge-water family. She had, moreover, the
				gratification of discovering in what order Sir Matthew, Lady Clarissa, the poet, the
				governess, most of the young Dowlings, and little Michael himself were to appear
				upon the scene, and then she returned the young gentleman's MS. with a very honest
				assurance that she doubted not the composition would most satisfactorily answer
				every purpose for which it was intended.

Absurd as the whole business appeared to her, she resolved to be present at the
				representation; and having perceived, in her study of the exists and entrances, that
				no part was allotted to the homely Martha, she determined to place herself near her
				during the performance, in the hope of eliciting the information she was so anxious
				to obtain.
On many occasions Miss Brotherton had remarked that this young lady either kept
				herself, or was kept very much apart from the rest of the family, which circumstance
				had been quite sufficient to propitiate her kindness, for most cordially did Mary
				Brotherton dislike the whole Dowling race. But so deep-seated was the feeling of
				poor Martha herself that nobody did, or could wish, to converse with her, that the
				hand-shakings and smiles of the heiress had never suggested to her the idea that she
				might wish to be better acquainted. This shyness had hitherto effectually kept them
				apart; but no sooner did Mary perceive that the neglected girl was the only one of
				the family, above the age of a mere baby, to whom no part in Mr. Norval's drama was
				allotted, than she resolved to profit by the circumstance, and, if possible, get
				from her such a commentary upon the piece, as might enable her to comprehend its
				plot and underplot.
Accordingly, when the great night of representation arrived, Miss Brotherton reached
				the Lodge somewhat before the hour named in the invitation, and finding, as she
				expected, the room where the company were to be received, unoccupied, she desired
				one of the liveried attendants to send Miss Martha Dowling's maid to her. A female
				servant soon appeared. "Are you Miss Martha's maid?" said the young lady.
"Oh! dear no, ma'am, I am Miss Dowling's and Miss Harriet's maid. Miss Martha never
				wants a lady's maid at all; but I can take any message from you, ma'am, that you may
				please to send."
Miss Brotherton took one of her own cards, and wrote upon it with a pencil — "Dear
				Miss Martha, if you are not going to act in the play, will you have the kindness to
				come to me."
This note the soubrette , as in duty bound, first showed to her own young
				ladies.
"Good gracious! How very odd! What can Miss Brotherton have to say to Martha? Martha!
				of all people in the world. She is not ill, Crompton, is she?" said Miss
				Arabella.
"Oh! dear no, ma'am — at least she don't look so. She seemed in a great hurry,
				however, for me to take the card."
"Well, take it then," cried Miss Harriet, impatiently, "and make haste, or I shall
				never get my ringlets done: they take such a time. Do give her the card, Arabella.
				What good is there in spelling it over a dozen times? I dare say she only wants to
				cross-question her about Augustus, and what he's going to act. So take the card,
				Crompton, and run with it to Martha as fast as you can."
 Crompton and the card found Martha sitting still undressed in the obscure little
				room allotted to her in the children's wing. She was deep in the pages of a new
				romance, and being, if possible, more  certain than usual that her
				presence would not be wanted, had made up her mind to enjoy herself till the time
				arrived for the commencement of the play, when it was her purpose to join the large
				party invited, in their progress from the drawing-room to the theatre. 
On receiving Miss Brotherton's card, however, she hastily resumed the business of her
				toilet; for though the summons was as unintelligible to her as to her sisters, she
				felt, at least, an equal desire that it should be civilly complied with. It never
				took long to make poor Martha as smart as she ever thought it necessary to be, and
				in a very few minutes she joined Miss Brotherton in the drawing-room.
"This is very kind of you, Miss Martha. I hope I have not hurried you?" said the
				heiress, taking her hand so kindly, that the shy girl could not but feel encouraged
				to speak to her with rather more confidence than usual.
"Why are you not going to take a part?" was the next question.
"I take a part! Oh! Miss Brotherton what should I make of acting?" said Martha,
				laughing and blushing, in reply.
"Nay I think you are very right, Martha. I assure you nothing could have persuaded me
				to have made the attempt. But I thought that if you did not play, you would perhaps
				have the kindness to take charge of me, and let me sit by you; for unless I have
				somebody to tell me what it all means I shall be horribly puzzled."
"I will tell you every thing I can," replied Martha, good-humouredly. "But I don't
				think I understand much about it myself."
"What sort of a little boy is it that your papa has been so kind to? Every body is
				talking about it, and Lady Clarissa says there is something quite sublime in what he
				is going to do for him. But I suppose Sir Matthew must have remarked some qualities
				particularly amiable and good in the child, or he would not distinguish him so
				remarkably from all others of the same class."
"You have heard the story of his saving Lady Clarissa Shrimpton from the cow that was
				going to toss her, have you not, Miss Brotherton?"
"Yes, my dear, I heard all that, you know, the morning I was here; — though, by the
				by, you were not in the room, I remember. But there must be something more in it
				than that. Do tell me all you know."
"Indeed I don't know any thing more," said Martha.
"What sort of a child is it?"
"A very nice little fellow indeed, and I think if I had been papa I should have done
				the same thing myself."
"Really! Then you do think this child is something out of the common way, I suppose?
				Pray tell me, dear Martha, will you, if you hear much about the people that work in
				the factories? and the children in particular?"
"No, indeed, Miss Brotherton, I know nothing in the world about them; except that I
				sometimes hear papa say that they are all very idle and ungrateful," replied
				Martha.

"I have been told that they are a very wretched set of people. But, perhaps, they
				cannot help it, Martha?" returned Mary,
"I do not know how that can be, Miss Brotherton; every body can help being idle, and
				every body can help being ungrateful, I should think."
"But it seems that they all live together, and make one another worse; and, in that
				case, the children are very much to be pitied; for, poor little things, they cannot
				help themselves. What makes you think this little boy is a nice child? Have you ever
				talked to him much?"
"Yes, a good deal; but papa has been taking him about to a great many houses; and
				besides, he has been occupied very much in learning his part, for Duo, who was
				teaching him, said that he could hardly read at all. So I have been trying to help
				him, and he is very quick. But I like him, too, because he appears so fond of his
				mother and brother. He cares for nothing that can be given him, unless he can take
				some of it to them."
"And does your papa let him do so?"
"Oh! yes, every day."
"That is very kind. Then I suppose the little fellow is superlatively
				happy?"
"I don't know," replied Martha, with a slight shake of the head.
"It is very strange if he be not," observed Miss Brotherton. "If he were kept from
				his mother I could easily understand that he might be very miserable,
				notwithstanding the great good luck that has befallen him; but if he is permitted to
				see her constantly, I can't imagine what he can want more."
"I don't know," again replied Martha.
The expected guests began now rapidly to assemble, and refreshments were handed round
				previous to their being conducted to the room prepared for the evening's amusement.
				"Don't forsake me, dear Martha!" whispered Miss Brotherton, "I am not very intimate
				with any of these ladies and gentlemen, and I shall not enjoy the evening's
				amusement, unless I am seated next you."
Martha felt a good deal surprised at the compliment, but readily agreed to the
				proposal; and in a few minutes, Lady Dowling, who was any thing rather than pleased
				by the whole affair, gave the assembled party to understand that the time fixed for
				their entering the theatre had arrived.
On tiptoe with curiosity, and eager beyond measure, to see what Lady Clarissa
				Shrimpton, Mr. Osmond Norval, and "all the Dowlings" would look like on the stage,
				the numerous company almost ran over one another in the vehement zeal with which
				they prepared to obey her.
 Of course no expense had been spared in fitting up the apartment allotted to the
				purpose, in form and style as like as might be to a theatre; and, thanks to the
				taste and ingenuity of the little French governess, the thing had been not only
				expensively, but well done. The space railed in for the orchestra very conveniently
				divided the  company from the actors; and, when the curtain drew up,
				the well-lighted stage exhibited just such a carpeted, draperied, mirrored, and
				flower-adorned arena, as well-dressed amateur ladies and gentlemen delighted to
				appear in. 
The very sight of the stage elicited a shout of applause; and when Mr. Osmond Norval,
				habited at all points according to the most accredited draped portraits of Apollo,
				came forth from behind the sky-blue silken hangings which formed the
					coulisses , all the ladies began clapping till their little palms and
				fingers tingled with the unwonted exercise.
The young poet certainly looked very handsome; and not the less so because he knew
				that besides Miss Brotherton's eyes, which he was certain must be fixed upon him
				(though he could not distinguish her in the obscure corner in which she had chosen
				to place herself beside Martha), those of Miss Arabella and Miss Harriet Dowling
				(both estimated at twenty thousand pounds), were fixed upon him too. Not to mention
				the speaking orbs of Lady Clarissa Shrimpton, whose nobility, he had little doubt,
				might be won to smile upon and endow him with all the little earthly goods she had,
				could he make up his mind to believe that he could do no better.
All this flattered, excited, and inspired him most becomingly; and as he stood with
				one silken leg slightly advanced, and so firmly planted as to require only the toe
				of its fellow to support him from behind, with a lyre suspended round his neck, and
				a wreath of bay-leaves mixing with the dark curls upon his brow, at least two dozen
				young ladies in the manufacturing interest declared to their secret souls that they
				never could hope to see another like him.
Having first recited the pretty sonnet before mentioned, in which he modestly hinted
				at more points of resemblance than one between himself and Milton, he suddenly
				changed his hand, and having, as he expressed it to Lady Clarissa, "gleaned with the
				hand of a master," he spoke the following lines, which in the copies printed for
				private circulation, were headed
"SHAKSPERIAN PROLOGUE. "Open your ears! For which of you will stop The seat
			of hearing, when loud rumour speaks? I, from the orient to the drooping west, Making the
			wind my post-horse, will unfold The act performed by virtuous Dowling here. Oh! for a
			muse of fire that should ascend The brightest heaven of discription! Then should the
			noble Dowling, like himself Assume the form of mercy; and, at his heels, Leashed in like
			hounds, should famine, pain, and labour, Crouch, all subdued!" &c. &c.  The
				applause which followed this lasted so long, that the performers began to fear there
				would not be time enough left for the piece. But  by degrees the tumult
				subsided, Apollo was permitted to retire, and the business of the scene began. 
There was something more nearly approaching a balance of power at Dowling Lodge than
				is often to be found in the domestic arrangements of gentlemen and their wives —
				for, though it may be a very doubtful point, whether man or wife most frequently get
				the mastery, it but rarely happens that the matter long remains unsettled. At
				Dowling Lodge, however, there was a beautiful alternation of power, which the
				measured movement of the engine in their factories, first sending up one side, and
				then the other, might, perhaps, have suggested. If matters came to a downright
				quarrel, however, Sir Matthew was sure to be the conqueror; for her ladyship got
				frightened, and gave in: but when any differences of opinion arose on points of no
				great importance, the lady's murmurings and mutterings were equally sure to be
				victorious, and Sir Matthew let her have her way, merely because, like the
				organ-grinder, "he knew the wally of peace and quiet."
On the subject of the private theatricals, there was, most decidedly, a difference of
				opinion between the heads of the Dowling family, and some rough skirmishing might
				have ensued, had not Mademoiselle Beaujoie hinted to her good friend, Sir Matthew,
				that if they could introduce a scene or two, where all the dear little children
				could be shown off, Lady Dowling's objections would probably give way. The
				experiment was made, and answered completely; on condition, that "Gratitude and
				Goodness" should open and close with scenes in which the whole family should appear
				in fancy dresses, and be grouped by the dancing-master in the most graceful
				attitudes he could invent, Lady Dowling withdrew her opposition. As soon, therefore,
				as Apollo had retired from the front of the stage, no less than sixteen male and
				female Dowlings rushed forth from the silken hangings, and formed themselves, after
				some little confusion, into a tableau , declared, on all sides, to be of
				unrivalled beauty. Again bravoes and clapping of hands announced the delight of the
				spectators; and, when this was calmed, some very pompous verses gave notice that
				this display of youthful grace and beauty, was on occasion of a rustic fête, in
				which the dramatis personæ were to amuse themselves al fresco .
				Then entered the Lady Clarissa; but, for some good reason or other, it had been
				decided, between the knight and herself, that she should enter alone: and from a
				most poetical scream of terror, soon uttered by her ladyship, it became evident that
				a dragon, or a cow, or some other dreadful animal had been pursuing her. Again and
				again, with most picturesque effect, she looked behind her towards the blue silk
					coulisses , from whence she had issued, till, at length, the feelings
				of the audience were worked up to a wonderful pitch, by her ejaculating — "It comes!
				It comes!" 
 This was little Michael's cue; and, as soon as the words were spoken, he entered
				from the opposite side, holding a ragged cap on  high, and dressed, in
				all respects, precisely as he had been on the memorable night of Lady Clarissa's
				vaccine adventure. 
In dumb show the lady indicated the direction from whence the dreaded monster would
				approach; and the most energetic and unsparing action of the limbs and person
				secured the audience, as well as her deliverer, from any possible mistake on the
				subject. Michael, too, performed his part with great spirit, exaggerating, as he had
				been commanded, by every possible means, the manævres necessary for turning the
				front of a cow.
To this scene, too, the audience gave loud applause, and in the midst of it entered
				Sir Matthew, who was, of course, greeted by bravoes, "long drawn out," till the
				ladies and gentlemen having nearly deafened one another, ceased at last, and
				listened to the beautiful explanation which followed.
First the company were made to comprehend that the danger was over, for the
				well-taught Michael turned about, and manfully facing the audience, pronounced
				distinctly "The beast is gone!" Then Sir Matthew, after bowing respectfully to the
				lady, said, "Permit me, madam, to express my joy, That you've been saved by this
				good little boy." It was, however, uttered in an accent of such temperate and
				measured feeling, that not even Lady Dowling saw any thing very particular in it. A
				precaution by the way, which had been suggested by the gentlemen during the frequent
				rehearsals.
Lady Clarissa's acting then became animated indeed; for the poet, following her
				instructions, had composed for her in smooth, yet startling rhymes, about thirty
				lines of the most fervent thanksgiving, in which, now laying one hand on the head of
				the ragged child, now clasping both together in the eagerness of her address to Sir
				Matthew, and now gracefully extending both arms towards the audience, as if to make
				them sharers in her generous emotions, she produced an effect more easily imagined
				than described.
The speech which followed from Sir Matthew was very noble, and at once let the
				audience into all the secret purposes of his benevolent heart. The by-play of
				Michael during this scene had been prepared for by his benefactor with particular
				care, but somehow or other the boy was not apt in catching the knight's idea; for
				instead of the tender but joyous smile with which he had been instructed to look up
				into the face of his munificent patron, his countenance expressed nothing but
				terror.
"That little fellow does not look happy, Martha," whispered Miss Brotherton.
"Oh no! he looks very frightened," replied Martha, "but that is very natural, is it
				not, considering the novelty of his situation?"
"I don't know," said the heiress.

The piece went on to exhibit the beautiful manner in which this adoption of a ragged
				factory-boy into the bosom of the Dowling family had been hailed by all of them as
				an especial grace from heaven, on account of the opportunity it afforded for
				relieving the overflowing generosity of their hearts. Sir Matthew, while looking
				round upon his sixteen full-dressed offspring, who were now again skilfully grouped
				upon the stage, was made to exclaim with clasped hands, and an almost sobbing excess
				of emotion, "The widow and the orphan are more dear, To their young hearts, than
				million pounds a year!" 
Every body was touched, and again the applause was deafening.
Then came a very striking scene indeed. Michael appeared superbly dressed, and on
				each side of him was a middling-sized Miss Dowling, holding lightly and gracefully
				each a little basket, from under the covers of which peeped out grapes and peaches
				on the one side, and something that had the semblance of a flask of wine on the
				other.
Then spoke the fair-haired Louisa. "Dear little boy, this basket's all your own,
			'Tis to reward the courage you have shown." And then Miss Charlotte. "So is this
			too, my pretty little boy, We hope 'twill give your poor old mother joy." And when
				Michael, having received a basket in each hand, appeared preparing to depart, the
				two young ladies exclaimed together, "'Tis papa sends it, who's so very kind, How to
				do good, is all he seeks to find!" 
Upon this, Michael turned round again towards the audience, and stood stock still. It
				was quite evident that he had some speech to make which he had apparently forgotten,
				for it was impossible for any child to look more completely distressed and at a
				loss.
At length it became pretty evident that, in lieu of all other performance, the poor
				boy was going to cry; and some ingenious persons doubted whether it might not be in
				his part to do so; but this idea was speedily removed by the very matter-of-fact
				pokes and nudges which the two young ladies bestowed upon him. In addition to this
				it seemed as if the little fellow caught some stimulating sounds from the
					coulisses , for he cast more than one furtive glance in that direction,
				and at length, with what was evidently a great effort, he stammered out, "My
				mother's dear, and so's my brother too, But dearer still are your papa and you. His
				charity's so great, his heart so good, He gives the naked clothes; the hungry food;
				And I for — one — will, — day — and night — in prayer, Ask blessings — for — him —
				and — his — worth declare." 

The two last lines were so completely choked by the tears, which all his efforts
				could not suffice to restrain, that they were perfectly unintelligible to the
				audience.
"Is all that vehemence of weeping a part of Mr. Norval's composition?" inquired Miss
				Brotherton in a whisper to Martha.
"Upon my word I don't know: but I should think not," was the reply.
"Martha!" said the heiress, very earnestly, "that child is suffering from an agony of
				terror."
"I should hope not," said Martha, in a voice that somewhat faltered.
"Do you know any thing about this boy?" pursued Miss Brotherton, continuing her
				whispering. "Do you know any thing about the mother he talks of?"
"Nothing whatever, Miss Brotherton."
"Do you feel quite satisfied, my dear, that this romantic adventure has been, or will
				be, advantageous to him?"
"I think," replied Martha, "that one can hardly doubt his being better off here than
				in the poverty of his mother's dwelling. You saw, Miss Brotherton, what a ragged
				condition the clothes were in which he had worn before."
"Decent clothes are a comfort, my dear Martha, there can be no doubt of it; but
				compared with the other circumstances which influence the happiness of life, they
				are of no great importance. Of course I suppose that your father means to educate
				him. Do you know whether he can read his bible yet?"
"I know that he could not," replied Martha, "when he came here."
"Poor little wretch! That is very terrible neglect somewhere. What sort of person is
				the mother?"
"By Michael's account," replied Martha, smiling, "she is a very estimable person
				indeed; but it certainly seems that she has not taken much pains with his education,
				poor little fellow!"
"What a sad thing it is," continued Miss Brotherton, "that we all of us know so
				little of the poor people employed in the factories! I believe they are said to be
				exceedingly well paid, but still I don't think it is quite right for the rich people
				in a neighbourhood to take no notice whatever of the poor. I know it is not so in
				other places; for I have heard my schoolfellows continually talk of their fathers'
				tenants and work-people, and of their schools, and their clothing societies, and all
				sorts of things, and I have been trying to do a little good just at home with the
				families of some of the work-people about the place. But I have just now got my head
				strangely full of these factory folks. I wish you could give me some information
				about them, Martha."
 "Indeed, my dear Miss Brotherton, I know as little as you do. I am told that they
				are very good-for-nothing, that they receive enormous sums annually in wages, and
				yet that they are never contented, but for ever complaining, just because they have
				work to do for what they  get, and yet papa says that it is the very
				prettiest lightest work in the world. And indeed I am afraid it is but too true, for
				this little fellow, though he is so interesting and intelligent that it is
				impossible to help liking him, always speaks of the factory as if he hated it." 
"And if he does hate it, Martha, why, if you question him should he conceal it?"
"But I never have questioned him about that; I should not think it right to do so.
				Only I remember his making me laugh, just after he came here, by saying something
				exceedingly naïve about their all liking wages but not work. Now, though I
				am not very deep in political economy, it is impossible not to see that poor people
				must work for what they get — don't you think so?"
"Assuredly, and rich people too. I have no doubt that both your father and my father
				had to work very hard for the fortunes which have rewarded their industry. In our
				class of life this is necessary. But that does not settle the question that is
				working in my head at present, and which, to tell you the truth, will not let me
				sleep by night nor amuse myself by day. How comes it that ALL the people — the only
				phrases I have heard upon the subject were very comprehensive — how comes it, Martha
				Dowling, that ALL the people, young and old, who work in the factories are classed
				as ignorant and depraved?"
"My dear Miss Brotherton, how is it possible that I should be able to answer
				you?"
"Have you not heard the same statement, Martha?"
"Oh, yes! very often. I know mamma says that nothing in the world should induce her
				to take a girl who had worked in the factories into the house, even in the very
				lowest situation. Oh! I believe they are very bad!"
"Very bad? But, good gracious! why are they very bad? What is the cause of this
				strange degradation of one peculiar class of human beings? It surely cannot arise
				from the nature of their employment; for if it did, of course the clergy of the
				neighbourhood would interfere to stop it. It is quite out of the question to suppose
				that in a Christian country many hundreds — nay thousands — Mrs. Tremlett tells me
				there are many thousands employed in the factories — it is impossible to suppose, is
				it not, that any labour or occupation could be permitted, which by its nature, and
				of necessity, tended to corrupt the morals of those employed in it? There must be
				some other cause for their wickedness, if wicked they are."
"Oh! they are very wicked, I am quite sure of that; for I have heard it
				again and again ever since I was born, and you know I have not been away like you,
				Miss Brotherton, always in London. I have never lived any where but here, and I
				never remember the time when I did not hear that the factory people were the very
				wickedest set of wretches in the world."
 For a few minutes Miss Brotherton was silent, and even seemed to have restored her
				attention to the silly business of the gaudy stage, for her eyes were fixed in that
				direction; but she presently gave evidence that wherever her eyes had been, her
				thought had not wandered  from the subject to which she appeared so
				earnestly to have devoted them. For she said in the low, slow, even tone, which
				denotes concentrated feeling — 
"If this be so, Miss Martha Dowling, if thousands of human beings in a Christian
				country are stigmatized as wicked, because their destiny has placed them in a
				peculiar employment, that employment ought to be swept for ever and for ever from
				the land, though the wealth that flowed from it outweighed the treasures of
				Mexico."
Martha Dowling started, but said not a word in reply; there was something in the
				manner of her neighbour which awed her. True, genuine, deep feeling, is always
				sublime, be it manifested by such a young girl as Mary Brotherton, or such an old
				king as Lear. But, though Martha was silent, her companion suffered not the
				conversation to drop; and presently resumed in a tone of less exaltation, — "Do you
				think, my dear, that I could get hold of your little Michael some day, so that I
				might have a little conversation with him?"
"Yes, certainly, Miss Brotherton," replied Martha, "I think papa would be quite
				pleased, for he seems to like nothing better than seeing every body take notice of
				him."
"Do you think your father loves the little boy, Martha?"
"I am sure he is very kind to him," replied the conscious daughter a little piqued.
				"For it can be nothing but kindness that makes him take the child into the house,
				and feed him and clothe him for nothing."
"And, of course, Martha, he will get some instruction here?"
"Oh! he has begun to read the bible already," replied the kind-hearted girl, eagerly.
				"I have undertaken that business myself. The poor little fellow seemed to suffer so,
				when he was learning his part. I never saw a child appear so heartily ashamed of any
				thing."
"One almost wonders at that too; brought up, as he must have been, in the very lap of
				ignorance. I should have thought, after all I have heard, that he would have been
				ashamed of nothing. However, I should like to talk to him. At what hour do you give
				him his reading lesson, Martha?"
"When I can catch him," replied the young lady, laughing. You have no idea, Miss
				Brotherton, how much the little gentleman is engaged. Papa has taken him about with
				him in the carriage, almost every where, and such quantities of people have been to
				see him!"
"And does he seem greatly delighted with it all?"
"No, I don't think he does. He seems to me to care for nothing in the world but his
				mother, and a little crippled brother that he talks of."
"That does not look as if he were thoroughly confirmed in wickedness as yet,"
				observed the heiress.
"No, indeed! It is his affectionate temper that has made me take to him; for I do
				believe he is very idle, and hates his work, just as papa says they all do,"
				answered Martha.
"Does he visit his mother every day?"
 "He either goes or sends to her, I believe. Papa makes a great point of something
				very nice being taken down to Ashleigh every day  for Michael's sick
				mother to eat; and the child always carries it himself, when papa does not send him
				elsewhere." 
"And at what hour does he generally go?"
"Always after luncheon."
"Don't you think the play must be almost come to an end, Martha?" said Miss
				Brotherton, after looking again on the stage for a few minutes, and yawning rather
				more conspicuously than politeness could warrant.
"I should think it must," replied Martha, catching, and returning the yawn.
There was, however, a good deal to be done. There was a figure dance to be performed,
				and a trio to be played on the pianoforte, harp, and violoncello, by the two eldest
				Miss Dowlings, and their music-master.
This last was a very long business: and the heiress, who, instead of having been
				instructed to endure annoyances patiently, had been rather taught never to endure
				them at all, got up in the middle of it, and telling Martha that her head ached too
				much to permit her remaining any longer, made her way out of the room, which she
				effected the more easily from having taken her station near a side door, which led
				from the theatre (in ordinary phrase, the school-room) into the private apartments
				of Mademoiselle Beaujoie.
Martha Dowling, of course, followed her, and expressed much concern for her malady,
				offering all the specifics usually suggested by one lady to another, under such
				circumstances. "No, thank you," was the reply she received to all, "I only want to
				get away."
"But it will not be very easy to do so, this way," replied Martha, "unless you will
				condescend to go through the passage that leads from the offices."
"Never fear, dear Martha," returned the self-willed young lady, "I will condescend to
				go through any passage that will lead to fresh air, for indeed that place was too
				hot!"
The room they first entered on passing through the door, was one dedicated to the
				reception of globes, slates, guitars, dumb bells, dictionaries, embroidering-frames,
				and sundry other miscellanies connected with an enlarged system of education. Beyond
				this was the bedchamber of Mademoiselle, which again led to an apartment opening
				upon that part of the school-room now occupied as the stage. This room, which was
				denominated Mademoiselle Beaujoie's parlour, was now converted into a general
				green-room and dressing-room, for into this, all exits from the stage were made.
While still in the bedroom, Miss Brotherton, and her more than half-frightened
				companion, heard voices speaking in no very pleasant accents from this theatrical
				retreat, and the angry tones of Sir Matthew Dowling himself were soon unmistakably
				audible.
"Let us go back, pray let us go back!" said the greatly distressed Martha, in a
				whisper.
 "I am too ill, my dear, to bear that room again," rewhispered Miss Brotherton. "Let
				me sit down here for a few minutes, and I shall  recover myself; and
				then we can return, and go out the other way with the rest of the company." 
It was impossible to argue the point; so poor Martha submitted, though cruelly
				distressed at the idea of her father's private violence of temper being listened to
				by one of those who had never seen Dowling Lodge, or its inhabitants, excepting in
				full dress. This distress was by no means lessened when some very audible words made
				it evident that Michael Armstrong was the object of the angry feelings to which he
				was now giving vent. As the best thing to be done under the circumstances; she
				pointed to a sofa at the greatest distance from the imperfectly-closed door from
				whence the sounds issued; but Miss Brotherton had already dropped into a chair so
				near this door of communication that she not only heard, but saw all that was
				passing in that part of the green-room which Sir Matthew Dowling occupied. That this
				was the last place in which a gentlewoman would have been likely to place herself at
				such a moment, is most certain; but the capricious heiress was wont to exclaim on
				many occasions, when observance and restraint were irksome to her, "I am not a
				gentlewoman — and why should I torment myself by affecting to be one."
It was probably by some such reasoning that she now justified to herself the strong
				measure she was adopting; in order to become acquainted with what was passing
					behind the scenes respecting Michael Armstrong.
Circumstances were favourable to the object; for Sir Matthew was in one of those
				towering fits of passion, to which his family and dependants knew him to be subject,
				though the majority of the world declared him to be an extremely good-natured
				man.
"Blackguard! — Vermin! — Devil's imp!" — were among the first intelligible words
				which reached the heiress, after she had seated herself; and these were accompanied
				by cuffs so heavy on the head and shoulders of Michael, that it required a very
				powerful effort over herself to prevent her darting forward to seize the arm that
				gave them. But this prudent effort was dictated and sustained by a stronger feeling
				than curiosity; and she remained perfectly still to await what should follow.
Dr. Crockley, who, though not among the corps of performers, had been permitted to be
				useful behind the scenes in a variety of ways, and among the rest had acted as
				prompter, stood beside the trembling child, and it was to his friendly ear that the
				irritated Sir Matthew addressed himself.
 "Will you believe he did not do it on purpose? Will you believe Crockley, that there
				was any thing to make him cry then? Had we not borne with all his beastly stupidity,
				expressly for the purpose of keeping the little ungrateful monster in good humour?
				Hadn't I fed him, and crammed him, as you bid me, with what was too good for him
				ever to have reached the smell of? Didn't I cosset his lazy beast of a mother with
				such niceties as the dirty beggar never heard of before? And his crook-shanked rat
				of a brother, too, haven't they been all fed at my cost for more than a month past?
				And then to see this  black-hearted traitor come upon the stage, and
				cry before all the company as if his heart was breaking?" 
"It's too bad to bear," replied Dr. Crockley, "and if he was to be flayed alive and
				salted, it would not be half what he deserved."
"Wouldn't the best thing I could do be to send him back into the factory to-morrow
				morning, Doctor?" demanded Sir Matthew, suddenly quitting his hold of the child, and
				setting his square arms akimbo. "By the living God! I am sick of the job."
"I will be very good, sir, if you will," said the boy, "and I won't go to sleep at
				the work at all, and no more won't Edward neither, if you will but please to let me
				go back again."
"You see how much he dreads the factory," said Sir Matthew, with a grim smile. "But,"
				nodding his head, and winking his eye familiarly to the child, "we shall see, my
				pretty dear, if Mr. Parsons can't contrive to do something more than just keep you
				awake. He shall go back, Crockley, upon my soul he shall. It is the only
				way to prevent his driving me mad. I loathe the very sight of him."
"You must do as you like, Sir Matthew," replied his confidential friend, "but it will
				be the most d — d foolish thing you ever contrived in your life, if you do. I tell
				you the story is doing wonders every where; and now, because a stupid brat can't say
				his lesson perfect, you are just going to spoil it all."
"His lesson perfect! Confound the sly vagabond, that was not the point, Crockley. It
				was not the lesson that choked him. How much will you bet me that if I get
				fifty lines written down abusing me and nothing else in 'em, he won't learn them off
				as glib and perfect as any actor on the stage? I know his black heart, and he shall
				find out that mine is not made of pap before I have done with him."
"That's all right and fair enough, and I have nothing to say against it," replied the
				friendly physician, "and let us talk it all over quietly together to-morrow morning;
				but for to-night — " And here Dr. Crockley taking his friend by the arm led him to
				the door which opened upon the stage, from whence issued a tintamarre of
				instruments sufficient to cover whatever he might wish to say, not only from the ear
				of little Michael, but from all others. The moment selected by the angry knight for
				relieving himself of the wrath which burned within him would have been a most
				favourable one, but for the accidental vicinity of Miss Brotherton. While the whole
				corps of performers, excepting the manufacturer and the factory-boy, were grouped
				upon the stage, in a style the most favourable for the display of their persons and
				dresses, the trio above mentioned augmented, by way of finale, by tambourines and
				triangles, went steadily on in a crescendo movement that ended in a clamour
				rendered perfect by the last peal of applause from the wellnigh worn-out audience,
				so that their secret conference was not otherwise likely to be overheard.
 At the moment after Sir Matthew had declared his intention of teaching Michael to
				know what his heart was made of, and just as he was himself led off by his friend
				Crockley, Miss Brotherton, pressing her two hands strongly upon her breast,
				involuntarily pronounced the  word " Monster !" and
				then placing her hands before here eyes remained lost in no very pleasing revery.
				But hardly had her meditations lasted a moment, ere they were chased by hearing the
				sound of some one falling near her, and looking round, she perceived poor Martha
				stretched insensible upon the floor. 
Inexpressibly shocked at remembering, which she did by no slow action of the mind,
				the suffering to which her own unscrupulous curiosity had exposed the unfortunate
				girl, she ran to her with eager haste, and with much repentant tenderness raised her
				head and did all her small experience suggested towards restoring her. The
				comfortable insensibility did not last long; and Martha, who with restored animation
				immediately recovered her recollection, and in whose composition no affectation of
				any kind had part, raised herself without assistance from the ground, and silently
				placed herself upon a sofa.
"Dear excellent Martha!" exclaimed Miss Brotherton, with much true feeling, "fear not
				that I should ever repeat what I have so accidentally heard; and let not your good
				and dutiful nature suffer thus, because I have heard it. We have all our
				faults, Martha, and it is the duty of each to pray for the conversion of their own
				hearts first, and then for the repentance of others. And what prayers, dear girl, so
				likely to be heard, as those of a good and dutiful child? Let us slip back to our
				places, Martha. This clapping of hands announces, as I take it, the conclusion of
				the piece."
Martha, though wounded to the very soul, uttered no word of deprecation or complaint;
				but there was an unsophisticated simplicity of character about her which made her
				decline, by a courtesy that had a little of the stiffness of ceremony in it, the
				offered arm of Mary, and stepping forward she opened the door by which they had left
				the theatre, till the heiress had passed through it, and resumed her place.
