
 CHAPTER XXVI. 
A DISMAL ENTERPRISE, AND ITS MELANCHOLY RESULT — MARTHA DOWLING PUNISHED MORE
				SEVERELY THAN SHE DESERVED — VERY WILD PROJECTS CONCEIVED BY MISS BROTHERTON, AND
				SPEEDILY PUT IN EXECUTION.

				It is now necessary that the narrative should briefly return to the
				period of Miss Brotherton's arrival at Milford Park, after her unsuccessful
				expedition in pursuit of Michael.
There was no needless delay between this return to her home, and the communication to
				Mrs. Armstrong and Edward of the dismal news of which she was the bearer; nor was
				there any consultation on this occasion, concerning the mode of her reaching
				Hoxley-lane. Poor Mary had greatly advanced in independence of spirit within the
				last few months; and had she encountered all the military quartered within twenty
				miles, with the Dowling family marching in procession at their head, she would have
				quietly driven through them all, with the carriage-windows up, perhaps, but with no
				greater precaution — except, indeed, an order to the coachman to drive on without
				stopping, let them meet who they would.
The carriage was at the door the morning after their return, and Miss Brotherton had
				not yet named her intended expedition to Mrs. Tremlett.
"You are going out without me, my dear?" said the old lady on hearing it
				announced.
"I am going to the widow Armstrong's, dear nurse," replied the heiress. "Your
				presence cannot help me through this dreaded visit. Then why should I make you share
				the pain of it?"
"Why? my dear! because I am of no earthly use, and had better die at once if I cannot
				be of some little comfort to you at such a time as this. Why, don't I know all about
				it, and how you must feel at this very moment, just as well as you do yourself,
				Mary? Sure it was a foolish notion to leave me here enjoying the arm-chair and the
				foot-stool, and the flowers, while you are having your heart broken by telling that
				poor pale body, that the child she loved so dearly is dead and gone for ever."
"If you could save either her or me a pang, nurse Tremlett, I would not thus have
				spared you," replied Miss Brotherton. "However, you shall go with me, dear friend.
				It is quite like yourself to wish it — and in truth, I might have guessed that you
				could not have remained easy and quiet at home while I was so engaged. And poor
				Fanny! — I have left her very busy with Martin, assisting in arranging the little
				room I have assigned her near my own. Shall we tell her where we are going, in case
				she should come in here to look for us?"
 "My dear Mary! If you will take my advice, you will let her go too. If you do not,
				the whole of this terrible talk will have to begin  all over again; for
				of course, when Mrs. Armstrong hears that you have got with you the only person who
				can tell any thing about her boy, she will be restless and anxious to see her — and
				then won't it be all over again, Mary?" 
"It will, indeed, dear nurse! You are very right, and very wise in this. She shall go
				with us, poor child. Though it will be a dreadful task for her!" replied Mary.
"And you would rather take it, dear, all on your own shoulders? I do not doubt that —
				only you don't know how to manage it," replied Mrs. Tremlett. "But there is another
				thing, Mary, that I have been thinking of," continued the kind-hearted old woman,
				"and that is the other poor boy. I'll engage to say, he has never missed school for
				an hour, after what you said to him about exerting himself. I saw how he took it;
				and, therefore, you may depend upon it, that he is at the schoolhouse now. Then just
				think, my dear, what his going home will be after you have told all! Poor creatures!
				It makes one's heart sick to fancy it! If I were you, Mary, I would send for him,
				tell him every thing at once, and then take him home to his mother."
Miss Brotherton instantly rose and rang the bell.
"Do not say you are of no use, my dear good creature!" said she. "How infinitely
				better this will be than the hurried, thoughtless plan which I had sketched!"
A message was accordingly despatched to the schoolhouse to summon Edward Armstrong,
				and in a few minutes he stood before them.
Most true is it that there is something holy and imposing in the presence of sorrow.
				It would be difficult to imagine any entrée into the boudoir of Miss
				Brotherton, which would have inspired a feeling both in her and her friend so nearly
				approaching awe, as did that of Edward Armstrong.
"There is no need to tell him, poor fellow!" exclaimed Mrs. Tremlett, mournfully
				shaking her head, as she saw the sudden and eloquent change in Edward's countenance
				the moment he looked in the face of Miss Brotherton. "There is no need to tell him!
				He knows it all, already!"
"He is dead, then!" said the boy, his pale lips parting, as it seemed, with
				difficulty, to pronounce the words, "Please, ma'am, let me go away."
He looked as if he were unable to sustain himself; and Mary, really fearing he might
				fall, started from her seat, and throwing her arms round him, almost carried him to
				the sofa.
"No, no, my poor Edward!" she said, "do not go away. Stay with those who love and
				pity you! Poor Michael is dead, Edward, and we must all try to support your
				mother under the dreadful news."
"How do you know he is dead?" cried Edward, starting up, and looking almost sternly
				at his benefactress. "How do you know that they have not hid him away where you
				cannot find him, that they may torture him, and work him to the bone, when there is
				nobody by to see?"

"I know that he is dead but too well, Edward," replied Mary, gently. "I have brought
				home with me a little girl who worked in the same factory, and who knew him well. He
				died of an infectious fever that killed many, many more. I am going to take this
				little girl with me to your mother, Edward, that she may question her, if she wishes
				it, about poor Michael, and I wish you to go with us, my dear boy; it is better that
				your poor mother should have you with her."
"You are going to tell mother?" said the boy with a shudder.
"Yes, Edward! — It must be done, and the sooner it is over the better. Your mother is
				a good woman, and a pious Christian, my dear boy. She will know and feel that all
				that can befall her is the will of God; and when she remembers this, she will rise
				above her sorrow, and thinking of the better world hereafter, will be able to say,
				'His will be done!'"
"Yes, ma'am — if it does not kill her first," answered Edward.
"Indeed, I think a great deal will depend on you, dear Edward, as to her manner of
				bearing it. If she sees you sink, be sure she will sink too; but if you make her
				feel that she has still a beloved child to live for, to whom life may yet be a
				blessing, she will cease to repine for the loss of one child, for the sake of making
				the other happy."
Edward slowly and silently shook his head; but after the melancholy silence of a
				minute or two, he said, "I will do my best, ma'am."
The scene which followed beside the bed of the poor widow, was one of such deep, but
				patient sorrow, as left an impression never to be forgotten on the minds of those
				who witnessed it. Mary's counsel had not been thrown away upon Edward. The boy
				displayed both a delicacy and firmness of character beyond his years, and above his
				education. No ordinary topics of consolation were clumsily uttered to redeem his
				pledge to Mary, nor did he affect a stoical indifference which he could not feel;
				but with gentle endearments he drew the mourning mother to think of him, and there
				was healing, as well as agony, in the tears she shed upon his bosom.
Of all this Fanny was a silent, but deeply-moved spectator. The widow gave her one
				earnest look when Mary said, "This little girl was the last person who spoke to
				Michael before he was laid on the sick bed from whence he never rose, and she seems
				to have loved him dearly."
One long earnest look was turned upon her when this was said, but no word was spoken
				to her, for the time was not yet come when the bereaved mother could seek comfort in
				any thing. Nevertheless, when Miss Brotherton rose to go, and pressing the hand of
				the poor sufferer in her own, promised to pay her another visit soon, Mrs. Armstrong
				murmured in her ear, "I should like to see that little girl again, when I can bear
				to name him." Mary nodded her assent, and left the mother and son to exchange
				thoughts and feelings, which, when deep and genuine, must ever be held sacred from
				every unkindred eye.
 Most watchfully did Mary attend to this poor pensioner; and many were the hours
				during which she sat, reading the book of life beside  her bed. By
				degrees, too, the bereaved mother did bear to name her lost darling to Fanny
				Fletcher; and having once listened to the sweet tones of her gentle voice, as she
				related all she had heard him say, all he had seemed to feel, and all he had seemed
				to think, the poor woman grew so enamoured of the uneventful tale, that she wearied
				not of making her repeat it. For days together Fanny would beg to be left beside
				her, while Edward resumed his place in the school; and Miss Brotherton often
				thought, when she drove to Hoxley-lane in the evenings, to bring back her little
					Protégée , that she had never chanced to witness so pretty a specimen
				of female tenderness and pity, as this lovely little girl exhibited, while
				ministering to the poor crippled woman, whose only claim upon her love was, that she
				wanted it — a species of claim, by the by, that is very rarely made in vain upon any
				uncorrupted female heart. 
With every want prevented, soothed by the most generous kindness, attended with the
				most watchful love, and cheered by a greater appearance of reviving health in the
				boy that she had thought crippled for life, than she had ever ventured to hope for,
				it might have been expected that the widow Armstrong would, in some degree, have
				forgotten passed sufferings, and have once more looked forward with hope. But no, it
				could not be! This last, this heaviest of all her sorrows came too late to be
				wrestled with, as others had been; and though her meek nature seemed so peacefully
				resigned, that there was more pleasure than pain in watching over her, she was, in
				truth, dying of a worn-out spirit and a broken heart.
By some means or other, the news that little Michael Armstrong was dead, reached
				Dowling Lodge. Sir Matthew knit his brows — wondered how the devil any body could
				have got tidings of him, but said nothing. To all the rest of the family, save one,
				the intelligence was too unimportant to be listened to at all; but to that one, to
				the already conscience-stricken and repentant Martha, it was a heavy blow! Most
				miserable, indeed, had been her state of mind for the last few months; from the day
				of her painful, but useless visit to Miss Brotherton, her eyes had been, in a great
				degree, opened to the hard and avaricious nature of her father's character. Like a
				person excluded from the light of the sun, and seeing only by the delusive glare of
				an unsteady lamp, Martha had passed her whole life in mistaking the nature and the
				value of almost every object around her. The language of Mary Brotherton had shot
				with a painful and unwelcome brightness upon the dim and uncertain twilight of her
				moral perceptions; and the unhappy girl learned to know that the only being who had
				ever seemed to love her, or whom she had ever ventured to love, was one that her
				better reason shrunk from, and her sober judgment condemned.
 Yet still he was her father, and still she loved him, and gladly, joyfully, would
				she have given her young life, could she thereby have changed his love of gold, for
				love of mercy. Sometimes she thought that time and age would teach him the
				hollowness of his present pursuits, and that if she never left him, but ever stood
				ready at his side  to watch some favourable moment, she might have the
				surpassing joy of seeing his heart open to the truth, and in a state to permit her
				helping to lead him to efficient repentance, and the all-merciful forgiveness of
				God. It was impossible but that such thoughts and feelings must separate her, more
				than ever, from the rest of her family, and she had already pretty generally
				received the epithet of methodistical , from the whole neighbourhood; but
				she hailed it as a blessing, and without a shadow of religious enthusiasm, beyond
				what was almost inevitable under the circumstances, and with no sectarian views or
				notions whatever, poor Martha gladly sheltered herself under the imputation of both
				in order to avoid joining in scenes of amusement for which she had no relish. 
In such a state of mind it was natural enough that Martha should deem a visit to the
				bereaved mother a penance which it was her duty to perform (though it was more
				painful to her, perhaps, than almost any other to which she could have been
				subjected), and she did perform it accordingly. She found the poor sufferer, whose
				eye she dreaded to meet, sinking fast into peace and rest, that never more could be
				disturbed. Miss Brotherton and Fanny were both with her; a bible was in the hands of
				the former, and Mrs. Armstrong's countenance, though greatly more pinched and pallid
				than she had ever before seen it, expressed a tranquil calmness which it was
				impossible to contemplate without pleasure.
But, alas! for poor Martha! she had the pang of seeing this consoled and consoling
				look suddenly changed to an expression of intense suffering, the moment her own
				person met the poor woman's eye. They had never seen each other since the fatal
				morning on which Martha had so innocently persuaded her to sign the articles of her
				boy's apprenticeship, and the recollection of that scene, and all its consequences,
				could not so suddenly come upon one, reduced already to almost the last stage of
				weakness, without shaking her terribly. The distended eye, the open mouth, the
				heaving breast, all spoke a degree of agitation, which in her condition was
				frightfully alarming; and Mary, who dreaded lest the calmness of her last moments
				should be disturbed, hastily turned to the intruder, and said, "Go, go! — the sight
				of you will kill her!"
Though there was no more of harshness in this, than the urgent circumstances of the
				case seemed to call for, Mary Brotherton would have rather died than utter it, could
				she have guessed the pang it gave to the already wounded heart of poor Martha. She
				made no reply; but, fixing on the victim of her most innocent delusion, a look, just
				long enough to impress the terrible expression of her countenance upon her own heart
				for ever, she turned away, and reached her splendid home in a state of mind that
				seemed fearfully to verify the annunciation, "He will visit the sins of the fathers
				upon the children."
 That day was the last of the widow's life, and it is probable it might have been so,
				even if Martha Dowling had not made her unfortunate visit; but the coincidence was
				fatal to the poor girl's peace, for the anxious inquiries she made respecting her,
				brought the intelligence of  her death, and the time of it, with
				sufficient accuracy to leave no doubt on Martha's mind, that the event had been
				accelerated by her appearance. 
Happily, however, for those who tenderly watched her last moments, the widow
				Armstrong's gentle nature permitted her not long to suffer from the irritation which
				the presence of Martha produced, and many hours before she closed her eyes for ever,
				she expressed her sorrow for having yielded so weakly to feelings which she had
				hoped were altogether conquered; assuring Mary (who never left her) that she
				acquitted the young lady of all intention to deceive her, and that the shock she
				felt from seeing her, only proceeded from the vivid recollections her appearance
				awakened.
Unhappily, however, it was long ere this healing assurance reached poor Martha; for
				Miss Brotherton, who was far from guessing its importance to her, had decided upon
				having no further intercourse with the Dowling family: a resolution which would
				never have been taken had her last interview with Martha at Milford Park ended more
				pleasantly. But it had been already so long acted upon, that it would have been
				equally awkward and disagreeable to break through it; and Martha long continued in
				the terrible persuasion that she had been accessory to the death of both mother and
				son.
 The loss of the only relatives he had ever known, following as they did so closely
				on each other, made Mary tremble for the health of Edward. She had watched the
				affecting close of the poor widow's life with all the tender feeling such a
				spectacle was calculated to excite in such a heart as hers. She had mourned for
				Michael for many reasons, and mourned sincerely; but she had hardly known the boy,
				and it was her sympathy with the sorrow of others, rather than her own, which caused
				the event to touch her so deeply. But to Edward she had become attached with so much
				fondness, and he had inspired such a feeling of wondering admiration in her mind by
				the extraordinary faculties he displayed, and the justness and uprightness of every
				thought and feeling, that to watch over his health and welfare had become nearly the
				first object of her isolated existence. The few months which had elapsed since the
				whole system of his life had been changed from all that was most injurious to
				health, to a mode of living in every way conducive to its recovery, had produced a
				more favourable and decisive effect on him, than could have been reasonably hoped
				for in the time; and it was a remarkable evidence of the powerful influence which
				such a change produces on the frame, that not all the sorrow and suffering which
				Miss Brotherton's intelligence brought, or the heart-wringing loss which followed
				it, could check the active energy of benignant nature in restoring health, where all
				she required for it was given, and all that had hitherto impeded her kindly
				operations was removed. Yet Edward was still lame, though so much less so than he
				had been, that his benefactress could not help indulging a hope that time and
				judicious treatment might remove the infirmity altogether. For some reason or other
				Miss Brotherton entertained no very particular respect for the medical practitioners
				of her immediate  neighbourhood, and for several months after her
				return she contented herself with following Mr. Bell's prescriptions, for friction
				and moderate exercise, without calling in any medical assistance at all. But though
				the improvement that followed was very perceptible, it was not rapid, and the idea
				of London advice suggested itself, as the most satisfactory mode of ascertaining at
				once whether a perfect recovery might be hoped for; information which it was very
				desirable she should obtain, before she decided in what way she should bring him up.
				Since the death of his mother, Milford Park had been Edward's home, and the orphan
				boy's hold on Miss Brotherton's warm heart had been greatly increased by the
				opportunities this gave her of more frequent intercourse with her. In truth, though
				he still attended the school for an hour or two every morning, by far the more
				important portion of his education went on under her own eye, and, as well as that
				of his little companion Fanny, was beginning to take a form and extent totally
				different from what she had at first intended for either of them. Ideas respecting
				them both, began by degrees to arise in her mind, which she at first endeavoured to
				resist, as being too much out of the usual course to be safely indulged in; but "use
				lessens marvel," and the notion of making a man of learning of Edward, and a woman
				of fortune of Fanny, which once and again she had rejected, as too romantic and
				absurd, gradually grew into an habitual theme of meditation on which her fancy
				delighted to fix itself. 
Mary Brotherton was at that time about twenty-two years old, extremely pretty, and
				moreover almost childishly young-looking for her age; and whatever she might have
				brought herself to think of it, most others would very naturally have deemed her
				adopting a boy of twelve, and a girl of eleven, a most outrageously preposterous and
				imprudent act. But her situation was one in most respects quite out of the common
				way, and she every day felt it more impossible that she could continue to endure the
				station of one of the magnates of a manufacturing neighbourhood, with all eyes fixed
				upon every thing she did, and her whole heart and soul recoiling from companionship
				with the only persons whom her neighbours and watchers would deem fit to be her
				particular friends.
 The heart of this isolated girl was so clingingly affectionate that it is probable
				she would, under almost any other circumstances, have at least loved the beautiful
				mansion in which she had passed the greatest part of her life, and felt the trees
				and flowers that adorned it to be as companions, and familiar friends; but a
				thousand painful thoughts were mingled with the consciousness that she was mistress
				of that fair domain; and the very fact that the education she felt inclined to
				bestow upon the two orphans would bring down upon her the criticisms, and probably
				the reprobation, of the whole neighbourhood, making it very desirable that the
				extraordinary project should be carried into execution elsewhere, was in her
				estimation more in its favour, than agains it. When, in addition to all this, she
				succeeded in persuading herself, from some of her miscellaneous reading, that there
				were German baths which might assist the restoration of Edward's limbs, and  that it was her duty to consult the most approved authorities upon his
				case, the decision to leave Milford Park, and remove to London, was at no great
				distance. 
Had her valued friend and counsellor, Mr. Bell, led her to believe that all the
				wealth she had, if thrown back among the class from which it was drawn, could have
				sufficed to remedy the evils under which they groaned, she was quite capable of
				stripping herself to her last shilling for the purpose; but he knew better, and he
				taught her to know better too; and having convinced himself that her best chance of
				happiness, as well as her best opportunity of doing good, would be in yielding to
				the affection which "her boy and girl" had inspired, he promised to assist her
				projected removal, by seeing that the orders she left, respecting her property, were
				faithfully executed; and, about eight months after the death of Mrs. Armstrong, the
				heiress left her parks and gardens, her splendid mansion and all its gorgeous
				appurtenances, to attend the orphan boy to London.
The consultation which, immediately after her arrival there, took place upon the case
				of Edward, was productive of, perhaps, the greatest pleasure Mary had ever known;
				for the sentence unanimously pronounced was, that the limbs of the boy were in a
				state of progress towards perfect recovery, the weakness and distortion brought on
				by his employment, not having lasted long enough to produce any deformity, capable
				of resisting the tendency of nature to recover herself, if not impeded by any fresh
				unhealthy influence. That any such should arise to disappoint her hopes was not
				likely; all that was required for him being good air, regular and moderate exercise,
				wholesome food, and abstinence from all violent exertion for the next year or two.
				As to her question respecting German baths, the answer was less unanimous; two
				gentlemen being of opinion that they would do no good at all; two that it was
				doubtful whether the case would be affected by them or not; and one that great
				benefit might probably ensue. But as all were of opinion that change of air was
				desirable, and as a pretty strong inclination to try fresh fields and pastures new
				seconded this judgment, Miss Brotherton determined to start for the Rhine. Mrs.
				Tremlett declared that she had not the slightest objection to foreign parts;
				Edward's heart swelled with an ecstasy made up of gratitude, hope, curiosity, and
				the delicious exhilaration attendant upon returning health; while Fanny looked
				around her, and listened to every one whose words referred to the expedition, with a
				very delightful consciousness of being wide awake, but not without some fear that
				she was dreaming, nevertheless.
Such was the party that filled the travelling-carriage of Miss Brotherton, while an
				English maid, a French footman, and a German courier, formed her suite.
Nothing, certainly, could be well more whimsical than the party with which she had
				thus surrounded herself; but this mattered little, since she was pleased with it —
				and we must leave her in the full enjoyment of a whole host of delightful feelings,
				while we return to follow the fortunes of poor Michael.

