
 CHAPTER XIV. 
MARY BROTHERTON CONTINUES SICK IN HEART AND MIND — BUT IS ROUSED AND CHEERED BY HER
				OWN STEADFAST WILL — AN O'ER TRUE TALE.

				It was not till the second dinner-bell had rung, that Mrs. Tremlett
				ventured to seek Mary in her chamber.
 The worthy woman was perfectly aware that the naturally strong 
				feelings of her young mistress had been violently affected by the scene they had
				witnessed, and though far perhaps from comprehending the effect it had produced on
				her mind, she was conscious that she should do no good by obtruding herself
				uncalled-for upon her retirement. 
But when the signal that always brought them together had passed unheeded, she became
				uneasy, and availing herself of the privilege that long and well-requited affection
				gave, she knocked at her door and called upon her name.
Miss Brotherton answered the summons immediately; but her withdrawing the bolt of her
				door, as well as the unchanged appearance of her dress, showed that she had not been
				occupied in preparing for dinner.
"You are not aware how late it is, my dear child. The second dinner-bell has rung!"
				said Mrs. Tremlett looking anxiously in her pale face.
"Has it?" replied the young lady; "indeed, I beg your pardon — but I will not keep
				you waiting, I will not dress to-day if you will excuse it."
"No, no, my dear, that won't do. Never mind about the dinner I will tell them to take
				it out again."
"Indeed I do not wish to dress," said Mary languidly. "Morgan will tease me by asking
				what dress I choose to wear and fifty questions besides. Let me go down as I am,
				nurse Tremlett."
"You shan't have Morgan at all dear. The dressing will refresh you my darling child;
				and it won't be the first time Mary, that I have done all that you wanted in that
				way. There — just sit down on the sofa for one minute, and I will speak about the
				dinner, and be back again."
It was very passively that Mary did as she was bid, and without another word of
				remonstrance sat down and awaited the return of her old friend. She was indeed
				completely exhausted, the scene she had witnessed had not touched only, it had wrung
				her heart; and the hours she had passed since, were not such as to bring her spirits
				back to their ordinary tone. It was not alone, the melancholy spectacle of a
				fellow-creature passing from life to death, which had thus strongly affected her —
				it was the frightful degradation of the group of human beings who had gazed upon it
				with her. It was the horrible recollection of the dying woman's statement respecting
				the lacerated flesh of her child — and it was the filth, the misery, the famine, and
				the vice that she had been warned of, and had seen, which had set her powerful,
				healthy, unprejudiced, and unselfish mind, to meditate upon the state of things
				which had produced it.
 It was hardly possible for any one to be more profoundly ignorant upon the subject
				which had thus seized upon her heart, than was Mary Brotherton. On the question of
				negro slavery she had from her very earliest infancy heard a great deal, for her
				father was an anti-(black)-slavery man, who subscribed to the African society, and
				the missionary fund; drank Mr. Wilberforce's health after dinner whenever he had
				company at his table; and while his own mills daily sent millions of groans to be
				registered in heaven from joyless young hearts  and aching infant
				limbs, he rarely failed to despatch with nearly equal regularity (all booked for the
				same region) a plentiful portion of benevolent lamentations over the sable sons of
				Africa, all uttered comfortably from a soft arm-chair, while digestion was gently
				going on, and his well-fed person in a state of the most perfect enjoyment. On the
				slavery question therefore Mary really knew a great deal, and felt concerning it as
				every true Christian must feel. But as to every thing concerning the nature of the
				labour performed in the factories by whose chimneys her pleasant park was surrounded
				— the age, sex, or condition, of the labourers — the proportion of their daily
				existence devoted to toil — the degree of care bestowed on their immortal souls — or
				the quantum of enjoyment permitted to them by their earthly masters, while awaiting
				a summons to the presence of their heavenly one — of all this Mary Brotherton was as
				ignorant as the sleek lapdog that dozed upon her hearth-rug. But this
				carefully-adjusted cloud was now passing away from her intellect for ever. If "Where
				ignorance is bliss, it is folly to be wise," that folly had seized upon her; for no
				longer was she destined to taste the doubtful joy of luxury that had never looked
				upon the seamy side of existence, or dreamed that the means that supplied its
				exquisite, yet almost unnoted refinements, were earned by the agony of labouring
				infants. But though this, worse than fools paradise, was thus closed upon her for
				ever, she felt a power and energy of purpose awaked within her heart, that she
				thanked God upon her bended knees for giving, though she trembled as she received
				it. And never did sainted nun breathe purer or more earnest vows of self-devotion to
				heaven, than did this ardent-spirited girl to the examination, and, if possible, to
				the relief of the misery she had at length learned to know existed round her. 
But like most other persons when occupied by a really profound emotion, Mary felt no
				inclination to talk about it. She had not indeed the slightest intention to conceal
				any thing she did from Mrs. Tremlett, but on the contrary hoped eventually to gain
				much assistance from her strong practical good sense; but she could not discuss, she
				could not reason, she could not prate about it now, and she went through the
				business of the dinner-table so tranquilly, that her watchful companion felt
				rejoiced, though a little surprised, at her recovered composure.
Soon after they retired from table, Mary proposed a walk in the grounds, and as they
				wandered together through the richly-scented flower-garden, and then seated
				themselves where the cool breeze of evening brought the tempered fragrance to their
				senses more delightfully still, the feverish feeling of tightness across her
				forehead, seemed to relax, and as if to apologise for the silent fit that had seized
				her, Mary looked kindly into the face of her old friend, and then bent forward and
				kissed her.
"Bless you, my dear love! you feel better now, don't you?" said the affectionate old
				woman.

"Yes, dear nurse — much better. The air is delicious to-night."
"It was too much for you, my dear child, that dreadful scene this morning! My dear
				Miss Brotherton you must be reasonable, indeed you must, or instead of making me the
				very happiest being in the world as you do now, my life will become one of continual
				terror and alarm. You can do no good, my dear, in putting yourself in such places as
				we were in to-day."
Mary reflected for a moment before she answered her, and then said, "Are you quite
				sure, nurse Tremlett that a young woman without any natural ties whatever, and with
				a fortune so large as mine, can do no good by making themselves acquainted with the
				condition of their poor neighbours?"
"Oh! no, Miss Mary dear, I never said that. You do a great deal of good by putting
				the gardener's, and under-gardener's children to school; and by all the help you
				give them and every body else that works about the place, and I dearly love to see
				you do it, and I have no doubt in the world, that it keeps many from sending their
				children to the mills, and it will bring a blessing upon your head, my dear. But
				that's nothing to do with poking yourself into such a place as you got into to-day.
				You never heard any thing so dreadful as what Sir Matthew Dowling was telling me
				about them, before you came out the first time."
Mary shuddered, as she heard his name.
"You will promise me dear, won't you, never to go to such a horrid place again,"
				resumed the old woman.
"We will not talk about that now, my dear Mrs. Tremlett, I want you to tell me what
				you think I could do that would be most useful for those poor young girls. I know
				what it is to lose a mother, dear nurse, and it makes me feel for them."
"God bless your kind heart, my dear! That is just like you, and I wish with all my
				heart and soul, that you lived somewhere among the farming people, for there you
				would have some reward for your charity. But God help me! If one half of what Sir
				Matthew told me is true, these horrid girls are worse than it is decent to tell you,
				and the father's as bad."
"But don't you think my good friend, considering that I am more than come to years of
				discretion, and that you are a good deal older still, don't you think it might be as
				well for us, in a case of such importance as this, to see and judge for ourselves,
				instead of taking Sir Matthew Dowling's word for it?" said the heiress, while a
				slight frown contracted her brow.
"Why yes, Miss Mary — only it is so difficult to come at the truth," replied Mrs.
				Tremlett.
"Surely there is one truth that it is easy enough to come at — I suppose you have no
				doubt upon your mind that these people are in dreadful distress?"
"Wicked people almost always are, Miss Mary."
 "Then it is my duty Mrs. Tremlett," replied Mary almost sternly, "to endeavour, at
				least in the case of such very young people, to  amend, or prevent
				their wickedness. It would be a frightful sin — worse in me, burdened as I feel
				myself with riches earned by the labour of such miserable little creatures as those
				whom we saw to-day — if I should look upon such utter destitution, let it be mixed
				up with what frailty it may, and pass along on the other side. I will not do it,
				Mrs. Tremlett, so never ask it more. At present all I know is, that I have seen
				misery. Its cause I have yet to learn — This may be the work of time, and I do not
				mean to wait till I have acquired such knowledge before I relieve the want and woe I
				have witnessed. I left word that the eldest girl was to come up to me. She will
				hardly delay doing so, poor creature, therefore I must again postpone my intended
				visit to Hoxley-lane, for I will not go out to-morrow till I have seen her." 
All this was very contrary to Mrs. Tremlett's judgment, for she had a very natural
				dread lest the warm heart of her young charge, should be imposed upon by the
				designing and depraved. Nevertheless there was a feeling of respect that came upon
				her involuntarily, and as it were unawares, as she listened to the firmly-spoken
				purpose of the young girl whom as yet she could hardly persuade herself was more
				than a child.
In pursuance of the resolution thus declared, Miss Brotherton did not stir from home
				during the whole of the following day. Lady Clarissa Shrimpton, Mrs. Gabberly, and
				one or two more distant neighbours called, but she was denied to them all, from the
				fear that her anticipated interview with Sophy Drake, might be interrupted. But the
				precaution was unnecessary; the long morning wore away without the girl's making her
				appearance, and it was not till past eight o'clock in the evening, that a servant
				entered the drawing-room, and informed Miss Brotherton that a very dirty girl and
				two little children were at the gate, who said she had given them orders to
				call.
"It is very true," replied the young lady. "These are the people I told you to let
				in." The man retired in silence, but paid himself for his forbearance by the
				vehemence of his wondering commentary in the servants' hall.
Mary Brotherton was sitting at an open window, with the last light of evening falling
				upon her and the volume she held in her hand.
She had been making what proved but an idle effort to read, even when that light was
				stronger; but now, the volume hung listlessly from her hand, while her eyes, fixed
				on the brightly tinted vapours in the west, seemed to look athwart them, and like
				the worthy gentleman on the platform before Tilbury Fort, to gaze on many things,
				that were " not yet in sight ." Mrs. Tremlett, with the happy indifference
				to the increasing twilight peculiar to the sisterhood of knitters, continued at
				another window to manoeuvre her bright weapons, and vary the successive fronts of
				her phalanx with no louder note of command, than was occasionally produced by the
				gentle clicking of her needles against each other. It was nearly an hour since a
				word had been exchanged between them, but now as the footman left the room, Mary
				turned towards her, and said — "This is poor Sophy, Mrs. Tremlett. Come and sit near
				me, will you? I want you to hear all she says."
 Her old friend moved her place accordingly, and had just seated 
				herself by the side of Miss Brotherton when the door again opened, and Sophy Drake,
				leading a little sister in each hand, entered the drawing-room. 
It required no force of contrast to render the miserable, squalid, unhealthy
				appearance of these poor girls most painfully striking; if it had, the elegant
				apartment into which they now entered would have furnished it. Mary's heart smote
				her as she gazed upon them. "So young — so pretty too!" thought she, "and yet so
				painful to look upon!"
The eldest of the three looked languid, weary, spirit-broken, and inanimate, hardly
				throwing a glance at the novel objects around her, and looking more fit to lie down
				and rest the aching limbs she slowly dragged along, than to indulge any feeling of
				curiosity. The little ones had the same unsteady tired gait, but they looked up with
				an expression of wonder, and almost of awe, on every object as they passed
				along."
"How are you all, my poor girls?" said Mary kindly, as they drew near to her. The
				eldest girl dropped a courtesy but made no audible reply.
"It is so sad and hopeless a grief to lose a mother," continued Miss Brotherton,
				"that I can say not one word to check your grief. But if there is any thing that I
				can do to make you more comfortable, I shall be glad to do it. You seem all of you
				greatly in want of clothes. How comes that, when so many of the family work, and get
				wages?"
"The wages isn't enough to buy us bread, ma'am," replied the eldest girl, and help
				pay lodging rent.
This statement seemed so very incredible, that Mary felt a painful conviction that
				the young creature before her was not speaking truth. She remained silent for a
				minute or two, and then said, "I suppose when you say bread, you mean food of all
				kinds? — and tea, and sugar, and butter, and so on?" said Mary.
"I have not had the taste of meat in my mouth for above these two years," replied
				Sophy colouring, and in a voice that seemed to indicate something like indignation —
				"and as to sugar in our tea, or butter on our bread, no factory child is brought up
				to it."
Mary coloured too. She longed to get accurate information respecting their manner of
				living, and the reasons why incessant labour failed to supply the necessaries of
				life; but she knew not well how to set about it.
"Do not be angry with me, Sophy," said she, "if I ask questions that seem unfeeling
				and very ignorant. I really know little or nothing about the manner in which poor
				people live, and I want to know. Not merely from curiosity, but because I should
				like to help them if I could."
"And God knows we want help bad enough, ma'am," replied the girl, while tears started
				to her eyes. "Father has got the money you gave yesterday, and we shall never hear
				any more of that."
"Is he a bad father to you then?"

"Not bad to beat us. But he drinks terrible."
"Then I suppose his wages go partly in that?"
"His wages, and our'n too, ma'am. He baint always able to get work. The old hands are
				often out, and then in course he takes our'n."
"Then if he was a temperate, steady man, you would do a great deal better?"
"In course we should, ma'am. But mother said he took to it, as most of the others do
				in all the mills, on account of hating to come home so, when we young ones comes in
				from work. I have heard mother say that father cried when I, that was the biggest,
				com'd home first beaten and bruised with the strap and the billy-roller."
"What is the billy-roller, Sophy," inquired Miss Brotherton, in an accent
				denoting considerable curiosity.
"It's a long stout stick, ma'am, that's used often and often to beat the little ones
				employed in the mills when their strength fails — when they fall asleep, or stand
				still for a minute."
"Do you mean, that the children work till they are so tired as to fall asleep
				standing?"
"Yes, ma'am. Dozens and dozens of 'em every day in the year except Sundays, is
				strapped, and kicked, and banged by the billy-roller, because they falls
				asleep."
"But, surely, parents are greatly to blame, to let children young enough for that, go
				to work at all?"
"They must just starve, ma'am, if they didn't," replied the girl.
"How many years have you worked in the factory yourself, Sophy?"
"Just twelve, ma'am, this last spring."
"And how old are you?"
"Seventeen, ma'am."
"Twelve from seventeen? — You mean to say that you began to work at the factory when
				you were five years old?" said Mary, with some appearance of incredulity.
"I was five years and three months, ma'am," answered the girl firmly.
Miss Brotherton looked at Mrs. Tremlett, but perceived no appearance of incredulity
				on her countenance. "Is this possible, Mrs. Tremlett?" said she.
"Yes, my dear, I believe that it is very common," replied the old woman. "I have
				often heard it spoken of among the servants."
"Have you ever been at school, Sophy?"
"Yes, ma'am. Afore father changed his mill and took work under Sir Matthew we all —
				father, mother, Grace, Dick, and all, worked for the great Quaker gentleman, Joseph
				Tell, and he had a school in the factory for Sundays."
"And you learnt to read there of course?"
"No, ma'am, I didn't;" replied the girl, shaking her head.
"Whose fault was that, my dear? — Surely if you were put to school, you ought to have
				learnt to read!"

"I couldn't, ma'am, I couldn't — and it was not my fault neither," replied the girl
				with considerable agitation.
"We was often and often kept going till twelve o'clock on a Saturday night, and when
				the Sunday comed we couldn't sit down upon the bench, neither Grace, nor Dick, nor
				I, without falling dead asleep. 'Twas the only right good sleep we had, that before
				Sundays I mean, 'cause father was always obligated to wake us every other morning
				afore five o'clock, summer and winter, and earlier than that too, when we worked
				night-work. So keeping our eyes open Sundays wasn't possible, 'cause they didn't
				strap us."
"Then there is not one of you can read?"
"No, ma'am, not one."
"Can your father read?"
"Yes, ma'am, he can. That is he could, he says, when he was younger, but he has
				almost forgot now. He says, in his young days, the machinery improvements was
				nothing like what they be now, and that the piecer children hadn't not half so far
				or so fast to walk as they have now, and he learnt to read of his own mother when he
				comed home at nights."
"And why doesn't he do the same for his children, as his mother did for him?" said
				Miss Brotherton.
"Because we couldn't keep our eyes open for two minutes together when we comes home
				at night. I have seen poor mother, as is dead and gone, lay little Becky here, down
				upon the bundle of straw that she and I sleeps upon, 'cause she couldn't keep up to
				eat her supper when she comed from the mill — and I have seen her put the sopped
				bread in her mouth when she was so dead asleep, that she couldn't get her to swallow
				it — and how could she or the rest of us learn to read, ma'am?"
Mary made no reply, but sat for a moment or two, with her eyes fixed on the ground,
				in very painful uncertainty as to what she could say or do, that could be of
				effectual service to the miserable group before her. She felt, that though poor
				Sophy might perhaps be telling nothing but the truth in this dismal description of
				her wretched family, it was not from her that any general information could be
				obtained. It was, as she thought, utterly impossible that it could apply to the
				hundreds of thousands whom she had heard it stated, as a matter of national pride,
				by some of her rich neighbours, were employed in the factories of England and
				Scotland. A moment's thought sufficed to convince her (as it has done multitudes of
				amiable-minded ladies and gentlemen besides), that it was perfectly impossible such
				horrors could exist on the glorious soil of Britain, unless indeed, as in the case
				before her, the unhappy drunkenness of the father plunged his helpless family into a
				degree of poverty, which nothing, perhaps, but the unnatural degree of labour
				described by this poor motherless girl, could avert.
 "I must clothe them all," thought she, "and put the little ones to school. Perhaps,
				too, I may find a place in my own kitchen for poor Sophy. But as to learning from
				her any thing that can be depended  upon respecting the system by which
				the factory labour is regulated, that is quite hopeless." 
She felt, however, that the weary-looking group ought not to return empty-handed
				after their walk, with no reward for it but her promises; and turning to Mrs.
				Tremlett, asked her in a half whisper what she could give them, that might be made
				immediately useful in the way of clothing; their garments being in a condition that
				it was painful to her to behold.
"You might give them that piece of dark cotton, my dear, that you bought the other
				day for the coachman's children. There is no great hurry you know about them, for
				they are not to go to school till next month."
"Very true. — It is just the thing," replied Mary; and having rung the bell and
				ordered her maid to appear, she gave orders to have it brought to her.
"I do not exactly know how much there is of it, Sophy," said she, putting it into her
				hand, "but enough, I think, for one or two of you, and I will get more of the same
				sort when next I go to Ashleigh."
Sophy took it with a courtesy; but having held it for a moment said, "Please, ma'am,
				this won't be no use to me, unless I may pawn part to get the rest made."
"Can you not make a gown for yourself and your sisters, my good girl?" demanded
				Mary.
"Please, ma'am, I never was learnt to sew," replied the girl, blushing.
More convinced than ever, that her first effort to assist the poor operatives, had
				led her by an unlucky chance into a family, whose unthrifty habits made it almost
				hopeless to attempt doing them any essential service, Mary drew forth her purse, and
				giving half-a-crown to each of them, took the useless material back, saying, "I will
				send you some more decent clothes to wear, Sophy — and then we must think what
				further can be done for you and these poor little ones. But, indeed, my dear girl, I
				greatly fear that unless your habits are improved, and that you can be taught to use
				your needle like all other decent young women, in making and mending what is given
				you, it will be impossible for me, or for any one to do you much good."
Poor Sophy Drake looked both sorry and ashamed as she listened to this reproof, — but
				she attempted not to answer it, and again courtesying as she received the money, she
				turned away without again speaking, and left the room.
"This is very, very dreadful! nurse Tremlett," said Mary, as soon as they were alone.
				"I could not have believed that it was possible in such a country as England, to
				find human beings in a state of such degraded ignorance as that poor girl. Did you
				ever meet with any thing like it before?"
 "I can't say, Miss Mary, that I ever before came within reach of hearing a
				factory-girl speak so much as I have heard to-day. But I can't pretend to say that I
				am a bit surprised. I told you, my dear, from  the beginning, that you
				would only get yourself into trouble, and do no good. From the very first of my
				coming to this country, which was but a month before I came to live with your mamma,
				I always heard the same history of the factory folks. And you know, my dear, what
				every body says, must be true." 
Mary, as she listened to this, looked harassed, puzzled, and wretched. "But is it not
				something unheard of in the history of the world," said she, "that thousands and
				hundreds of thousands of persons should exist, all labouring, young and old, with
				unceasing industry to support themselves, and that this their painful labour should
				subject them to such habits of inevitable ignorance and degradation, that all decent
				and respectable persons must be taught to shun them?"
"It does seem very hard upon them, my dear, to be sure," replied her companion; "but
				as to why it is so, I am sure it is impossible for us to guess. It must be
				partly their own faults of course; but at any rate, my dear, I wish you would not go
				on, working yourself up so. I can't bear to see you, Miss Mary, looking vexed and
				miserable for what you can't help the least bit in the world. And besides, my dear,
				I must say, that it is nowise right for a young lady like you to run the risk of
				getting near very bad people indeed, whose ways I don't like to talk to you about. I
				know you can't abide Sir Matthew Dowling, and I can't say I ever saw or heard of
				much to like in him; but for all that, there is not any good that I can see in
				disbelieving what he told us about these very people. He must know more about them
				than we can, and it was quite shocking I do assure you, Miss Mary, the things he
				told me. A great deal too bad to repeat, I promise you."
Mary burst into tears. "I am very unhappy, Mrs. Tremlett," said she, "and it is not
				putting faith in Sir Matthew Dowling that can make me less so. That I may be led to
				do many things from my great ignorance, which were I better informed I should not
				do, is very likely; and it is therefore my duty to obtain information upon this
				tremendous subject as speedily as possible. Would to God, my good friend, that you
				could give it me! but as you cannot, we will cease to speculate together upon what
				we neither of us understand. I am sorry that our awful adventure yesterday,
				prevented my purposed visit to the poor woman in Hoxley-lane. We both agreed, you
				know, that I could get no harm there; and I have an object in view in making that
				visit that I am sorry to have delayed. We will go there to-morrow, nurse Tremlett, —
				and so early in the morning, as to run no risk of meeting any of the fine folks who
				love to show themselves on the Ashleigh road."
Mary Brotherton did go early the following morning to Hoxley-lane. But her visit was
				too late, by exactly twenty-four hours.

