
WHIT MONDAY

Light shadows—hardly seen as such—
Crept softly o'er the summer land
In mute caresses, like the touch
Of some familiar hand.

"I want to give your work-people a treat," said Tremaine to Elisabeth, in the early
     summer.
"That is very nice of you; but this goes without saying, as you are always planning and doing
     something nice. I shall be very glad for our people to have a little pleasure, as at present
     the annual tea-meeting at East Lane Chapel seems to be their one and only dissipation; and
     although tea-meetings may be very well in their way, they hardly seem to fulfil one's ideal of
     human joy."
"Ah! you have touched upon a point to which I was coming," said Alan earnestly; "it is
     wonderful how often our minds jump together! Not only am I anxious to give the Osierfield
     people something more enjoyable than a tea-meeting—I also wish to eliminate the tea-meeting
     spirit from their idea of enjoyment."
"How do you mean?" It was noteworthy that while Elisabeth was always ready to teach
     Christopher, she was equally willing to learn from Alan.
     
"I mean that I want to show people that pleasure and religion have nothing to do with each
     other. It always seems to me such a mistake that the pleasures of the poor—the innocent
     pleasures, of course—are generally inseparable from religious institutions. If they attend a
     tea-party, they open it with prayer; if they are taken for a country drive, they sing hymns by
     the way."
"Oh! but I think they do this because they like it, and not because they are made to do it,"
     said Elisabeth eagerly.
"Not a bit of it; they do it because they are accustomed to do it, and they feel that it is
     expected of them. Religion is as much a part of their dissipation as evening dress is of ours,
     and just as much a purely conventional part; and I want to teach them to dissociate the two
     ideas in their own minds."
"I doubt if you will succeed, Mr. Tremaine."
"Yes, I shall; I invariably succeed. I have never failed in anything yet, and I never mean to
     fail. And I do so want to make the poor people enjoy themselves thoroughly. Of course, it is a
     good thing to have one's pills always hidden in jam; but it must be a miserable thing to belong
     to a section of society where one's jam is invariably full of pills."
Elisabeth smiled, but did not speak; Alan was the one person of her acquaintance to whom she
     would rather listen than talk.
"It is a morbid and unhealthy habit," he went on, "to introduce religion into everything, in
     the way that English people are so fond of doing. It decreases their pleasures by casting its
     shadow over purely human and natural joys; and it increases their sorrow and want by teaching
     them to lean upon
      some hypothetical Power, instead of trying to do the best that they can for
     themselves. Also it enervates their reasoning faculties; for nothing is so detrimental to one's
     intellectual strength as the habit of believing things which one knows to be impossible."
"Then don't you believe in religion of any kind?"
"Most certainly I do—in many religions. I believe in the religion of art and of science and
     of humanity, and countless more; in fact, the only religion I do not believe in is
     Christianity, because that spoils all the rest by condemning art as fleshly, science as untrue,
     and humanity as sinful. I want to bring the old Pantheism to life again, and to teach our
     people to worship beauty as the Greeks worshipped it of old; and I want you to help me."
Elisabeth gasped as Elisha might have gasped when Elijah's mantle fell upon him. She was as
     yet too young to beware of false prophets. "I should love to make people happy," she said;
     "there seems to be so much happiness in the world and so few that find it."
"The Greeks found it; therefore, why should not the English? I mean to teach them to find it,
     and I shall begin with your work-people on Whit Monday."
"What shall you do?" asked the girl, with intense interest.
"It is no good taking away old lamps until you are prepared to offer new ones in their place;
     therefore I shall not take away the consolations (so called) of religion until I have shown the
     people a more excellent way. I shall first show them nature, and then art—nature to arouse
     their highest instincts,
      and art to express the same; and I am convinced that after they have once been
     brought face to face with the beautiful thus embodied, the old faiths will lose the power to
     move them."
When Whit Monday came round, the throbbing heart of the Osierfield stopped beating, as it was
     obliged to stop on a bank-holiday; and the workmen, with their wives and sweethearts, were
     taken by Alan Tremaine in large brakes to Pembruge Castle, which the owner had kindly thrown
     open to them, at Alan's request, for the occasion.
It was a long drive and a wonderfully beautiful one, for the year was at its best. All the
     trees had put on their new summer dresses, and never a pair of them were of the same shade. The
     hedges were covered with a wreath of white May-blossom, and seemed like interminable drifts of
     that snow in summer which is as good news from a far country; and the roads were bordered by
     the feathery hemlock, which covered the face of the land as with a bridal veil.
"Isn't the world a beautiful place?" said Elisabeth, with a sigh of content, to Alan, who was
     driving her in his mail-phaeton. "I do hope all the people will see and understand how
     beautiful it is."
"They can not help seeing and understanding; beauty such as this is its own interpreter.
     Surely such a glimpse of nature as we are now enjoying does people more good than a hundred
     prayer-meetings in a stuffy chapel."
"Beauty slides into one's soul on a day like this, just as something—I forget what—slid into
     the soul of the Ancient Mariner; doesn't it?"
"Of course it does; and you will find that these people—now that they are brought face to
     face with
      it—will be just as ready to worship abstract beauty as ever the Greeks were. The
     fault has not been with the poor for not having worshipped beauty, but with the rich for not
     having shown them sufficient beauty to worship. The rich have tried to choke them off with
     religion instead, because it came cheaper and was less troublesome to produce."
"Then do you think that the love of beauty will elevate these people more and make them
     happier than Christianity has done?"
"Most assuredly I do. Had our climate been sunnier and the fight for existence less bitter, I
     believe that Christianity would have died out in England years ago; but the worship of sorrow
     will always have its attractions for the sorrowful; and the doctrine of renunciation will never
     be without its charm for those unfortunate ones to whom poverty and disease have stood
     sponsors, and have renounced all life's good things in their name before ever they saw the
     light. Man makes his god in his own image; and thus it comes to pass that while the strong and
     joyous Greek adored Zeus on Olympus, the anæmic and neurotic Englishman worships Christ on
     Calvary. Do you tell me that if people were happy they would bow down before a stricken and
     crucified God? Not they. And I want to make them so happy that they shall cease to have any
     desire for a suffering Deity."
"Well, you have made them happy enough for to-day, at any rate," said Elisabeth, as she
     looked up at him with gratitude and admiration. "I saw them all when they were starting, and
     there wasn't one face among them that hadn't joy written on every feature in capital
     letters."
"Then in that case they won't be troubling their
      minds to-day about their religion; they will save it for the gloomy days, as we
     save narcotics for times of pain. You may depend upon that."
"I'm not so sure: their religion is more of a reality to them than you think," Elisabeth
     replied.
While Alan was thus, enjoying himself in his own fashion, his guests were enjoying themselves
     in theirs; and as they drove through summer's fairyland, they, too, talked by the way.
"Eh! but the May-blossom's a pretty sight," exclaimed Caleb Bateson, as the big wagonettes
     rolled along the country roads. "I never saw it finer than it is this year—not in all the years
     I've lived in Mershire; and Mershire's the land for May-blossom."
"It do look pretty," agreed his wife. "I only wish Lucy Ellen was here to see it; she was
     always a one for the May-blossom. Why, when she was ever such a little girl she'd come home
     carrying branches of it bigger than herself, till she looked like nothing but a walking
     May-pole."
"Poor thing!" said Mrs. Hankey, who happened to be driving in the same vehicle as the
     Batesons, "she'll be feeling sad and homesick to see it all again, I'll be bound."
Lucy Ellen's mother laughed contentedly. "Folks haven't time to feel homesick when they've
     got a husband to look after; he soon takes the place of May-blossom, bless you!"
"You're in luck to see all your children married and settled before the Lord has been pleased
     to take you," remarked Mrs. Hankey, with envy in her voice.
"Well, I'm glad for the two lads to have somebody to look after them, I'm bound to say; I
     feel now as they've some one to air their shirts when I'm not there, for you never can trust a
     man to look after
      himself—never. Men have no sense to know what is good for 'em and what is bad for
     'em, poor things! But Lucy Ellen is a different thing. Of course I'm pleased for her to have a
     home of her own, and such nice furniture as she's got, too, and in such a good circuit; but
     when your daughter is married you don't see her as often as you want to, and it is no good
     pretending as you do."
"That's true," agreed Caleb Bateson, with a big sigh; "and I never cease to miss my little
     lass."
"She ain't no little lass now, Mr. Bateson," argued Mrs. Hankey; "Lucy Ellen must be forty,
     if she's a day."
"So she be, Mrs. Hankey—so she be; but she is my little lass to me, all the same, and always
     will be. The children never grow up to them as loves 'em. They are always our children, just as
     we are always the Lord's children; and we never leave off a-screening and a-sheltering o' them,
     any more than He ever leaves off a-screening and a-sheltering of us."
"I'm glad to hear as Lucy Ellen has married into a good circuit. Unless the Lord build the
     house we know how they labour in vain that build it; and the Lord can't do much unless He has a
     good minister to help Him. I don't deny as He may work through local preachers; but I
     like a regular superintendent myself, with one or more ministers under him."
"Oh! Lucy Ellen lives in one of the best circuits in the Connexion," said Mrs. Bateson
     proudly; "they have an ex-president as superintendent, and three ministers under him, and a
     supernumerary as well. They never hear the same preached more than once a month; it's something
     grand!"
"Eh! it's a fine place is Craychester," added Caleb; "they held Conference there two years
     ago."
     
"It must be a grand thing to live in a place where they hold Conference," remarked Mrs.
     Hankey.
"It is indeed," agreed Mrs. Bateson; "Lucy Ellen said it seemed for all the world like
     heaven, to see so many ministers about, all in their black coats and white neckcloths. And then
     such preaching as they heard! It isn't often young folks enjoy such privileges, and so I told
     her."
"When all's said and done, there's nothing like a good sermon for giving folks real pleasure.
     Nothing in this world comes up to it, and I doubt if there'll be anything much better in the
     next," said Caleb; "I don't see as how there can be."
His friends all agreed with him, and continued, for the rest of the drive, to discuss the
     respective merits of various discourses they had been privileged to hear.
It was a glorious day. The sky was blue, with just enough white clouds flitting about to show
     how blue the blue part really was; and the varying shadows kept passing, like the caress of
     some unseen yet ever-protecting Hand, over the green nearnesses and the violet distances of a
     country whose foundations seemed to be of emerald and amethyst, and its walls and gateways of
     pearl. The large company from the Osierfield drove across the breezy common at the foot of
     Sedgehill Ridge, and then plunged into a network of lanes which led them, by sweet and
     mysterious ways, to the great highway from the Midlands to the coast of the western sea. On
     they went, past the little hamlet where the Danes and the Saxons fought a great fight more than
     a thousand years ago, and which is still called by a strange Saxon name, meaning "the
     burying-place of the slain"; and the little hamlet smiled in the summer sunshine, as if
      with kindly memories of those old warriors whose warfare had been accomplished so
     many centuries ago, and who lie together, beneath the white blossom, in the arms of the great
     peacemaker called Death, waiting for the resurrection morning which that blossom is sent to
     foretell. On, between man's walls of gray stone, till they came to God's walls of red
     sandstone; and then up a steep hill to another common, where the sweet-scented gorse made a
     golden pavement, and where there suddenly burst upon their sight a view so wide and so
     wonderful that those who look upon it with the seeing eye and the understanding heart catch
     glimpses of the King in His beauty through the fairness of the land that is very far off. On
     past the mossy stone, like an overgrown and illiterate milestone, which marks the boundary
     between Mershire and Salopshire; and then through a typical English village, noteworthy because
     the rites of Mayday, with May-queen and May-pole to boot, are still celebrated there exactly as
     they were celebrated some three hundred years ago. At last they came to a picturesque wall and
     gateway, built of the red stone which belongs to that part of the country, and which has a
     trick of growing so much redder at evening-time that it looks as if the cold stone were
     blushing with pleasure at being kissed Good-night by the sun; and then through a wood sloping
     on the left side down to a little stream, which was so busy talking to itself about its own
     concerns that it had not time to leap and sparkle for the amusement of passers-by; until they
     drew up in front of a quaint old castle, built of the same stone as the outer walls and
     gateway.
The family were away from home, so the whole of the castle was at the disposal of Alan and
     his party, and they had permission to go wherever they liked.
      The state-rooms were in front of the building and led out of each other, so that
     when all the doors were open any one could see right from one end of the castle to the other.
     Dinner was to be served in the large saloon at the back, built over what was once the
     courtyard; and while his servants were laying the tables with the cold viands which they had
     brought with them, Alan took his guests through the state-rooms to see the pictures, and
     endeavoured to carry out his plan of educating them by pointing out to them some of the finer
     works of art.
"This," he said, stopping in front of a portrait, "is a picture of Lady Mary Wortley-Montagu,
     who was born here, painted by one of the first portrait-painters of her day. I want you to look
     at her hands, and to notice how exquisitely they are painted. Also I wish to call your
     attention to the expression of her face. You know that it is the duty of art to interpret
     nature—that is to say, to show to ordinary people those hidden beauties and underlying meanings
     of common things which they would never be able to find out for themselves; and I think that in
     the expression on this woman's face the artist has shown forth, in a most wonderful way, the
     dissatisfaction and bitterness of her heart. As you look at her face you seem to see right into
     her soul, and to understand how she was foredoomed by nature and temperament to ask too much of
     life and to receive too little."
"Well, to be sure!" remarked Mrs. Bateson, in an undertone, to her lord and master; "she is a
     bit like our superintendent's wife, only not so stout. And what a gown she has got on! I should
     say that satin is worth five-and-six a yard if it is worth a penny. And I call it a sin and a
     shame to have a
      dirty green parrot sitting on your shoulder when you're wearing satin like that.
     If she'd had any sense she'd have fed the animals before she put her best gown on."
"I never could abide parrots," joined in Mrs. Hankey; "they smell so."
"And as for her looking dissatisfied and all that," continued Mrs. Bateson, "I for one can't
     see it. But if she did, it was all a pack of rubbish. What had she to grumble at, I should like
     to know, with a satin gown on at five-and-six a yard?"
By this time Alan had moved on to another picture. "This represents an unhappy marriage," he
     explained. "At first sight you see nothing but two well-dressed people sitting at table; but as
     you look into the picture you perceive the misery in the woman's face and the cruelty in the
     man's, and you realize all that they mean."
"Well, I see nothing more at second sight," whispered Mrs. Hankey; "except that the
     tablecloth might have been cleaner. There's another of your grumbling fine ladies! Now for sure
     she'd nothing to grumble at, sitting so grand at table with a glass of sherry-wine to
     drink."
"The husband looks a cantankerous chap," remarked Caleb.
"Poor thing! it's his liver," said Mrs. Bateson, taking up the cudgels as usual on behalf of
     the bilious and oppressed. "You can see from his complexion that he is out of order, and that
     all that rich dinner will do him no good. It was his wife's duty to see that he had something
     plain to eat, with none of them sauces and fal-lals, instead of playing the fine lady and
     making troubles out of nothing. I've no patience with her!"
     
"Still, he do look as if he'd a temper," persisted Mr. Bateson.
"And if he do, Caleb, what of that? If a man in his own house hasn't the right to show a bit
     of temper, I should like to know who has? I've no patience with the women that will get married
     and have a man of their own; and then cry their eyes out because the man isn't an old woman. If
     they want meekness and obedience, let 'em remain single and keep lapdogs and canaries; and
     leave the husbands for those as can manage 'em and enjoy 'em, for there ain't enough to go
     round as it is." And Mrs. Bateson waxed quite indignant.
Here Tremaine took up his parable. "This weird figure, clothed in skins, and feeding upon
     nothing more satisfying than locusts and wild honey, is a type of all those who are set apart
     for the difficult and unsatisfactory lot of heralds and forerunners. They see the good time
     coming, and make ready the way for it, knowing all the while that its fuller light and wider
     freedom are not for them; they lead their fellows to the very borders of the promised land,
     conscious that their own graves are already dug in the wilderness. No great social or political
     movement has ever been carried on without their aid; and they have never reaped the benefits of
     those reforms which they lived and died to compass. Perhaps there are no sadder sights on the
     page of history than those solitary figures, of all nations and all times, who have foretold
     the coming of the dawn and yet died before it was yet day."'
"Did you ever?" exclaimed Mrs. Bateson sotto voce; "a grown man like that, and not
     to know John the Baptist when he sees him! Forerunners and heralds indeed! Why, it's John the
     Baptist as large
      as life, and those as don't recognise him ought to be ashamed of
     theirselves."
"Lucy Ellen would have known who it was when she was three years old," said Caleb
     proudly.
"And so she ought; I'd have slapped her if she hadn't, and richly she'd have deserved
     it."
"It's a comfort as Mr. Tremaine's mother is in her grave," remarked Mrs. Hankey, not a whit
     behind the others as regards shocked sensibilities; "this would have been a sad day for her if
     she had been alive."
"And it would!" agreed Mrs. Bateson warmly. "I know if one of my children hadn't known John
     the Baptist by sight, I should have been that ashamed I should never have held up my head again
     in this world—never!"
Mr. Bateson endeavoured to take a charitable view of the situation. "I expect as the poor
     lad's schooling was neglected through having lost his parents; and there's some things as you
     never seem to master at all except you master 'em when you're young—the Books of the Bible
     being one of them."
"My lads could say the Books of the Bible through, without stopping to take breath, when they
     were six, and Lucy Ellen when she was five and a half."
"Well, then, Kezia, you should be all the more ready to take pity on them poor orphans as
     haven't had the advantages as our children have had."
"So I am, Caleb; and if it had been one of the minor prophets I shouldn't have said a word—I
     can't always tell Jonah myself unless there's a whale somewhere at the back; but John the
     Baptist——!"
When the inspection of the pictures had been accomplished, the company sat down to dinner in
     the
      large saloon; and Alan was slightly disconcerted when they opened the proceedings
     by singing, at the top of their voices, "Be present at our table, Lord." Elisabeth, on seeing
     the expression of his face, sorely wanted to laugh; but she stifled this desire, as she had
     learned by experience that humour was not one of Alan's strong points. Now Christopher could
     generally see when a thing was funny, even when the joke was at his own expense; but Alan took
     life more seriously, which—as Elisabeth assured herself—showed what a much more earnest man
     than Christopher he was, in spite of his less orthodox opinions. So she made up her mind that
     she would not catch Christopher's eye on the present occasion, as she usually did when anything
     amused her, because it was cruel to laugh at the frustration of poor Alan's high-flown plans;
     and then naturally she looked straight at the spot where Chris was presiding over a table, and
     returned his smile of perfect comprehension. It was one of Elisabeth's peculiarities that she
     invariably did the thing which she had definitely made up her mind not to do.
After dinner the party broke up and wandered about, in small detachments, over the park and
     through the woods and by the mere, until it was tea-time. Alan spent most of his afternoon in
     explaining to Elisabeth the more excellent ways whereby the poor may be enabled to share the
     pleasures of the rich; and Christopher spent most of his in carrying Johnnie Stubbs to the mere
     and taking him for a row, and so helping the crippled youth to forget for a short time that he
     was not as other men are, and that it was out of pity that he, who never worked, had been
     permitted to take the holiday which he could not earn.
     
After tea Alan and Elisabeth were standing on the steps leading from the saloon to the
     garden.
"What a magnificent fellow that is!" exclaimed Alan, pointing to the huge figure of Caleb
     Bateson, who was talking to Jemima Stubbs on the far side of the lawn. Caleb certainly
     justified this admiration, for he was a fine specimen of a Mershire puddler—and there is no
     finer race of men to be found anywhere than the puddlers of Mershire.
Elisabeth's eyes twinkled. "That is one of your anæmic and neurotic Christians," she remarked
     demurely.
Displeasure settled on Alan's brow; he greatly objected to Elisabeth's habit of making fun of
     things, and had tried his best to cure her of it. To a great extent he had succeeded (for the
     time being); but even yet the cloven foot of Elisabeth's levity now and then showed itself,
     much to his regret.
"Exceptions do not disprove rules," he replied coldly. "Moreover, Bateson is probably
     religious rather from the force of convention than of conviction." Tremaine never failed to
     enjoy his own rounded sentences, and this one pleased him so much that it almost succeeded in
     dispelling the cloud which Elisabeth's ill-timed gibe had created.
"He is a class-leader and a local preacher," she added.
"Those terms convey no meaning to my mind."
"Don't they? Well, they mean that Caleb not only loyally supports the government of
     Providence, but is prepared to take office under it," Elisabeth explained.
Alan never quarrelled with people; he always reproved them. "You make a great mistake—and an
     extremely feminine one—Miss Farringdon, in
     invariably deducting general rules from individual instances. Believe me, this is
     a most illogical form of reasoning, and leads to erroneous, and sometimes dangerous,
     conclusions."
Elisabeth tossed her head; she did not like to be reproved, even by Alan Tremaine. "My
     conclusions are nearly always correct, anyhow," she retorted; "and if you get to the right
     place, I don't see that it matters how you go there. I never bother my head about the 'rolling
     stock' or the 'permanent way' of my intuitions; I know they'll bring me to the right
     conclusion, and I leave them to work out their Bradshaw for themselves."
In the meantime Jemima Stubbs was pouring out a recital of her grievances into the
     ever-sympathetic ear of Caleb Bateson.
"You don't seem to be enjoying yourself, my lass," he had said in his cheery voice, laying a
     big hand in tender caress upon the girl's narrow shoulders.
"And how should I, Mr. Bateson, not having a beau nor nobody to talk to?" she replied in her
     quavering treble. "What with havin' first mother to nurse when I was a little gell, and then
     havin' Johnnie to look after, I've never had time to make myself look pretty and to get a beau,
     like other gells. And now I'm too old for that sort of thing, and yet I've never had my chance,
     as you may say."
"Poor lass! It's a hard life as you've had, and no mistake."
"That it is, Mr. Bateson. Men wants gells as look pretty and make 'em laugh; they don't care
     for the dull, dowdy ones, such as me; and yet how can a gell be light-hearted and gay, I should
     like to know, when it's work, work, work, all the day, and
      nurse, nurse, nurse, all the night? Yet the men don't make no allowance for
     that—not they. They just see as a gell is plain and stupid, and then they has nothing more to
     do with her, and she can go to Jericho for all they cares."
"You've had a hard time of it, my lass," repeated Bateson, in his full, deep voice.
"Right you are, Mr. Bateson; and it's made my hair gray, and my face all wrinkles, and my
     hands a sight o' roughness and ugliness, till I'm a regular old woman and a fright at that. And
     I'm but thirty-five now, though no one 'ud believe it to look at me."
"Thirty-five, are you? B'ain't you more than that, Jemima, for surely you look more?"
"I know I does, but I ain't; and lots o' women—them as has had easy times and their way made
     smooth for them—look little more than gells when they are thirty-five; and the men run after
     'em as fast as if they was only twenty. But I'm an old woman, I am, and I've never had time to
     be a young one, and I've never had a beau nor nothing."
"It seems now, Jemima, as if the Lord was dealing a bit hard with you; but never you fret
     yourself; He'll explain it all and make it all up to you in His own good time."
"I only hope He may, Mr. Bateson."
"My lass, do you remember how Saint Paul said, 'From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I
     bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus'? Now it seems to me that all the gray hairs and
     the wrinkles and the roughness that come to us when we are working for others and doing our
     duty, are nothing more nor less than the marks of the Lord Jesus."
"That's a comfortin' view of the matter, I don't deny."
     
"There are lots o' men in this world, Jemima, and still more women, who grow old before their
     time working for other people; and I take it that when folks talk o' their wrinkles, the Lord
     says, 'My Name shall be in their foreheads'; and when folks talk o' their gray hairs, He says,
     'They shall walk with Me in white: for they are worthy.' And why do we mark the things that
     belong to us? Why, so as we can know 'em again and can claim 'em as our own afore the whole
     world. And that's just why the Lord marks us: so as all the world shall know as we are His, and
     so as no man shall ever pluck us out of His Hand."
Jemima looked gratefully up at the kindly prophet who was trying to comfort her. "Law! Mr.
     Bateson, that's a consolin' way of looking at things, and I only hope as you're right. But all
     the same, I'd have liked to have had a beau of my own just for onst, like other gells. I dessay
     it's very wicked o' me to feel like this, and it's enough to make the Lord angry with me; but
     it don't seem to me as there's anything in religion that quite makes up for never havin' had a
     beau o' your own."
"The Lord won't be angry with you, my lass; don't you fear. He made women and He understands
     'em, and He ain't the one to blame 'em for being as He Himself made 'em. Remember the Book
     says, 'as one whom his mother comforteth'; and I hold that means as He understands women and
     their troubles better than the kindest father ever could. And He won't let His children give up
     things for His sake without paying them back some thirty, some sixty, and some an hundred fold;
     and don't you ever get thinking that He will."
"As Jemima says, yours is a comfortable
     doctrine, Bateson, but I am afraid you have no real foundation for your consoling
     belief," exclaimed Alan Tremaine, coming up and interrupting the conversation.
"Eh! but I have, sir, saving your presence; I know in Whom I have believed; and what a man
     has once known for certain, he can never not know again as long as he lives."
"But Christianity is a myth, a fable. You may imagine and pretend that it is true, but you
     can not know that it is."
"But I do know, sir, begging your pardon, as well as I know you are standing here and the sun
     is shining over yonder."
Alan smiled rather scornfully: how credulous were the lower classes, he thought in his pride
     of intellectual superiority. "I do not understand how you can know a thing that has never been
     proved," he said.
The giant turned and looked on his fragile frame with eyes full of a great pity. "You do not
     understand, you say, sir that's just it; and I am too foolish and ignorant to be able to
     explain things rightly to a gentleman like you; but the Lord will explain it to you when He
     thinks fit. You are young yet, sir, and the way stretches long before you, and the mysteries of
     God are hidden from your eyes. But when you have loved and cherished a woman as your own flesh,
     and when you have had little children clinging round your knees, you'll understand rightly
     enough then without needing any man to teach you."
"My good man, do you suppose a wife and children would teach me more than the collected
     wisdom of the ages?"
     
"A sight more, Mr. Tremaine—a sight more. Folks don't learn the best things from books, sir.
     Why, when the Lord Himself wrote the law on tables of stone, they got broken; but when He
     writes it on the fleshly tables of our hearts, it lives forever. And His Handwriting is the
     love we bear for our fellow-creatures, and—through them—for Him; at least, so it seems to
     me."
"That is pure imagination and sentiment, Bateson. Very pretty and poetic, no doubt; but it
     won't hold water."
Caleb smiled indulgently. "Wait till you've got a little lass of your own, like my Lucy
     Ellen, sir. Not that you'll ever have one quite as good as her, bless her! for her equal never
     has been seen in this world, and never will. But when you've got a little lass of your own, and
     know as you'd be tortured to death quite cheerful-like just to save her a minute's pain, you'll
     laugh at all the nonsense that's written in books, and feel you know a sight better than all of
     'em put together."
"I don't quite see why."
"Well, you see, sir, it's like this. When the dove came back to the ark with the olive leaf
     in her mouth, Noah didn't begin sayin' how wonderful it was for a leaf to have grown out of
     nothing all of a sudden, as some folks are so fond of saying. Not he; he'd too much sense. He
     says to his sons, 'Look here: a leaf here means a tree somewhere, and the sooner we make for
     that tree the better!' And so it is with us. When we feel that all at onst there's somebody
     that matters more to us than ourselves, we know that this wonderful feelin' hasn't sprung out
     of the selfishness that filled our hearts before, but is just a leaf off a great Tree
      which is a shadow and resting-place for the whole world."
Tremaine looked thoughtful; Caleb's childlike faith and extensive vocabulary were alike
     puzzles to him. He did not understand that in homes—however simple—where the Bible is studied
     until it becomes as household words, the children are accustomed to a "well of English
     undefiled"; and so, unconsciously, mould their style upon and borrow their expressions from the
     Book which, even when taken only from a literary standpoint, is the finest Book ever read by
     man.
After a minute's silence he said: "I have been wondering whether it really is any pleasure to
     the poor to see the homes of the rich, or whether it only makes them dissatisfied. Now, what do
     you think, Bateson?"
"Well, sir, if it makes 'em dissatisfied it didn't ought to."
"Perhaps not. Still, I have a good deal of sympathy with socialism myself; and I know I
     should feel it very hard if I were poor, while other men, not a whit better and probably worse
     than myself, were rich."
"And so it would be hard, sir, if this was the end of everything, and it was all haphazard,
     as it were; so hard that no sensible man could see it without going clean off his head
     altogether. But when you rightly understand as it's all the Master's doing, and that He knows
     what He's about a sight better than we could teach Him, it makes a wonderful difference.
     Whether we're rich or poor, happy or sorrowful, is His business and He can attend to that; but
     whether we serve Him rightly in the place where He has put us, is our business, and it'll take
     us all our time
      to look after it without trying to do His work as well."
Tremaine merely smiled, and Bateson went on—
"You see, sir, there's work in the world of all kinds for all sorts; and whether they be
     lords and ladies, or just poor folks like we, they've got to do the work that the Lord has set
     them to do, and not to go hankering after each other's. Why, Mr. Tremaine, if at our place the
     puddlers wanted to do the work of the shinglers, and the shinglers wanted to do the work of the
     rollers, and the rollers wanted to do the work of the masters, the Osierfield wouldn't be for
     long the biggest ironworks in Mershire. Not it! You have to use your common sense in religion
     as in everything else."
"You think that religion is the only thing to make people contented and happy? So do I; but I
     don't think that the religion to do this effectually is Christianity."
"No more do I, sir; that's where you make a mistake, begging your pardon; you go confusing
     principles with persons. It isn't my love for my wife that lights the fire and cooks the dinner
     and makes my little home like heaven to me—it's my wife herself; it wasn't my children's faith
     in their daddy that fed 'em and clothed 'em when they were too little to work for themselves—it
     was me myself; and it isn't the religion of Christ that keeps us straight in this world and
     makes us ready for the next—it is Christ Himself."
Thus the rich man and the poor man talked together, moving along parallel lines, neither
     understanding, and each looking down upon the other—Alan with the scornful pity of the scholar
     who has delved in the dust of dreary negatives which
     generations of doubters have gradually heaped up; and Caleb with the pitiful scorn
     of one who has been into the sanctuary of God, and so learned to understand the end of these
     men.
Late that night, when all the merrymakers had gone to their homes, Tremaine sat smoking in
     the moonlight on the terrace of the Moat House.
"It is strange," he said to himself, "what a hold the Christian myth has taken upon the minds
     of the English people, and especially of the working classes. I can see how its pathos might
     appeal to those whose health was spoiled and whose physique was stunted by poverty and misery;
     but it puzzles me to find a magnificent giant such as Bateson, a man too strong to have nerves
     and too healthy to have delusions, as thoroughly imbued with its traditions as any one. I fail
     to understand the secret of its power."
At that very moment Caleb was closing the day, as was his custom, with family prayer, and his
     prayer ran thus—
"We beseech Thee, O Lord, look kindly upon the stranger who has this day shown such favour
     unto Thy servants; pay back all that he has given us sevenfold into his bosom. He is very
     young, Lord, and very ignorant and very foolish; his eyes are holden so that he can not see the
     operations of Thy Hands; but he is not very far from Thy Kingdom. Lead him, Heavenly Father, in
     the way that he should go; open his eyes that he may behold the hidden things of Thy Law; look
     upon him and love him, as Thou didst aforetime another young man who had great possessions.
     Lord, tell him that this earth is only Thy footstool; show him that the beauty he sees all
     around him is the hem of Thy garment; and teach
      him that the wisdom of this world is but foolishness with Thee. And this we beg,
     O Lord, for Christ's sake. Amen."
Thus Caleb prayed, and Alan could not hear him, and could not have understood him even if he
     had heard.
But there was One who heard, and understood.
     
