
THIS SIDE OF THE HILLS

On this side of the hills, alas!
Unrest our spirit fills;
For gold, men give us stones and brass—
For asphodels, rank weeds and grass—
For jewels, bits of coloured glass—
On this side of the hills.

The end of July was approaching, and the season was drawing to a close. Cecil Farquhar and
     Elisabeth had seen each other frequently since they first met at the Academy soirée,
     and had fallen into the habit of being much together; consequently the thought of parting was
     pleasant to neither of them.
"How shall I manage to live without you?" asked Cecil one day, as they were walking across
     the Park together. "I shall fall from my ideals when I am away from your influence, and again
     become the grovelling worlding that I was before I met you."
"But you mustn't do anything of the kind. I am not the keeper of your conscience."
"But you are, and you must be. I feel a good man and a strong one when I am with you, and as
     if all things were possible to me; and now that I have once found you, I can not and will not
     let you go."
     
"You will have to let me go, Mr. Farquhar; for I go down to the Willows at the end of the
     month, and mean to stay there for some time. I have enjoyed my success immensely; but it has
     tired me rather, and made me want to rest and be stupid again."
"But I can not spare you," persisted Cecil; and there was real feeling in his voice.
     Elisabeth represented so much to him—wealth and power and the development of his higher nature;
     and although, had she been a poor woman, he would possibly never have cherished any intention
     of marrying her, his wish to do so was not entirely sordid. There are so few wishes in the
     hearts of any of us which are entirely sordid or entirely ideal; yet we find it so difficult to
     allow for this in judging one another.
"Don't you understand," Farquhar went on, "all that you have been to me: how you have
     awakened the best that is in me, and taught me to be ashamed of the worst? And do you think
     that I shall now be content to let you slip quietly out of my life, and to be the shallow,
     selfish, worldly wretch I was before the Academy soirée? Not I."
Elisabeth was silent. She could not understand herself, and this want of comprehension on her
     part annoyed and disappointed her. At last all her girlish dreams had come true; here was the
     fairy prince for whom she had waited for so long—a prince of the kingdom she loved above all
     others, the kingdom of art; and he came to her in the spirit in which she had always longed for
     him to come—the spirit of failure and of loneliness, begging her to make up to him for all that
     he had hitherto missed in life. Yet—to her surprise—his appeal found her cold and
      unresponsive, as if he were calling out for help to another woman and not to
     her.
Cecil went on: "Elisabeth, won't you be my wife, and so make me into the true artist which,
     with you to help me, I feel I am capable of becoming; but of which, without you, I shall always
     fall short? You could do anything with me—you know you could; you could make me into a great
     artist and a good man, but without you I can be neither. Surely you will not give me up now!
     You have opened to me the door of a paradise of which I never dreamed before, and now don't
     shut it in my face."
"I don't want to shut it in your face," replied Elisabeth gently; "surely you know me better
     than that. But I feel that you are expecting more of me than I can ever fulfil, and that some
     day you will be sadly disappointed in me."
"No, no; I never shall. It is not in you to disappoint anybody, you are so strong and good
     and true. Tell me the truth: don't you feel that I am as clay in your hands, and that you can
     do anything with me that you choose?"
Elisabeth looked him full in the face with her clear gray eyes. "I feel that I could do
     anything with you if only I loved you enough; but I also feel that I don't love you, and that
     therefore I can do nothing with you at all. I believe with you that a strong woman can be the
     making of a man she loves; but she must love him first, or else all her strength will be of no
     avail."
Farquhar's face fell. "I thought you did love me. You always seemed so glad when I came and
     sorry when I left; and you enjoyed talking to me, and we understood each other, and were happy
     together. Can you deny that?"
     
"No; it is all true. I never enjoyed talking with anybody more than with you; and I certainly
     never in my life met any one who understood my ways of looking at things as thoroughly as you
     do, nor any one who entered so completely into all my moods. As a friend you are most
     satisfactory to me, as a comrade most delightful; but I can not help thinking that love is
     something more than that."
"But it isn't," cried Cecil eagerly; "that is just where lots of women make such a mistake.
     They wait and wait for love all their lives; and find out too late that they passed him by
     years ago, without recognising him, but called him by some wrong name, such as friendship and
     the like."
"I wonder if you are right."
"I am sure that I am. Women who are at all romantic, have such exaggerated ideas as to what
     love really is. Like the leper of old, they ask for some great thing to work the wonderful
     miracle upon their lives; and so they miss the simple way which would lead them to
     happiness."
Elisabeth felt troubled and perplexed. "I enjoy your society," she said, "and I adore your
     genius, and I pity your loneliness, and I long to help your weakness. Is this love, do you
     think?"
"Yes, yes; I am certain of it."
"I thought it would be different," said Elisabeth sadly; "I thought that when it did come it
     would transform the whole world, just as religion does, and that all things would become new. I
     thought it would turn out to be the thing that we are longing for when the beauty of nature
     makes us feel sad with a longing we know not for what. I thought it would change life's dusty
     paths into
      golden pavements, and earth's commonest bramble-bush into a magic
     briar-rose."
"And it hasn't?"
"No; everything is just the same as it was before I met you. As far as I can see, there is no
     livelier emerald twinkling in the grass of the Park than there ever is at the end of July, and
     no purer sapphire melting into the Serpentine."
Cecil laughed lightly. "You are as absurdly romantic as a school-girl! Surely people of our
     age ought to know better than still to believe in fairyland; but, as I have told you before,
     you are dreadfully young for your age in some things."
"I suppose I am. I still do believe in fairyland—at least I did until ten minutes ago."
"I assure you there is no such place."
"Not for anybody?"
"Not for anybody over twenty-one."
"I wish there was," said Elisabeth with a sigh. "I should have liked to believe it was there,
     even if I had never found it."
"Don't be silly, lady mine. You are so great and wise and clever that I can not bear to hear
     you say foolish things. And I want us to talk about how you are going to help me to be a great
     painter, and how we will sit together as gods, and create new worlds. There is nothing that I
     can not do with you to help me, Elisabeth. You must be good to me and hard upon me at the same
     time. You must never let me be content with anything short of my best, or willing to do
     second-rate work for the sake of money; you must keep the sacredness of art ever before my
     eyes, but you must also be very gentle to me when I am weary, and very tender to me when I am
     sad; you must encourage
      me when my spirit fails me, and comfort me when the world is harsh. All these
     things you can do, and you are the only woman who can. Promise me, Elisabeth, that you
     will."
"I can not promise anything now. You must let me think it over for a time. I am so puzzled by
     it all. I thought that when the right man came and told a woman that he loved her, she would
     know at once that it was for him—and for him only—that she had been waiting all her life; and
     that she would never have another doubt upon the subject, but would feel convinced that it was
     settled for all time and eternity. And this is so different!"
Again Cecil laughed his light laugh. "I suppose girls sometimes feel like that when they are
     very young; but not women of your age, Elisabeth."
"Well, you must let me think about it. I can not make up my mind yet."
And for whole days and nights Elisabeth thought about it, and could come to no definite
     conclusion.
There was no doubt in her mind that she liked Cecil Farquhar infinitely better than she had
     liked any of the other men who had asked her to marry them; also that no one could possibly be
     more companionable to her than he was, or more sympathetic with and interested in her work—and
     this is no small thing to the man or woman who possesses the creative faculty. Then she was
     lonely in her greatness, and longed for companionship; and Cecil had touched her in her
     tenderest point by his constant appeals to her to help and comfort him. Nevertheless the fact
     remained that, though he interested her, he did not touch her heart; that remained a closed
     door to him. But supposing that her friends were
      right, and that she was too cold by nature ever to feel the ecstasies which
     transfigure life for some women, should she therefore shut herself out from ordinary domestic
     joys and interests? Because she was incapable of attaining to the ideal, must the commonplace
     pleasures of the real also be denied her? If the best was not for her, would it not be wise to
     accept the second-best, and extract as much happiness from it as possible? Moreover, she knew
     that Cecil was right when he said that she could make of him whatsoever she wished; and this
     was no slight temptation to a woman who loved power as much as Elisabeth loved it.
There was also another consideration which had some weight with her; and that was the
     impression, gradually gaining strength in her mind, that Cecil Farquhar was George Farringdon's
     son. She could take no steps in the way of proving this just then, as Christopher was away for
     his holiday somewhere in the Black Forest, and nothing could be done without him; but she
     intended, as soon as he returned, to tell him of her suspicion, and to set him to discover
     whether or not Cecil was indeed the lost heir. Although it never seriously occurred to
     Elisabeth to hold her peace upon this matter and so keep her fortune to herself, she was still
     human enough not altogether to despise a course of action which enabled her to be rich and
     righteous at the same time, and to go on with her old life at the Willows and her work among
     the people at the Osierfield, even after George Farringdon's son had come into his own.
Although the balance of Elisabeth's judgment was upon the side of Cecil Farquhar and his
     suit, she could not altogether stifle—try as she might—her
      sense of disappointment at finding how grossly poets and such people had
     exaggerated the truth in their description of the feeling men call love. It was all so much
     less exalted and so much more commonplace than she had expected. She had long ago come to the
     conclusion—from comparisons between Christopher and the men who had wanted to marry her—that a
     man's friendship is a better thing than a man's love; but she had always clung to the belief
     that a woman's love would prove a better thing than a woman's friendship: yet now she herself
     was in love with Cecil—at least he said that she was, and she was inclined to agree with
     him—and she was bound to admit that, as an emotion, this fell far short of her old attachment
     to Cousin Anne or Christopher or even Felicia. But that was because now she was getting old,
     she supposed, and her heart had lost its early warmth and freshness; and she experienced a
     weary ache of regret that Cecil had not come across her path in those dear old days when she
     was still young enough to make a fairyland for herself, and to abide therein for ever.
"The things that come too late are almost as bad as the things that never come at all," she
     thought with a sigh; not knowing that there is no such word as "too late" in God's
     Vocabulary.
At the end of the week she had made up her mind to marry Cecil Farquhar. Women, after all,
     can not pick and choose what lives they shall lead; they can only take such goods as the gods
     choose to provide, and make the best of the same; and if they let the possible slip while they
     are waiting for the impossible, they have only themselves to blame that they extract no good at
     all out of life. So she wrote to Cecil, asking him to come and see her
      the following day; and then she sat down and wondered why women are allowed to
     see visions and to dream dreams, if the actual is to fall so far short of the imaginary. Brick
     walls and cobbled streets are all very well in their way; but they make but dreary
     dwelling-places for those who have promised themselves cities where the walls are of jasper and
     the pavements of gold. "If one is doomed to live always on this side of the hills, it is a
     waste of time to think too much about the life on the other side," Elisabeth reasoned with
     herself, "and I have wasted a lot of time in this way; but I can not help wondering why we are
     allowed to think such lovely thoughts, and to believe in such beautiful things, if our dreams
     are never to come true, but are only to spoil us for the realities of life. Now I must bury all
     my dear, silly, childish idols, as Jacob did; and I will not have any stone to mark the place,
     because I want to forget where it is."
Poor Elisabeth! The grave of what has been, may be kept green with tears; but the grave of
     what never could have been, is best forgotten. We may not hide away the dear old gnomes and
     pixies and fairies in consecrated ground—that is reserved for what has once existed, and so has
     the right to live again; but for what never existed we can find no sepulchre, for it came out
     of nothingness, and to nothingness must it return.
After Elisabeth had posted her letter to Cecil, and while she was still musing over the
     problem as to whether life's fulfilment must always fall short of its promise, the drawing-room
     door was thrown open and a visitor announced. Elisabeth was tired and depressed, and did not
     feel in the mood for keeping up her reputation for brilliancy; so it was
      with a sigh of weariness that she rose to receive Quenelda Carson, a struggling
     little artist whom she had known slightly for years. But her interest was immediately aroused
     when she saw that Quenelda's usually rosy face was white with anguish, and the girl's pretty
     eyes swollen with many tears.
"What is the matter, dear?" asked Elisabeth, with that sound in her voice which made all weak
     things turn to her. "You are in trouble, and you must let me help you."
Quenelda broke out into bitter weeping. "Oh! give him back to me—give him back to me," she
     cried; "you can never love him as I do, you are too cold and proud and brilliant."
Elisabeth stood as if transfixed. "Whatever do you mean?"
"You have everything," Quenelda went on, in spite of the sobs which shook her slender frame;
     "you had money and position to begin with, and everybody thought well of you and admired you
     and made life easy for you. And then you came out of your world into ours, and carried away the
     prizes which we had been striving after for years, and beat us on our own ground; but we
     weren't jealous of you—you know that we weren't; we were glad of your success, and proud of
     you, and we admired your genius as much as the outside world did, and never minded a bit that
     it was greater than ours. But even then you were not content—you must have everything, and
     leave us nothing, just to satisfy your pride. You are like the rich man who had everything, and
     yet took from the poor man his one ewe lamb; and I am sure that God—if there is a God—will
     punish you as He punished that rich man."
     
Elisabeth turned rather pale; whatever had she done that any one dared to say such things to
     her as this? "I still don't understand you," she said.
"I never had anything nice in my life till I met him," the girl continued incoherently—"I had
     always been poor and pinched and wretched and second-rate; even my pictures were never
     first-rate, though I worked and worked all I knew to make them so. And then I met Cecil
     Farquhar, and I loved him, and everything became different, and I didn't mind being second-rate
     if only he would care for me. And he did; and I thought that I should always be as happy as I
     was then, and that nothing would ever be able to hurt me any more. Oh! I was so happy—so
     happy—and I was such a fool, I thought it would last forever! I worked hard and saved every
     penny that I could, and so did he; and we should have been married next year if you hadn't come
     and spoiled it all, and taken him away from me. And what is it to you now that you have got
     him? You are too proud and cold to love him, or anybody else, and he doesn't care for you a
     millionth part as much as he cares for me; yet just because you have money and fame he has left
     me for you. And I love him so—I love him so!" Here Quenelda's sobs choked her utterance, and
     her torrent of words was stopped by tears.
"Come and sit down beside me and tell me quietly what is the matter," said Elisabeth gently;
     "I can do nothing and understand nothing while you go on like this. But you are wrong in
     supposing that I took your lover from you purposely; I did not even know that he was a friend
     of yours. He ought to have told me."
"No, no; he couldn't tell you. Don't you see
      that the temptation was too strong for him? He cares so much for rank and money,
     and things like that, my poor Cecil! And all his life he has had to do without them. So when he
     met you, and realized that if he married you he would have all the things he wanted most in the
     world, he couldn't resist it. The fault was yours for tempting him, and letting him see that he
     could have you for the asking; you knew him well enough to see how weak he was, and what a hold
     worldly things had over him; and you ought to have allowed for this in dealing with him."
A great wave of self-contempt swept over Elisabeth. She, who had prided herself upon the fact
     that no man was strong enough to win her love, to be accused of openly running after a man who
     did not care for her but only for her money! It was unendurable, and stung her to the quick!
     And yet, through all her indignation, she recognised the justice of her punishment. She had not
     done what Quenelda had reproached her for doing, it was true; but she had deliberately lowered
     her ideal: she had wearied of striving after the best, and had decided that the second-best
     should suffice her; and for this she was now being chastised. No men or women who wilfully turn
     away from the ideal which God has set before them, and make to themselves graven images of the
     things which they know to be unworthy, can escape the punishment which is sure, sooner or
     later, to follow their apostasy; and they do well to recognise this, ere they grow weary of
     waiting for the revelation from Sinai, and begin to build altars unto false gods. For now, as
     of old, the idols which they make are ground into powder, and strawed upon the water, and given
     them to drink;
      the cup has to be drained to the dregs, and it is exceeding bitter.
"I still think he ought to have told me there was another woman," Elisabeth said.
"Not he. He knew well enough that your pride could not have endured the thought of another
     woman, and that that would have spoiled his chance with you forever. There always is another
     woman, you know; and you women, who are too proud to endure the thought of her, have to be
     deceived and blinded. And you have only yourselves to thank for it; if you were a little more
     human and a little more tender, there would be no necessity for deceiving you. Why, I should
     have loved him just the same if there had been a hundred other women, so he always told me the
     truth; but he lied to you, and it was your fault and not his that he was obliged to lie."
Elisabeth shuddered. It was to help such a man as this that she had been willing to sacrifice
     her youthful ideals and her girlish dreams. What a fool she had been!
"If you do not believe me, here is his letter," Quenelda went on; "I brought it on purpose
     for you to read, just to show you how little you are to him. If you had loved him as I love
     him, I would have let you keep him, because you could have given him so many of the things that
     he thinks most about. But you don't. You are one of the cold, hard women, who only care for
     people as long as they are good and do what you think they ought to do; Cecil never could do
     what anybody thought he ought to do for long, and then you would have despised him and grown
     tired of him. But I go on loving him just the same, whatever he does; and
      that's the sort of love that a man wants—at any rate, such a man as Cecil."
Elisabeth held out her hand for the letter; she felt that speech was of no avail at such a
     crisis as this; and, as she read, every word burned itself into her soul, and hurt her pride to
     the quick.
"Dearest Quenelda" (the letter ran, in the slightly affected handwriting which
     Elisabeth had learned to know so well, and to welcome with so much interest), "I have something
     to say to you which it cuts me to the heart to say, but which has to be said at all costs. We
     must break off our engagement at once; for the terrible truth has at last dawned upon me that
     we can never afford to marry each other, and that therefore it is only prolonging our agony to
     go on with it. You know me so well, dear little girl, that you will quite understand how the
     thought of life-long poverty has proved too much for me. I am not made of such coarse fibre as
     most men—those men who can face squalor and privation, and lack all the little accessories that
     make life endurable, without being any the worse for it. I am too refined, too highly strung,
     too sensitive, to enter upon such a weary struggle with circumstances as my marriage with a
     woman as poor as myself would entail; therefore, my darling Quenelda, much as I love you I feel
     it is my duty to renounce you; and as you grow older and wiser you will see that I am
     right.
"Since I can not marry you whom I love, I have put romance and sentiment forever out of my
     life; it is a bitter sacrifice for a man of my nature to make, but it must be done; and I have
     decided to enter upon a mariage de convenance with Miss Farringdon,
      the Black Country heiress. Of course I do not love her as I love you, my
     sweet—what man could love a genius as he loves a beauty? And she is as cold as she is clever.
     But I feel respect for her moral characteristics, and interest in her mental ones; and, when
     youth and romance are over and done with, that is all one need ask in a wife. As for her
     fortune, it will keep me forever out of the reach of that poverty which has always so
     deleterious an effect upon natures such as mine; and, being thus set above those pecuniary
     anxieties which are the death of true art, I shall be able fully to develop the power that is
     in me, and to do the work that I feel myself called to do.
"Good-bye, my sweetest. I can not write any more; my heart is breaking. How cruel it is that
     poverty should have power to separate forever such true lovers as you and I!
"Your heartbroken 
"Cecil."
Elisabeth gave back the letter to Quenelda. "Do you mean to tell me that you don't despise
     the man who sent this?" she asked.
"No; because I love him, you see. You never did."
"You are right there. I never loved him. I tried to love him, but I couldn't."
"I know you didn't. As I told you before, if you had loved him I would have given him up to
     you."
Elisabeth looked at the girl before her with wonder. What a strange thing this love was,
     which could make a woman forgive such a letter as that, and still cling to the man who wrote
     it! So there was such a place as fairyland after all, and poor little
      Quenelda had found it; while she, Elisabeth, had never so much as peeped through
     the gate. It had brought Quenelda much sorrow, it was true; but still it was good to have been
     there; and a chilly feeling crept across Elisabeth's heart as she realized how much she had
     missed in life.
"I think if one loved another person as much as that," she said to herself, "one would
     understand a little of how God feels about us." Aloud she said: "Dear, what do you want me to
     do? I will do anything in the world that you wish."
Quenelda seized Elisabeth's hand and kissed it. "How good you are! And I don't deserve it a
     bit, for I've been horrid to you and said vile things."
There was a vast pity in Elisabeth's eyes. "I did you a great wrong, poor child!" she said;
     "and I want to make every reparation in my power."
"But you didn't know you were doing me a great wrong."
"No; but I knew that I was acting below my own ideals, and nobody can do that without doing
     harm. Show me how I can give you help now? Shall I tell Cecil Farquhar that I know all?"
"Oh! no; please not. He would never forgive me for having spoiled his life, and taken away
     his chance of being rich." And Quenelda's tears flowed afresh.
Elisabeth put her strong arm round the girl's slim waist. "Don't cry, dear; I will make it
     all right. I will just tell him that I can't marry him because I don't love him; and he need
     never know that I have heard about you at all."
And Elisabeth continued to comfort Quenelda until the pale cheeks grew pink again, and half
     the girl's beauty came back; and she went away at last
      believing in Elisabeth's power of setting everything right again, as one believes
     in one's mother's power of setting everything right again when one is a child.
After she had gone, Elisabeth sat down and calmly looked facts in the face; and the prospect
     was by no means an agreeable one. Of course there was no question now of marrying Cecil
     Farquhar; and in the midst of her confusion Elisabeth felt a distinct sense of relief that this
     at any rate was impossible. She could still go on believing in fairyland, even though she never
     found it; and it is always far better not to find a place than to find there is no such place
     at all. But she would have to give up the Willows and the Osierfield, and all the wealth and
     position that these had brought her; and this was a bitter draught to drink. Elisabeth felt no
     doubt in her own mind that Cecil was indeed George Farringdon's son; she had guessed it when
     first he told her the story of his birth, and subsequent conversations with him had only served
     to confirm her in the belief; and it was this conviction which had influenced her to some
     extent in her decision to accept him. But now everything was changed. Cecil would rule at the
     Osierfield and Quenelda at the Willows instead of herself, and those dearly loved places would
     know her no more.
At this thought Elisabeth broke down. How she loved every stone of the Black Country, and how
     closely all her childish fancies and girlish dreams were bound up in it! Now the cloud of smoke
     would hang over Sedgehill, and she would not be there to interpret its message; and the sun
     would set beyond the distant mountains, and she would no longer catch glimpses of the country
     over the hills.
      Even the rustic seat, where she and Christopher had sat so often, would be hers
     no longer; and he and she would never walk together in the woods as they had so often walked as
     children. And as she cried softly to herself, with no one to comfort her, the memory of
     Christopher swept over her, and with it all the old anger against him. He would be glad to see
     her dethroned at last, she supposed, as that was what he had striven for all those years ago;
     but, perhaps, when he saw a stranger reigning at the Willows and the Osierfield in her stead,
     he would be sorry to find the new government so much less beneficial to the work-people than
     the old one had been; for Elisabeth knew Cecil quite well enough to be aware that he would
     spend all his money on himself and his own pleasures; and she could not help indulging in an
     unholy hope that, whereas she had beaten Christopher with whips, her successor would beat him
     with scorpions. In fact she was almost glad, for the moment, that Farquhar was so unfit for the
     position to which he was now called, when she realized how sorely that unfitness would try
     Christopher.
"It will serve him right for leaving me and going off after George Farringdon's son," she
     said to herself, "to discover how little worth the finding George Farringdon's son really was!
     Christopher is so self-centred, that a thing is never properly brought home to him until it
     affects himself; no other person can ever convince him that he is in the wrong. But this will
     affect himself; he will hate to serve under such a man as Cecil; I know he will; because Cecil
     is just the type of person that Christopher has always looked down upon, for Christopher is a
     gentleman and Cecil is not. Perhaps when he finds out how
     inferior an iron-master Cecil is to me, Christopher will wish that he had liked me
     better and been kinder to me when he had a chance. I hope he will, and that it will make him
     miserable; for those hard, self-righteous people really deserve to be punished in the end." And
     Elisabeth derived so much comfort from the prospect of Christopher's coming trials, that she
     almost forgot her own.
     
