
GEORGE FARRINGDON'S SON

I need thee, Love, in peace and strife;
For, till Time's latest page be read,
No other smile could light my life
Instead.
And even in that happier place,
Where pain is past and sorrow dead,
I could not love an angel's face
Instead.

That night Elisabeth wrote to Christopher Thornley, telling him that she believed she had
     found George Farringdon's son at last, and asking him to come up to London in order to
     facilitate the giving up of her kingdom into the hands of the rightful owner. And, in so doing,
     she was conscious of a feeling of satisfaction that Christopher should see for himself that she
     was not as mercenary as he had once imagined her to be, but that she was as ready as he had
     ever been to enable the king to enjoy his own again as soon as that king appeared upon the
     scene. To forsake the reigning queen in order to search for that king, was, of course, a
     different matter, and one about which Elisabeth declined to see eye to eye with her manager
     even now. Doubtless he had been in the right all through, and she in the wrong, as all
      honourable people could see for themselves; but when one happens to be the queen
     one's self, one's perspective is apt to become blurred and one's sense of abstract justice
     confused. It is so easy for all of us to judge righteous judgment concerning matters which in
     no way affect ourselves.
Elisabeth was still angry with Christopher because she had deliberately made the worst of
     herself in his eyes. It was totally unjust—and entirely feminine—to lay the blame of this on
     his shoulders; as a matter of fact, he had had nothing at all to do with it. She had purposely
     chosen a path of life of which she knew he would disapprove, principally in order to annoy him;
     and then she had refused to forgive him for feeling the annoyance which she had gone out of her
     way to inflict. From the purely feminine standpoint her behaviour was thoroughly consistent; a
     man, however, might in his ignorance have accused her of inconsistency. But men know so little
     about some things!
The following afternoon Cecil Farquhar came to see Elisabeth, as she had bidden him; and she
     smiled grimly to herself as she realized the difference between what she had intended to say to
     him when she told him to come, and what she was actually going to say. As for him, he was full
     of hope. Evidently Elisabeth meant to marry him and make him into a rich man; and money was the
     thing he loved best in the world. Which of us would not be happy if we thought we were about to
     win the thing we loved best? And is it altogether our own fault if the thing we happen to love
     best be unworthy of love, or is it only our misfortune?
Because he was triumphant, Cecil looked handsomer than usual, for there are few things more
     be
     coming than happiness; and as he entered the room, radiant with that vitality
     which is so irresistibly attractive, Elisabeth recognised his charm without feeling it, just as
     one sees people speaking and gesticulating in the distance without hearing a word of what is
     said.
"My dear lady, you are going to say yes to me; I know that you are; you would not
     have sent for me if you were not, for you are far too tender-hearted to enjoy seeing pain which
     you are forced to give."
Elisabeth looked grave, and did not take his outstretched hand. "Will you sit down?" she
     said; "there is much that I want to talk over with you."
Cecil's face fell. In a superficial way he was wonderfully quick in interpreting moods and
     reading character; and he knew in a moment that, through some influence of which he was as yet
     in ignorance, such slight hold as he had once had upon Elisabeth had snapped and broken since
     he saw her last. "Surely you are not going to refuse to marry me and so spoil my life.
     Elisabeth, you can not be as cruel as this, after all that we have been to each other."
"I am going to refuse to marry you, but I am not going to spoil your life. Believe me, I am
     not. There are other things in the world besides love and marriage."
Cecil sank down into a seat, and his chin twitched. "Then you have played with me most
     abominably. The world was right when it called you a heartless flirt, and said that you were
     too cold to care for anything save pleasure and admiration. I thought I knew you better, more
     fool I! But the world was right and I was wrong."
"I don't think that we need discuss my character,"
     said Elisabeth. She was very angry with herself that she had placed herself in
     such a position that any man dared to sit in judgment upon her; but even then she could not
     elevate Cecil into the object of her indignation.
He went on like a querulous child. "It is desperately hard on me that you have treated me in
     this way! You might have snubbed me at once if you had wished to do so, and not have made me a
     laughing-stock in the eyes of the world. I made no secret of the fact that I intended to marry
     you; I talked about it to everybody; and now everybody will laugh at me for having been your
     dupe."
So he had boasted to his friends of the fortune he was going to annex, and had already openly
     plumed himself upon securing her money! Elisabeth understood perfectly, and was distinctly
     amused. She wondered if he would remember to remind her how she was going to elevate him by her
     influence, or if the loss of her money would make him forget even to simulate sorrow at the
     loss of herself.
"I don't know what I shall do," he continued, with tears of vexation in his eyes; "everybody
     is expecting our engagement to be announced, and I can not think what excuses I shall invent. A
     man looks such a fool when he has made too sure of a woman!"
"Doubtless. But that isn't the woman's fault altogether."
"Yes; it is. If the woman hadn't led him on, the man wouldn't have made sure of her. You have
     been unutterably cruel to me—unpardonably cruel; and I will never forgive you as long as I
     live."
Elisabeth winced at this—not at Cecil's refusal to forgive her, but at the thought that she
     had
      placed herself within the reach of his forgiveness. But she was not penitent—she
     was only annoyed. Penitence is the last experience that comes to strong-willed, light-hearted
     people, such as Elisabeth; they are so sure they are right at the time, and they so soon forget
     about it afterward, that they find no interval for remorse. Elisabeth was beginning to forgive
     herself for having fallen for a time from her high ideal, because she was already beginning to
     forget that she had so fallen; life had taught her many things, but she took it too easily even
     yet.
"I have a story to tell you," she said; "a story that will interest you, if you will
     listen."
By this time Cecil's anger was settling down into sulkiness. "I have no alternative, I
     suppose."
Then Elisabeth told him, as briefly as she could, the story of George Farringdon's son; and,
     as she spoke, she watched the sulkiness in his face give place to interest, and the interest to
     hope, and the hope to triumph, until the naughty child gradually grew once more into the
     similitude of a Greek god.
"You are right—I am sure you are right," he said when she had finished; "it all fits in—the
     date and place of my birth, my parents' poverty and friendlessness, and the mystery concerning
     them. Oh! you can not think what this means to me. To be forever beyond the reach of poverty—to
     be able to do whatever I like for the rest of my life—to be counted among the great of the
     earth! It is wonderful—wonderful!" And he walked up and down the room in his excitement, while
     his voice shook with emotion.
"I shall have such a glorious time," he went on—"the most glorious time man ever had! Of
     course, I shall not live in that horrid Black
     Country—nobody could expect me to make such a sacrifice as that; but I shall spend
     my winters in Italy and my summers in Mayfair, and I shall forget that the world was ever cold
     and hard and cruel to me."
Elisabeth watched him curiously. So he never even thought of her and of what she was giving
     up. That his gain was her loss was a matter of no moment to him—it did not enter into his
     calculations. She wondered if he even remembered Quenelda, and what this would mean to her; she
     thought not. And this was the man Elisabeth had once delighted to honour! She could have
     laughed aloud as she realized what a blind fool she had been. Were all men like this? she asked
     herself; for, if so, she was glad she was too cold to fall in love. It would be terrible indeed
     to lay down one's life at the feet of a creature such as this; it was bad enough to have to lay
     down one's fortune there!
Throughout the rest of the interview Cecil lived up to the estimate that Elisabeth had just
     formed of his character: he never once remembered her—never once forgot himself. She explained
     to him that Christopher Thornley was the man who would manage all the business part of the
     affair for him, and give up the papers, and establish his identity; and she promised to
     communicate with Cecil as soon as she received an answer to the letter she had written to
     Christopher informing the latter that she believed she had at last discovered George
     Farringdon's son.
Amidst all her sorrow at the anticipation of giving up her kingdom into the hands of so
     unfitting a ruler as Cecil, there lurked a pleasurable consciousness that at last Christopher
     would recognise her worth, when he found how inferior her successor was to herself. It was
     strange how this desire to
      compel the regard which she had voluntarily forfeited, had haunted Elisabeth for
     so many years. Christopher had offended her past all pardon, she said to herself; nevertheless
     it annoyed her to feel that the friendship, which she had taken from him for punitive purposes,
     was but a secondary consideration in his eyes after all. She had long ago succeeded in
     convincing herself that the grapes of his affection were too sour to be worth fretting after;
     but she still wanted to make him admire her in spite of himself, and to realize that Miss
     Elisabeth Farringdon of the Osierfield was a more important personage than he had considered
     her to be. Half the pleasure of her success as an artist had lain in the thought that this at
     last would convince Christopher of her right to be admired and obeyed; but she was never sure
     that it had actually done so. Through all her triumphal progress he had been the Mordecai at
     her gates. She did not often see him, it is true; but when she did, she was acutely conscious
     that his attitude toward her was different from the attitude of the rest of the world, and
     that—instead of offering her unlimited praise and adulation—he saw her weaknesses as clearly
     now she was a great lady as he had done when she was a little girl.
And herein Elisabeth's intuition was not at fault; her failings were actually more patent to
     Christopher than to the world at large. But here her perception ended; and she did not see,
     further, that it was because Christopher had formed such a high ideal of her, that he minded so
     much when she fell short of it. She had not yet grasped the truth that whereas the more a woman
     loves a man the easier she finds it to forgive his faults, the more a man
      loves a woman the harder he finds it to overlook her shortcomings. A woman merely
     requires the man she loves to be true to her; while a man demands that the woman he loves shall
     be true to herself—or, rather, to that ideal of her which in his own mind he has set up and
     worshipped.
Her consciousness of Christopher's disapproval of the easy-going, Bohemian fashion in which
     she had chosen to walk through life, made Elisabeth intensely angry; though she would have died
     rather than let him know it. How dared this one man show himself superior to her, when she had
     the world at her feet? It was insupportable! She said but little to him, and he said still less
     to her, and what they did say was usually limited to the affairs of the Osierfield;
     nevertheless Elisabeth persistently weighed herself in Christopher's balances, and measured
     herself according to Christopher's measures; and, as she did so, wrote Tekel opposite
     her own name. And for this she refused to forgive him. She assured herself that his balances
     were false, and his measures impossible, and his judgments hard in the extreme; and when she
     had done so, she began to try herself thereby again, and hated him afresh because she fell so
     far short of them.
But now he was going to see her in a new light; if he declined to admire her in prosperity,
     he should be compelled to respect her in adversity; for she made up her mind she would bear her
     reverses like a Spartan, if only for the sake of proving to him that she was made of better
     material than he, in his calm superiority, had supposed. When he saw for himself how plucky she
     could be, and how little she really cared for outside things, he might at last discover that
     she was not as unworthy of his regard
      as he had once assumed, and might even want to be friends with her again; and
     then she would throw his friendship back again in his face, as he had once thrown hers, and
     teach him that it was possible even for self-righteous people to make mistakes which were past
     repairing. It would do him a world of good, Elisabeth thought, to find out—too late—that he had
     misjudged her, and that other people besides himself had virtues and excellences; and it
     comforted her, in the midst of her adversities, to contemplate the punishment which was being
     reserved for Christopher, when George Farringdon's son came into his own. And she never
     guessed—how could she?—that when at last George Farringdon's son did come into his own, there
     would be no Christopher Thornley serving under him at the Osierfield; and that the cup of
     remorse, which she was so busily preparing, was for her own drinking and not for
     Christopher's.
Christopher's expected answer to her epistle was, however, not forthcoming. The following
     morning Elisabeth received a letter from one of the clerks at the Osierfield, informing her
     that Mr. Thornley returned from his tour in Germany a week ago; and that immediately on his
     return he was seized with a severe attack of pneumonia—the result of a neglected cold—and was
     now lying seriously ill at his house in Sedgehill. In order to complete the purchase of a piece
     of land for the enlargement of the works, which Mr. Thornley had arranged to buy before he went
     away, it was necessary (the clerk went on to say) to see the plans of the Osierfield; and these
     were locked up in the private safe at the manager's house, to which only Christopher and
     Elisabeth possessed keys. Therefore, as the
     manager was delirious and quite incapable of attending to business of any kind,
     the clerk begged Miss Farringdon to come down at once and take the plans out of the safe; as
     the negotiations could not be completed until this was done.
For an instant the old instinct of tenderness toward any one who was weak or suffering welled
     up in Elisabeth's soul, and she longed to go to her old playmate and help and comfort him; but
     then came the remembrance of how once before, long ago, she had been ready to help and comfort
     Christopher, and he had wanted neither her help nor her comfort; so she hardened her heart
     against him, and proudly said to herself that if Christopher could do without her she could do
     without Christopher.
That summer's day was one which Elisabeth could never forget as long as she lived; it stood
     out from the rest of her life, and would so stand out forever. We all know such days as
     this—days which place a gulf, that can never be passed over, between their before and after.
     She travelled down to Sedgehill by a morning train; and her heart was heavy within her as she
     saw how beautiful the country looked in the summer sunshine, and realized that the home she
     loved was to be taken away from her and given to another. Somehow life had not brought her all
     that she had expected from it, and yet she did not see wherein she herself had been to blame.
     She had neither loved nor hoarded her money, but had used it for the good of others to the best
     of her knowledge; yet it was to be taken from her. She had not hidden her talent in a napkin,
     but had cultivated it to the height of her powers; yet her fame was cold and dreary to her, and
     her greatness turned to ashes in her hands. She had
      been ready to give love in full measure and running over to any one who needed
     it; yet her heart had asked in vain for something to fill it, and in spite of all its longings
     had been sent empty away. She had failed all along the line to get the best out of life; and
     yet she did not see how she could have acted differently. Surely it was Fate, and not herself,
     that was to blame for her failure.
When she arrived at Sedgehill she drove straight to Christopher's house, and learned from the
     nurse who was attending him how serious his illness was—not so much on account of the violence
     of the cold which he had taken in Germany, as from the fact that his vitality was too feeble to
     resist it. But she could not guess—and there was no one to tell her—that his vitality had been
     lowered by her unkindness to him, and that it was she who had deliberately snapped the
     mainspring of Christopher's life. It was no use anybody's seeing him, the nurse said, as he was
     delirious and knew no one; but if he regained consciousness, she would summon Miss Farringdon
     at once.
Then Elisabeth went alone into the big, oak-panelled dining-room, with the crape masks before
     its windows, and opened the safe.
She could not find the plans at once, as she did not know exactly where to look for them; and
     as she was searching for them among various papers, she came upon a letter addressed to herself
     in Christopher's handwriting. She opened it with her usual carelessness, without perceiving
     that it bore the inscription "Not to be given to Miss Farringdon until after my death"; and
     when she had begun to read it, she could not have left off to save her life—being a woman. And
     this was what she read:
     
"My Darling—for so I may call you at last, since you will not read this letter until
     after I am dead;
"There are two things that I want to tell you. First, that I love you, and always
     have loved you, and always shall love you to all eternity. But how could I say this to you,
     sweetheart, in the days when my love spelled poverty for us both? And how could I say it when
     you became one of the richest women in Mershire, and I only the paid manager of your works?
     Nevertheless I should have said it in time, when you had seen more of the world and were
     capable of choosing your own life for yourself, had I thought there was any chance of your
     caring for me; for no man has ever loved you as I have loved you, Elisabeth, nor ever will. You
     had a right to know what was yours, when you were old enough to decide what to do with it, and
     to take or leave it as you thought fit; and no one else had the right to decide this for you.
     But when you so misjudged me about my journey to Australia, I understood that it was I myself,
     and not my position, that stood between us; and that your nature and mine were so different,
     and our ideas so far apart, that it was not in my power to make you happy, though I would have
     died to do so. So I went out of your life, for fear I should spoil it; and I have kept out of
     your life ever since, because I know you are happier without me; for I do so want you to be
     happy, dear.
"There is one other thing I have to tell you: I am George Farringdon's son. I shouldn't have
     bothered you with this, only I feel it is necessary—after I am gone—for you to know the truth,
     lest any impostor should turn up and take your property
      from you. Of course, as long as I am alive I can keep the secret, and yet take
     care that no one else comes forward in my place; and I have made a will leaving everything I
     possess to you. But when I am gone, you must hold the proofs of who was really the person who
     stood between you and the Farringdon property. I never found it out until my uncle died; I
     believed, as everybody else believed, that the lost heir was somewhere in Australia. But on my
     uncle's death I found a confession from him—which is in this safe, along with my parents'
     marriage certificate and all the other proofs of my identity—saying how his sister told him on
     her death-bed that, when George Farringdon ran away from home, he married her, and took her out
     with him to Australia. They had a hard life, and lost all their children except myself; and
     then my father died, leaving my poor mother almost penniless. She survived him only long enough
     to come back to England, and give her child into her brother's charge. My uncle went on to say
     that he kept my identity a secret, and called me by an assumed name, as he was afraid that Miss
     Farringdon would send both him and me about our business if she knew the truth; as in those
     days she was very bitter against the man who had jilted her, and would have been still bitterer
     had she known he had thrown her over for the daughter of her father's manager. When Maria
     Farringdon died and showed, by her will, that at last she had forgiven her old lover, my
     uncle's mind was completely gone; and it was not until after his death that I discovered the
     papers which put me in possession of the facts of the case.
"By that time I had learned, beyond all disputing, that I was too dull and stupid ever to win
      your love. I only cared for money that it might enable me to make you happy; and
     if you could be happier without me than with me, who was I that I should complain? At any rate,
     it was given to me to insure your happiness; and that was enough for me. And you said that I
     didn't care what became of you, as long as I laid up for myself a nice little nest-egg in
     heaven! Sweetheart, I think you did me an injustice. So be happy, my dearest, with the Willows
     and the Osierfield and all the dear old things which you and I have loved so well; and remember
     that you must never pity me. I wanted you to be happy more than I wanted anything else in the
     world, and no man is to be pitied who has succeeded in getting what he wanted most.
"Yours, my darling, for time and eternity, 
Christopher Farringdon."
Then at last Elisabeth's eyes were opened, and for the first time in her life she saw
     clearly. So Christopher had loved her all along; she knew the truth at last, and with it she
     also knew that she had always loved him; that throughout her life's story there never had
     been—never could be—any man but Christopher. Until he told her that he loved her, her love for
     him had been a fountain sealed; but at his word it became a well of living water, flooding her
     whole soul and turning the desert of her life into a garden.
At first she was overpowered with the joy of it; she was upheld by that strange feeling of
     exaltation which comes to all of us when we realize for a moment our immortality, and feel that
     even death itself is powerless to hurt us. Christopher was dying, but what did that signify? He
     loved her—that was the
      only thing that really mattered—and they would have the whole of eternity in
     which to tell their love. For the second time in her life she came face to face with the fact
     that there was a stronger Will than her own guiding and ruling her; that, in spite of all her
     power and ability and self-reliance, the best things in her life were not of herself but were
     from outside. As long ago in St. Peter's Church she had learned that religion was God's Voice
     calling to her, she now learned that love was Christopher's voice calling to her; and that her
     own strength and cleverness, of which she had been so proud, counted for less than nothing. To
     her who longed to give, was given; she who desired to love, was beloved; she who aspired to
     teach, had been taught. That strong will of hers, which had once been so dominant, had suddenly
     fallen down powerless; she no longer wanted to have her own way—she wanted to have
     Christopher's. Her warfare against him was at last accomplished. To the end of her days she
     knew she would go on weighing herself in his balances, and measuring herself according to his
     measures; but now she would do so willingly, choosing to be guided by his wisdom rather than
     her own, for she no more belonged to herself but to him. The feeling of unrest, which had
     oppressed her for so many years, now fell from her like a cast-off garment. Christopher was the
     answer to her life's problem, the fulfilment of her heart's desire; and although she might be
     obliged to go down again into the valley of the shadow, she could never forget that she had
     once stood upon the mountain-top and had beheld the glory of the promised land.
And she never remembered that now her fortune was secured to her, and that the Willows and
     the
      Osierfield would always be hers; even these were henceforth of no moment to her,
     save as monuments of Christopher's love.
So in the dingy dining-room, on that hot summer's afternoon, Elisabeth Farringdon became a
     new creature. The old domineering arrogance passed away forever; and from its ashes there arose
     another Elisabeth, who out of weakness was made stronger than she had ever been in her
     strength—an Elisabeth who had attained to the victory of the vanquished, and who had tasted the
     triumph of defeat. But in all her exaltation she knew—though for the moment the knowledge could
     not hurt her—that her heart would be broken by Christopher's death. Through the long night of
     her ignorance and self-will and unsatisfied idealism she had wrestled with the angel that she
     might behold the Best, and had prayed that it might be granted unto her to see the Vision
     Beautiful. At last she had prevailed; and the day for which she had so longed was breaking, and
     transfiguring the common world with its marvellous light. But the angel-hand had touched her,
     and she no longer stood upright and self-reliant, but was bound to halt and walk lamely on her
     way until she stood by Christopher's side again.
This exalted mood did not last for long. As she sat in the gloomy room and watched the
     blazing sunshine forcing its way through the darkened windows, her eye suddenly fell upon two
     notches cut in the doorway, where she and Christopher had once measured themselves when they
     were children; and the familiar sight of these two little notches, made by Christopher's knife
     so long ago, awoke in her heart the purely human longing for him as the friend and comrade she
     had known and looked up to all
      her life. And with this longing came the terrible thought of how she had hurt and
     misunderstood and misjudged him, and of how it was now too late for her to make up to him in
     this life for all the happiness of which she had defrauded him in her careless pride. Then, for
     the first time since she was born, Elisabeth put her lips to the cup of remorse, and found it
     very bitter to the taste. She had been so full of plans for comforting mankind and helping the
     whole world; yet she had utterly failed toward the only person whom it had been in her power
     actually to help and comfort; and her heart echoed the wail of the most beautiful love-song
     ever written—"They made me the keeper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not
     kept."
As she was sitting, bowed down in utter anguish of spirit while the waves of remorse flooded
     her soul, the door opened and the nurse came in.
"Mr. Thornley is conscious now, and is asking for you, Miss Farringdon," she said.
Elisabeth started up, her face aglow with new hope. It was so natural to her not to be cast
     down for long. "Oh! I am so glad. I want dreadfully to see him, I have so much to say to him.
     But I'll promise not to tire or excite him. Tell me, how long may I stay with him, Nurse, and
     how quiet must I be?"
The nurse smiled sadly. "It won't matter how long you stay or what you say, Miss Farringdon;
     I don't think it is possible for anything to hurt or help him now; for I am afraid, whatever
     happens, he can not possibly recover."
As she went upstairs Elisabeth kept saying to herself, "I am going to see the real
     Christopher for the first time"; and she felt the old, shy fear of
      him that she had felt long ago when Richard Smallwood was stricken. But when she
     entered the room and saw the worn, white face on the pillow, with the kind smile she knew so
     well, she completely forgot her shyness, and only remembered that Christopher was in need of
     her, and that she would gladly give her life for his if she could.
"Kiss me, my darling," he said, holding out his arms; and she knew by the look in his eyes
     that every word of his letter was true. "I am too tired to pretend any more that I don't love
     you. And it can't matter now whether you know or not, it is so near the end."
Elisabeth put her strong arms round him, and kissed him as he asked. "Chris, dear," she
     whispered, "I want to tell you that I love you, and that I've always loved you, and that I
     always shall love you; but I've only just found it out."
Christopher was silent for a moment, and clasped her very close. But he was not so much
     surprised as he would have been had Elisabeth made such an astounding revelation to him in the
     days of his health. When one is drawing near to the solution of the Great Mystery, one loses
     the power of wondering at anything.
"How did you find it out, my dearest?" he asked at last.
"Through finding out that you loved me. It seems to me that my love was always lying in the
     bank at your account, but until you gave a cheque for it you couldn't get at it. And the cheque
     was my knowing that you cared for me."
"And how did you find that out, Betty?"
"I was rummaging in the safe just now for the plans of the Osierfield, and I came upon your
     letter."
     
"I didn't mean you to read that while I was alive; but, all the same, I think I am rather
     glad that you did."
"And I am glad, too. I wish I hadn't always been so horrid to you, Chris; but I believe I
     should have loved you all the time, if only you had given me the chance. Still, I was
     horrid—dreadfully horrid; and now it is too late to make it up to you." And Elisabeth's eyes
     filled with tears.
"Don't cry, my darling—please don't cry. And, besides, you have made it up to me by loving me
     now. I am glad you understand at last, Betty; I did so hope you would some day."
"And you forgive me for having been so vile?"
"There is nothing to forgive, sweetheart; it was my fault for not making you understand; but
     I did it for the best, though I seem to have made a mess of it."
"And you like me just the same as you did before I was unkind to you?"
"My dear, don't you know?"
"You see, Chris, I was wanting you to be nice to me all the time—nothing else satisfied me
     instead of you. And when you seemed not to like me any longer, but to care for doing your duty
     more than for being with me, I got sore and angry, and decided to punish you for making a place
     for yourself in my heart and then refusing to fill it."
"Well, you did what you decided, as you generally do; there is no doubt of that. You were
     always very prone to administer justice and to maintain truth, Elisabeth, and you certainly
     never spared the rod as far as I was concerned."
"But now I see that I was wrong; I understand that it was because you cared so much for
     abstract
      right, that you were able to care so much for me; a lower nature would have given
     me a lower love; and if only we could go through it all again, I should want you to go to
     Australia after George Farringdon's son."
Christopher's thin fingers wandered over Elisabeth's hair; and as they did so he remembered,
     with tender amusement, how often he had comforted her on account of her dark locks. Now one or
     two gray hairs were beginning to show through the brown ones, and it struck him with a pang
     that he would no longer be here to comfort her on account of those; for he knew that Elisabeth
     was the type of woman who would require consolation on that score, and that he was the man who
     could effectually have administered it.
"I can see now," Elisabeth went on, "how much more important it is what a man is than what a
     man says, though I used to think that words were everything, and that people didn't feel what
     they didn't talk about. You used to disappoint me because you said so little; but, all the
     same, your character influenced me without my knowing it; and whatever good there is in me,
     comes from my having known you and seen you live up to your own ideals. People wonder that
     worldly things attract me so little, and that my successes haven't turned my head; so they
     would have done, probably, if I had never met you; but having once seen in you what the ideal
     life is, I couldn't help despising lower things, though I tried my hardest not to despise them.
     Nobody who had once been with you, and looked even for a minute at life through your eyes,
     could ever care again for anything that was mean or sordid or paltry. Darling, don't you
     understand that my knowing you
      made me better than I tried to be—better even than I wanted to be; and that all
     my life I shall be a truer woman because of you?"
But by that time the stupendous effort which Christopher had made for Elisabeth's sake had
     exhausted itself, and he fell back upon his pillows, white to the lips, and too weak to say
     another word. Yet not even the great Shadow could cloud the love that shone in his eyes, as he
     looked at Elisabeth's eager face, and listened to the voice for which his soul had hungered so
     long. The sight of his weakness brought her down to earth again more effectually than any words
     could have done; and with an exceeding bitter cry she hid her face in her arms and sobbed
     aloud—
"Oh! my darling, my darling, come back to me; I love you so that I can not let you go. The
     angels can do quite well without you in heaven, but I can not do without you here. Oh! Chris,
     don't go away and leave me, just now that we've learned to understand one another. I'll be good
     all my life, and do everything that you tell me, if only you won't go away. My dearest, I love
     you so—I love you so; and I've nobody in the world but you."
Christopher made another great effort to take her in his arms and comfort her; but it was too
     much for him, and he fainted away.
     
