
LITTLE WILLIE

He that beginneth may not end,
And he that breaketh can not mend.

The summer which brought fame to Elisabeth, brought something better than fame to Willie
     Tremaine. All through the winter the child had grown visibly feebler and frailer, and the
     warmer weather seemed to bring additional weakness rather than strength. In vain did Alan try
     to persuade himself that Willie was no worse this year than he had been other years, and that
     he soon would be all right again. As a matter of fact, he soon was all right again; but not in
     the way which his father meant.
Caleb Bateson's wisdom had been justified. Through his passionate love for little Willie,
     Alan had drawn near to the kingdom of God; not as yet to the extent of formulating any specific
     creed or attaching himself to any special church—that was to come later; but he had learned, by
     the mystery of his own fatherhood, to stretch out groping hands toward the great Fatherhood
     that had called him into being; and by his own love for his suffering child to know something
     of the Love that passeth knowledge. Therefore Alan Tremaine was a better
      and wiser man than he had been in times past. A strong friendship had gradually
     grown up between himself and Christopher Thornley; and it was a friendship which was good for
     both of them. Though Christopher never talked about his religious beliefs, he lived them; and
     it is living epistles such as this which are best known and read of all thoughtful men, and
     which—far more than all the books and sermons ever written—are gradually converting the
     kingdoms of this world into the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ. Alan would have
     refuted—to his own satisfaction, if not to Christopher's—any arguments which the latter might
     have brought forward in favour of Christianity; but he could not refute the evidence of a life
     which could never have been lived but for that Other Life lived in Judæa nineteen centuries
     ago. Perhaps his friendship with Christopher did as much for Alan as his love for Willie in
     opening his eyes to the hidden things of God.
The intercourse with the Tremaines was, on the other hand, of great advantage to Christopher,
     as it afforded him the opportunity of meeting and mixing with men as clever and as cultivated
     as himself, which is not always easy for a lonely man in a provincial town who devotes his
     loneliness to intellectual pursuits. Christopher was fast becoming one of the most influential
     men in Mershire; and his able management of the Osierfield had raised those works to a greater
     height of prosperity than they had ever attained before, even in the days of William and John
     Farringdon.
But now the shadows were darkening around Alan Tremaine, as day by day Willie gradually faded
     away. Felicia, too, at last awoke to the real state
      of the case, and, in her way, was almost as anxious as her husband.
During the spring-time, as Willie's life grew shorter with the lengthening days, the child's
     chiefest delight lay in visits from Christopher. For Elisabeth's sake Christopher had always
     felt an interest in little Willie. Had not her dear hands fondled the child, before they were
     too busy to do anything but weave spells to charm the whole world? And had not her warm heart
     enfolded him, before her success and her fame had chilled its fires? For the sake of the
     Elisabeth that used to be, Christopher would always be a friend to Willie; and he did not find
     it hard to love the child for his own sake, since Christopher had great powers of loving, and
     but little to expend them upon.
As Willie continually asked for Elisabeth, Felicia wrote and told her so; and the moment she
     found she was wanted, Elisabeth came down to the Willows for a week—though her fame and the
     London season were alike at their height—and went every day to see Willie at the Moat House. He
     loved to have her with him, because she talked to him about things that his parents never
     mentioned to him; and as these things were drawing nearer to Willie day by day, his interest in
     them unconsciously increased. He and she had long talks together about the country on the other
     side of the hills, and what delightful times they would have when they reached it: how Willie
     would be able to walk as much as he liked, and Elisabeth would be able to love as much as she
     wanted, and life generally would turn out to be a success—a thing which it so rarely does on
     this side of the hills.
Christopher, as a rule, kept away from the Moat
      House when Elisabeth was there; he thought she did not wish to see him, and he
     was not the type of man to go where he imagined he was not wanted; but one afternoon they met
     there by accident, and Christopher inwardly blessed the Fate which made him do the very thing
     he had so studiously refrained from doing. He had been sitting with Tremaine, and she with
     Felicia and Willie; and they met in the hall on their way out.
"Are you going my way?" asked Elisabeth graciously, when they had shaken hands. It was dull
     at Sedgehill after London, and the old flirting spirit woke up in her and made her want to
     flirt with Christopher again, in spite of all that had happened. With the born flirt—as with
     all born players of games—the game itself is of more importance than the personality of the
     other players; which sometimes leads to unfortunate mistakes on the part of those players who
     do not rightly understand the rules of the game.
"Yes, Miss Farringdon, I am," said Christopher, who would have been going Elisabeth's way had
     that way led him straight to ruin. With him the personality of the player—in this case, at
     least—mattered infinitely more than any game she might choose to play. As long as he was
     talking to Elisabeth, he did not care a straw what they were talking about; which showed that
     he really was culpably indifferent to—if not absolutely ignorant of—the rules of the game.
"Then we might as well walk together." And Elisabeth drew on her long Suède gloves and
     leisurely opened her parasol, as they strolled down the drive after bidding farewell to the
     Tremaines.
Christopher was silent from excess of happiness.
      It was so wonderful to be walking by Elisabeth's side again, and listening to her
     voice, and watching the lights and shadows in those gray eyes of hers which sometimes were so
     nearly blue. But Elisabeth did not understand his silence; she translated it, as she would have
     translated silence on her own part, into either boredom or ill-temper, and she resented it
     accordingly.
"You are very quiet this afternoon. Aren't you going to talk to me?" she said; and
     Christopher's quick ear caught the sound of the irritation in her voice, though he could not
     for the life of him imagine what he had done to bring it there; but it served to silence him
     still further.
"Yes—yes, of course I am," he said lamely; "what shall we talk about? I am afraid there is
     nothing interesting to tell you about the Osierfield, things are going on so regularly there,
     and so well."
How exactly like Christopher to begin to talk about business when she had given him the
     chance to talk about more interesting subjects—herself, for instance, Elisabeth thought; but he
     never had a mind above sordid details! She did not, of course, know that at that identical
     moment he was wondering whether her eyes were darker than they used to be, or whether he had
     forgotten their exact shade; he could hardly have forgotten their colour, he decided, as there
     had never been a day when he had not remembered them since he saw them last; so they must
     actually be growing darker.
"I'm glad of that," said Elisabeth coldly, in her most fine-ladylike manner.
"It was distinctly kind of you to find time to run down here, in the midst of your London
     life, to see
      Willie! He fretted after you sadly, and I am afraid the poor little fellow is not
     long for this world." And Christopher sighed.
Elisabeth noted the sigh and approved of it. It was a comfort to find that the man had
     feelings of any sort, she said to herself, even though only for a child; that was better than
     being entirely immersed in self-interest and business affairs.
So they talked about Willie for a time, and the conversation ran more smoothly—almost
     pleasantly.
Then they talked about books; and Elisabeth—who had grown into the habit of thinking that
     nobody outside London knew anything—was surprised to find that Christopher had read
     considerably more books than she had read, and had understood them far more thoroughly. But
     this part of the conversation was inclined to be stormy; since Christopher as a rule disliked
     the books that Elisabeth liked, and this she persisted in regarding as tantamount to disliking
     herself.
Whereupon she became defiant, and told stories of her life in London of which she knew
     Christopher would disapprove. There was nothing in the facts that he could possibly disapprove
     of, so she coloured them up until there was; and then, when she had succeeded in securing his
     disapproval, she was furious with him on account of it. Which was manifestly unfair, as
     Christopher in no way showed the regret which he could not refrain from experiencing, as he
     listened to Elisabeth making herself out so much more frivolous and heartless than she really
     was.
"This is the first time I have had an opportunity of congratulating you on your success," he
     said to her at last; "we are all very proud of it at Sedgehill;
      but, believe me, there is no one who rejoices in it a tithe as much as I do, if
     you will allow me to say so."
Elisabeth was slightly mollified. She had been trying all the time, as she was so fond of
     trying years ago, to divert the conversation into more personal channels; and Christopher had
     been equally desirous of keeping it out of the same. But this sounded encouraging.
"Thank you so much," she answered; "it is very nice of you all to be pleased with me! I
     always adored being admired and praised, if you remember."
Christopher remembered well enough; but he was not going to tell this crushing fine lady how
     well he remembered. If he had not exposed his heart for Elisabeth to peck at in the old days,
     he certainly was not going to expose it now; then she would only have been scientifically
     interested—now she would probably be disdainfully amused.
"I suppose you saw my picture in this year's Academy," Elisabeth added.
"Saw it? I should think I did. I went up to town on purpose to see it, as I always do when
     you have pictures on view at any of the shows."
"And what did you think of it?"
Christopher was silent for a moment; then he said—
"Do you want me to say pretty things to you or to tell you the truth?"
"Why, the truth, of course," replied Elisabeth, who considered that the two things were
     synonymous—or at any rate ought to be.
"And you won't be angry with me, or think me impertinent?"
"Of course not," answered Elisabeth, who most
      certainly would; and Christopher—not having yet learned wisdom—believed her.
"I thought it was a distinctly powerful picture—a distinctly remarkable picture—and if any
     one but you had painted it, I should have been delighted with it; but somehow I felt that it
     was not quite up to your mark—that you could do, and will do, better work."
For a second Elisabeth was dumbfounded with amazement and indignation. How dare this one man
     dispute the verdict of London? Then she said—
"In what way do you think the work could have been done better?"
"That is just what I can't tell you; I wish I could; but I'm not an artist, unfortunately. It
     seems to me that there are other people (not many, I admit, but still some) who could have
     painted that picture; while you are capable of doing work which no one else in the world could
     possibly do. Naturally I want to see you do your best, and am not satisfied when you do
     anything less."
Elisabeth tossed her head. "You are very hard to please, Mr. Thornley."
"I know I am, where your work is concerned; but that is because I have formed such a high
     ideal of your powers. If I admired you less, I should admire your work more, don't you
     see?"
But Elisabeth did not see. She possessed the true artist-spirit which craves for appreciation
     of its offspring more than for appreciation of itself—a feeling which perhaps no one but an
     artist or a mother really understands. Christopher, being neither, did not understand it in the
     least, and erroneously concluded that adoration of the creator absolves one from the necessity
     of admiration of the thing created.
     
"I shall never do a better piece of work than that," Elisabeth retorted, being imbued with
     the creative delusion that the latest creation is of necessity the finest creation. No artist
     could work at all if he did not believe that the work he was doing—or had just done—was the
     best piece of work he had ever done or ever should do. This is because his work, however good,
     always falls short of the ideal which inspired it; and, while he is yet working, he can not
     disentangle the ideal from the reality. He must be at a little distance from his work until he
     can do this properly; and Elisabeth was as yet under the influence of that creative glamour
     which made her see her latest picture as it should be rather than as it was.
"Oh, yes, you will; you will fulfil my ideal of you yet. I cherish no doubts on that
     score."
"I can't think what you see wrong in my picture," said Elisabeth somewhat pettishly.
"I don't see anything wrong in it. Good gracious! I must have expressed myself badly if I
     conveyed such an impression to you as that, and you would indeed be justified in writing me
     down an ass. I think it is a wonderfully clever picture—so clever that nobody but you could
     ever paint a cleverer one."
"Well, I certainly couldn't. You must have formed an exaggerated estimate of my artistic
     powers."
"I think not! You can, and will, paint a distinctly better picture some day."
"In what way better?"
"Ah! there you have me. But I will try to tell you what I mean, though I speak as a fool; and
     if I say anything very egregious, you must let my ignorance be my excuse, and pardon the clumsy
     expression of my intentions because they are so well meant. It doesn't seem to me
     to be enough for anybody to do good work; they must go further, and do the best possible work
     in their power. Nothing but one's best is really worth the doing; the cult of the second-best
     is always a degrading form of worship. Even though one man's second-best be intrinsically
     superior to the best work of his fellows, he has nevertheless no right to offer it to the
     world. He is guilty of an injustice both to himself and the world in so doing."
"I don't agree with you. This is an age of results; and the world's business is with the
     actual value of the thing done, rather than with the capabilities of the man who did it."
"You are right in calling this an age of results, Miss Farringdon; but that is the age's
     weakness and not its strength. The moment men begin to judge by results, they judge unrighteous
     judgment. They confound the great man with the successful man; the saint with the famous
     preacher; the poet with the writer of popular music-hall songs."
"Then you think that we should all do our best, and not bother ourselves too much as to
     results?"
"I go further than that; I think that the mere consideration of results incapacitates us from
     doing our best work at all."
"I don't agree with you," repeated Elisabeth haughtily. But, nevertheless, she did.
"I daresay I am wrong; but you asked me for my candid opinion and I gave it to you. It is a
     poor compliment to flatter people—far too poor ever to be paid by me to you; and in this case
     the simple truth is a far greater compliment than any flattery could be. You can imagine what a
     high estimate I have
      formed of your powers, when so great a picture as The Pillar of Cloud fails to
     satisfy me."
The talk about her picture brought to Elisabeth's mind the remembrance of that other picture
     which had been almost as popular as hers; and, with it, the remembrance of the man who had
     painted it.
"I suppose you have heard nothing more about George Farringdon's son," she remarked, with
     apparent irrelevance. "I wonder if he will ever turn up?"
"Oh! I hardly think it is likely now; I have quite given up all ideas of his doing so,"
     replied Christopher cheerfully.
"But supposing he did?"
"In that case I am afraid he would be bound to enter into his kingdom. But I really don't
     think you need worry any longer over that unpleasant contingency, Miss Farringdon; it is too
     late in the day; if he were going to appear upon the scene at all, he would have appeared
     before now, I feel certain."
"You really think so?"
"Most assuredly I do. Besides, it will not be long before the limit of time mentioned by your
     cousin is reached; and then a score of George Farringdon's sons could not turn you out of your
     rights."
For a moment Elisabeth thought she would tell Christopher about her suspicions as to the
     identity of Cecil Farquhar. But it was as yet merely a suspicion, and she knew by experience
     how ruthlessly Christopher pursued the line of duty whenever that line was pointed out to him;
     so she decided to hold her peace (and her property) a little longer. But she also knew that the
     influence of Christopher was even yet so strong upon her, that, when the time
      came, she should do the right thing in spite of herself and in defiance of her
     own desires. And this knowledge, strange to say, irritated her still further against the
     innocent and unconscious Christopher.
The walk from the Moat House to Sedgehill was a failure as far as the re-establishment of
     friendly relations between Christopher and Elisabeth was concerned, for it left her with the
     impression that he was less appreciative of her and more wrapped up in himself and his own
     opinions than ever; while it conveyed to his mind the idea that her success had only served to
     widen the gulf between them, and that she was more indifferent to and independent of his
     friendship than she had ever been before.
Elisabeth went back to London, and Christopher to his work again, and little Willie drew
     nearer and nearer to the country on the other side of the hills; until one day it happened that
     the gate which leads into that country was left open by the angels, and Willie slipped through
     it and became strong and well. His parents were left outside the gate, weeping, and at first
     they refused to be comforted; but after a time Alan learned the lesson which Willie had been
     sent to teach him, and saw plain.
"Dear," he said to his wife at last, "I've got to begin life over again so as to go the way
     that Willie went. The little chap made me promise to meet him in the country over the hills, as
     he called it; and I've never broken a promise to Willie and I never will. It will be difficult
     for us, I know; but God will help us."
Felicia looked at him with sad, despairing eyes. "There is no God," she said; "you have often
     told me so."
"I know I have; that was because I was such a
      blind fool. But now I know that there is a God, and that you and I must serve Him
     together."
"How can we serve a myth?" Felicia persisted.
"He is no myth, Felicia. I lied to you when I told you that He was."
And then Felicia laughed; the first time that she had laughed since Willie's death, and it
     was not a pleasant laugh to hear. "Do you think you can play pitch-and-toss with a woman's soul
     in that way? Well, you can't. When I met you I believed in God as firmly as any girl believed;
     but you laughed me out of my faith, and proved to me what a string of lies and folly it all
     was; and then I believed in you as firmly as before I had believed in God, and I knew that
     Christianity was a fable."
Alan's face grew very white. "Good heavens! Felicia, did I do this?"
"Of course you did, and you must take the consequences of your own handiwork; it is too late
     to undo it now. Don't try to comfort me, even if you can drug yourself, with fairy-tales about
     meeting Willie again. I shall never see my little child again in this life, and there is no
     other."
"You are wrong; believe me, you are wrong." And Alan's brow was damp with the anguish of his
     soul.
"It is only what you taught me. But because you took my faith away from me, it doesn't follow
     that you can give it back to me again; it has gone forever."
"Oh, Felicia, Felicia, may God and you and Willie forgive me, for I can never forgive
     myself!"
"I can not forgive you, because I have nothing to forgive; you did me no wrong in opening my
     eyes. And God can not forgive you, because there
      never was a God; so you did Him no wrong. And Willie can not forgive you, because
     there is no Willie now; so you did him no wrong."
"My dearest, it can not all have gone from you forever; it will come back to you, and you
     will believe as I do."
Felicia shook her head. "Never; it is too late. You have taken away my Lord, and I know not
     where you have laid Him; and, however long I live, I shall never find Him again."
And she went out of the room in the patience of a great despair, and left her husband alone
     with his misery.
     
