
CHAPTER IV
ALISON
AS sometimes happens with busy people in London, the Erles had hundreds of
     acquaintances and but few intimate friends. A friendship is costly, in point of time, and Mary
     found, when one chapter of her life was done that spring morning, that there were two people
     only that she must imperatively see: a man and a woman—Vincent Hemming and Alison Ives. How
     their features stood out among the crowd of vague faces, which belonged to that other life!
     Alison Ives especially, who always looked like a Reynolds, with her handsome, clever face, her
     superb air, and her huge hats tied under the chin. With that grave sweetness which endears to
     us the Siddons in the National Gallery, she yet had the look of a thinker, modernised by a
     slightly bored expression, and a little distinguished way which at once made other women in her
     vicinity look dowdy or vulgar. Her clothes always seemed to suit her,
      as its feathers do a bird. There are women who look like an
      édition de luxe of a poor book; Alison Ives suggested that
     of a classic.
It had been her habit for a couple of years past to sit at the feet of Professor Erle; she
     constantly announced, indeed, that he was the only man she wanted to marry, only that he was
     firm, and would not permit it. Besides, it was no good trying to compete with her mother, Lady
     Jane, who was sixty-five—and irresistible. Women of sixty-five, she said, were nowadays the
     only people who inspired a great passion. She supposed her turn would come—a quarter of a
     century hence. But, all the same, the daughter was much admired in the world; but the world, as
     understood by her mother, Lady Jane, by no means entirely satisfied this eminently modern young
     woman. It was whispered that she had serious views, though it was certain that she was pretty
     enough to please a Prime Minister, and clever enough to entertain a guardsman, if she found
     herself next to either at dinner. Alison did not mind which, she said; in fact, after a long
     day in the East-end, when she was tired, she rather preferred the guardsman, who would be
     content to talk of polo ponies, whereas, when a young woman is put next to a Premier, it
     behoves her to look, at any rate, very brilliant indeed. Though she
      never smoked, was ignorant of billiard cues and guns, and
     hated playing the man, Alison had been heard to murmur something like an oath. It was a habit
     which she had picked up in Paris, when she was working in a sculptor's studio; and she always
     declared that dame and sapristi, being in a foreign tongue, were notoriously less efficacious, and by
     inference more pardonable, than swearing in the vernacular. For the rest, with the best heart
     in the world, she had a somewhat caustic tongue, could interpret Chopin like an artist, and
     always had her hair exquisitely dressed.
What attracted people at once was her womanliness, her lack of snobbishness, her real desire
     to be in sympathy with her own sex. Like all exceptional people, she had her moods, and
     sometimes for months together she was heard of only as forming one of a party in this or that
     great country house, while at other times she would come to town and study fitfully, or devote
     herself to the task of helping young girls. Once, in the middle of the season, she took a
     lodging in a by-street in the Mile End Road, but she only stayed seven weeks, and, when she
     appeared again, the expression on her face was sadder than before. ‘Of course, one ought to
      know what it is like,’ she said, when Mary asked her why she had left so soon.
     ‘It's an experience—but a
      terrible one. It's not only the drunkenness, the down-at-heel
     vice, the astounding absence of any thrift or forethought, and the incredible repetition of one
     solitary adjective; but it seems to me that, when one or two of us go and live down there, we
     absolutely do no permanent good at all. The thing will be to bring the East-end here—one by
     one, of course, just as we go there.’
Alison kept her word. This spring had found her ensconced in a workman's flat in the Mayfair
     district, with one small servant, whom she had befriended in Whitechapel.
‘But it's as much for myself as her,’ explained Alison, laughing. She hated to be thought
     philanthropic. ‘All we women are so incredibly dependent on other people. It's absurd that we
     don't know how to do anything useful. I shall keep my flat, and go to it now and again, when I
     am tired of shooting-parties. It will be a little home for my East-end girls, whom I intend to
     train. I daresay I shall be disappointed in them, but that's inevitable with all experiments.
     Anyway, it will probably do me more good than it will them. The only real slavery nowadays is
     the slavery of luxury. We are all getting so pampered that we can't exist without it. People do
     the most incredible things. I have known a woman stay with a husband whom she loathed, and whom
     it was an
      outrage to live with, simply because she couldn't do her own
     hair. I'm going to get our cook at Ives Court to teach me how to broil a mutton-chop, though, I
     daresay, she's too grand for that; and I shall go and watch the laundry-maid at her work.’
‘And your hands, you lunatic?’ Mary had exclaimed. ‘I think I see you with red knuckles.’
‘Oh,’ said Alison, laughing, ‘I shall tell that little manicure just out of Bond Street to
     come twice a week. There's that new stuff, “Eau des Orchidées”; it's wonderful. Don't imagine
     I'm going to give up the only old-fashioned quality we modern women have got—our vanity. It's
     the only thing that makes us still bearable.’
This was the young woman who was shown into the study by Elizabeth one morning a few days
     after the funeral at Highgate. Mary was bending over a desk, busy with her father's proofs,
     when she came in. The elder girl's beautiful brown eyes were suspiciously shiny; it had
     evidently cost her an effort to come into the study which she knew so well. The two girls wrung
     each other's hands silently. But after the first kiss, in which she said everything that she
     dared not put in words, Alison, with her ready tact, began talking business at once.
The younger girl announced her plans frankly.
      There was just enough money for her to live meagrely, quietly
     on for the next few years, while she tried her luck at art. Mary had always meant to paint some
     day, when her time should be at her own disposal. To paint was a long-cherished ambition, mused
     over on drowsy afternoons in the reading-room of the British Museum, nursed during the days
     when she had remained bending over a desk in her father's study, patiently inscribing what the
     professor dictated as he walked up and down the little room. As for Jimmie, he was to remain at
     Winchester, and, if he could succeed in winning a scholarship, was to go to Oxford, as the
     father had wished. By living carefully this could be managed.
‘No woman ever made a great artist yet,’ said Alison, after a pause, ‘but, if you don't mind
     being third-rate, of course go in and try. I suppose it'll mean South Kensington, the Royal
     Academy, and then—portraits of babies in pastel or cottage gardens for the rest of your
     life.’
‘Oh, don't.’
‘Never mind, my dear girl. You must work at something. Try the British Art School. Has
     Vincent Hemming been?’ she added, rather inconsequently.
‘Oh, yes, he has called. Two or three times, Elizabeth says, but I haven't seen any one,’
     said
      Mary, remembering, with a little shudder, the inquisitive
     voices at the door.
‘I don't see why,’ said Alison, thoughtfully, ‘you shouldn't take a flat in the same building
     with me. Of course, there are little drawbacks. The ladies use a limited, if somewhat virulent
     vocabulary, and now and again one has to step over an elderly gentleman who lives just below,
     and who comes home tired, and sometimes goes to sleep on the stairs. But one gets accustomed to
     that.’
‘I think on the whole,’ said Mary, smiling, ‘I'll take some rooms near. There are some
     furnished rooms in Bulstrode Street, kept by an old servant of ours. I've got to think of
     Jimmie and his holidays, you see.’
‘Where is the boy, by the by?’
‘Oh, poor Jimmie, I let him go—the day—the day after. He was very good; he said that nothing
     would induce him to leave me, and sat, poor boy, for at least an hour with his arms round my
     neck, crying. Then another note came from Smith minor—the boy who keeps so many lop-eared
     rabbits, you remember—asking him to go and spend a week with them in the country.’
‘And then?’ said Alison quickly. ‘Ah! I can see Jimmie saying he shouldn't dream of going,
     and then wandering round the room, asking if
      you were not perhaps going out of town yourself. And about
     seven o'clock an epistle was indited to say that he would be very pleased to go, and the next
     morning Jimmie went off in a four-wheel cab, looking quite cheerful.’
Mary smiled in spite of herself.
‘Poor boy,’ she said softly, in an extenuating voice, ‘he can't bear anything sad!’
‘So much,’ said Alison after a pause, ‘for brothers.’
‘We've got,’ answered the other, ‘fortunately or unfortunately, to depend upon ourselves in
     all the crises of life. I've got lots to do; lawyers to see, these proofs to correct, and to
     make arrangements for my own future.’
‘Only that? She refuses herself nothing,’ said Alison. ‘I am modestly contented with
     arranging for Evelina's future. Evelina is my last girl. As for my own, I leave it to
     Providence.’
‘You can afford to,’ replied Mary, ‘but we have it on the authority of a proverb that Heaven
     is not above taking assistance from mortals in this respect.’
‘My dear, you should never say cynical things; you'll find you will so often be obliged to do
     them! But I want to tell you about Evelina,’ she went on nervously, afraid every minute that
      one or other of them might break down. ‘Evelina is my new
     girl,’ she continued, settling down on the fender-stool. ‘Her name is actually Evelina—isn't it
     preposterous? I should like to call her Polly, only I don't believe in changing poor people's
     names to suit your own fancy, as if they were cats or canaries. Well, Evelina's baby—’
‘Oh, there is a baby?’
‘Why, of course. A poor waxen little thing that screams all day long. I've put it out to
     nurse in a crêche that a friend of mine has started in
     Kentish Town. And now I'm trying to cultivate a sense of humour in Evelina.’
‘It will be difficult, won't it?’ said Mary, trying hard to take an interest.
‘Never mind. It's what women ought to cultivate above all other things, especially the poorer
     classes. With a keen sense of the ridiculous, they would never fall in love at all; and as to
     improvident marriages, they simply wouldn't exist. If you could see the baby's father!—a
     pudding-faced boy, who helps in a tiny cheesemonger's shop down there. She “walked out” with
     him for two years. He is now nearly nineteen. It is all very well to smile, but it is
     terrible—for the woman. In the evening, when she has done her work, she lights the lamp in my
     little sitting-room (everything
      thing is quite simple, you know; only I've got a few books,
     and the tiny Corot from my den at Ives Court, and the Rossetti drawings), and then I read aloud
     while she knits. I read comic things—Dickens, Mark Twain, and so on; and when the poor girl
     laughs, I feel that I have scored. She isn't much more than a child, you know, and she has such
     a good heart. I think she likes to talk to me: she tells me her little story.’
‘A story,’ repeated Mary; ‘she has a story, then?’
‘Oh! a common one enough down there,’ answered Alison. ‘She drifted into the East-end from
     Essex, about three years ago, and became a drudge-of-all-work in a family of ten, in the Mile
     End Road. Her master was pleased to make love to her when his wife and the eight children had
     gone for the day to South-end; Evelina ran out of the house, leaving her box behind, and never
     dared to go back. Mary, these London idylls are not pretty. She is, however, beginning to show
     a faint sense of the ridiculous. I believe I shall make a sensible person of Evelina.’
Mary raised her head, for she had been listening mechanically, with her eyes fixed on the
     ink-spots on her father's desk, the desk on which his hand had so often rested. But it
      was impossible not to feel cheered by Alison's whimsical yet
     energetic personality. She looked so bright, so alert, so capable, as she stood there, in her
     pretty black gown and her rakish hat, a little askew with the wind.
‘By the by, did I tell you the adventure I had on my visit to the Blaythewaites? My dear, it
     was only by the intervention of Providence that I didn't have to dine the first night in my
     tailor-gown. Of course, I went down third-class—’
‘That's because you are saving for Evelina's baby, I suppose,’ interrupted Mary.
‘And so,’ went on Alison, taking no notice of the interruption, ‘the footman never thought of
     looking for me there. They all drove off without me, and my basket trunk, with my favourite
     white gown in it, got taken off with some other people to another place about five miles off.
     However, it was got back in time, and when I told my little story at dinner to Sir Horace, he
     was immensely amused, though I'm sure Lady Blaythewaite thought I was graduating for a lunatic
     asylum. People who don't know me well always do.’
‘Did you tell Sir Horace Blaythewaite about the workman's flat—and Evelina?’ said Mary,
     laughing. Alison was already at the door, tying on her hat firmly.

‘You know I never talk about that,’ she said, flushing up. ‘Why it would look like a pose—as
     if I thought myself better than other people. And I couldn't bear any one to say that I had
     ‘taken up slumming.’ You know how I detest the whole attitude of the upper and middle classes
     towards the poor. Lifting the lids of people's saucepans and routing under their beds for fluff
     is simply impertinence. Why, district visiting is nothing less than a gross breach of manners—a
     little worse than electioneering, if that's possible. I'm just going up,’ she said, giving a
     rakish twist to her velvet hat-strings, ‘to the crêche in
     Kentish Town to see Evelina's baby. I'm going on the top of one of those charming trams. I told
     Worth when I was in Paris that I always went on the tops of omnibuses, and he designed me this
     little frock on purpose. It's pretty, isn't it, but a little too ingénue for me? It smacks of the Comédie Française. I think I see Reichemberg in
     it,’ said Alison doubtfully, smoothing down the folds of her loose bodice. ‘Now, you've got to
     promise to come and dine with me and mother in Portman Square; we shall have the house to
     ourselves. Good-bye. Eight o'clock.’
‘Nonsense! It's very sweet of you, but I can't possibly go,’ cried Mary down the passage.

In another instant she was gone, and the house seemed blank and empty again. But trying not
     to think of her sorrow, Mary went steadily on with the proofs.
