
CHAPTER XIX
ALISON ARRANGES A MATCH
TWO or three days after the dinner in Portman Square, as Mary was trying to impart
     an air of reality to her ‘society’ article in The Fan—a task at which she was
     busy on three mornings of every month—a pencil note was brought from Alison, dated, to her
     surprise, from Portman Square.
‘Dear little girl,’ it said, ‘I'm down with an awful cold—bronchitis, I think. The doctor
     says I'm not to get up. It's such a nuisance my being seedy, because to-day is Evelina's
     wedding-day. She's to be married at 2.30. Will you, like a dear, go and see that she's dressed,
     and bring her here to me? And my presents—the tea-service, and the work-basket, and the new cot
     for the baby—see that she has them, won't you?—Yours, ALISON.’
‘Tell the man,’ said Mary to the stolid maid-of-all-work, who was waiting, with pendant red
     hands and slightly open mouth, at the door,
      ‘that I shall be round in half an hour.’ There were still
     another dozen lines to write. The thing must be neatly turned, made acidulous and sparkling. It
     took some fifteen minutes of writing and scratching out. Then mechanically she ran her eye once
     again over the lines, tied up the sheets of MSS., and directed it to the editor before she left
     the house.
Mary found the bride all dressed and ready when she reached the flat. Always a silent girl,
     who accepted things as they came, Evelina seemed to-day paralysed with the excitement of her
     position. In silence they drove in a four-wheel cab to Portman Square. Lady Jane, with an
     uneasy look on her plump, worldly face, was issuing from Alison's bedroom when they got
     upstairs.
‘That's so kind of you, my dear Mary. Go in—go in. My poor Alison wishes to see you. And
     this, no doubt, is the young person she is so interested in. My dear child has such a good
     heart. You will stay, will you not, while darling Alison is poorly? I have to go to a meeting
     of the Primrose League—the dear Primrose League. And, Mary, my child,’ she added, as she
     rustled down the stairs in her ample garments, ‘kindly ask my maid, as you're near my room, to
     bring down my bottle of lavender-salts—the strong ones with the gold top.’

Alison was sitting up in bed, with her head slightly bent forward in a fit of coughing, as
     they stepped inside. It was in a large, gay-looking bedroom that she lay—a room furnished by
     Lady Jane in a style which she considered suitable to an unmarried daughter. There were many
     chintz draperies, patterned with sprawling pink roses; the pillows were trimmed with deep lace,
     and the ample silk eider-down quilt was of a piercing blue. Little pot-bellied Loves disported
     themselves on the round looking-glass, and a number of slim gold-and-white chairs were placed
     about the room. A bronchitis-kettle was steaming near the bed, and bright sunshine lay along
     the counterpane and in patches on the carpet.
‘Here she is!’ said Mary; and Evelina, with loudly-creaking boots, stepped, gawky and
     embarrassed in her finery, to the bedside, her red cheeks and wrists accentuated by the pallor
     of her soiled white-silk frock. A wreath of stiff kid orange-blossoms lay on her wiry, dark
     hair, from which hung backwards a veil of white tulle. One of the thumbs of her white silk
     gloves had already ripped up. On her ample bosom heaved and fell a gold locket, containing a
     curl of the baby's hair.
‘Kiss me, my dear,’ whispered Alison; ‘I hope you are going to be very, very happy. I'm so
     sorry I can't be at the wedding.’

‘Oh, Miss Alison,’ cried the girl, ‘I'm so sorry you're—you're not well. Joe and me, we'd
     both like to put the wedding off till you could come—’
‘Don't wait for that, Evelina,’ said Alison, an anxious look crossing her forehead; ‘you
     mustn't wait for that. Mary, you'll go with her to the church, and see that the wedding
     breakfast—’
‘Yes, yes, dear, Don't tire yourself thinking about it all. How did you catch this
     dreadful—cold?’
‘Waiting for an omnibus in the Mile End Road. You know—that night of the dinner here. I had
     been to the hospital. I must have caught a chill.’
‘Alison, I'm coming back.’
‘Oh, yes. Good-bye, my dear Evelina. I wish I could have been with you to-day,’ she said,
     wistfully. ‘I hope you'll like the little house; and mind you look after Joe, and keep him
     steady. Good-bye, good luck!’
And a few minutes later the pink cheeks, the second-hand wedding-dress, and the creaking
     boots were being conveyed in a four-wheeled cab towards matrimonial respectability.
Alison wanted to hear all about it when Mary got back.
‘Well, and what did she say?’ asked the sick woman.

‘She didn't say anything. Brides never do,’ said Mary.
‘And how did Joe behave?’
‘As far as I could make out, he was terrified at me, and as I saw that, in all probability,
     he would eat nothing as long as I was there, I made an excuse, and left the wedding-feast, no
     doubt to the intense relief of the guests.’
‘And the baby—my dear fat thing?’
‘Oh, the baby,’ said Mary, ‘apparently belongs to the new anti-marriage movement. He doesn't
     approve, it would seem, of any legalising of the bond which unites his father and mother. At
     any rate, he screamed till he was purple in the face, and had to be removed from the room by a
     first cousin of his mamma's, a young lady who wore more ostrich feathers than I have ever seen
     on one human head. And as for poor Evelina,’ continued Mary, laughing, ‘I'm afraid, after all
     the pains you've taken, you haven't developed in her a sense of humour. Otherwise she wouldn't
     have insisted on being married in a second-hand white silk dress.’
‘You don't understand,’ protested Alison. ‘I think that it shows a certain vague hankering
     after the ideal—a sort of élan towards the unattainable.’
‘Nonsense! she ought to have been married in a good stout waterproof.’

‘Well, thank goodness, we're not all sensible. How dull it would be if we were!’
‘I must say the kid orange-blossoms and the reach-me-down wedding-dress quite made my
     joy.’
‘You're an unsympathetic beast,’ said Alison, tossing on her rumpled pillows.
      ‘I shouldn't have laughed. I know these people so much better than
     you do.’
Presently she fell into a doze, and Mary sat at the window, trying to read, but with her eyes
     and thoughts constantly on the bed, where Alison was tossing about in a curiously restless
     manner.
‘Little Mary!’ came a voice from the bed presently.
‘Yes, dear?’
‘Promise me that you will never, never do anything to hurt another woman,’ said the sick
     girl, running her finger along the pattern on the counterpane. ‘I don't suppose for an instant
     you ever would. But there come times in our lives when we can do a great deal of good, or an
     incalculable amount of harm. If women only used their power in the right way! If we were only
     united we could lead the world. But we're not—we're not,’ she said, closing her eyes with a
     tired gesture.
‘Ah!’ said Mary slowly, ‘but we shall be by and by. All we modern women are going
      to help each other, not to hinder. And there's a great deal
     to do—’
‘Yes, and we've all so little time,’ said Alison, regretfully. ‘Do you remember the hospital,
     and that poor girl, Number Twenty-seven?’
‘Yes, of course. What makes you think of her?’ faltered Mary.
‘She's dead, you know. It can't be nice to die in a hospital, can it? The ugly, long ward,
     those ghastly, twitching faces on the pillows, the students staring at you, then the mortuary,
     and a pauper's funeral.’
‘Don't talk about it, Alison.’
‘And yet that girl,’ muttered the sick woman, ‘was Dunlop Strange's mistress. He made her
     what she was.’
‘Oh, Alison, are you sure?’
Alison nodded.
‘I thought at first it might be a got-up story—one hears of such things, you know. But it was
     true, quite true. She had his photographs, his letters, little things that belonged to him.
     Mary, that wretched creature was a respectable girl—a shop assistant—when she first saw him.
     No, it isn't a pretty world!’
‘And Dr. Strange? Does he know?’
‘I told him that night at the dinner. I was furious. He tried to brave it out, to pretend he
     knew nothing about her. I hope,’ she added,
      while the anxious look deepened on her forehead, ‘that I
     shall never have to see him again. You won't,’ she said excitedly, ‘let them bring him up here,
     to me?’
‘No, no, of course not.’
But the thing seemed to have taken possession of her mind.
‘When did you see her, Mary?’ she asked presently. ‘You seemed to know her when we stopped at
     that bed.’
‘I only saw her once in the Regent's Park, waiting about for some one. I remembered her face
     perfectly—it made an impression on me. It—it was that day at the end of July when—when I
     expected Vincent back—’
‘That was the day they pulled her out of the canal—the slimy green canal. She got fourteen
     days for that. The magistrate said it was a painful case, and that he would let her off
     easily.’
‘They might have let her drown. It would have been better,’ replied Mary, gazing into the
     firelight.
‘She never said a word about him,’ said Alison presently, ‘she never mentioned
     his name. Lots of girls would have made a scandal, out of revenge. There must have been some
     good in her. It was only quite at the last that I knew for certain.’

The winter dusk fell early in the spacious bed-room. There was a terrible tension in the air.
     The very atmosphere seemed charged with feminine emotion, as the two girls, exaggerating, as
     over-refined women will, the importance of ethical standards of conduct in the great teeming
     universe, talked on and on in the gathering gloom.
It was dark when Lady Jane returned, bringing with her large, pink cheeks, her parted hair,
     her rustling silk clothes, an air at once motherly and mundane into the sick room.
‘I shall insist, my darling, on your seeing some one else,’ she announced in her rather loud
     but cheery voice. ‘I can quite understand your not wishing to see our dear Dunlop, for we
     women,’ she added with a sigh, ‘all have our little coquetries. But what objection can you have
     to seeing Danby? I shall send round at once to Travers Danby.’
But the great man, when he finally arrived, preserved an impenetrable mask in the presence of
     Alison, of her mother, and of Mary. A prolonged consultation with the other doctor resulted in
     frequent doses of brandy or port wine being ordered, and an admission, just at the hall-door,
     that the case was serious.
Mary went down to the dining-room when the bell rang, leaving Alison's old nurse at the
     bedside
      side. Lady Jane's one idea was that Dunlop Strange should be
     called in.
‘If she would only see him,’ she reiterated for the fifth time, shaking her head tragically
     when the butler offered her a savoury, ‘he is so clever with chest complaints, so marvellously,
     marvellously clever! Why, he cured Kempton—Lord Sandown's eldest son—when he was positively
     given up by every doctor in London. And they say the poor young man had led a perfectly
     shocking life.’
‘Dear Lady Jane,’ urged Mary, ‘pray don't insist on it to her. It would be worse than
     useless—it really would do harm.’ She had made up her mind to say nothing about ‘Number
     Twenty-seven,’ and her sordid little tragedy. Lady Jane was kind and charming, but she had
     retained the prejudices of ladies who were young in the fifties. In all probability she would
     only call the dead girl some old-fashioned hard names. Certainly she would never comprehend her
     daughter's extremely modern sympathy for this woman who had drawn her last breath in a hospital
     ward.
It was settled that Mary should remain all night at the bedside. There were a dozen things to
     think of: food, stimulants, medicines, blisters. She ran over carefully in her mind all that
     she would have to do during the night. Lady Jane
      said she would lie down in the next room but with the door
     open, to listen.
Towards ten o'clock, the sick girl sat up, saying she could breathe easier in that
     position.
‘Oh, how I hate being ill,’ she muttered, clenching her fingers as they lay on the
     counter-pane. ‘Mary,’ she continued, while the irritable anxious look deepened on her face for
     she had to stop—‘I feel,’ she gasped at last, ‘as if I were choking.’
‘Dear,’ said the other girl, ‘why don't you lie down?’
‘I can't—I can't breathe if I do. Mary, do you think I shall be ill long? I've always hated
     being ill. There is the personal degradation—one looks odious, one is odious.’
‘Dear, you will be all right again in a day or two,’ urged Mary.
‘Oh! I don't mean that,’ she muttered, falling back. ‘It doesn't matter; nothing matters,
     nothing matters,’ she went on till she fell into an uneasy dose. She was lying tossing from one
     side to the other with her head lower than her shoulders, when Dr. Danby came again at
     eleven.
‘How long has the patient been in that position?’ whispered the great man. Something in the
     tone of his voice made her heart stand still.
‘She's been lying like that all the time—
      when she isn't sitting up coughing,’ faltered the girl.
‘Ah! We must keep up the patient's strength in every way. It's very serious now, Miss
     Erle.’
Mary heard the words, but they sounded a long way off.
