
CHAP. XIV. MOUNT OLYMPUS.
Wretched in spirit, groaning under the feeling of
                                        insult, self-condemning, and ill-satisfied in every way,
                                        Bold returned to his London lodgings. Ill as he had fared in
                                        his interview with the archdeacon, he was not less under the
                                        necessity of carrying out his pledge to Eleanor; and he went
                                        about his ungracious task with a heavy heart.
The attorneys whom he had employed in London received his
                                        instructions with surprise and evident misgiving: however,
                                        they could only obey, and mutter something of their sorrow
                                        that such heavy costs should only fall upon their own
                                        employer,— especially as nothing was wanting but
                                        perseverance to throw them on the opposite party. Bold left
                                        the office which he had latterly so much frequented, shaking
                                        the dust from off his feet; and before he was down the
                                        stairs, an edict had already gone forth for the preparation
                                        of the bill.
He next thought of the newspapers. The case had 
                                        been taken up by more than one; and he was well aware that
                                        the key note had been sounded by the Jupiter. He had been
                                        very intimate with Tom Towers, and had often discussed with
                                        him the affairs of the hospital. Bold could not say that the
                                        articles in that paper had been written at his own
                                        instigation; he did not even know as a fact that they had
                                        been written by his friend. Tom Towers had never said that
                                        such a view of the case, or such a side in the dispute,
                                        would be taken by the paper with which he was connected.
                                        Very discreet in such matters was Tom Towers, and altogether
                                        indisposed to talk loosely of the concerns of that mighty
                                        engine of which it was his high privilege to move in secret
                                        some portion. Nevertheless, Bold believed that to him were
                                        owing those dreadful words which had caused such panic at
                                        Barchester,—and he conceived himself bound to prevent their
                                        repetition. With this view he betook himself from the
                                        attorneys' to that laboratory where, with amazing chemistry,
                                        Tom Towers compounded thunderbolts for the destruction of
                                        all that is evil, and for the furtherance of all that is
                                        good, in this and other hemispheres.
Who has not heard of Mount Olympus—that high abode of all the
                                        powers of type, that favoured seat of the great goddess
                                        Pica, that wondrous habitation  of gods and
                                        devils, from whence, with ceaseless hum of steam and
                                        never-ending flow of Castalian ink, issue forth fifty
                                        thousand nightly edicts for the governance of a subject
                                        nation?
Velvet and gilding do not make a throne, nor gold and jewels a
                                        sceptre. It is a throne because the most exalted one sits
                                        there—and a sceptre because the most mighty one wields it.
                                        So it is with Mount Olympus. Should a stranger make his way
                                        thither at dull noonday, or during the sleepy hours of the
                                        silent afternoon, he would find no acknowledged temple of
                                        power and beauty, no fitting fane for the great Thunderer,
                                        no proud facades and pillared roofs to support the dignity
                                        of this greatest of earthly potentates. To the outward and
                                        uninitiated eye, Mount Olympus is a somewhat humble
                                        spot—undistinguished, unadorned,—nay, almost mean. It stands
                                        alone, as it were, in a mighty city, close to the densest
                                        throng of men, but partaking neither of the noise nor the
                                        crowd; a small secluded, dreary spot, tenanted, one would
                                        say, by quite unambitious people at the easiest rents. 'Is
                                        this Mount Olympus?' asks the unbelieving stranger. 'Is it
                                        from these small, dark, dingy buildings that those
                                        infallible laws proceed which cabinets are called upon to
                                        obey; by which bishops  are to be guided, lords
                                        and commons controlled,— judges instructed in law, generals
                                        in strategy, admirals in naval tactics, and orange-women in
                                        the management of their barrows?' 'Yes, my friend- from
                                        these walls. From here issue the only known infallible bulls
                                        for the guidance of British souls and bodies. This little
                                        court is the Vatican of England. Here reigns a pope,
                                        self-nominated, self-consecrated —ay, and much stranger
                                        too,—self-believing! —a pope whom, if you cannot obey him, I
                                        would advise you to disobey as silently as possible; a pope
                                        hitherto afraid of no Luther; a pope who manages his own
                                        inquisition, who punishes unbelievers as no most skilful
                                        inquisitor of Spain ever dreamt of doing—one who can
                                        excommunicate thoroughly, fearfully, radically; put you
                                        beyond the pale of men's charity; make you odious to your
                                        dearest friends, and turn you into a monster to be pointed
                                        at by the finger!'
Oh heavens! and this is Mount Olympus!
It is a fact amazing to ordinary mortals that the Jupiter is
                                        never wrong. With what endless care, with what unsparing
                                        labour, do we not strive to get together for our great
                                        national council the men most fitting to compose it. And how
                                        we fail! Parliament is always wrong: look at the Jupiter,
                                                 and see how futile are their meetings,
                                        how vain their council, how needless all their trouble! With
                                        what pride do we regard our chief ministers, the great
                                        servants of state, the oligarchs of the nation on whose
                                        wisdom we lean, to whom we look for guidance in our
                                        difficulties! But what are they to the writers of the
                                        Jupiter? They hold council together and with anxious thought
                                        painfully elaborate their country's good; but when all is
                                        done, the Jupiter declares that all is nought. Why should we
                                        look to Lord John Russell—why should we regard Palmerston
                                        and Gladstone, when Tom Towers without a struggle can put us
                                        right? Look at our generals, what faults they make; at our
                                        admirals, how inactive they are. What money, honesty, and
                                        science can do, is done; and yet how badly are our troops
                                        brought together, fed, conveyed, clothed, armed, and
                                        managed. The most excellent of our good men do their best to
                                        man our ships, with the assistance of all possible external
                                        appliances, but in vain. All, all is wrong—alas! alas! Tom
                                        Towers, and he alone, knows all about it. Why, oh why, ye
                                        earthly ministers, why have ye not followed more closely
                                        this heaven-sent messenger that is among us?
Were it not well for us in our ignorance that we confided all
                                        things to the Jupiter? Would it not  be wise in
                                        us to abandon useless talking, idle thinking, and profitless
                                        labour? Away with majorities in the House of Commons, with
                                        verdicts from judicial bench given after much delay, with
                                        doubtful laws, and the fallible attempts of humanity! Does
                                        not the Jupiter, coming forth daily with fifty thousand
                                        impressions full of unerring decision on every mortal
                                        subject, set all matters sufficiently at rest? Is not Tom
                                        Towers here, able to guide us and willing?
Yes indeed,—able and willing to guide all men in all things, so
                                        long as he is obeyed as autocrat should be obeyed—with
                                        undoubting submission: only let not ungrateful ministers
                                        seek other colleagues than those whom Tom Towers may
                                        approve; let church and state, law and physic, commerce and
                                        agriculture —the arts of war, and the arts of peace, all
                                        listen and obey, and all will be made perfect. Has not Tom
                                        Towers an all-seeing eye? From the diggings of Australia to
                                        those of California, right round the habitable globe, does
                                        he not know, watch, and chronicle the doings of every one?
                                        From a bishopric in New Zealand to an unfortunate director
                                        of a North-west passage, is he not the only fit judge of
                                        capability? From the sewers of London to the Central Railway
                                        of India,—from the palaces  of St. Petersburg
                                        to the cabins of Connaught, nothing can escape him. Britons
                                        have but to read, to obey, and be blessed. None but the
                                        fools doubt the wisdom of the Jupiter; none but the mad
                                        dispute its facts.
No established religion has ever been without its unbelievers,
                                        even in the country where it is the most firmly fixed; no
                                        creed has been without scoffers; no church has so prospered
                                        as to free itself entirely from dissent. There are those who
                                        doubt the Jupiter! They live and breathe the upper air,
                                        walking here unscathed, though scorned—men, born of British
                                        mothers and nursed on English milk, who scruple not to say
                                        that Mount Olympus has its price, that Tom Towers can be
                                        bought for gold!
Such is Mount Olympus, the mouthpiece of all the wisdom of this
                                        great country. It may probably be said that no place in this
                                        19th century is more worthy of notice. No treasury mandate
                                        armed with the signatures of all the government has half the
                                        power of one of those broad sheets, which fly forth from
                                        hence so abundantly, armed with no signature at all.
Some great man, some mighty peer—we'll say a noble duke—retires
                                        to rest feared and honoured by all his countrymen—fearless
                                        himself; if not a good  man, at any rate a
                                        mighty man—too mighty to care much what men may say about
                                        his want of virtue. He rises in the morning degraded, mean,
                                        and miserable; an object of men's scorn, anxious only to
                                        retire as quickly as may be to some German obscurity, some
                                        unseen Italian privacy, or, indeed, any where out of sight.
                                        What has made this awful change? what has so afflicted him?
                                        An article has appeared in the Jupiter; some fifty lines of
                                        a narrow column has destroyed all his grace's equanimity,
                                        and banished him for ever from the world. No man knows who
                                        wrote the bitter words; the clubs talk confusedly of the
                                        matter, whispering to each other this and that name; while
                                        Tom Towers walks quietly along Pall Mall, with his coat
                                        buttoned close against the east wind, as though he were a
                                        mortal man, and not a god dispensing thunderbolts from Mount
                                        Olympus.
It was not to Mount Olympus that our friend Bold betook himself.
                                        He had before now wandered round that lonely spot, thinking
                                        how grand a thing it was to write articles for the Jupiter;
                                        considering within himself whether by any stretch of the
                                        powers within him he could ever come to such distinction;
                                        wondering how Tom Towers would take any little humble
                                        offering of his talents; calculating that Tom Towers himself
                                        must have once had a beginning,  have once
                                        doubted as to his own success. Towers could not have been
                                        born a writer in the Jupiter. With such ideas, half
                                        ambitious and half awe-struck, had Bold regarded the
                                        silent-looking workshop of the gods; but he had never yet by
                                        word or sign attempted to influence the slightest word of
                                        his unerring friend. On such a course was he now intent; and
                                        not without much inward palpitation did he betake himself to
                                        the quiet abode of wisdom, where Tom Towers was to be found
                                        o' mornings inhaling ambrosia and sipping nectar in the
                                        shape of toast and tea.
Not far removed from Mount Olympus, but somewhat nearer to the
                                        blessed regions of the West, is the most favoured abode of
                                        Themis. Washed by the rich tide which now passes from the
                                        towers of Cæsar to Barry's halls of eloquence and again
                                        back, with new offerings of a city's tribute, from the
                                        palaces of peers to the mart of merchants stand those quiet
                                        walls which Law has delighted to honour by its presence.
                                        What a world within a world is the Temple! how quiet are its
                                        "entangled walks," as some one lately has called them, and
                                        yet how close to the densest concourse of humanity! how
                                        gravely respectable its sober alleys, though removed but by
                                        a single step from the profanity of the Strand and  the low iniquity of Fleet Street! Old St.
                                        Dunstan, with its bell-smiting bludgeoners, has been
                                        removed; the ancient shops with their faces full of pleasant
                                        history are passing away one by one; the bar itself is to
                                        go—its doom has been pronounced by the Jupiter; rumour tells
                                        us of some huge building that is to appear in these
                                        latitudes dedicated to law, subversive of the courts of
                                        Westminster, and antagonistic to the Rolls and Lincolns Inn;
                                        but nothing yet threatens the silent beauty of the Temple:
                                        it is the mediæval court of the metropolis.
Here, on the choicest spot of this choice ground, stands a lofty
                                        row of chambers, looking obliquely upon the sullied Thames;
                                        before the windows, the lawn of the Temple Gardens stretches
                                        with that dim yet delicious verdure so refreshing to the
                                        eyes of Londoners. If doomed to live within the thickest of
                                        London smoke, you would surely say that that would be your
                                        chosen spot. Yes, you, you whom I now address, my dear,
                                        middle-aged bachelor friend, can nowhere be so well
                                        domiciled as here. No one here will ask whether you are out
                                        or at home; alone or with friends: here no Sabbatarian will
                                        investigate your Sundays, no censorious landlady will
                                        scrutinise your empty bottle, no valetudinarian neighbour
                                        will complain of late hours. If you love books, to what  place are books so suitable? The whole
                                        spot is redolent of typography. Would you worship the
                                        Paphian goddess, the groves of Cyprus are not more taciturn
                                        than those of the Temple. Wit and wine are always here, and
                                        always together; the revels of the Temple are as those of
                                        polished Greece, where the wildest worshipper of Bacchus
                                        never forgot the dignity of the god whom he adored. Where
                                        can retirement be so complete as here? where can you be so
                                        sure of all the pleasures of society?
It was here that Tom Towers lived, and cultivated with eminent
                                        success the tenth Muse who now governs the periodical press.
                                        But let it not be supposed that his chambers were such, or
                                        so comfortless, as are frequently the gaunt abodes of legal
                                        aspirants. Four chairs, a half-filled deal book-case with
                                        hangings of dingy green baize, an old office table covered
                                        with dusty papers, which are not moved once in six months,
                                        and an older Pembroke brother with rickety legs, for all
                                        daily uses—a despatcher for the preparation of lobsters and
                                        coffee, and an apparatus for the cooking of toast and mutton
                                        chops; such utensils and luxuries as these did not suffice
                                        for the well being of Tom Towers. He indulged in four rooms
                                        on the first floor, each of which was furnished, if not with
                                                 the splendour, with probably more than
                                        the comfort of Stafford House. Every addition that science
                                        and art have lately made to the luxuries of modern life was
                                        to be found there. The room in which he usually sat was
                                        surrounded by book-shelves carefully filled; nor was there a
                                        volume there which was not entitled to its place in such a
                                        collection, both by its intrinsic worth and exterior
                                        splendour: a pretty portable set of steps in one corner of
                                        the room showed that those even on the higher shelves were
                                        intended for use. The chamber contained but two works of
                                        art—the one, an admirable bust of Sir Robert Peel, by Power,
                                        declared the individual politics of our friend; and the
                                        other, a singularly long figure of a female devotee, by
                                        Millais, told equally plainly the school of art to which he
                                        was addicted. This picture was not hung, as pictures usually
                                        are, against the wall; there was no inch of wall vacant for
                                        such a purpose: it had a stand or desk erected for its own
                                        accommodation; and there on her pedestal, framed and glazed,
                                        stood the devotional lady looking intently at a lily as no
                                        lady ever looked before.
Our modern artists, whom we style Præ-Raffaellites, have
                                        delighted to go back, not only to the finish and peculiar
                                        manner, but also to the subjects of the early painters. It
                                        is impossible to give them too much  praise for
                                        the elaborate perseverance with which they have equalled the
                                        minute perfections of the masters from whom they take their
                                        inspiration: nothing probably can exceed the painting of
                                        some of these latter-day pictures. It is, however, singular
                                        into what faults they fall as regards their subjects: they
                                        are not quite content to take the old stock groups— a
                                        Sebastian with his arrows, a Lucia with her eyes in a dish,
                                        a Lorenzo with a gridiron, or the virgin with two children.
                                        But they are anything but happy in their change. As a rule,
                                        no figure should be drawn in a position which it is
                                        impossible to suppose any figure should maintain. The
                                        patient endurance of St. Sebastian, the wild ecstacy of St.
                                        John in the Wilderness, the maternal love of the virgin, are
                                        feelings naturally portrayed by a fixed posture; but the
                                        lady with the stiff back and bent neck, who looks at her
                                        flower, and is still looking from hour to hour, gives us an
                                        idea of pain without grace, and abstraction without a
                                        cause.
It was easy, from his rooms, to see that Tom Towers was a
                                        Sybarite, though by no means an idle one. He was lingering
                                        over his last cup of tea, surrounded by an ocean of
                                        newspapers, through which he had been swimming, when John
                                        Bold's card was brought in by his tiger. This tiger never
                                        knew that  his master was at home, though he
                                        often knew that he was not, and thus Tom Towers was never
                                        invaded but by his own consent. On this occasion, after
                                        twisting the card twice in his fingers, he signified to his
                                        attendant imp that he was visible; and the inner door was
                                        unbolted, and our friend announced.
I have before said that he of the Jupiter and John Bold were
                                        intimate. There was no very great difference in their ages,
                                        for Towers was still considerably under forty; and when Bold
                                        had been attending the London hospitals, Towers, who was not
                                        then the great man that he had since become, had been much
                                        with him. Then they had often discussed together the objects
                                        of their ambition and future prospects; then Tom Towers was
                                        struggling hard to maintain himself, as a briefless
                                        barrister, by short-hand reporting for any of the papers
                                        that would engage him; then he had not dared to dream of
                                        writing leaders for the Jupiter, or canvassing the conduct
                                        of Cabinet ministers. Things had altered since that time:
                                        the briefless barrister was still briefless, but he now
                                        despised briefs: could he have been sure of a judge's seat,
                                        he would hardly have left his present career. It is true he
                                        wore no ermine, bore no outward marks of a world's respect;
                                        but with what a load of inward importance was he charged! It
                                        is true his name  appeared in no large
                                        capitals; on no wall was chalked up "Tom Towers for
                                        ever"—"Freedom of the Press and Tom Towers:" but what member
                                        of Parliament had half his power? It is true that in far-off
                                        provinces men did not talk daily of Tom Towers, but they
                                        read the Jupiter, and acknowledged that without the Jupiter
                                        life was not worth having. This kind of hidden but still
                                        conscious glory suited the nature of the man. He loved to
                                        sit silent in a corner of his club and listen to the loud
                                        chattering of politicians, and to think how they all were in
                                        his power —how he could smite the loudest of them, were it
                                        worth his while to raise his pen for such a purpose. He
                                        loved to watch the great men of whom he daily wrote, and
                                        flatter himself that he was greater than any of them. Each
                                        of them was responsible to his country, each of them must
                                        answer if inquired into, each of them must endure abuse with
                                        good humour, and insolence without anger. But to whom was
                                        he, Tom Towers, responsible? No one could insult him; no one
                                        could inquire into him. He could speak out withering words,
                                        and no one could answer him: ministers courted him, though
                                        perhaps they knew not his name; bishops feared him; judges
                                        doubted their own verdicts unless he confirmed them; and
                                        generals, in their councils of war, did not consider  more deeply what the enemy would do, than
                                        what the Jupiter would say. Tom Towers never boasted of the
                                        Jupiter; he scarcely ever named the paper even to the most
                                        intimate of his friends; he did not even wish to be spoken
                                        of as connected with it; but he did not the less value his
                                        privileges, or think the less of his own importance. It is
                                        probable that Tom Towers considered himself the most
                                        powerful man in Europe; and so he walked on from day to day,
                                        studiously striving to look a man, but knowing within his
                                        breast that he was a god.

