
CHAP. XXI. CONCLUSION.
Our tale is now done, and it only remains to us to
                                        collect the scattered threads of our little story, and to
                                        tie them into a seemly knot. This will not be a work of
                                        labour, either to the author or to his readers; we have not
                                        to deal with many personages, or with stirring events, and
                                        were it not for the custom of the thing, we might leave it
                                        to the imagination of all concerned to conceive how affairs
                                        at Barchester arranged themselves.
On the morning after the day last alluded to, Mr. Harding, at an
                                        early hour, walked out of the hospital, with his daughter
                                        under his arm, and sat down quietly to breakfast at his
                                        lodgings over the chemist's shop. There was no parade about
                                        his departure; no one, not even Bunce, was there to witness
                                        it: had he walked to the apothecary's thus early to get a
                                        piece of court plaster, or a box of lozenges, he could not
                                        have done it with less appearance of an important movement.
                                        There was a tear  in Eleanor's eye as she
                                        passed through the big gateway and over the bridge; but Mr.
                                        Harding walked with an elastic step, and entered his new
                                        abode with a pleasant face.
"Now, my dear," said he, "you have everything ready, and you can
                                        make tea here just as nicely as in the parlour at the
                                        hospital." So Eleanor took off her bonnet and made the tea.
                                        After this manner did the late Warden of Barchester Hospital
                                        accomplish his flitting, and change his residence.
It was not long before the archdeacon brought his father to
                                        discuss the subject of a new warden. Of course he looked
                                        upon the nomination as his own, and he had in his eye three
                                        or four fitting candidates, seeing that Mr. Cumming's plan
                                        as to the living of Puddingdale could not be brought to
                                        bear. How can I describe the astonishment which confounded
                                        him, when his father declared that he would appoint no
                                        successor to Mr. Harding? "If we can get the matter set to
                                        rights, Mr. Harding will return," said the bishop; "and if
                                        we cannot, it will be wrong to put any other gentleman into
                                        so cruel a position."
It was in vain that the archdeacon argued and lectured, and even
                                        threatened; in vain he my-lorded his poor father in his
                                        sternest manner; in vain his "good heavens!" were ejaculated
                                        in a tone that might  have moved a whole synod,
                                        let alone one weak and aged bishop. Nothing would induce his
                                        father to fill up the vacancy caused by Mr. Harding's
                                        retirement.
Even John Bold would have pitied the feelings with which the
                                        archdeacon returned to Plumstead: the church was falling,
                                        nay, already in ruins; its dignitaries were yielding without
                                        a struggle before the blows of its antagonists; and one of
                                        its most respected bishops, his own father—the man
                                        considered by all the world as being in such matters under
                                        his, Dr. Grantly's control—had positively resolved to
                                        capitulate, and own himself vanquished!
And how fared the hospital under this resolve of its visitor?
                                        Badly indeed. It is now some years since Mr. Harding left
                                        it, and the warden's house is still tenantless. Old Bell has
                                        died, and Billy Gazy; the one-eyed Spriggs has drunk himself
                                        to death, and three others of the twelve have been gathered
                                        into the church-yard mould. Six have gone, and the six
                                        vacancies remain unfilled! Yes, six have died, with no kind
                                        friend to solace their last moments, with no wealthy
                                        neighbour to administer comforts and ease the stings of
                                        death. Mr. Harding, indeed, did not desert them; from him
                                        they had such consolation as a dying man may receive from
                                        his Christian pastor;  but it was the
                                        occasional kindness of a stranger which ministered to them,
                                        and not the constant presence of a master, a neighbour, and
                                        a friend.
Nor were those who remained better off than those who died.
                                        Dissensions rose among them, and contests for pre-eminence;
                                        and then they began to understand that soon one among them
                                        would be the last,—some one wretched being would be alone
                                        there in that now comfortless hospital,—the miserable relic
                                        of what had once been so good and comfortable.
The building of the hospital itself has not been allowed to go to
                                        ruins. Mr. Chadwick, who still holds his stewardship, and
                                        pays the accruing rents into an account opened at a bank for
                                        the purpose, sees to that; but the whole place has become
                                        disordered and ugly. The warden's garden is a wretched
                                        wilderness, the drive and paths are covered with weeds, the
                                        flower-beds are bare, and the unshorn lawn is now a mass of
                                        long damp grass and unwholesome moss. The beauty of the
                                        place is gone; its attractions have withered. Alas! a very
                                        few years since it was the prettiest spot in Barchester, and
                                        now it is a disgrace to the city.
Mr. Harding did not go out to Crabtree Parva. An arrangement was
                                        made which respected the homestead of Mr. Smith and his
                                        happy family, and  put Mr. Harding into
                                        possession of a small living within the walls of the city.
                                        It is the smallest possible parish, containing a part of the
                                        Cathedral Close and a few old houses adjoining. The church
                                        is a singular little Gothic building, perched over a
                                        gateway, through which the Close is entered, and is
                                        approached by a flight of stone steps which leads down under
                                        the archway of the gate. It is no bigger than an ordinary
                                        room,—perhaps twenty-seven feet long by eighteen wide,—but
                                        still it is a perfect church. It contains an old carved
                                        pulpit and reading-desk, a tiny altar under a window filled
                                        with dark old-coloured glass, a font, some half-dozen pews,
                                        and perhaps a dozen seats for the poor, and also a vestry.
                                        The roof is high-pitched, and of black old oak, and the
                                        three large beams which support it run down to the side
                                        walls, and terminate in grotesquely carved faces—two devils
                                        and an angel on one side, two angels and a devil on the
                                        other. Such is the church of St. Cuthbert at Barchester, of
                                        which Mr. Harding became rector, with a clear income of
                                        seventy-five pounds a-year.
Here he performs afternoon service every Sunday, and administers
                                        the Sacrament once in every three months. His audience is
                                        not large; and, had they been so, he could not have
                                        accommodated them: but  enough come to fill his
                                        six pews, and, on the front seat of those devoted to the
                                        poor is always to be seen our old friend Mr. Bunce, decently
                                        arrayed in his bedesman's gown.
Mr. Harding is still precentor of Barchester; and it is very
                                        rarely the case that those who attend the Sunday morning
                                        service miss the gratification of hearing him chant the
                                        Litany, as no other man in England can do it. He is neither
                                        a discontented nor an unhappy man; he still inhabits the
                                        lodgings to which he went on leaving the hospital, but he
                                        now has them to himself. Three months after that time
                                        Eleanor became Mrs. Bold, and of course removed to her
                                        husband's house.
There were some difficulties to be got over on the occasion of
                                        the marriage. The archdeacon, who could not so soon overcome
                                        his grief, would not be persuaded to grace the ceremony with
                                        his presence, but he allowed his wife and children to be
                                        there. The marriage took place at the palace, and the bishop
                                        himself officiated. It was the last occasion on which he
                                        ever did so; and, though he still lives, it is not probable
                                        that he will ever do so again.
Not long after the marriage, perhaps six months, when Eleanor's
                                        bridal-honours were fading, and persons were beginning to
                                        call her Mrs. Bold without  twittering, the
                                        archdeacon consented to meet John Bold at a dinner-party,
                                        and since that time they have become almost friends. The
                                        archdeacon firmly believes that his brother-in-law was, as a
                                        bachelor, an infidel, an unbeliever in the great truths of
                                        our religion; but that matrimony has opened his eyes, as it
                                        has those of others. And Bold is equally inclined to think
                                        that time has softened the asperities of the archdeacon's
                                        character. Friends though they are, they do not often revert
                                        to the feud of the hospital.
Mr. Harding, we say, is not an unhappy man; he keeps his
                                        lodgings, but they are of little use to him, except as being
                                        the one spot on earth which he calls his own. His time is
                                        spent chiefly at his daughter's or at the palace; he is
                                        never left alone, even should he wish to be so; and within a
                                        twelvemonth of Eleanor's marriage his determination to live
                                        at his own lodging had been so far broken through and
                                        abandoned, that he consented to have his violoncello
                                        permanently removed to his daughter's house.
Every other day a message is brought to him from the bishop. "The
                                        bishop's compliments, and his lordship is not very well
                                        to-day, and he hopes Mr. Harding will dine with him." This
                                        bulletin as to the old man's health is a myth; for though he
                                        is over eighty he is never ill, and will probably die some
                                                 day, as a spark goes out, gradually
                                        and without a struggle. Mr. Harding does dine with him very
                                        often, which means going to the palace at three and
                                        remaining till ten; and whenever he does not the bishop
                                        whines, and says that the port wine is corked, and complains
                                        that nobody attends to him, and frets himself off to bed an
                                        hour before his time.
It was long before the people of Barchester forgot to call Mr.
                                        Harding by his long well-known name of Warden. It had become
                                        so customary to say Mr. Warden, that it was not easily
                                        dropped. "No, no," he always says when so addressed, "not
                                        warden now, only precentor."
THE END.
