

COUNT LITVINOFF IS SYMPATHETIC
AT the moment when Mrs Fludger's sense of propriety was being outraged by what she termed, in
     a subsequent recital of her wrongs to her first-floor front, 'that shindy on the stairs,' Miss
     Stanley was lying on the sofa in the sitting-room at Morley's Hotel, reading the novel that had
     taken the last season by storm, and pushed everything else out of sight on the bookstalls. But
     even the thrilling interest of this work did not keep her from falling fast asleep in the
     middle of the fourth chapter; and she passed the next half hour in a dreamland more pleasant
     than Morley's Hotel; for that hostelry, especially when her father was, as usual, in the City,
     seemed to her to be deadly dull. She had just come back to the world of solid furniture and
     characterless window curtains; her first waking thought was that some tea would be worth
     anything to her just then—except the trouble of getting up to ring for it—and she wished
     dreamily that waiters could know by intuition when they were wanted. It almost seemed as if
     they did, for a tap came at the door, and she had to stop her reflections to say,—
'Come in.'
'Mr Richard Ferrier,' said the waiter who appeared. 'Are you at home, ma'am?'
'Oh, yes; show him up,' she said; and to herself, wonder ingly, 'How funny of him
     to come at this time.' Then, as he entered, 'Good afternoon, Mr Ferrier. What a dreadful day!
     Papa has not come home yet.'
'I am very sorry to say,' said Richard, as he took her offered hand, 'that I shall not be
     able to come this evening.'
'Oh, I'm so sorry!' she said, cheerfully. 'I hope there's nothing wrong. Can't your brother
     come, either?'
'I don't know, Miss Stanley,' he answered, leaning one arm on the mantelpiece, and looking
     down, but not at her, though she had seated herself in a low chair near the fire, and was quite
     within easy visual range. 'I am not likely to know much more about my brother.'
'Not know much more about your brother, Mr Richard?' she said, opening her eyes very wide.
     'What can you mean? Surely you haven't quarrelled?'
'I suppose we have quarrelled. At anyrate, my brother told me half an hour ago never to speak
     to him again on this side of the grave.'
Clare felt that this promised to be several degrees more interesting even than her book. She
     couldn't help wondering what they had quarrelled about. Was it perhaps—
'What did you say to him?'
'I said nothing—he went away, and I came here.' He spoke in that particularly even and
     monotonous voice which, with some people, is always the token of suppressed agitation.
'I mean what had you said to make him say that?'
'I told him the truth.'
'But perhaps you said the truth too sharply, and, besides, you ought to make it up with
     him—especially as you're the eldest. It's so terrible for brothers to quarrel.' She ended with
     a little didactic air which became her very well.
'I am afraid this is one of the quarrels that can't be made up. I can't alter facts; neither
     can he, unfortunately.'

'Is it so very serious?' she asked. 'Oh—papa will be so sorry. But you'll feel differently
     when you have had time to think it over.'
'Circumstances don't change by being thought over.'
'No, but our view of them does.'
'Well, I can say this, Miss Stanley; if ever I could change my opinion of my brother's
     conduct I should be only too glad, and I should be the first to make advances towards
     reconciliation.'
'Why, surely, Mr Roland's done nothing wrong?'
'You may be sure he has, in my opinion at least, or I should not have spoken to him as I did;
     knowing, too, all that it involved,' he added in a lower voice.
'Oh, yes,' said Clare in quite an awestruck tone—all that her father had told her about old
     Mr Ferrier's will coming into her mind with a rush. 'Why, I had forgotten that.'
'Yes,' said Richard, looking straight at her for the first time that afternoon, 'I shall lose
     my living, and more, the hope of my life; but at anyrate, thank God, I keep my honour, and he
     has lost even that.'
Clare returned his gaze steadily.
'You have no right to say that, unless you are quite, quite, quite sure,' she said rather
     haughtily.
She had no motive for that little speech, save a natural love for fair play, but he read in
     it a desire to champion his brother against his attack, and he was goaded to the point of
     indiscretion.
'I am so sure,' he answered bitterly, 'that sooner than touch hands in friendship with him
     again, I am giving up all my chances in life, and with them the hope of winning you. Don't say
     anything,' he went on, seeing that she was about to speak. 'I had no right to say that. I did
     not mean to annoy you with any hint of my vain devotion, but I couldn't help 
     saying it. Consider it unsaid if you like, but don't be vexed with me. There is one thing I
     must ask you. I should be untrue to my love for you if I did not ask it. Do not let my brother
     win what his fault forbids me to try for.'
She rose.
'I have given you no right to talk in that way, nor to ask me any such promise, and I will
     promise nothing since I know nothing,' she said, indignantly.
'Then at least it shall not be my fault,' said Richard with equal fire, 'if you do not know
     what every woman he comes near ought to know. He is not free to offer love to any woman. He
     owes all the love he is capable of to a woman he has ruined and deserted.'
Miss Stanley looked at him coldly and contemptuously. He stood silent a moment, and in that
     moment felt the utter falseness of the step he had taken. She turned slightly away from him,
     and he knew that there were no more words to be said on either side.
'Good-bye,' he said; 'I shall not be at all likely to trouble you again.'
'Good afternoon,' she said, without moving; and he went out. Now, indeed, everything was
     over.
Clare, left to herself, sank down again in her low chair, and knitted her brows in annoyed
     meditation. Quarrels, separations, and crushing impertinent people with 'dynamic glances' were
     all very well in novels, but in real life it was much nicer to have things go smoothly. She
     could not quite foresee all the complications that this quarrel might lead to, but she knew
     that it would make a great difference at Firth Vale. Aspinshaw would be duller than ever. Would
     Roland come this evening? Could what Dick had said be true? If it was, she thought, he had no
     right to say it to her; and it was mean of him to say it to anyone behind his brother's back.
     Count  Litvinoff would be sure to come, at anyrate. 'Let's hope he'll be
     entertaining,' she said to herself.
When a woman is bored, or tired, or vexed, or perplexed, or worried, after a quarrel, or
     before a journey, there is one resource to which she always flies. Miss Stanley rang for
     tea.
The waiter who announced Mr Ferrier had quite settled in his own mind that in so doing he was
     ushering in one of the chief characters in a love scene, but when he caught sight of the young
     man's face as he came from Miss Stanley's presence, he decided that the scene in which Mr
     Ferrier had just played his part, had not had much love-sweetness about it, at anyrate. Count
     Litvinoff, coming up the stairs a moment afterwards, met Dick going down, and thought so
     too.
'Ah! Mr Ferrier,' he said genially; 'we are to be fellow guests to-night, I believe.'
'I think not,' said Dick, shaking hands; 'I shall not be able to come.'
Litvinoff's face fell, and he looked quite naturally grieved.
'How unfortunate,' he said.
'I say,' said Richard, after a minute's pause, 'were you in a place called Spray's Buildings,
     a turning out of Porson Street, about an hour ago? You'll think it strange of me to ask, but I
     have a particular reason for wanting to know.'
'Porson Street—Porson Street. I've heard the name somewhere, but I certainly haven't been
     there this afternoon.'
The Court of St Petersburg had evidently missed a good diplomatist in Count Michael
     Litvinoff. The lie was admirably told.
'No,' said Richard, 'I didn't suppose you had, but I thought I'd just set my mind at rest
     about it.'
'May I ask,' said Litvinoff, leaning on the banisters and idly swinging his eyeglass by the
     guard, 'why your mind was disturbed concerning my incomings and outgoings?'

'You are quite right. It is no business of mine; but I asked, in order to verify or disprove
     a statement of my brother's.'
'So your brother, at anyrate, honours me with his interest, does he?'
'You'd better ask him—good afternoon.'
'A sweet disposition that,' observed Litvinoff, when, having watched the other out of sight,
     he turned towards his room. 'They ought to teach politeness at Cambridge, and put it down among
     the extras. By the way, there may be something to be got out of our brother. Things are getting
     too mixed to be pleasant. Wonder whether he'll turn up to-night?'
He did turn up, in such a state of depression as to promise to be a thorough wet blanket on
     all the fires of social gaiety. In fact, none of the little party which assembled round Mr
     Stanley's dinner-table were in a state of mind to make them what is called good company. Roland
     was thoroughly unhinged by the events of the afternoon, which to him had been so utterly
     unexpected, and were so completely unexplained. It needed a determined effort on his part to
     listen to Mr Stanley's commonplaces instead of thinking out some means of compassing a
     reconciliation with his brother. He felt sure that their quarrel hinged on a mistake, but what
     that mistake was, or what its subject was, he was at a loss to conjecture.
Clare was listless and distraite. She was intensely annoyed by the remembrance of
     that little episode with Richard, and, though she told herself that she did not believe a word
     he had said, she found it hard to forget it and to treat Roland as usual. She had not had a
     chance of telling her father anything about Richard, for Litvinoff had been punctual, and Mr
     Stanley had come back from the City late, and cross as well as late; and the old gentleman's
     continued references to the absentee, and his regrets for the 'sudden business' which had
     prevented him  from being present, made matters several degrees more uncomfortable
     than they would otherwise have been.
Litvinoff had his own reasons for not feeling very joyous on this occasion, but he had not
     had three years of wandering in exile among all sorts and conditions of men for nothing, and he
     was able to put his own personal feelings on one side, and to do what was exacted by the
     proprieties. No one could have told from his manner that he had a care in the world. More than
     this, he succeeded after a while in inspiring the others with some of his own powers of
     self-repression; and though they did not perhaps feel more festive, they made a successful
     effort to seem so, in order to be not out of harmony with what seemed to them to be his gaiety
     and light-heartedness.
During the earlier part of the evening he devoted himself entirely to Mr Stanley, a real act
     of self-abnegation in any young man, when Mr Stanley's daughter was in the room. But Mr Stanley
     was interested in the financial condition of United States railways, and Count Litvinoff—odd
     thing in an exile—knew absolutely everything that was to be known about the financial condition
     of United States railways, and, what was better, he had a friend who knew even more than that,
     and whose knowledge was quite at Mr Stanley's service. If during the long conference on these
     entrancing topics he cast occasional glances across the room to where Clare and young Ferrier
     sat talking, they were certainly not envious ones, for 'the gentle Roland' did not seem to be
     having a good time of it. Litvinoff took pity on him presently, and came to the rescue.
'Are we to have no music, Miss Stanley?' he asked, when the subject of the financial
     condition of the United States railways was exhausted for the time being, and his host showed
     decided symptoms of a desire to descant on the beauties of  'our great
     Conservative institutions, sir,' and 'the glorious Constitution which,' etc.
Miss Stanley felt that singing to three people would be better than talking to one, and in
     the intervals between the songs that followed she and Litvinoff seemed to conspire to keep the
     conversation general.
'Penny Napoleon,' so often a refuge of the bored and the uncongenial, helped the long evening
     to its end, and though the last state of it was better than the first, everyone was glad to say
     good-night to everyone else.
The two young men, by the way, did not say good-night to each other when they left the
     Stanleys.
'Come and have a cigar,' said Litvinoff, precisely as he had done on the last occasion of
     their meeting there. And Roland, nothing loth to defer the moment of being alone again with his
     own perplexities, consented.
But even in the Count's comfortable little sitting-room his perplexities pursued him, and in
     more objectionable shape, too. For the first words his companion uttered, after he had supplied
     his guest with one of his special cigars and a tumbler of something unexceptionable, with
     lemon, hot, were—
'Your brother tells me you're taking an interest in my movements, Mr Ferrier.'
'How do you mean?'
'I had the felicity to meet him to-day, and he asked me—rather bluntly, perhaps—if I had been
     this afternoon in some street, the name of which escapes me at the moment—Morford Street, was
     it? I told him no, and begged to know the reason of his question. He then said he wished to
     verify (I think those were his exact words) a statement of yours. I asked him, did you take an
     interest in my movements? He then said, in a manner tant soit peu abrupt, 'You'd
     better ask him,' and vanished into the Ewigkeit. Voilà, I have asked
     you.'

Roland took two or three puffs at his cigar, and surrounded himself with a little cloud of
     smoke. Then he rose and stood with his back to the fire, and in that attitude he looked,
     Litvinoff thought, uncommonly like his brother.
'Look here,' he said slowly, 'according to the laws of etiquette and all that sort of thing,
     I have known you far too short a time to think of talking to you about my relations with my
     brother, but I am horribly perplexed about him; and since he has let you know that there is
     something wrong between us, I may as well tell you all I know about it. I need hardly say that
     all I say to you is said in strict confidence.'
The Count bowed.
'For some time we have not been upon the very best of terms; but that's neither here nor
     there. There was nothing seriously wrong between us. This morning, without any apparent cause,
     he made a kind of veiled accusation against me, which I could not understand, and even went so
     far as to tell me I ought not to go near—'
He hesitated. Litvinoff made an interrogatory movement, which prevented his stopping short,
     as he seemed inclined to do.
'Miss Stanley,' he ended.
'Ah, so?' said the other, raising his eyebrows, and looking sympathetically interested.
'We had a sharp word; but I should not have thought much more of it if it hadn't been for
     what came later. This afternoon I was going to see a man you introduced me to the other night,
     Lenoir, who, I thought, I remembered lived in Porson Street.'
'Ah, yes, it was Porson Street your brother named,' interrupted Litvinoff.
'As I was looking about for him I fancied I caught sight of you, but it was foggy,
     and when I followed the man into a house, it turned out not to be you. At least, I suppose
     not.'

'No, no; it certainly was not I.'
'Well, as I was looking about, bewildered, on a staircase, I met my brother, who, I suppose,
     had followed me. He asked me what I wanted there. I told him. He said I was a scoundrel and a
     liar. Of course, I couldn't stand that, so I let out at him, and came away—and there the matter
     stands. What do you make of it?'
'Excuse me,' said the other, 'does your brother drink?'
'Certainly not; he's one of the most temperate men I know.'
'Could he have done it because—But ah, no, that is quite impossible.'
'I beg your pardon?'
'Is your brother in love with Miss Stanley?' said Litvinoff, slowly and directly.
'I think he is. What made you think so?'
'It was coming from her presence that I met him.'
'By God! That may account for her manner to-night,' said Roland in a low tone, but not so low
     but that Litvinoff heard him, and read his thought almost before he heard his word.
'No, no, that is quite impossible; dismiss that from your mind. He would never be so base as
     to traduce you to her. Besides, where is the motive, unless he fears you? Is there perhaps some
     other lady in the case?'
'No.'
'He told you you were not worthy to go near Miss Stanley,' said the other, lowering his voice
     deferentially at her name. 'That can only mean one thing.'
'It may mean that he is mad, or—by Jove!—it may mean one other thing. But of that other thing
     I am as innocent as you are.'
If he was as innocent as Count Litvinoff looked, he was innocent indeed.

'Perhaps it will arrange itself. Quarrels about ladies often adjust themselves—or rather the
     lady usually adjusts them.'
'This,' said Roland, 'is more serious than most quarrels for both of us, and more serious
     than I can tell you; but I think I've troubled you enough with our family affairs. I'll say
     good-night.'
Litvinoff came down to the door with him, and helped him on with his coat. As he did so, he
     said softly,—
'If it is any comfort to you, your brother did not seem to have prospered in his suit. He
     looked distressed, and, fancied, remorseful. Good-night. Ah, what a lovely night. The fog has
     quite cleared up. How lucky for you. Au revoir!'
