

VENGEANCE ASTRAY
JOHN HATFIELD had left Dartford, his wife, and his work, driven by an impulse as vague as it
     was irresistible. He did not know what he meant to do; his one idea was that he must face his
     daughter's betrayer, and tax him with his crime. He did not very much care what came after. But
     the long tramp through England, broken though it was by many a lift from good-natured
     waggoners, had given him time for thinking. Reflection did not soften his resentment. On the
     contrary, the more he thought, the harder his heart felt, and each new hour of solitary musing
     left him more bitter, more vindictive, more angered than he had been the hour before. His
     wife's story convicted him of the one fault from which he had always believed himself to be
     free—blind stupidity. The loss of his daughter had never been out of his mind for half an hour
     at a time since she had gone away, and he had thought and thought, till his brain had seemed to
     spin round, over every least detail of her flight, and of the time just before it, in the hope
     of finding out who was her betrayer. And yet in all his thinking he had never come anywhere
     near the truth. Other people had, though; he knew that, as he remembered hints he had sneered
     at from some of the least brilliant of the hands—fools he had often called them. Yet, fools as
     they were, they had been able to see more clearly than he, the father, whose 
     brain sharpest love and sorrow ought surely to have had power to quicken.
Added to all this, the thought that he had gone on working for, taking the money of, and, to
     a certain extent, living in a condition of dependence on, the man who had wronged him, and then
     had turned him out on to the world, stung his spirit almost to madness.
The spring woke early that year, and the weather was bright and glad, the air clear and sweet
     and joyous with a thousand bird-voices. The Midland woods and hedges that he passed were
     beginning to deck themselves in the fresh greenness of their new spring garments. Their beauty
     brought no peace to him. He but noticed them to curse their monotony and apparent endlessness.
     The only things he did notice with anything like satisfaction were the milestones and
     fingerposts, which told him that so much more ground had been got over. He put up at night at
     the cheapest and poorest-looking inns he could find. They were good enough to lie awake in, for
     his feverish longing and impatience to reach his end almost consumed him and made sleep an
     impossibility. Eager as he was to get on, he had self-restraint enough to spend none of his
     store of money—such a little store as it was—on travelling. Roland Ferrier might not be at
     Thornsett after all, and he might have to follow him, or mayhap return to Dartford and bide his
     time; and so, though his progress was straight and steady it was slow, and he did not reach
     Thornsett until the night that had witnessed the explanations between the brothers.
He had done more than twenty-five miles that day, and he was footsore and tired out when, as
     night was falling, he reached the top of the hill at whose foot lay the village which had been
     his home for thirty years. All along he had been determined to make straight for Thornsett
     Edge, and to confront Roland at once. He felt that the young man might be surprised into  more admissions than he would choose to make if he were prepared. But physical
     fatigue is wonderfully effective in upsetting mental decision. Hatfield felt that neither in
     body nor in mind was he fit to go through at once with the part he had chosen. He must
     rest—sleep, if possible. He threw himself down on the heather by the pathside, and leaned his
     head on his arm, while he debated what to do. Nature decided for him, and he fell asleep.
When he woke, a young moon was shining coldly down upon him. He felt stiff, and not rested.
     The heather was wet with night-dew. How late was it? He thought by the moon about eight
     o'clock.
He would go down to the village and see who was left in the old place; perhaps he might get a
     lodging there. The Spotted Cow was closed, he had heard. He limped down the steep stony street.
     There were no lights to be seen. As he reached the house that had been his, he saw that it was
     empty, and a longing came over him to get inside it. Why not sleep there? So, turning aside, he
     went up the three stone steps and along the narrow paved pathway that ran under the windows
     separating the house from the tiny front garden. His hand fell on the latch of the door quite
     naturally, and it never occurred to him that it would not yield to his touch as it had been
     wont to do. But it did not yield. He was in that frame of mind when any resistance is
     intolerable. He drew back and then threw himself against the door with all his weight. It gave
     way noisily and he went in. He passed round the wooden screen, and stood in the middle of the
     flagged floor.
To return to a house where we have been happy, even if we have left it for greater happiness,
     is always sad if not painful; but to go back to a house that seems to hold within its desolate
     walls, not only all our memories but  all our possibilities of happiness—when we
     have left it in sorrow, to take back to it an added load of new, unexpected, intolerable
     trouble—this, let us be thankful, is not given to many of us.
John Hatfield could not bear it. He cast one look round at the dark, fireless hearth, the
     uncurtained window, turned, and came out. Sleep there? He would rather sleep on the bare
     hillside, or in the churchyard itself, for that matter.
The rush of memories drove him before it. He could not stay in the village. Every other house
     in it had been a home too, and was crowded with recollections almost as maddening as those that
     peopled his own home, in which—bitterest thought of all—Roland Ferrier had lisped out childish
     prattle, and climbed on his knee to share his caresses with baby Alice. And at the remembrance
     his resolution came back. He would go to Thornsett Edge then and there, let come what might.
     Weak as he was, he was strong enough to make his tired feet carry him so far, and once there
     his passion could be trusted to give him strength to say and do all that needed to be said and
     done. He clenched his nerves, as though the pain of his bruised feet would grow less by being
     despised, and he walked on. But when he reached the turn in the road that brought the mill in
     sight his mood altered again, and almost before he knew that his intention had changed he found
     himself limping painfully down the stone steps into the little hollow. As he caught sight of
     the door where Litvinoff had stood on the night of the fire he muttered a curse on the man who
     had stood between the 'hands' and their purpose that night. He felt faint and giddy. The many
     square windows of the mill seemed to look on him like eyes, and the broken panes in them lent
     them a sinister expression. The few past months had changed the face of the mill wonderfully.
     No one had repaired the damage done by the rioters, and the wind and  rain had had
     their will of the place. It looked now, Hatfield thought, as though it had been deserted for
     years instead of months.
Everything was deadly still. The only sounds were the trickling of the stream as it flowed
     past, and his own heavy breathing. He was becoming unaccountably sleepy. Why should he not
     sleep here? He would go on to Thornsett in the morning. He stumbled downward till he reached
     the wall of the mill. He soon found a window that could be unfastened by passing his hand
     through one of its broken panes and turning round the primitive hasp. It was rusty, and moved,
     as it were, reluctantly. Still, it did move, and he opened the window and crept through it. He
     found himself on the edge of a huge stone tank, or vat. One more forward movement and he would
     have been plunged in the dark-looking water that half filled it. He shuddered. How could he
     have been such a fool as to forget the position of that tank? He crept round the edge of it,
     and reached the stone-paved floor of the basement. There lay a mass of something dark. It was
     the great stone that had thundered through the roof of the mill just after young Roland Ferrier
     had given the deputation their answer. Hatfield looked up at the ugly hole in the ceiling, a
     hole that repeated itself in the two upper floors and the roof, through which he could see the
     sky. The moon was shining brightly by this time, and the many-windowed building was lighted
     well enough for the man to find his way about. Had it been dark, he thought he should not have
     had much difficulty. He went up the stairs, and made his way to a room on the second storey,
     where he fancied there would be some soft rubbish he could lie down on. He was not
     disappointed, and, yielding to the utter weariness that had come to him, he lay down, and in a
     moment slept.
He had not been asleep three minutes when he awoke with  a start to find himself
     sitting up and listening. What had he heard? The click of a door and a footstep. He was widely,
     nervously, intensely awake now. Had it been fancy, born of the utter desolation and loneliness
     of the place where he was? He listened strainedly. No. This at least was no fancy. There was a
     footstep resounding hollowly through the great empty rooms.
Some watcher, perhaps, from whom he ought to keep himself hidden if he did not want to be
     handed over to the constable as a vagrant. What an ending, that, to his journey! Yes, he must
     lie quiet, and yet, how could he? Suppose—and at the thought his blood ran coldly through his
     veins—suppose old Richard Ferrier had got up from under that white stone in Thornsett
     churchyard, and had come down to keep watch over what his sons had so little regarded. The
     footsteps came nearer, and Hatfield sprang to his feet and walked not away from, but towards,
     the sound. The impulse of a naturally brave man when he is frightened is to face the
     fearsome thing as speedily as may be. Hatfield opened the door. Then he sprang forward, for he
     saw no ghost, but, as it seemed to him, the object of his search—not old Richard, but young
     Roland, standing with his back to him. The bright moonlight lighting up the figure left no room
     in his mind for a doubt. At the sight, all his ideas of asking for explanation vanished in an
     instant, and left him with no impulse but to catch the young man by the throat and to squeeze
     the life out of him.
As the other turned at the sound of the opening door he gave a cry of horror at the sight of
     the wild, haggard figure springing at him—the white, angry, maddened face close to his own.
'Keep back!' he almost screamed, as Hatfield rushed upon him, but even as he spoke the man's
     hands fastened on his throat, and the two closed in a silent, deadly struggle. They  had hardly grasped each other when both remembered the danger that lay behind them—that
     black gap in the floor—and each tried to edge away from it without loosening his hold. Too
     late, though. The strain of the strong men wrestling was too much for the splintered boards
     already rotted through by the rain and snow of the past months. Crash went the flooring beneath
     their feet, and as the two went through, fast locked in each other's arms, Hatfield, above his
     adversary, saw, in a flash of intensest horror, that the face below him was not that of Roland,
     but of Richard.
It was the last thing he ever saw in this world. In another moment he was lying, a dead man,
     at the bottom of the great tank. Again the stillness of the empty mill was undisturbed, and the
     only movement in it was that of the heavy-coloured water as it settled down again into
     stagnation over him.
Roland went to bed that night without troubling himself much about his brother. He had been
     deeply wronged, and he was a man who, not easily offended, was, when once alienated,
     implacable. He did not find it easy to forgive. Though he had shaken hands with his brother he
     had not forgiven him, and he came down to breakfast the next morning quite prepared to keep up
     his rôle of injured innocence, and to prevent his brother from experiencing much
     satisfaction in the reconciliation. Richard had always been an early riser, and Roland quite
     expected to find him in the dining-room waiting, but he was not there. He waited some little
     time, and then desired Mrs Brock to see if Mr Ferrier was in his room, and it was not till she
     returned with the intelligence that he was not and that his bed had not been slept in, that
     Roland began to wonder in anxious earnest where his brother could be.
A very short search showed that he was not in the house or grounds. Could he have gone to the
     churchyard? No, thought  Roland; Dick wasn't that sort of fellow. Perhaps he had
     gone over to Gates, and had stayed all night. In a very short time Roland was at The Hollies
     questioning eagerly, and, with an inexplicable feeling of dread and anxiety growing stronger
     upon him with each moment, he learned that Dick had not been there. He would go down to the
     village, and Mr Gates volunteered to come with him, though he laughed cheerfully at the idea of
     there being anything to worry about in Dick's non-appearance. 'He's playing off some trick on
     you,' he said. 'However, come along, and we'll soon find him.' So they walked together towards
     the village.
'Hullo,' said Mr Gates, as they passed the mill, 'that door's no business open! Perhaps
     Dick's up to some games in there.'
The door he pointed at was one opening from the mill on to a flight of stone steps that ran
     sideways outside the building from the second storey to the ground.
'Whether he's there or not,' the lawyer went on, 'some one has been there, and we'd better
     see who it is.'
So they went down, and, crossing the courtyard, between whose stones the grass was springing
     already, ran up the steps and passed through the open door.
The whole place was flooded with the brilliant morning sunlight.
The two made a few steps forward. They saw the hole in the floor, and paused. Then Roland's
     heart seemed to stand still, for he saw on the board at the edge of the gap a hat, and his
     brother's silver-headed walking stick, and he knew what had happened. With an exceeding bitter
     cry he turned from Gates and sprang down an inner staircase, glancing at each floor as he
     passed it, and on the stones at the bottom he found what he sought—Dick. Or was it Dick? Could
     this mangled, twisted, bloody mass be his brother? The pitiless  light came
     through the cobwebbed windows, and showed plainly enough that it was Dick, or Dick's body.
'Run for Bailey,' he shouted to Gates, who had followed him; and he went.
Then Roland lifted Richard's head. Was he alive? Yes. At the movement a spasm of agony
     contracted his face, and his eyes opened. A look of relief came into them when he saw his
     brother.
'Don't move me, old man,' he whispered; and the other knelt beside him, his arms under the
     poor head. He could not speak, for he saw that his brother was dying.
After a moment Richard spoke again, very faintly.
'I'm glad you've come.' He could only say a few words at a time, and between the sentences
     came long pauses, in each of which Roland fancied the last silence had come.
'I wanted you, old fellow. It's nearly over now. It's been like hell lying here. I know he's
     somewhere near, and I couldn't help him. It was Hatfield, and he mistook me for you. It was
     through me he believed you had wronged Alice. He was hiding here, and attacked me. We struggled
     and fell. I'm afraid he's dead. You'll see presently.'
Then came a longer pause than any that had gone before, and still Roland could not speak.
Gates had sent down a man from the cottage above, but when he came Richard made impatient
     signs, and he went and stood outside.
'You didn't care about making it up, Rowley; but it's all right between us now, isn't
     it?'
Roland's tears were falling over his brother's face.
'Oh, Dick, Dick, Dick!' He could say nothing else.
'It's hard lines,' Richard said; 'but it's all my own fault. Never mind, old chap.
     Water!'

Roland called to the labourer, and when the water had been brought Dick seemed to gather his
     strength together.
'Since I've been lying here, I've wished I could believe I was going to see father again, and
     I half believe it's possible. I shouldn't care if I was going to the old dad again.'
'Oh, Dick! Can I do nothing for you?'
'No, old chap; only tell her I sent her my love. She has it, and she won't mind
     now.'
Then he lay silent, with closed eyes. Presently he made a movement. Roland interpreted it,
     and kissed his face.
'I'm going, old man!' he said. 'Good-bye. Clare! Clare! Clare!' He murmured her name over and
     over again, more and more faintly.
Roland put the water to his lips again, but it was too late. He had drunk of the Nepenthe of
     Death.
