
CHAPTER LXXIV. Showing What Happened in the Churchyard.  
These arrangements as to the return of Mr. Palliser's party to London did not, of course,
      include Mr. Grey. They were generally discussed in Mr. Grey's absence, and communicated to him
      by Mr. Palliser. "I suppose we shall see you in England before long?" said Mr. Palliser. "I
      shall be able to tell you that before you go," said Grey. "Not but that in any event I shall
      return to England before the winter."
"Then come to us at Matching," said Mr. Palliser. "We shall be most happy to have you. Say
      that you'll come for the first fortnight in December. After that we always go to the Duke, in
      Barsetshire. Though, by-the-by, I don't suppose we shall go anywhere this year," Mr. Palliser
      added, interrupting the warmth of his invitation, and reflecting that, under the present
      circumstances, perhaps, it might be improper to have any guests at Matching in December. But
      he had become very fond of Mr. Grey, and on this occasion, as he had done on some others,
      pressed him warmly to make an attempt at Parliament. "It isn't nearly so difficult as you
      think," said he, when Grey declared that he would not know where to look for a seat. "See the
      men that get in. There was Mr. Vavasor. Even he got a seat."
"But he had to pay for it very dearly."
"You might easily find some quiet little borough."
"Quiet little boroughs have usually got their own quiet little Members," said Grey.
"They're fond of change; and if you like to spend a thousand pounds, the thing isn't
      difficult. I'll put you in the way of it." But Mr. Grey still declined. He was not a man prone
      to be talked out of his own way of life, and the very fact that George Vavasor had been in
      Parliament would of itself have gone far towards preventing any attempt on his part in that
      direction. Alice had also wanted him to go into public life, but he had put aside her request
      as though the thing were quite out of the question,—never giving a moment to its
      consideration. Had she asked him to settle himself and her in Central Africa, his manner and
      mode of refusal would have been the same. It was this immobility on his part,—this absolute
      want of any of the weakness of indecision, which had frightened her, and driven her away from
      him. He was partly aware of this; but that which he had declined to do at her solicitation, he
      certainly would not do at the advice of any one else. So it was that he argued the matter with
      himself. Had he now allowed himself to be so counselled, with what terrible acknowledgements
      of his own faults must he not have presented himself before Alice?
"I suppose books, then, will be your object in life?" said Mr. Palliser.
"I hope they will be my aids," Grey answered. "I almost doubt whether any object such as
      that you mean is necessary for life, or even expedient. It seems to me that if a man can so
      train himself that he may live honestly and die fearlessly, he has done about as much as is
      necessary."
"He has done a great deal, certainly," said Mr. Palliser, who was not ready enough to carry
      on the argument as he might have done had more time been given to him to consider it. He knew
      very well that he himself was working for others, and not for himself; and he was aware,
      though he had not analysed his own convictions on the matter, that good men struggle as they
      do in order that others, besides themselves, may live honestly, and, if possible, die
      fearlessly. The recluse of Nethercoats had thought much more about all this than the rising
      star of the House of Commons; but the philosophy of the rising star was the better philosophy
      of the two, though he was by far the less brilliant man. "I don't see why a man should not
      live honestly and be a Member of Parliament as well," continued Mr. Palliser, when he had been
      silent for a few minutes.
"Nor I either," said Grey. "I am sure that there are such men, and that the country is under
      great obligation to them. But they are subject to temptations which a prudent man like myself
      may perhaps do well to avoid." But though he spoke with an assured tone, he was shaken, and
      almost regretted that he did not accept the aid which was offered to him. It is astonishing
      how strong a man may be to those around him,—how impregnable may be his exterior, while within
      he feels himself to be as weak as water, and as unstable as chaff.
But the object which he had now in view was a renewal of his engagement with Alice, and he
      felt that he must obtain an answer from her before they left Lucerne. If she still persisted
      in refusing to give him her hand, it would not be consistent with his dignity as a man to
      continue his immediate pursuit of her any longer. In such case he must leave her, and see what
      future time might bring forth. He believed himself to be aware that he would never offer his
      love to another woman; and if Alice were to remain single, he might try again, after the lapse
      of a year or two. But if he failed now,—then, for that year or two, he would see her no more.
      Having so resolved, and being averse to anything like a surprise, he asked her, as he left her
      one evening, whether she would walk with him on the following morning. That morning would be
      the morning of her last day at Lucerne; and as she assented she knew well what was to come.
      She said nothing to Lady Glencora on the subject, but allowed the coming prospects of the
      Palliser family to form the sole subject of their conversation that night, as it had done on
      every night since the great news had become known. They were always together for an hour every
      evening before Alice was allowed to go to bed, and during this hour the anxieties of the
      future father and mother were always discussed till Alice Vavasor was almost tired of them.
      But she was patient with her friend, and on this special night she was patient as ever. But
      when she was released and was alone, she made a great endeavour to come to some fixed
      resolution as to what she would do on the morrow,—some resolution which should be absolutely
      resolute, and from which no eloquence on the part of any one should move her. But such
      resolutions are not easily reached, and Alice laboured through half the night almost in vain.
      She knew that she loved the man. She knew that he was as true to her as the sun is true to the
      earth. She knew that she would be, in all respects, safe in his hands. She knew that Lady
      Glencora would be delighted, and her father gratified. She knew that the countesses would open
      their arms to her,—though I doubt whether this knowledge was in itself very persuasive. She
      knew that by such a marriage she would gain all that women generally look to gain when they
      give themselves away. But, nevertheless, as far as she could decide at all, she decided
      against her lover. She had no right of her own to be taken back after the evil that she had
      done, and she did not choose to be taken back as an object of pity and forgiveness.
"Where are you going?" said her cousin, when she came in with her hat on, soon after
      breakfast.
"I am going to walk,—with Mr. Grey."
"By appointment?"
"Yes, by appointment. He asked me yesterday."
"Then it's all settled, and you haven't told me!"
"All that is settled I have told you very often. He asked me yesterday to walk with him this
      morning, and I could not well refuse him."
"Why should you have wished to refuse him?"
"I haven't said that I did wish it. But I hate scenes, and I think it would have been
      pleasanter for us to have parted without any occasion for special words."
"Alice, you are such a fool!"
"So you tell me very often."
"Of course he is now going to say the very thing that he has come all this way for the
      purpose of saying. He has been wonderfully slow about it; but then slow as he is, you are
      slower. If you don't make it up with him now, I really shall think you are very wicked. I am
      becoming like Lady Midlothian;—I can't understand it. I know you want to be his wife, and I
      know he wants to be your husband, and the only thing that keeps you apart is your
      obstinacy,—just because you have said you wouldn't have him. My belief is that if Lady
      Midlothian and the rest of us were to pat you on the back, and tell you how right you were,
      you'd ask him to take you, out of defiance. You may be sure of this, Alice; if you refuse him
      now, it'll be for the last time."
This, and much more of the same kind, she bore before Mr. Grey came to take her, and she
      answered to it all as little as she could. "You are making me very unhappy, Glencora," she
      said once. "I wish I could break you down with unhappiness," Lady Glencora answered, "so that
      he might find you less stiff, and hard, and unmanageable." Directly upon that he came in,
      looking as though he had no business on hand more exciting than his ordinary morning's
      tranquil employments. Alice at once got up to start with him. "So you and Alice are going to
      make your adieux," said Lady Glencora. "It must be done sooner or later," said Mr. Grey; and
      then they went off.
Those who know Lucerne,—and almost everybody now does know Lucerne,—will remember the big
      hotel which has been built close to the landing-pier of the steamers, and will remember also
      the church that stands upon a little hill or rising ground, to the left of you, as you come
      out of the inn upon the lake. The church is immediately over the lake, and round the church
      there is a burying-ground, and skirting the burying-ground there are cloisters, through the
      arches and apertures of which they who walk and sit there look down immediately upon the blue
      water, and across the water upon the frowning menaces of Mount Pilate. It is one of the
      prettiest spots in that land of beauty; and its charm is to my feeling enhanced by the
      sepulchral monuments over which I walk, and by which I am surrounded, as I stand there. Up
      here, into these cloisters, Alice and John Grey went together. I doubt whether he had formed
      any purpose of doing so. She certainly would have gone without question in any direction that
      he might have led her. The distance from the inn up to the church-gate did not take them ten
      minutes, and when they were there their walk was over. But the place was solitary, and they
      were alone; and it might be as well for Mr. Grey to speak what words he had to say there as
      elsewhere. They had often been together in those cloisters before, but on such occasions
      either Mr. Palliser or Lady Glencora had been with them. On their slow passage up the hill
      very little was spoken, and that little was of no moment. "We will go in here for a few
      minutes," he said. "It is the prettiest spot about Lucerne, and we don't know when we may see
      it again." So they went in, and sat down on one of the embrasures that open from the cloisters
      over the lake.
"Probably never again," said Alice. "And yet I have been here now two years running."
She shuddered as she remembered that in that former year George Vavasor had been with her.
      As she thought of it all she hated herself. Over and over again she had told herself that she
      had so mismanaged the latter years of her life that it was impossible for her not to hate
      herself. No woman had a clearer idea of feminine constancy than she had, and no woman had
      sinned against that idea more deeply. He gave her time to think of all this as he sat there
      looking down upon the water.
"And yet I would sooner live in Cambridgeshire," were the first words he spoke.
"Why so?"
"Partly because all beauty is best enjoyed when it is sought for with some trouble and
      difficulty, and partly because such beauty, and the romance which is attached to it, should
      not make up the staple of one's life. Romance, if it is to come at all, should always come by
      fits and starts."
"I should like to live in a pretty country."
"And would like to live a romantic life,—no doubt; but all those things lose their charm if
      they are made common. When a man has to go to Vienna or St. Petersburg two or three times a
      month, you don't suppose he enjoys travelling?"
"All the same, I should like to live in a pretty country," said Alice.
"And I want you to come and live in a very ugly country." Then he paused for a minute or
      two, not looking at her, but gazing still on the mountain opposite. She did not speak a word,
      but looked as he was looking. She knew that the request was coming, and had been thinking
      about it all night; but now that it had come she did not know how to bear herself. "I don't
      think," he went on to say, "that you would let that consideration stand in your way, if on
      other grounds you were willing to become my wife."
"What consideration?"
"Because Nethercoats is not so pretty as Lucerne."
"It would have nothing to do with it," said Alice.
"It should have nothing to do with it."
"Nothing; nothing at all," repeated Alice.
"Will you come, then? Will you come and be my wife, and help me to be happy amidst all that
      ugliness? Will you come and be my one beautiful thing, my treasure, my joy, my comfort, my
      counsellor?"
"You want no counsellor, Mr. Grey."
"No man ever wanted one more. Alice, this has been a bad year to me, and I do not think that
      it has been a happy one for you."
"Indeed, no."
"Let us forget it,—or rather, let us treat it as though it were forgotten. Twelve months ago
      you were mine. You were, at any rate, so much mine that I had a right to boast of my
      possession among my friends."
"It was a poor boast."
"They did not seem to think so. I had but one or two to whom I could speak of you, but they
      told me that I was going to be a happy man. As to myself, I was sure that I was to be so. No
      man was ever better contented with his bargain than I was with mine. Let us go back to it, and
      the last twelve months shall be as though they had never been."
"That cannot be, Mr. Grey. If it could, I should be worse even than I am."
"Why cannot it be?"
"Because I cannot forgive myself what I have done, and because you ought not to forgive
      me."
"But I do. There has never been an hour with me in which there has been an offence of yours
      rankling in my bosom unforgiven. I think you have been foolish, misguided,—led away by a vain
      ambition, and that in the difficulty to which these things brought you, you endeavoured to
      constrain yourself to do an act, which, when it came near to you,—when the doing of it had to
      be more closely considered, you found to be contrary to your nature." Now, as he spoke thus,
      she turned her eyes upon him, and looked at him, wondering that he should have had power to
      read her heart so accurately. "I never believed that you would marry your cousin. When I was
      told of it, I knew that trouble had blinded you for awhile. You had driven yourself to revolt
      against me, and upon that your heart misgave you, and you said to yourself that it did not
      matter then how you might throw away all your sweetness. You see that I speak of your old love
      for me with the frank conceit of a happy lover."
"No;—no, no!" she ejaculated.
"But the storm passes over the tree and does not tear it up by the roots or spoil it of all
      its symmetry. When we hear the winds blowing, and see how the poor thing is shaken, we think
      that its days are numbered and its destruction at hand. Alice, when the winds were shaking
      you, and you were torn and buffeted, I never thought so. There may be some who will forgive
      you slowly. Your own self-forgiveness will be slow. But I, who have known you better than any
      one,—yes, better than any one,—I have forgiven you everything, have forgiven you instantly.
      Come to me, Alice, and comfort me. Come to me, for I want you sorely." She sat quite still,
      looking at the lake and the mountain beyond, but she said nothing. What could she say to him?
      "My need of you is much greater now," he went on to say, "than when I first asked you to share
      the world with me. Then I could have borne to lose you, as I had never boasted to myself that
      you were my own,—had never pictured to myself the life that might be mine if you were always
      to be with me. But since that day I have had no other hope,—no other hope but this for which I
      plead now. Am I to plead in vain?"
"You do not know me," she said; "how vile I have been! You do not think what it is,—for a
      woman to have promised herself to one man while she loved another."
"But it was me you loved. Ah! Alice, I can forgive that. Do I not tell you that I did
      forgive it the moment that I heard it? Do you not hear me say that I never for a moment
      thought that you would marry him? Alice, you should scold me for my vanity, for I have
      believed all through that you loved me, and me only. Come to me, dear, and tell me that it is
      so, and the past shall be only as a dream."
"I am dreaming it always," said Alice.
"They will cease to be bitter dreams if your head be upon my shoulder. You will cease to
      reproach yourself when you know that you have made me happy."
"I shall never cease to reproach myself. I have done that which no woman can do and honour
      herself afterwards. I have been—a jilt."
"The noblest jilt that ever yet halted between two minds! There has been no touch of
      selfishness in your fickleness. I think I could be hard enough upon a woman who had left me
      for greater wealth, for a higher rank,—who had left me even that she might be gay and merry.
      It has not been so with you."
"Yes, it has. I thought you were too firm in your own will, and—"
"And you think so still. Is that it?"
"It does not matter what I think now. I am a fallen creature, and have no longer a right to
      such thoughts. It will be better for us both that you should leave me,—and forget me. There
      are things which, if a woman does them, should never be forgotten;—which she should never
      permit herself to forget."
"And am I to be punished, then, because of your fault? Is that your sense of justice?" He
      got up, and standing before her, looked down upon her. "Alice, if you will tell me that you do
      not love me, I will believe you, and will trouble you no more. I know that you will say
      nothing to me that is false. Through it all you have spoken no word of falsehood. If you love
      me, after what has passed, I have a right to demand your hand. My happiness requires it, and I
      have a right to expect your compliance. I do demand it. If you love me, Alice, I tell you that
      you dare not refuse me. If you do so, you will fail hereafter to reconcile it to your
      conscience before God."
Then he stopped his speech, and waited for a reply; but Alice sat silent beneath his gaze,
      with her eyes turned upon the tombstones beneath her feet. Of course she had no choice but to
      yield. He, possessed of power and force infinitely greater than hers, had left her no
      alternative but to be happy. But there still clung to her what I fear we must call a
      perverseness of obstinacy, a desire to maintain the resolution she had made,—a wish that she
      might be allowed to undergo the punishment she had deserved. She was as a prisoner who would
      fain cling to his prison after pardon has reached him, because he is conscious that the pardon
      is undeserved. And it may be that there was still left within her bosom some remnant of that
      feeling of rebellion which his masterful spirit had ever produced in her. He was so imperious
      in his tranquillity, he argued his question of love with such a manifest preponderance of
      right on his side, that she had always felt that to yield to him would be to confess the
      omnipotence of his power. She knew now that she must yield to him,—that his power over her was
      omnipotent. She was pressed by him as in some countries the prisoner is pressed by the
      judge,—so pressed that she acknowledged to herself silently that any further antagonism to him
      was impossible. Nevertheless, the word which she had to speak still remained unspoken, and he
      stood over her, waiting for her answer. Then slowly he sat down beside her, and gradually he
      put his arm round her waist. She shrank from him, back against the stonework of the embrasure,
      but she could not shrink away from his grasp. She put up her hand to impede his, but his hand,
      like his character and his words, was full of power. It would not be impeded. "Alice," he
      said, as he pressed her close with his arm, "the battle is over now, and I have won it."
"You win everything,—always," she said, whispering to him, as she still shrank from his
      embrace.
"In winning you I have won everything." Then he put his face over her and pressed his lips
      to hers. I wonder whether he was made happier when he knew that no other touch had profaned
      those lips since last he had pressed them?
