
CHAPTER IV.
"In every well-conditioned stripling, as I conjecture, there already blooms a certain
      prospective Paradise, cheered by some fairest Eve."
Presently they move, and passing down the slabbed incline, and across the water
      into the King's garden, tread very slowly the fine gravel of the broad walk, as sentinels on
      either hand of which stand heaven-high firs, that yet have been clipped out of all fir
      semblance, and, like their brothers round the Schloss, wear the likeness of yews, cut into
      such tall narrow sugar-loafs that their forest kin would disown them. Silently they step
      along. Perhaps the utter repose, the absence of progress and
       hurry, the sober stillness of all around, tells sleepily upon their young
      spirits. Perhaps to them speech is not so easy as it was a month ago. It is Belinda who
      resumes the conversation.
"I suppose that it will devolve upon me after all?" she says with a sigh.
"That what will devolve upon you?" asks Rivers dreamily.
He has forgotten all about Professor Forth, and is lost in a sea of speculation as to
      whether ever woman in this world before had such a short upper lip.
"To tell Professor Forth that I do not think he will be my brother-in-law," she answers,
      smiling.
"You think that Miss Churchill will shirk it?" absently.
The Professor is still a mist-figure to him. It is her chin now. Was there ever such a
      ravishing round chin?
"I think so; she generally does."
" Generally !" awaked for a moment from his trance by shocked surprise. "Does it
      often happen?"

"It was a slip of the tongue," she answers, laughing; "it has happened once or twice
      before."
"And you?"
The bold wind has loosened a very small strand of her hair, and is blowing it against her
      cheek. How many years of his life—ten? fifteen? twenty?—would he give to be allowed to replace
      it behind her ear?
"And I? Oh, I dry the victims' eyes, and tell them that there is as good fish in the sea as
      ever came out of it."
"And yours?" that little lock is still frolicking distractingly; ought he to tell her of it?
      "Who dries your victims' eyes?"
"They have not any eyes to dry," she answers precipitately. "I do not mean that they are
      blind, but that there are no such people; they do not exist."
"You mean, I suppose," he says, reddening, "that I had no business to ask about them?"
"I mean what I say, neither more nor less: they do not exist!"

Her tone is cold and trenchant, as of one who would check a displeasing topic. In point of
      fact it is intense shyness—the shyness of hearing herself talked about, and talked about by
      him—that makes it so; but to a listener it has all the effect of a freezing haughtiness,
      repressing impudent intrusion. She hears it herself with bitterness.
"Is it any wonder that no one has ever loved me?" she says internally.
It is clear that he hears it too.
"You are offended," he cries miserably. "I wish to heaven that I had never come to-day!
      Everything has gone wrong! You let Professor Forth help you out of the carriage! you let him
      hand you the potatoes—"
She smiles involuntarily.
"On the contrary: he recommended me not to take any; he said they were rancid!"
"You let him pick up your pocket-handkerchief!"
Again she smiles more broadly.

"He certainly did not avail himself of the permission. I think that his knees are scarcely
      supple enough for him to be very anxious to pick up even Sarah's."
As she speaks she puts up her hand and carelessly pushes back her wandering love- lock; but
      one little tendril still escapes and frisks in the breeze.
He thrusts his hands hard down into his pockets to resist the intense though monstrous
      temptation to aid her in its recapture.
"If you knew," he says hurriedly, "what I felt when you drove up to the Gasthof to-day; in
      what an agony of dread lest you should think me presumptuous for having forced myself into
      your party—lest you should murder me with one of those terrible frozen looks of yours—"
"One of those terrible frozen looks of mine?" repeats she with a puzzled air. "It is very
      odd! I wonder how I do them?"
"You may think me as great an ass as you please," pursues he rapidly—"and, indeed,
       you would not be human if you did not—but I give you my word of honour, for the
      first moment I dared not look. I shut my eyes!"
At that she smiles subtilely.
"How, in Heaven's name, have you managed to make me so much afraid of you?" continues the
      lad, with gathering agitation. "You are never rude; you are not sarcastic; nothing makes you
      angry; you speak most softly; and yet—"
"And yet," she says, finishing his sentence for him with a rather bitter smile, "and yet you
      shake in your shoes before me! I know you all do. Ever since I grew up—nay, before; I think
      that at fourteen I began to inspire dread—I have always been hearing how frightened people are
      of me. It is so pleasant! No doubt you had been told it before you came to know me, had not
      you?"
In the eagerness of that query she has stopped and faced him, the colour hurrying up to her
      cheeks, and her eyes fastened in imperative asking on his.

He does not answer for a moment. He is dizzily marvelling whether blood of so wondrous a
      tint had ever flooded lily cheek before. She repeats her question with emphasis:
"Had not you?"
"I—I— had heard that you snubbed people!"
"Have you found it true?" she says, in a low and rather anxious voice. "Have I—have I—"
      hesitating, "snubbed you?"
To this question she has honestly expected a reply in the negative, and is proportionately
      startled by the virile energy of the affirmative that instead follows. "That you have—times
      out of mind!"
"Have I?" she says, in a key of genuine bewilderment. "How? when? where? What is it that I
      do?"
He does not answer.
"Is it," she goes on diffidently, Sarah's dictum as to the one unforgivable sin committible
      by women against men flashing across her mind, sinister and appropriate— "is it that I make
      you feel small?"

"Small! Yes," assents he, with pungent emphasis; "I should think you did! invisibly,
      imperceptibly small. But that is not the worst. I was prepared for that. I had heard it was
      your way!"
She laughs grimly. "What a pleasant way!"
"There are days on which—I do not know how you do it—you make me feel as aloof from you as
      if—"
"As if what?"
"As if I were down here, and you were—"
"And I were what?" with an accent of sincere and puzzled curiosity.
"And you were—and you were—one of the heavenly host up there!" ends the young man, baldly
      and stammering. But love is no brightener of the wits.
"One of the heavenly host?" repeats she, justly infuriate at this stale comparison. "An
      angel, in short! Must I always be an angle, or a goddess? If anyone knew how sick I am of
      being a goddess! I declare I should be thankful to be
       called a Fury , or even a Ghoul , for a change!"
So saying, she turns her shoulder peevishly to him; and leaving the garden, begins to walk
      quickly along the road by the water, as if to make up for her late loitering. He keeps pace
      with her, dumb in snubbed contrition, stupefied by love and, unhappily for himself, fully
      conscious of it; burningly aware of the hopeless flatness of his last simile, and rendered by
      his situation quite incapable of redeeming it by any brighter sally.
Presently they leave the water and all its rioting wavelets, and pace through the fir-wood
      towards the little Schloss—the big one's quaint baby-brother.
Beneath the fir-trees the blue hepaticas flower plentiful and late, and the young
      stitchworts open their fresh eyes to the spring. Regardless of ten-groschen penalties, Belinda
      leaves the road, and stoops to pick the little blossoms.
Docilely following her motions, he stoops and picks too. He picks to more
       purpose than she, indeed; for when, by-and-by, they straighten themselves again
      and compare results, his is by far the largest nosegay.
"Will you take them?" he says, timidly proffering them, for her tart speech has robbed him
      of his last barleycorn of courage; "or shall I—shall I—carry them for you?"
What would not he carry for her? A newspaper parcel down St. James's Street; a bulging
      carpet-bag through Rotten Row!
"Thank you, I will carry them myself," she answers, stretching out her pretty, bare hand for
      them. "They shall make up to me," smiling, "for the gardenias of which I was deprived by—an
      accident. Do you know that I was not allowed even to smell them? Did not I bear my loss like a
      Trojan?" Then, hesitating a little, she steps a pace or so nearer to him, and, half shyly
      holding out her own little bunch, "Exchange is no robbery," she says with a soft look. "Will
      you," gently mocking his frightened tone, "will you take them?
       or shall I —shall I —carry them for you?"
He makes her no answer; he is quite unable. The tears have sprung to his eyes. He is very
      young, has never loved before; and it seems to him that at that fair hand holding out its
      little blue bunch Heaven opens to him.
There are days on which Heaven opens to us all, but to most of us next day it shuts
      again.
Above them the pines lay their dark heads stilly together against the fair sky, that looks
      austere, yet not unkind. Here the loud wind is kept at bay, and whispers scarcely more noisily
      than they themselves are doing in their safe retreat.
With what halting words of lame ecstasy he would have thanked her will never now be known.
      Dumbly he has received her gift, refraining, by what iron constraint put upon himself, from
      any least detention of those cool, pale fingers that just unintentionally touch his, and then
      innocently withdraw. The labouring syllables that
       are struggling to his lips are for ever driven thence by the sound of a high-
      pitched young voice calling clearly through the still wood:
"Where are you? What has become of you? We have been searching high and low for you. Have
      you been searching high and low for us ? Ah! evidently you have!" laughing
      ironically. "Well, now you have had the good fortune to find us!"
Ere the end of this sentence, Sarah has frisked up to them, and, for the time, Heaven's door
      shuts in their faces, and Earth's dull portals reopen for them.
"Are you aware that there is a fine of ten groschen for leaving the road?" calls out the
      Professor from the distance, but nobody heeds him.
"Are you picking flowers?" asks Sarah demurely. "How nice! Pick me some." Then, turning to
      Rivers, she adds maliciously: "I am not greedy; I shall be quite content with that miserable
      little bunch that you are clutching so tightly. Give it me!"

But at that he finds his tongue again.
"Not if you were to go down on your knees to me for it!" he cries tragically, lifting his
      right hand and holding his poor little prize high above her restless, small head.
"Not if I were to go down on my knees?" repeats she in accents of the deepest incredulity.
      "Come, that is trop fort ! It is worth putting to the test."
As she speaks, she sinks at once upon her knees on the crushed herbage, and, joining her
      hands as in prayer, looks up at him, and says, in a small, childish voice, whose alluring
      properties she has tested on many a hard-fought field, " Please !"
She might as well have knelt to and allured one of the solemn straight pines. He does not
      even avert his eyes from her, as though, if he saw her, he must yield. He looks her full in
      the face, and says doggedly:
"Not if you knelt there till the Day of Judgment!"
"What are you about, Sarah?" comes
       the Professor's voice again, from the road, where the ten-groschen penalty still
      keeps him. "Are not you aware that although the grass may appear dry on the surface, the
      ground still contains a great deal of latent moisture!"
But a second time he speaks to the wind.
"Not if I knelt here till the Day of Judgment?" repeats Sarah, still hardly believing her
      own ears; then, wisely taking the only course left open to her, with as good a grace as may
      be: "If that is the case, of course I will get up again at once!"
So saying she rises, apparently not at all put out of countenance, and flicks the bits of
      grass from the knees that had bent in vain.
"Do not you wish to see the King's boars fed? I understood you to say that you wished to see
      the King's boars fed!" shouts the Professor, striking in snappishly the third time, the
      contumely with which his remarks have been treated beginning to tell very perceptibly upon his
      tone.

"The King's boars?" repeats Sarah, sotto voce , descending to a degrading pun, and
      accompanying it with a wink that is worthy of it. "Do you think the King has room for one more
      in his menagerie? if so, I might be permitted to offer him mine! Yes," raising her voice, and
      beginning to trip back towards her betrothed, "of course we are coming!"
She has not gone two steps, however, before she bethinks herself; and, turning back, tucks
      her arm determinately under her sister's.
"Belinda," she says resolutely, "you have not seen the Little Schloss! you have not seen the
      lighthouse! you have not seen the pheasantries! you shall see the boars!"
So saying she sweeps her off hurriedly ahead; and Rivers, cursing fearfully, is compelled to
      follow with the Professor, with whom he has about as much in common as a non-reading,
      hard-rowing, foot-balling, cricketing undergraduate mostly has with an exceptionally
      stiff-backed and donnish Don.

Nor is the Professor, whose contempt for undergraduates in general is not to be equalled
      save by his aversion, very much better pleased with the arrangement.
However, it does not last long. A few minutes of brisk walking brings them to the clear
      space in midwood—the sandy spot railed round with palings where his Majesty of Saxony's pigs
      have their daily rations dealt out to them.
There the girls sit down on the wooden bench provided for the accommodation of admiring
      spectators. Many dark forms have already arrived, and are rooting and grubbing hither and
      thither. They have immensely long noses, long dark hair large dark ears; hind-quarters that
      run away like hyænas, and a general air of absurdity and unpiglike pigness. Amongst them are
      several fierce-looking old gentlemen with their ugly lips lifted over formidable tusks, shaggy
      as bears, and with their long grey hair wet and shiny, as if they had been rolling in some
      muddy place. Every moment there is an arrival; a fresh
       pig, two fresh pigs emerging from the wood and trotting hastily, with ears
      anxiously erect, to the rendezvous, afraid of having arrived too late.
About the whole family, when united, there is a general unamiability; a spiteful biting and
      nipping at each other; a squeaking and angrily grunting; a wrathful pursuit and hasty flight.
      The little piglets, tawny-coloured and striped like tiny tigers, toddle sweetly about in their
      artless babyhood.
Irresistibly attracted by the childlike graces of one of these latter, yet smaller, more
      striped, weirder than its brethren, Sarah has run after it, and is now scampering in pursuit
      round the arena.
The Professor, relieved at having found a sandy spot, is standing, stork-like, at a little
      distance off, poised on one leg, and cautiously seeking for traces of moisture on the sole of
      the other boot.
Once more Rivers and Belinda are alone.
"I will be the death of her!" says the
       boy, with an angry smile, shaking his fist in the direction of the sportive
      Sarah.
But apparently the latter's ears are nearly as long as those of the objects of her
      chase.
"Whom will you be the death of?" she cries, desisting suddenly. "The mischief is in the pig!
      I cannot catch it; and I am sure I do not know what I should have done with it if I had.
      Well," having by this time come up to them again, "of whom will you be the death?"
"Of you," replies the young fellow stoutly, though in his heart he is a little scared at the
      unexpected distance to which his threat has carried. "Yes, of you," looking full at her with
      his straightforward, handsome, angry eyes; "at least, if I am not the death of you, as I
      should like to be, I will be even with you some fine day —see if I am not!"
She looks back at him, coolly pondering, but does not answer. A flash of almost
      compassionate astonishment is darting across her mind that any man in the
       possession of sight, health, and vigour— any man, more especially at the most
      inflammable of all ages, can look at her with the unsimulated indifference, slightly coloured
      with dislike, that this Rivers is doing! At once he rises in her esteem. Turning away, she
      walks thoughtfully back to the pigs.

By-and-by, as through the long, light evening the girls bowl smoothly homewards, before the
      shy white stars look out, Sarah suddenly breaks the silence that, for several quiet miles, has
      lain upon both.
"Belinda!" she says abruptly; "by all laws, human and divine, that bouquet was yours! The
      gardenias are now the colour of old leather, and smell rather nastily than otherwise; but,
      such as they are, they are yours!"
And even on these terms, poor Belinda is glad and thankful to have her nosegay again!

