
CHAPTER XII.
" Still at dinner, are they? I shall not detain them a moment; I am sure they will
      admit me; they always admit me. No, I will not wait in the salon; I will join them in the
      dining-room."
Such are the sentences uttered by Miss Watson's voice, and plainly audible through the door
      on that same evening, as addressed to Tommy, who is opposing his puny infant strength to the
      forcible breaking in upon his mistresses at their dessert by the before-mentioned lady. With
      what result may readily be guessed.
"Have you heard about young
       Rivers?" cries she, thrusting the boy aside and bursting in upon them.
They are sitting, as they have sat upon so many happier evenings, the one old woman and the
      two young ones, in their pretty soigné evening dresses. For the last three quarters
      of an hour Belinda has been struggling to solve the problem how to swallow. It is dreadful to
      eat, but it is still more dreadful to have your lack of appetite noticed and wondered at.
      Grapes are perhaps less difficult than most other things for an unwilling palate to deal with;
      and she has taken a few Muscats, and is holding a small bunch between her hot and listless
      fingers at the time of Miss Watson's bouncing entrance. Instantly they fall with a slight
      patter upon her plate.
"What about him?" asks Sarah eagerly, jumping up and running towards the intruder, while
      Mrs. Churchill drops the little red Alpine strawberry she is in the act of lifting to her
      lips, and says in an amazed voice:

"Dear me, Miss Watson! how you startle one!"
"You have not heard, then?" says the other loudly, in a voice of relief. "I am the first to
      tell you?"
"Yes, yes; of course. What is there to tell?" As she speaks, Sarah places herself adroitly
      between their visitor and her view of Belinda, and mentally thanks her gods for the failing
      light and the unkindled gas.
"I was at the station this evening," begins the other, only too happy to embark upon her
      tale; "indeed, I have come almost straight thence." She is in rather dishevelled morning
      dress. "I went to see the Rays off. You know how much we have been together; they would never
      have forgiven me if I had not!"
Despite her anxious suspense, Sarah cannot avoid a sardonic smile. It is the open secret of
      the whole English colony that the Ray family has been compelled, by Watson assiduities,
      regretfully and at great personal inconvenience, to curtail their stay in the Saxon
      capital.

"I took their tickets for them," pursues the unconscious narrator—"I never mind
      trouble—indeed, I insisted upon it. To tell truth, I was a little glad of the opportunity to
      find out where they were going to book to, about which they had made rather a foolish mystery,
      when, just as I was counting my change, whom should I see coming up to the ticket-office but
      young Rivers!"
"Well?" Even Sarah is a little breathless.
"'And what brings you here, pray?' I said. 'Are you come, too, to see the Rays off?' He did
      not hear me. I was prepared for that; you know you explained to me that he was a little deaf.
      By-the-way, that deafness should be seen to at once, and so I shall tell him, if I ever meet
      him again."
If she ever meets him again ! Belinda is leaning forward in an attitude of the
      acutest strained listening; her heart is beating against the edge of the table with loud, hard
      blows.

"He evidently could not have heard me," pursues Miss Watson fluently; "nor seen me either,
      for the matter of that, as he turned sharp round and walked off in the other direction. Of
      course, as soon as the Rays could spare me, I went after him and overtook him."
"Of course!" murmurs Sarah, under her breath.
"I put my hand on his arm. 'Come, now, where are you off to?' just like that. He shook my
      hand off-you know he never had any manners—that is why I think he must be related to the
      Stukeley Rivers; they are proverbially rude, as a family. 'What do you want?' he said, just as
      if he had not heard my question. 'I want to know where you are off to?' I said. 'Where
       are you off to?' He hesitated for a moment, and then seeing, I suppose, that I was
      not to be trifled with, that I was determined to have an answer of some kind, he turned his
      head quite away, and said so low that I could hardly hear him, 'I am going back to England
       to-night.' Then he was away like a shot, and what with the confusion of the
      train coming in, and seeing that the Rays had all their parcels right in the carriage—of
      course at the last moment one was missing —I never caught another glimpse of him."
She stops, out of breath, her narrative ended; nor, for a moment, does any one of her three
      auditors comment upon it.
Belinda has sunk back in her chair, and round her the room is spinning. Sarah, Miss Watson,
      granny, the dogs, all are whirling. Mrs. Churchill is the first to speak.
"I suppose," she says, in a voice still somewhat ruffled by Miss Watson's inroad, and
      picking up the sugar-sifter in her delicate old fingers, "that he was tired of Dresden. There
      is nothing very wonderful in that. Punch, take your hands off the table this instant."
"But it is so sudden!" cries Miss Watson, in a loud aggrieved tone, as if Rivers' departure
      were a personal injury.
       "Why did not he tell us? He never told me; did he ever tell you he was going?"
      Nobody takes the trouble to answer. "I am sure that yesterday, at Wesenstein, nobody would
      have said that he had such an idea in his head, would they now?" turning directly to
      Belinda.
By a great exertion of the powers of the mind over their weaker brothers of the body,
      Belinda has forced the room and the people to stand steady and still again. By a like exertion
      she frames a sentence, which, though short, is not conspicuously tremulous.
"No; I think not."
"Probably he was telegraphed for home," says Sarah, coming hastily to her sister's rescue,
      and trying to divert from her the brunt of Miss Watson's eyes and speech. "Probably he had bad
      news!"
"I should not wonder," answers Miss Watson, looking down on the floor for a moment in
      inquisitive reflection. "I should not at all wonder. He looked like a man who had had bad
      news. In point
       of fact, he looked shockingly ill. I never saw a man so changed in so short a
      time. I am so annoyed with myself," in a tone of the sincerest vexation, "for not having asked
      him point-blank!"
"I should have thought that you might have spared yourself that reproach," says Sarah;
      adding, as she casts an oblique glance in the friendly dusk towards Belinda, to see how she is
      holding up, "Most likely one of his relations is dead."
"I hope it is not even worse than that," answers the other, in a voice of mysterious
      curiosity. "I hope that none of his sisters have got into a disagreeable scrape. You know
      that, in the world, the Rivers women have the character of being un peu leste ."
It is not till every possible conjecture has been exhausted, till the few facts known have
      been worn bare and shiny by turning and handling, that Miss Watson at length withdraws. She
      would not have gone then, had not the idea suddenly presented
       itself, that, if she make haste, she will be able before bedtime to force
      herself and her news upon three or four more households.
No sooner is the outer door safely shut upon her, than—
"Tommy is incorrigible!" says Mrs. Churchill, in a tone of irritation. "The number of times
      that I have impressed upon him not to admit that woman on any pretext whatever, while we are
      at dinner!"
"Pooh, granny! what nonsense you talk!" replies Sarah, disrespectfully. "When that great
      galleon bears down upon him, what can a poor little skiff like Tommy do? Of course she will
      come to breakfast and luncheon and dinner, and we may think ourselves very lucky if she does
      not insist on thrusting herself upon us in our baths." As she speaks, she puts her hand under
      her sister's heavy hanging, limp arm, and draws her away towards the salon. "If you will be so
      slow, granny," she says, with a parting laugh, "we must
       leave you to carouse alone. I believe you enjoy yourself more when you have no
      witnesses of your gourmandise."
But arrived in the salon, she no longer laughs. Belinda has thrown herself flaccidly into a
      chair. The curtains are undrawn, and through them her eyes stare out upon the street—the
      street where, through the deepening gloom, the lit lamps, but now such insignificant yellow
      specks, are beginning to gain importance and use—the street so continually worn by his eager
      footsteps, where she has so often heard them, up and down, up and down, waiting, watching, for
      hours, if it be past all seemliness and moderation for him to venture a visit, on the bare
      chance of her throwing him out one parting smile. All through dinner she has been dreading the
      evening—dreading its suspense, the bell that will ring now and again, the intervals that will
      elapse, and then the blank silence, nothing resulting, showing that it was not he who rang.
      Well, suspense is over and gone now; but she
       would be glad to have it back again, seeing that it has taken hope with it.
"Well," she says after a pause, looking up wearily at her sister, who stands beside her with
      her fair arms folded and her white brows bent in an attitude of serious reflection very
      unnatural to her; "well, what do you say now? Who was right now?"
"I," replies Sarah. "I am more convinced than ever that he left a note or message for you,
      and that it has miscarried."
Belinda's shoulders lift themselves slightly in an unbelieving shrug.
"Notes do not miscarry."
"He left it with the servants to send," pursues Sarah decidedly, "and they—you know what
      German servants are—put it into the post or into the fire, to save themselves trouble."
Belinda offers no contradiction, but neither does any ray of hope brighten her dull face at
      this hypothesis.
"Are you quite sure," asks Sarah, looking penetratingly in her elder's face, so as
       to glean her answer from it rather than from her words, "are you quite sure that
      you did not snub him yesterday at Wesenstein? I know that you very often do it without
      intending it; that you can no more help it than you can help drawing breath; but are you sure
      that you did not?"
"Snubbed him! good heavens, no!"
She has writhed herself half over, and is thrusting her poor face into the cushioned back of
      the chair, as if she wished that she could for ever bury it there, while the blood seems to be
      rushing in hot shamed tinglings all over her body, as her sister's words call up before her in
      all the vividness of new life that scene in the wood, in which snubbing bore so small a
      part.
"Then it is perfectly obvious," replies Sarah collectedly, and with cool common sense, "as I
      told that hornet just now, that he has had bad news and been telegraphed for home. I hope,"
      with an accent of wakened anxiety, "that it is not the iron that has gone wrong."
"I hope it is not anything about his
       father," says Belinda, startled by this suggestion out of her own hot and
      miserable retrospect; "he would never get over it."
"Pooh!" says Sarah; "sons do not die of their fathers' deaths; and in fact, as far as we are
      concerned, it would simplify matters a good deal; he would be his own father then."
For a few moments there is a silence, cut into only by the sound of Punch's snores, regular
      and long drawn out, through the door. It is Belinda who, contrary to what one would have
      expected, breaks it.
"You were always telling me," she says with a hard smile, that yet looks as if it needed
      only one touch to make it dissolve into bitter tears—"you were always telling me that I was so
      cold to him; you were always advising and urging me to be less cold; perhaps," with a sort of
      gasp, "perhaps I have obeyed you too well; perhaps-perhaps he thinks so."
"Do you mean," cries Sarah, with a derisive laugh whose offensive quality is,
       however, lessened by the soothing gesture of a kind arm thrown at the same
      moment round her afflicted elder's neck, "do you mean to say that you suspect him of having
      taken to his heels because you gave him two civil words and one look that was not a scowl? If
      such is the case, he is a valuable admirer, and the more express trains he gets into the
      better."
But Belinda is too much cast down to make any rejoinder.
"You will pardon my saying so," continues Sarah in a counterfeit apology that is
      contradicted by the lurking mirth in her eye, "but he would not have been nearly so tiresome
      as he was if he had not been genuinely in love. If a man is only playing at love he can be
      civil and amusing to other people; but," breaking into an unavoidable laugh, "was poor David
      amusing? he had his one solitary ever- lasting idée fixe . My dear soul," passing her
      light hand with a stroking motion down Belinda's heaving shoulder, "what a trial he was to
      granny and me! And—
       cheer up!— what a trial he will be again!"
This is all the consolation, if consolation it can be called, that Belinda has to take to
      bed with her.

