
CHAPTER VI.
It is too true. While the words are yet in Sarah's mouth, the door opens and admits
      the red face, the grizzled fringe, and the black and white plaid gown that they have all been
      apprehensively expecting.
"Any admittance?" cries the burly voice, as the owner enters without awaiting an answer to
      her question. "All alive and well?"
"We are all alive," replies Sarah gloomily, giving a hand ten degrees limper even than that
      one which she had vouch-safed to Rivers. "As to being well—"
"Why are you all sitting in the dark? Why are all your blinds down?" interrupts
       the other breathlessly, unable any longer to contain the curiosity with which she
      has been bursting all the way up the long stone stairs.
There is a moment of stupefied silence, as the conviction flashes coldly on all their minds
      that they have over-reached themselves.
"I happened to look up as I was passing," continues Miss Watson inquisitively, "and saw that
      the blinds were all drawn down. I thought that of course I had better inquire the reason at
      once; but I could not get any satisfactory answer out of your page-boy—Tommy he tells me his
      name is. I had a little talk with him on the stairs coming up; he does not seem a very
      intelligent boy—Tommy—does he?"
"We had him cheaper by getting him out of an idiot asylum," replies Sarah gravely; and
      Rivers, moonstruck as he is, explodes.
"Grandmamma quite well?"
"Do you think that she is dead, and that that is why we have the blinds down?"
       says Sarah ironically. "Thanks, she is quite well, but she is not up yet. You see
      it is a little early!"
At this side-stroke Rivers winces. Does not it apply equally to him? But upon the object at
      whom it is aimed it is absolutely wasted.
"No bad news from England, eh?"
"Thanks, no!"
"I was afraid"—her eyes wandering inquisitively round—"by seeing the blinds down, that you
      might have heard of the loss of a relation. No? Well, then, why are they all
      down?"
There is a moment's silence. What question can be easier, and yet more difficult, to answer?
      At last:
"There is no reason why they should not be pulled up now?" says Sarah drily. "Mr. Rivers, up
      with the blinds!"
Mr. Rivers obeys. The houses on the other side of the street again come into sight, and the
      gloom flies.
"I am so glad of this opportunity to make your acquaintance, Mr. Rivers!"
       says Miss Watson, following him to the window, and cordially extending her large
      hand. "As soon as I heard your name I longed to ask you what Rivers you are? I know so many
      Rivers. I am sure that I must know all your people! What Rivers are you?"
The young man has turned, the blind-cord still in his hand, towards her. His face has grown
      nearly as red as hers, albeit the red is of a different quality.
"That is a rather posing question, is not it?" he says, with a confused laugh, the
      Englishman's difficulty in discussing himself being, in his case, intensified a hundredfold by
      the consciousness that Belinda is eagerly listening; "how can I describe myself?"
"All the rivers run into the sea, but the sea is not full!" says Sarah flippantly; and
      Rivers looks vexed.
There is not one among us, however wise and good and humble, who does not detest a joke upon
      his own name.
"I know Lord Rivers," continues Miss
       Watson, fixing him with her inexorable eye. "At least I may really say that I
      virtually know him; we were at the same hotel at Cairo for two nights together; and though we
      never exactly met, as he did not dine at the table d'hôte , yet there is a sort of
      freemasonry in being at the same hotel! How is Lord Rivers? is he quite well? Is
      there any chance of his coming here?"
"I have not the slightest idea," replies Rivers bluntly. "He is not the most distant
      connection of mine!"
"Ah! then"—with a look of enlightenment —"you are one of the other Rivers; one of
      the Stukeley Rivers—Sir Edward Rivers' family. Now do tell me, which of the brothers are you?
      I am always so puzzled amongst them! Are you Humphrey? or Randulphus? or a younger one
      still?"
"I am neither Humphrey, nor Randulphus, nor a younger one still!" answers Rivers sulkily,
      his usually amiable and always beautiful boy's face beginning to look rather dangerous under
      this continued
       baiting. "I am not related to Sir Edward Rivers, and I never heard of
      Stukeley!"
"Then I declare that I am quite at a loss!" says she, baffled.
But as her eye shows no sign of releasing him, as she is evidently bent upon extracting from
      him a response of some kind, he has to make what shift he can to answer her.
"I am sure I do not know what Rivers we are!" he says, in a shy, fierce voice, looking out
      of the window as if with some vague idea of escape by it. "There are a good many of us, and we
      live in York- shire; and my father is in business!"
As the back of his head is turned to the room; and as, unlike Sarah, he has no eyes in it,
      perhaps she is justified in putting up one hand as a speaking-trumpet to her lips, and
      noiselessly mouthing through it for her sister's benefit the syllables, "Ar—ti—fi— ci—al
      ma—nure!" At all events, this is what she does.

"She is really gone!" says Sarah, turning
       away from the window half an hour later, after a cautious reconnoitre, and
      drawing a long breath. "Mercifully, the Greenes were passing, and she fell upon them from
      behind, so that they could not escape her. Generally she has a way of pretending to have
      forgotten her umbrella, and coming back to hear what one is saying of her."
"I wonder she has not been cured of that before now," says Belinda gravely, "as she never
      can have heard any good."
"It is the triumph of hope over experience!" rejoins Sarah. "Well," with a gay look at
      Rivers, "at least it is a comfort to think that she has at last found out conclusively what
      Rivers you are!"
"Or, rather, what Rivers I am not," replies he drily; "it is not quite the same thing."
"To be neither Humphrey nor Randulphus!" says Belinda, with a happy, shy, rallying smile;
      "how sad!"
"I wonder, now, what your Christian name really is?" says Sarah. "Come out,
       Slutty; she is gone! Slutty always crawls under this bureau when Miss Watson
      calls; she hates her so! I have tried to teach her to bite her leg, but she will not go so far
      as that. Yes now, what is your Christian name?"
"What should you think?" he asks joyously, his heart leaping wildly at that small coy smile
      which his dear lady has just spared him. "What do I look like?"
"You might be Arthur , " replies Sarah, sitting down with Slutty in her lap, and
      looking him over well and thoroughly; "there is no reason why you should not be
       Reginald ; and I have heard of more unlikely things than your being Guy
      !"
"Wrong! grossly wrong!" replies he, enduring her scrutiny with the most perfect sang
       froid , and, indeed, giving her back her cool hardy look. "I never heard a worse shot!
      And you —what do you think?" his tone growing suddenly reverent, and his bold eyes
      veiled and shy.
"You shall give me only one guess!" she answers merrily. "I say— David !"

" David !" repeats Sarah scornfully. "How likely! Try Goliath at once!"
But Rivers, in an ecstasy of pleasure at his love's intuition, is crying out:
"How did you know? How did you find out? I never told you!"
"Was not it a good guess?" she says with a demure smile. "No; it was not a guess! I read
      it—you know you sat before us last Sunday—in the fly-leaf of your Prayer-book in church!"
She blushes faintly as a China rose at this admission of how her thoughts and eyes had
      stolen away from praise and supplication to spell out his name.
" David !" repeats Sarah, in an extremely dubious voice. "H'm!"
"It is a family name among us," he adds in explanation; "among my mother's people, that
      is."
There is a moment's silence. For the first and only time in her life Sarah wishes for Miss
      Watson back again, to ascertain, as she undoubtedly would by direct inquiry, who and what his
      mother's people
       are. But as she herself does not feel quite equal to the task, the fact remains
      wrapped in as much mystery as does the nature of his father's commercial operations.
"Well, I suppose," says the young man, sighing heavily, and gently and reluctantly setting
      down Slutty (Slutty loves him; he has mastered the exact spot in her back which demands
      delicate and perennial scratching. She has forsaken Sarah to jump up on his lap, though she
      has in general but a poor opinion of men's laps, as cold and hollow pretences)—"I suppose I
      must be going. I am afraid that you have already had too much of me!"
He pauses, with a wistful look towards Belinda's bent and shining head, but neither girl
      contradicts him: the one because she so cordially agrees with him; the other because she so
      passionately dissents. He moves unwillingly to the door, but there halts again. "And—and
      Wesenstein?" he says desperately.
"What about it?" cries Sarah peevishly. "Did not you hear us calling all our gods
       to witness to Miss Watson that we were so broken with fatigue since Moritzburg
      that we could scarcely lift a finger?"
"I heard you ," he answers bluntly, laying a significant stress upon the
      pronoun.
"Now I warn you," says she, holding up her forefinger threateningly at him, "that if you
      mention Wesenstein again, I shall stop my ears."
"There are other places besides Wesenstein," returns he pertinaciously; something about
      Belinda—not anything she has said certainly, for she has said nothing— but possibly the
      unnatural fury with which she is knitting, encouraging him to persevere.
"Of course!" very snappishly; 'Tharandt!'
"No, not Tharandt; there are other places beside Tharandt. Loch Mühle, for instance; have
      you ever seen Loch Mühle?"
"Never!" very crossly; "and I humbly hope that I never shall. Why should we
       go anywhere?" pursues she, burying, her ill-humoured face in the sofa-cushion.
      "Leave me, leave me to repose. I have not the faintest wish to go anywhere."
"And you never do anything but what you wish yourself?" asks Rivers snubbingly, eyeing with
      extreme disfavour her petulant prettiness. To him she does not appear in the least pretty.
"Never, if I can help it!" replies she, raising her head, surprised and languidly titillated
      by his tone, which is not what she had expected in him. "Do you?"
He laughs drily.
"Never, if I can help it; but in a large family one cannot help it."
"In a large family," repeats she. "You are one of a large family?"
"It depends upon what you call large; there are six of us."
"Five too many," rejoins she promptly. "And where do you come—third— fourth?"
"I come first."
"Are you taking a leaf out of Miss
       Watson's book?" asks Belinda severely, joining in the dialogue for the first
      time.
"I think I am," replies the other composedly.
"Well, then, we will make a bargain: I will ask you no more questions if you will promise to
      invite me to go no more expeditions; there!"
So saying, she re-buries her head in the pillows; and as she totally declines to raise it
      again, and as neither does Belinda add another syllable, he is at length obliged to withdraw
      defeated.
For a moment after he has disappeared, Belinda still knits violently, her forehead puckered,
      a warm pink wave ebbing and flowing in her cheeks, and a sharp brush between love and pride
      going on in her heart. For the first time in her life pride goes to the wall. She tosses down
      her stocking and springs to the door.
"Mr. Rivers!" she calls tremblingly; "Mr. Rivers!"
He must have walked very slowly, for
       he has only just reached the double doors of egress.
"Yes," he answers pantingly; "yes?"
"It is nothing," she says, faltering into deep shyness again, and quivering under the fervid
      expectancy of his look. "I only wanted to tell you that—that it is not my fault; that, for my
      part, I should have liked to go to Loch Mühle."
"Then why in Heaven's name could not you say so sooner?" asks Sarah, whose long ears have
      again served her faithfully, pouncing out upon them. "I am sorry that his name is
       David ," she says reflectively, a little later, when he has gone, jubilant now, to
      arrange the excursion. "I am afraid it looks ill; the poor people are so fond of Scripture
      names."

A high sun, hot and benign; a west wind, sweet with last night's rain; myriads and myriads
      of blossomed fruit-trees; villages that seem built of and buried in snow; enormous bunches of
      pear-blossoms,
       that look as if the boughs must break under their weight; the ways all white with
      arches of cherry-bloom; the horses trotting over a carpet of strewn cherry- petals, as at some
      high wedding pomp; and a seat opposite Belinda, who has allowed him to open her parasol for
      her. Is it any wonder that Rivers has forgotten that it is near three o'clock, and that, at an
      hour at which most people are full, he and his company are still fasting? But they
      have not forgotten. For the last mile and a half he has been pelted by an ever sharper shower
      of anxious and peevish questions as to whether the Kutscher knows the road; as to whether they
      have still a mile, two miles, half a mile to go; as to whether he is sure that there is a
      Gasthof; as to whether, lastly and desperately this, he is certain that there is such a place
      as Lohmen (it is at Lohmen that they are to lunch) at all.
"I suppose," says the Professor finally, putting on his spectacles in order to look full and
      murderously at him through them
       (he does not often look at undergraduates, he dislikes them too much), "I suppose
      that you are aware that the whole responsibility of the excursion rests with you?"
"Yes, I am aware," replies Rivers in-attentively and dreamily.
She has just deigned to accept a little switch from him—a flowered cherry-bough, blossomed
      to the end of each brown twig— and is daintily waving away the audacious summer flies with
      it.
The Professor has five distinct good reasons for being cross, and for most people one
      suffices. Firstly, he did not want to come at all; secondly, he has the threatenings of a
      snuffly cold, contracted in the long Moritzburg grass and among the Moritzburg pigs, and
      probably to be sensibly worsened by the present pleasure trip; thirdly, he hates sitting with
      his back to the horses—a thing which his votaries indeed seldom suffer him to do—but in this
      case there has been no suggestion of offering him a front seat; fourthly, his digestion has
      been for so many years his
       master, that it now allows him with impunity no least derangement of his meal-
      times; fifthly and lastly, Sarah has three times flagrantly pretended not to hear him when he
      addressed her, and has once crabbedly asked him to let her have a little more room. For Sarah
      is, if possible, still crosser than he.
The low, trivial words that the sweet wind carries not to her, but alongside of her; the
      ardent iron-grey eyes that she is always accidentally meeting, and that instantly lose their
      ardour the moment they encounter hers; the dust, for, despite last night's rain, there is
      dust; the sense of physical emptiness, that no tickled vanity, no warmed passions redeem, have
      wrought her by the time they at length alight at the door of a simple but not
      untempting-looking Gasthof to such a pitch of ill-humour as makes her betrothed's mild
      fractiousness pale beside it.
"How cross they are!" says Rivers, having for the first time realised this long sufficiently
      patent fact, and looking after
       them with sunny wonder, as the Professor hastens into the inn to order luncheon,
      eagerly followed by Sarah.
"And how greedy!" adds Belinda.
And having thus calmly characterised their companions' vices, they stray away together down
      the little garden path, where the bloody warriors and the cat-faced pansies merrily grow in
      the sandy border, and forget them. They have not, however, been long left to watch the happy
      butterflies hover, and the young flowers blow, before a captious voice overtakes and recalls
      them.
"I thought," cries the Professor from the open Gasthof door, and in a voice whose
      exasperation is sensibly sharpened even since it was last heard in querulous inquiry five
      minutes ago—"I thought, Mr. Rivers, that you gave us to understand that there was a
       good hotel to be found here?"
"And is not there?" answers the young man absently.
He has just thieved a sweetbriar spray,
       young and vernal, and is making it fit for his love's tender hand by carefully
      nipping off all its thorns.
"I think," pursues the voice, "that an inn can hardly be qualified as good when there is not
      a single vegetable to be procured —not even a potato!"
"Of course it cannot," replies Rivers serenely. "Look!" pointing joyously out to his
      companion a poised butterfly opening and shutting its freaky wings on a dark pansy face; "does
      not he look jolly? He is the first tortoiseshell I have seen this spring."
"And where," continues the voice, in an intenser key of resentment, "there is absolutely
      nothing of any kind to be obtained except veal."
"Except veal!" repeats Rivers, rousing himself with an effort into a simulation of interest;
      "you do not say so! Well, but," lapsing into unavoidable radiance again, "does it matter much?
      German veal is always so good. I hope," looking sunnily round, "that no one dislikes
      veal!"

There is a sulky silence, broken only by Belinda's murmuring that she loves it, and by the
      Professor's remarking that all white meats are more or less indigestible. Whether they like it
      or not, however, further inquiry only serves to confirm the fact that they must either resign
      themselves to a luncheon of kalbfleisch and bread (calf-flesh being the one universally
      procurable flesh in Germany) or not lunch at all. Nor, when this is settled, does the
      calf-flesh seem in any hurry to appear. By-and-by, indeed, a leisurely Blowsabella of a
      serving-maid lays a coarse clean cloth and some knives and forks in what she calls the
      bavillon, a homely arbour at the garden end; and thither the Professor at once repairs, and
      seating himself at his place before the empty table, lays his watch before him, and seems to
      derive a bitter solace from counting the numerous moments as they pass, and announcing them by
      five at a time aloud to Rivers. But Rivers does not hear.
"Do not let us go near them," he says
       in a cajoling, low voice to Belinda, wiling her away again into the sun and the
      flowers; "in their present frame of mind it is not safe."
"Well, you know it is not the first of April, and you have made fools of us!" she
      answers, a little drily.
"Are you starving?" he cries, roused into sudden, tardy compunction.
The Professor's and Sarah's pangs had left him cold as a stone, merciless as Herod.
"Famished!" replies she; but she says it with such a charming smile of absolute well-being,
      making mirthful her grave lips, that his misgivings fly. For all they care, the kalbfleisch
      may be an hour, two hours, three in coming!
It has been smoking for a couple of minutes, indeed, on the table, and the Professor and
      Sarah have been seen greedily to help themselves before they think it worth while to draw
      nigh. When at length they do:
"It is uneatable!" says the Professor,
       laying down his knife and fork with a shocking calmness, and regarding Rivers,
      as he approaches in his infuriating, senseless radiance, with a glassy look of vengeful
      despair.
"Impossible!" cries the young man, hastily helping himself, and boldly taking a good
      mouthful. "Pah!" changing countenance; "but it is, though! What filth!"
Nor is this expression, albeit strong, at all too strong to qualify the plat now
      set before these hungry persons. In the first place it is but too clear that the kalb has
      originally died a natural death, and has afterwards, perhaps in order to disguise this slight
      accident, undergone every possible variation of baking, boiling, roasting, stewing, frying,
      seething! But, after all, it is not disguised.
There is a blank, sulphurous silence. They all look at Rivers.
"I thought," says the Professor, in a cutting, small voice, "that you gave us to
      understand—"

"What does it matter what he gave us to understand?" cries Sarah, in a fury, rudely
      interrupting him. "The more fools we to believe him! It would be more to the purpose if you or
      he or anybody would give us to understand how we are to get back to Dresden alive!"
Another murderous silence, broken this time by Belinda diffidently syllabling the word
      "eggs."
"Eggs, of course," cries Rivers, snatching at the happy suggestion, and darting a look of
      enamoured gratitude at her who has made it. "How stupid not to think of them before! nothing
      in the world better than a fresh egg, nor more nutritious!"
This last clause is a poor little sop thrown to the Professor's ireful maw. In a moment he
      has fled swift as any scudding rabbit to the house, and in two seconds more is back again,
      beaming.
"Of course they can have eggs—any number; and in three minutes at the outside they will be
      cooked."

But the three minutes pass, and three more, and three more again.
"I wish," says Sarah, addressing herself in a tone of the most intense and poignant
      crossness to the young man, "that you would kindly sit somewhere where I could not see you; I
      think I could bear it better if you did. You look so idiotically cheerful!"
Even as she speaks, the Dienstmädchen comes into sight, sauntering deliberately down the
      path; having by her want of sympathy with their sufferings clearly amply dined herself, and
      with a plate upon which many eggs are drunkenly rolling about together in her hand.
At this simple sight the Professor smiles faintly, and even Sarah's sulky brow grows smooth.
      But, alas! too soon do they exult! It takes but one glance to show that no new-laid eggs are
      these, milky and warm, over which the triumphant hens have but just ceased chuckling. Elderly,
      nay, veteran eggs are these, as their dirty, mottled hue but too plainly testifies. The
       only wonder is how a single family can have become possessed of so many addled
      eggs at once.
"You had better take care how you open it!" says Rivers, laughing nervously, and with an
      ill-timed attempt at a joke, as the Professor cautiously cracks one, his fellows looking
      breathlessly on; "it will probably go off with a bang!"
Nobody smiles.

