
CHAPTER IV.
It is next day. Outside, snow is falling; but it is flabby, irresolute,
      large-flaked snow, that melts as it reaches the slushy street, and makes it slushier still.
      Mrs. Churchill is standing by the window, eyeing the weather with disgust, and Sarah and the
      dogs are seated higgledy-piggledly on the hearthrug.
"This is what we are to expect for the next five months!" cries Mrs. Churchill, addressing
      this exasperated remark partly to the outside mud and mirk, and partly to her
      grand-daughter.
Neither heeds it. Sarah's whole attention, indeed, is occupied in bribing Punch,
       by a sweet biscuit brought up from luncheon, to the performance of the most
      striking in his repertoire of tricks, an affecting representation of death; which, when
      contrasted with his usual superabundant life, is much admired by strangers, and indeed by his
      own family.
It is, however, the one of his accomplishments for which he himself has the least
      partiality. The command to die has to be reiterated many times before he at length rolls
      reluctantly over on his side; and even then, as he looks up every half a second and jumps up
      every second, a good deal of the repose of death has to be supplied by the spectator's
      imagination.
"What a climate!" pursues Mrs. Churchill in angry ejaculation. "Good heavens, Sarah, why do
      you let Jane make such a dreadful noise?"
She may well ask. Jane, seated on her haunches, is volunteering, in a loud series of forward
      barks, to die, to beg, to trust, to dance—to do anything of which she is utterly incapable, in
      order to divert
       to herself the attention monopolised by Punch.
Slutty, with her usual poor-spiritedness, has crawled away under a chair in sulky annoyance
      at her brother's social success.
"How anyone that can help it spends the winter in England, is more than I can imagine!"
      pursues the old lady, shivering back to the fire. "If we were rid of Belinda we would go
      abroad."
"Why should not Belinda go too?— No," holding up a finger in severe prohibition of Punch's
      premature resurrection; "dead! dead! head down! dead!"
"I could not possibly afford it; and besides," with a shrug, "she would spoil the whole
      thing; she is such a wet blanket."
"Everybody cannot be always on the grin like you and me," answers Sarah with surly
      disrespect.
"We would go to the South," says Mrs. Churchill, perfectly unmoved by her granddaughter's
      want of reverence, to which, indeed, she is thoroughly accustomed, her bright old eye
      lightening at the notion of a
       holiday; "we would have a week in Paris, and go to the play every night. I must
      see Judic in this new piece. We would run over to Monaco and try our luck. If only," her
      exhilarated tone changing to one of impatient vexation, "if only Belinda were out of the
      way!"
Mrs. Churchill is far too much of an old gentlewoman to speak loud, but her utterance is
      distinct and pure; she does not swallow all the tails of her words, as we English are accused
      of doing. It would be impossible for anyone entering the room not to hear her; more
      particularly as Jane has at length been persuaded to cease favouring the company with her
      remarks.
Sarah lifts her head. She had an impression as of the door softly closing. In a moment a
      sudden thought has made her hustle aside the dogs, spring up, and fly out on the landing. She
      was right. Sure enough, Belinda is slowly descending the stairs, with her back to her sister.
      Even before she turns her face, which in
       obedience to her junior's call she does, Sarah knows somehow by the look of her
      back that she has heard. She is in walking-dress, and is evidently making for the
      hall-door.
"Are you going out?" asks Sarah, with as guilty a face and voice as if she herself, and not
      her grandmother, had been the author of the ill-natured remarks so unfortunately
      overheard.
"Yes."
"To-day?" shivering.
"Yes."
"Alone?"
"Yes."
"Walking?"
"No."
"In a hansom?"
"Yes."
"Where are you going?" cries Sarah, with uncomfortable curiosity following her sister, who
      has already resumed her downward progress.
"I am going to the National Gallery to meet Mr. Forth."

"To the National Gallery? why cannot he come here?"
"Because, unfortunately, there is hardly so fine a collection of pictures here as there,"
      replies Belinda disagreeably. "He wishes to show me a particular picture of the early Italian
      school."
A cold apprehension steals over Sarah.
"Do not go!" she cries impulsively, catching her sister's hands; "I am sure his picture is
      as little worth seeing as himself. Let him wait. Come back to the fire."
But Belinda resolutely draws her hands away and opens the street door.
"I am glad to be—for at all events a couple of hours—'out of the way,'" she says icily.
As Sarah, discomfited, climbs the stairs again, she winks away something very like a small
      tear from her jovial blue eye.

The light is dull. The short afternoon already shows signs of waning. In the
       National Gallery, strolling about its handsome, all but empty rooms, is the usual
      sprinkling of odds and ends that represents the daily quota of art-lovers supplied by London
      from its four millions: two or three mal-peigné artisans; three or four ill-dressed
      women; a child or two. No better meeting-place could be found for any two people who wish to
      converse undisturbed, but have no reason to avoid their fellow-creatures' eyes. Under this
      head come the two persons who have so long been standing before a well-known Hobbema (the
      Giotto, which was the ostensible cause of their meeting, has been already inspected). A
      passer-by might presume that they were exhaustively criticizing each individual beauty, but in
      point of fact one does not see the picture at all, and the other thinks that she does not. In
      after days, however, she finds that she must have done, so plainly comes out, printed on her
      mind, the impress of that long, long straight road going away, away; of those great, tall,
      wayside poplars, with
       their perspective of lengthy stems, their high, scant heads raised loftily into
      the pale sky—such slight, gray-green heads, each one with a different character about it; of
      the man walking along the road to the distant red-roofed Dutch village. It has seemed to
      Belinda as if that man must reach the village before the Professor has finished his slow
      speech; but he is not yet there, and the Professor has ended. For he has spoken, and not
      Greek. And now Belinda is speaking. Her eyes are fixed still with a sort of glassiness on the
      cool and tranquil canvas of the long-dead master; and the poplars seem almost to sway to her
      breath. Her voice is steady and quiet, though hard.
"I am very glad of what you say as to personal affection having no part in your motives for
      asking me to marry you. You do not want—love," she makes a hardly perceptible pause before
      pronouncing the word, "and I have none to give; so at all events we start fair."
He makes a sort of gesture of assent.

"I distrust, and have cause for distrusting, professions of affection," he answers
      drily.
A certain flavour of rancour in his tone tells his hearer that he is thinking of her sister,
      and a trivial passing wonder crosses her mind as to how far Sarah had carried her nefarious
      simulation of an unlikely passion. Never has it seemed so unlikely as at this moment.
"All that I ask, all that I wish to obtain, is an intelligent, sympathetic companion."
" Sympathetic! " she repeats reflectively. "I am not sympathetic; I should be
      deceiving you if I were to let you suppose that I am. No! let us be sure that we understand
      each other; I have as little sympathy to give as I have—love!"
Again that slight hesitation.
"Possibly!" he answers, with a stiff impatience, looking rather annoyed at her opposition;
      "on my side, I think it right to tell you of what you may perhaps be already aware, that the
      press of my occupations and the condition of my health forbid my
       indulging in many amusements enjoyed by other persons, but from which I shall be
      compelled to require you, as well as myself, to abstain."
"I do not want amusements!" replies Belinda gloomily; "amusements do not amuse me. I want
      occupation; can you give me plenty of that?"
His face unbends with a slight smile.
"I think I can promise you that in the life you will share with me, you will find no lack of
      that. My mother—"
"Your mother!" repeats Belinda brusquely; "she is still alive then?"
"She is still spared to me," replies he piously; but a tone in his voice, striking upon her
      fine ear, tells her that he would not have quarrelled with the will of Heaven, had he not been
      so successful in keeping awhile "one parent from the skies."
"She must be very old," says Belinda thoughtfully, not reflecting on the unflattering
      inference to be drawn from this remark.

He assents: "She is somewhat advanced in years."
Belinda is silent for a moment or two. Her eyes are still vacantly fastened on the Hobbema;
      and a vague, absent wish to be walking with that man along that quiet road to that red village
      is playing about the surface of her preoccupied mind.
"Is she—" she begins, and then breaks off.
Across her memory have darted various facts communicated by Sarah about her future
      mother-in-law; facts of a not altogether satisfactory complexion; something about her being
      out of her mind, and never ceasing asking questions.
"Is she—" It is so difficult to word it civilly; "doting," "imbecile," "off her head"—she
      tries them all, but none sounds polite enough. "Is she" (she has it at last) "in full
      possession of her faculties?"
He hesitates a moment.
"She is somewhat deaf."
"Is her sight good?"
"I regret to say that it is almost gone."

"But she keeps her faculties? her mind?" pursues Belinda persistently.
"Her intellect is not what it was!" he answers, so shortly that Belinda feels that it is
      impossible to pursue her catechism further.
And, indeed, why should she? Has not the tone of his answers sufficiently proved to her
      that, for once in her life, Sarah had spoken unvarnished truth.
"My mother's bodily health is excellent," he continues presently; "I only wish that my own
      constitution were half as vigorous as hers; but her infirmities are such as to need a great
      deal of loving care: more," with a sigh, "than I am able to spare from my own avocations!"
Belinda is silent, drawing the obvious but not particularly welcome inference that the
      loving care is henceforth to be given by her.
"I am not naturally fond of old people," she says slowly. "I have been very little thrown
      with them; the only old person whom I know intimately, granny, is a great
       deal younger in herself than I am. I will be as kind as I can to your mother; but
      that is not the sort of occupation I meant. I meant," turning her restless large look away
      from the restful picture to his face, at which she has hitherto hardly glanced— "I meant
      something that would fill the mind—some hard study!"
"There is nothing that I am aware of to prevent your pursuing any line of study you may
      choose to select," he answers rather pettishly.
"And you think that the taste—the zest for it will certainly come— certainly ?"
      pursues she eagerly. "Did you ever know a case of its failing? I must not deceive you; it has
      not come to me yet; I take no pleasure in learning; I think that I have as little real
      aptitude for study as" (Sarah, she is going to say, but stops in time)—"as the veriest dunce.
      But you think that I shall succeed if I persevere, do not you?" (plying him both with her
      feverish questions, and with the plaintive importunity of her eyes); "that perseverance must
      bring success
       to anyone, however moderately bright. I know, of course"—humbly—"that I am not
      more than very moderately bright."
"You have a good average intelligence," he answers drily; "it would be flattery to imply
      that you have more!"
"Of course, of course!" she rejoins, meekly acquiescing in this lover-like expression of
      partiality; and then there is silence again.
It is broken by Professor Forth. It would not have been broken by Belinda. She is dreamily
      walking again along Hobbema's straight Dutch road. Would the village be at all like Wesenstein
      when you reached it?
"I suppose," he says ceremoniously, "that there will be no objection to my calling to-morrow
      morning in—Street, to announce to your grandmother the step that we propose taking. I am, of
      course, not aware whether or no she will be likely to oppose it."
"Not she!" answers Belinda, leaping back from dreamland, and breaking into a
       hard laugh; "she will be delighted to be rid of me."
"And—and your sister?" says he, with that same slight resentful difficulty which he always
      finds in mentioning Sarah; "will she, too, be delighted to be rid of you?"
"No—o, I think not!" answers Belinda slowly. "She would be perfectly justified if she were,
      for I have done my best of late to embitter her life; but no, I think not. By-the-bye,"
      looking up and speaking with a quick animation that contrasts with her late sarcastic
      indifference, "I must stipulate that you will allow her to visit me. You do not bear malice to
      her," she adds naïvely, "for—for what happened formerly?"
"I am not likely to bear malice," he answers with an arid smile, "for a course of action for
      which I at least, as it turns out, have so much reason to be thankful."
"That is right," she answers carelessly, passing by his stiff politesse ; "then I
       think that is all. I think there is nothing more to say, is there?"
She speaks with the same unemotional business air as if she were concluding the purchase of
      a piece of land, or of some yards of cloth. The room is, at the moment, empty of anyone but
      themselves. It is near closing-time, and the sparse visitors are trailing off. There is
      nothing to hinder a lover-like parting embrace between the two persons who have just engaged
      to pass their lives together. But the possibility of this never once crosses Belinda's mind,
      not even when her newlybetrothed steps a pace nearer to her, and says, in a voice through
      which rather more of human emotion than she has ever before heard in it pierces:
"You must allow me to repeat the expression of my gratification—of my thanks!"
"What for?" she asks, piercing him with the direct look of her icy eyes. "It is a mere
      matter of business that we have been transacting. You want a secretary,
       housekeeper, nurse for your mother; I want a home of my own, and a 'guide,
      philosopher, and friend,'" laughing harshly. "I see no room for thanks on either side!"
To such a speech, what rejoinder is there to make? He makes none.
"I may as well go home now," she says, in the same cool, matter-of-fact tone as before; "any
      further arrangements that there are to make may be made when you come to-morrow. You ask at
      what hour? At whatever hour best suits your convenience; early or late, it is indifferent to
      me which. I must ask you to call a hansom for me."
As they emerge from the building they find that rain is falling, a sleety rain to which the
      undecided snow has turned. It beats in her face as she walks down the steps; she does not take
      the trouble to run in order to escape it; she would as soon be wet as dry. It drives in upon
      her even in the hansom, where she has refused to allow the glass to be lowered.
       One can get very fairly well soaked in a hansom if one goes the right way to
      work. And all along sleety Pall Mall, all the sleety way home, she is pestered with the sight,
      the smell, almost the feel , of the wood at Wesenstein!

"Granny," says Belinda, entering the drawing-room, walking straight up to Mrs. Churchill and
      standing before her, not allowing her attention to be distracted even by the wagging of three
      kind tails, distinctly addressed to her. "You and Sarah may begin to pack your boxes at once;
      you may be off to Monaco as soon as you please; I shall be 'out of the way'!"
Mrs. Churchill lifts her eyes, in which is none of their usual frisky light, and fixes them
      coldly on her tall young granddaughter, standing pale and severe before her. She has always
      thought Belinda too tall; it strikes her more forcibly than ever now, as she sees her towering
      majestically
       above her. Belinda is too everything, except amusing.
"Are you hinting at Waterloo Bridge, by way of improving our spirits?" she asks
      sarcastically.
Mrs. Churchill is not in her playfullest mood, by which, almost as much as by her large lawn
      caps, she is known to an admiring public. The weather; the fact that several tiresome and not
      one pleasant person have been to call; the consciousness of guilt towards Belinda—a
      consciousness not quite stifled indeed, but diverted into the channel of anger by the smart,
      and in fact unmeasured rebukes she has had to submit to from Sarah—all, all combine to rob her
      of her usual suavity. Sarah's rebukes, indeed, would have led to a quarrel could she afford to
      quarrel with Sarah, but she cannot. Upon her hangs too much of the ease and diversion of her
      life. But there is no such motive to prevent her quarrelling with Belinda, and she feels that
      to do so would be a pleasant relief.

"Waterloo Bridge!" repeats Belinda, with a momentary want of comprehension; then, "Oh, I
      see! No; there are other modes of being out of the way beside death."
"Perhaps you mean to announce to us your approaching marriage," suggests the old lady
      ironically.
"You have saved me the trouble," answers the girl curtly, sitting down as she speaks and
      beginning to unfasten her cloak, whose warmth the hot and scented room begins to make
      oppressive.
"You are going to be married?" cries the old lady, jumping actively up, and running towards
      her; ennui , ill-humour, and sarcasm together racing away out of her voice, and
      making place both in it and in her sparkling eyes for a delightful excitement. "You do not say
      so! My dear child, you have taken us by surprise! I do not know when I have been so
      pleased!"
"Do not be in too great a hurry!" interrupts Belinda coldly. "Before you express
       any more pleasure, you had better hear who it is whom I have promised to
      marry."
"I was just going to ask, of course. Who is it? My dear child, I cannot tell you how
       intriguée I am to know," running swiftly over in her mind the list of Belinda's
      somewhat shadowy admirers, all of them kept so rigorously at bay that it would have seemed
      impossible that any one of them could have approached within sight of love-making.
"It is Professor Forth!"
Mrs. Churchill's jaws drop; the dimpling smiles—she still has the remnants of an old dimple
      or two—vanish from her cheek. For several moments she is totally incapable of speech; and even
      at the end of them is only able to gasp out the incoherent words:
"Professor Forth! What are you talking about? Nonsense! Impossible!"
"If you disbelieve me," says Belinda quietly, "you had better ask him. He is
       coming to-morrow to inquire whether you can spare me. I told him that I thought
      you could."
"Professor Forth!" repeats Mrs. Churchill, gradually but slowly regaining the possession of
      her senses. "I cannot think what has happened to the girls; first Sarah, and then you. You
      must be bewitched!"
"I do not think that he has used any magic," rejoins Belinda, still with that pallid
      composure of hers. "The matter lies in a nut-shell: he wants a wife, and I want a—" "Husband"
      she is going to say, but something in the employ of the word in such a connection strikes her
      as shocking and impossible. She leaves her sentence for ever unfinished.
"Well, ' tous les goûts sont respectables ,' I suppose," rejoins Mrs. Churchill
      with a cynical shrug.
"To what are you applying that lying pet maxim of yours, my old friend?" asks Sarah
      playfully, coming suddenly into the
       room, rubbing her little cold hands and approaching her grandmother with a
      conciliatory air.
She feels a vague relief in seeing that Belinda is at home again. Neither answers; Belinda,
      because she has no wish to rob her grandmother of the pleasure of communicating her piece of
      intelligence; Mrs. Churchill, because a remnant of hurt dignity ties the tongue which she is
      longing to unloose.
"To what or whom are you applying it?" repeats Sarah more sharply, glancing suspiciously
      from one to the other as she speaks.
"To Belinda," replies the elder woman, unable any longer to refrain herself. "I do not know
      how you will like being supplanted, but she has just been informing me, as you once before
      did, that Professor Forth is to be my grandson."
"He is not!" cries Sarah loudly and angrily, turning scarlet. "Belinda," taking her sister
      by the shoulder and rudely
       shaking her, "why do not you speak? why do not you contradict her? why do you
      allow her to say such things about you? It is not true! Say that it is not true; it is only a
       canard . You have been saying it only to tease her; say that it is not true!"
"Why should not it be true?" asks Belinda, turning her lovely cold face and her gloomy eyes
      up towards Sarah.
The latter's hand drops nerveless from her sister's shoulder, and she steps back a pace or
      two.
"Then it is true!" she says, horrified.
"One would hardly imagine from your manner that you yourself had once been engaged to him,"
      returns Belinda drily; "and yet I believe that it was so."
"More shame for me," cries the other violently; "but I will do myself the justice to say
      that I never had the most distant intention of marrying him."
"There we differ then," says Belinda,
       slowly rising, and walking with her cloak over her arm to the door, "for I have
      every intention of marrying him; and so, granny," turning as she reaches it and calmly facing
      them both, "as I began by saying, you may pack your trunks for Monaco as soon as you
      please."
"How tiresomely she harps upon that string!" cries Mrs. Churchill peevishly; the more
      peevishly for the pricks that her conscience, albeit a tough one, is giving her.
"It is all your doing," says Sarah morosely, viciously rattling the fire-irons and boxing
      the dogs' ears; "you have driven her to it; sooner or later I knew that you would!"
"Pooh!" replies the other crossly; "she is not so easily driven or led either. If it were
      for her happiness," with a little pious parental air, "I cannot say that I should much regret
      her marriage; and if it does really come off—it is a shocking thing, of course, such an
       amant pour rire , but she
       seems bent upon it; and if it does really come off," the natural frisky light
      reilluming her eyes, "why then, my dear child, there is in point of fact nothing to keep us
      from the South!"

