
CHAPTER V.
The morrow has come. Mrs. Churchill has risen refreshed and healthful from pleasing
      dreams of sunshine and lansquenet. Sarah has tossed between vexed visions and unwonted
      wakefulness. And Belinda? Belinda makes no complaint of her night. She looks older than when
      she went to bed, but the cold is pinching, and for the last year and a half she has been
      perceptibly ageing. The morrow has come, and the Professor. To-day he is not ushered into the
      little dark back-room, but is led by a full-buttoned pompous Tommy into the drawing-room,
      where his grandmother elect sits ready and alone to receive him.

Perhaps they have not a great deal to say to each other. At all events the interval is short
      before the bell is rung and a message given to request Miss Churchill to come down. She is
      sitting in her little chilly bedroom, her cheek pressed against the window-pane and her eyes
      idly following the dirty sparrows on the leads.
Without a moment's lingering, she obeys. As she enters the room her betrothed advances to
      meet her.
"I am happy to be able to inform you," he says in his stiff Donnish voice, "that your
      grandmother is good enough to say that she has no obstacle to oppose to our union."
"I told you that she would not," replies Belinda calmly; "I knew that she could spare
      me."
The words are simple and simply spoken, with no special stress or significant accent laid
      upon them; and yet under them the old lady winces.
"It is no case of 'sparing,'" she says sharply; "of course it is a break-up to our
       little circle; but I have no right to allow personal feeling to influence me. You
      are old enough to decide for yourself; you are of age; you came of age six months ago. In a
      case of this kind a third person has no business to interfere; and of course if you are
      sincerely fond of each other—"
Belinda shivers.
"Fond! it is no question of fondness !" she says, breathing quick and short, and in
      a concentrated low voice; "you entirely misapprehend. I thought that Mr. Forth had explained
      to you; it is a mariage de raison ; we marry one another because we can be useful to
      each other. Is it not so?" appealing to him with abrupt and uncompromising directness.
"Mrs. Churchill must be as well aware as yourself," he replies pettishly, "that I have no
      reason to wish for exaggerated professions of affection."
"Well, I will leave you to settle it between yourselves," cries Mrs. Churchill rather
      hastily, gathering up her work and making for the door; eluding, as she has
       made a golden rule of doing through life, any scene that threatened to be
      disagreeable. "You will stay to luncheon, of course, Mr. Forth?"
Nodding and smiling, she withdraws; and the dogs, with their usual fine tact, follow her—all
      but Jane. As soon as she is gone:
"I hope," says Belinda, fixing her joyless, unbashful eyes full upon him—eyes with enough
      coldness in them to freeze a volcano—"that there is no misapprehension, that you understand
      our relative positions as I do."
"I believe that there is no necessity to go over the same ground again!" he answers
      snappishly.
His snappishness does not infect her.
"It is better to go over it now while it is yet time, than afterwards, when it would be too
      late," she answers earnestly.
He has drawn near his usual magnet, the fire, and is chafing his bloodless hands over it.
      Perhaps this is the reason why he expresses neither assent nor dissent.

"I want to make it quite clear to you," she says, still in that same deeply earnest voice,
      "so that you may not have cause to reproach me afterwards, or think that I have dealt unjustly
      with you: I have not one grain of love to give you, nor ever shall have!" letting fall each
      slow word with a weight of heavy emphasis. "Many men—most men—would refuse a woman upon such
      terms. It is open to you still to refuse me."
The person she is addressing moves uneasily in his chair.
"I imagined," he says fretfully, "that we had treated this subject exhaustively
      yesterday."
"We cannot treat it too exhaustively," she answers persistently. "Though I cannot love
      you—happily for you, you have no wish that I should—I will do my best by you; I will be as
      useful to you as I can. From what I gather of your circumstances I imagine that I can be very
      useful to you. You are not young; you have not good health; you are lonely."

A certain sound of fidgeting from the chair so chillily drawn close to the hearth betrays
      that there is something in this catalogue of his infirmities not altogether agreeable to its
      occupant.
"I am lonely too, in my way," continues Belinda, with an unconscious accent of self-pity;
      "we can help each other; you will teach me," appealing to him with that hopeless, cold
      gentleness of hers. "I shall be a dull scholar, and never do you credit; but you will teach
      me; we will do our best by each other."
As she finishes speaking she draws nearer to him, and holds out her young soft hand, as if
      to seal with it this frosty bargain. He takes it formally, but does not press it any more than
      he had pressed her grandmother's. Perhaps he has no inclination. Perhaps he dares not.
Belinda sits down opposite to him; the light from the window, such as it is, falling full on
      her face; her hands folded in her lap, and her eyes looking straight before
       her. There is something so odd and strained in her attitude that Jane,
      wellmeaning but injudicious, goes up to her and rubs her long nose and her pinkrimmed eyes
      against her knees to cheer her.
"Had your grandmother been able to spare me a few more minutes," says Mr. Forth, in a key in
      which a slight tinge of umbrage is perceptible, "I could have wished to enter with her into
      some details, upon which, as things now are, I have been unable to touch. With regard to the
      date, for instance, I should be unwilling to hurry you unduly, but—"
During the whole of his last sentence she has felt him watching her narrowly. Is this the
      touchstone that he is applying to her sincerity? Does he expect her to turn as dishonestly
      restive as Sarah had obviously done whenever any suggestion of a like nature had been made to
      her? The idea crosses her mind with a sort of thin fugitive amusement.
"You need not consult granny," she
       answers coldly; "you had better arrange it so as best to suit your own
      convenience."
There is such an evident good faith, such an entire absence of all desire of evasion in her
      look and tone, that his scrutiny relaxes.
"It is all one to me," she says; "there is nothing to wait for."
In her tone is such a flat, tame hopelessness that Jane redoubles her rubbing against her
      knees, and accompanies it with an acute, short bark. If that will not put her in spirits,
      nothing will.
"I should, of course," pursues Mr. Forth, "be anxious to leave you sufficient time for such
      preparations as you may wish to make."
"What preparations?" she asks brusquely; "I need none. You are past the age, I suppose, when
      marriage festivities would give you much pleasure; and they would be entirely out of place
      here."
"It is, however,usual, I believe," he answers, in an annoyed tone, "to make
       some slight sacrifices to conventionality on an occasion of this kind; it is
      usual—"
"It is usual to love one another!" breaks in she with a bitter laugh. "What is usual with
      others does not apply to us; you need not take my preparations into your calculations."
He is silent, but his face expresses vexation.
"It had better be soon," continues Belinda coolly; "I shall be in the way here if it is not.
      They want to be rid of me; they want to go to the south of France; it had better be soon."
But even now Professor Forth does not immediately answer. Perhaps this mode of treating the
      question of an approaching marriage seems to him even more bafling than Sarah's. At last:
"It is extremely fortunate for me," he says slowly, and without any perceptible exhilaration
      of tone, "to find you so ready to meet my views."
"There is nothing to wait for," repeats she flatly. It seems as if in this
       phrase there were a dismal charm for her.
Again there is a pause, during which Belinda's eyes rest upon her betrothed's face with a
      look of cold expectancy.
"Were I not reassured," he begins at length, "by the indifference you express as to the
      date, I should hesitate to name one so early as the 10th of next month."
"Could not it be sooner?" asks Belinda curtly.
He looks at her in unfeigned astonishment. In this family is he to experience no medium
      between disingenuous procrastination and unmaidenly haste?
Belinda sees and interprets his look, but her eyes do not fall; her cheeks do not colour
      beneath it.
"When a thing has to be done," she says, with a sort of restlessness for a moment ruffling
      her hitherto deathly calm, "it is well that it should be done at once; I hate dawdling!"
"I fear," he says, in a perplexed and not particularly pleased voice, "that my
       engagements will not allow of my suggesting an earlier date. I had thought that
      the 10th would have left a clear fortnight, before the commencement of term, for whatever
      journey—"
" Journey !" she interrupts almost rudely, breathing quick. "What journey? do you
      mean a wedding tour?" with an accent of indescribable shrinking. "Why should we make one at
      all? why should not we go straight to Oxbridge?"
"I am sorry," he answers stiffly, "to disoblige you; but, quite independently of present
      arrangements, I have been advised by my medical man to try the effect of a more bracing air,
      as a corrective to the extreme relaxingness of Oxbridge!"
She is silent for a moment; then:
"Of course," she says grudgingly, "if it is a matter of health, I can say nothing; but, as
      far as I am concerned, I would far rather go straight to Oxbridge."

"He is not going to stay to luncheon
       then?" cries Sarah, in an exhilarated voice, running into the drawing-room; after
      having been hanging perilously far over the upper banisters unseen, to speed the parting
      guest. "Thank God for that! There are sweetbreads for luncheon, and I should have been sorry
      to miss them, as I certainly should, for nothing would have induced me to sit down with
      him!"
"I think you will have to get over that little difficulty in time!" replies Belinda
      drily.
She had risen to bid her betrothed goodbye, and yet stands. She is holding her cold right
      hand, which still seems to feel the chill impress of his frosty handshake, to the fire.
"He is gone for good, is not he?" continues Sarah, hurrying up; "you have thought better of
      it? it was only a joke? As a joke, it was not a bad one; I am not sure," with a glance of
      indignant admiration at her sister, "that in that point of view it was not an improvement even
      upon mine in the same line; but one may have too much
       of it. It was a joke, was not it?" with an eager stress.
"On the contrary," replies Belinda, with as icy a composure as if her lover's bloodless eld
      were infectious, and she had caught it; "the day is fixed!"
In her hasty entrance Sarah had left the door ajar, and through it her grandmother now
      enters; having apparently overheard the last words.
"The day fixed!" repeats she, with her eyes dancing; "my dear Belinda, you take us by storm!
      we are in a whirl! But fixed for when?"
"For the 10th of next month," replies Belinda curtly, turning away her dull face from her
      beaming questioner, and speaking in a key, if possible, yet more frozen than before.
"The 10th!" repeats Mrs. Churchill, in a tone into which she honestly, if not very
      successfully, tries to infuse a tinge of regret; "that is soon! You are in a
      hurry to leave us!"
"There is nothing to wait for," replies
       Belinda, mechanically repeating her dreary formula.
"I cannot think how we shall manage about your clothes!" continues Mrs. Churchill, growing
      pink with pleasure, and her old dimple reappearing. "We shall be shockingly hurried! we must
      go about your underclothes and lingerie this afternoon. Mary Smith in Sloane Street
      is excellent, is not she, Sarah? but she has already half a dozen wedding orders."
"She may be spared a seventh," replies Belinda, with a bitter small smile. "I will have no
      new clothes!"
"That means, of course, that you are not in earnest," says Mrs. Churchill, with a
      disappointed refrigeration of tone; "that the whole thing is a fiction. You might as well have
      said so at first!"
A flash of hope has come into Sarah's sunny eyes as she looks eagerly at her sister; but at
      the expression of that sister's face it at once dies down again.
"Do not be afraid," says Belinda quietly, "it is no fiction; but I will have no new
       clothes: you will have the more money to spend at Monaco."
"Monaco! Monaco!" repeats Mrs. Churchill, hiding a look of conscious guilt under a fretful
      air; "you have Monaco on the brain; it is your idée fixe ! But as to your
      clothes—"
"As to my clothes—simply I will not have any," replies. Belinda, with a look of imperative
      decision.
"I should have thought them the one Goshen in your desert," says Sarah, with an annoyed
      laugh; "them and the presents."
"Presents!" echoes Belinda impatiently; "I will have no presents!"
"In short," says Mrs. Churchill sarcastically, "you and the Professor will crawl in a
      four-wheeled cab to a registry-office at eight o'clock in the morning."
"If you substitute a church for a registry-office, you have exactly expressed my
      intention."
There is an aghast silence. Sarah and Mrs. Churchill look at one another.
       Something in their interchange of glances grates upon Belinda.
"You will never understand," she says, exchanging her icy calm voice for one of excessive
      irritability, such irritability as of late her family has been too well acquainted with, "and
      it is no use explaining to you. I am tired of explaining to you that this is not an ordinary
      marriage. What is there to make a gala of, and buy new clothes for, in a mere matter of
      business? I tell you it is a mere matter of business; I keep dinning it into your ears, but
      you will not understand! it is a mere matter of business !"
She repeats it over and over again, as if to reassure herself by the strength and number of
      her own repetitions, and looks round at her two auditors, as if daring them to oppose any
      contradiction to her assertion. Neither of them does. It is, indeed, some moments before
      either of them finds anything to say. Then—
"Have you made this quite clear to Professor Forth?" asks Mrs. Churchill drily.

"Quite!" replies Belinda excitedly; "quite! I made it as clear as the sun in heaven; he
      quite understands; he fully agrees with me; he is quite of my way of thinking."
"He must be a very odd bridegroom," says Mrs. Churchill sarcastically.
"It is a marriage of the mind!" replies Belinda, still more excitedly, looking round with
      angry suspicion in search of the ridicule which she dimly feels may attach to her last
      utterance. "I do not suppose that there is anything very odd in two people hoping to draw a
      certain amount of rational happiness from such."
Mrs. Churchill turns away to conceal an ungovernable smile.
"A marriage of the mind!" repeats Sarah, with a disgusted accent; "well, I have heard of
      them before, but this is the first time that I ever had the pleasure of meeting one; and I
      humbly hope it may be the last."

