
CHAPTER II.
A night has passed since the Professor's damaged violets bit the dust. It is now
      morning, and at the window of her bedroom in the Lüttichau Strasse, with the sash flung high
      (to the deep astonishment of the German Dienstmädchen, to whom the smell of an unaired room,
      further flavoured with departed sausages and old beer, is as dear as to the rest of her
      nation), Belinda sits, the sun warming her hair, and the tart air freshening her face. She is
      looking fixedly out on the pear-tree in the garden-scrap below—the pear-tree that a week ago
      was pinchedly struggling into flower, that has been daily whitening
       ever since, and now seems to stagger under its burden of blossom-snow. Yet I
      doubt whether she sees it.
"Is it possible?" she is saying to herself, almost with awe—the awe that a great joy
      gives—"is it possible?"
A slight noise makes her turn her head and see the tall white door open to admit her
      sister.
"Are you alone?" says the latter, cautiously peeping.
"Of course I am alone," replies Belinda crossly. "Am I in the habit of receiving in my
      bedroom?"
This not particularly gracious answer is, however, quite enough for Sarah, who forthwith
      enters, and steps friskily across the sunshiny parquet, looking as clean as a cherry, as pink
      and white as a May-bush.
"The moment is apparently not a propitious one," she says, laughing, and drawing a chair
      close up to her sister's kness; "but as my need is sore, I am afraid I cannot afford to wait
      for a better. I
       have come, my Belinda, to ask a favour of you."
"Then you may go away again at once," replies Belinda with surly decision, "for I tell you,
      once for all, I will not grant it!"
"What! refuse even before you hear what it is?" cries the other, lifting those brows which
      nature, slightly abetted, perhaps, by a pair of tweezers, has drawn in the thinnest straight
      line across her wrinkleless forehead.
"Do you think I do not recognise that well-known formula?" asks Belinda severely. "I am sure
      that I have heard it often enough. It means that you expect me to tell Professor Forth that
      you have every intention of jilting him!"
"You word it coarsely," replies Sarah composedly; "but I have heard worse guesses."
"Then I absolutely and flatly refuse the office!" rejoins Belinda firmly. " Why you
      engaged yourself to him in the first instance—"
" Why indeed?" interrupts the other,
       casting up both eyes and hands to heaven. "You may well ask!"
"And yet," pursues Belinda, regarding her sister with an air of stern wonder, "when you
      wrote to announce your engagement to me, you said that you did not know what you had done to
      deserve such happiness!"
"I did not—I did not!" cries Sarah, reddening for once with genuine shame, and putting her
      fingers before her face. "Do not say it; it is not true! It was not about him; it was one of
      the others!"
" One of the others !" echoes Belinda, scornfully curling up her fine nose. "How
      pleasant and dignified to be bandied about! One of the others !"
"It may not be dignified," replies Sarah impudently, though under the lash of her sister's
      words even her throat has crimsoned, "but it is not so very unpleasant!"
"You know," continues Belinda sternly, "that I took a solemn oath to wash my hands of your
      affairs, last time, when I
       had that painful scene with poor young Manners, and he walked round the room on
      his knees after me, clutching my skirts and sobbing!"
"He always sobbed!" interjects Sarah hard-heartedly. "I have seen him cry like a pump!"
"I have already told six men that you had only been making fools of them," continues the
      elder sister, contemptuously passing by her junior's lame attempt at palliation.
"Six! Come now, gently."
"I repeat, six! In fact, I think I am rather understating it; and I will not tell a
      seventh!"
"A seventh!!!"
"If you imply that I am exaggerating, I am quite willing to count. First"—checking off on
      her long white fingers, beginning with the thumb—"first, young Manners!"
"We have had him once already!"
"Second"—travelling on to the forefinger —"Colonel Greene. Poor fellow! he sobbed too!"

"More shame for him!"—brazenly.
"Third, the young clergyman whom you picked up at the seaside, and whose name I never can
      remember."
"No more can I!" cries Sarah, with animation. "How strange! Pooh! What was it again? Did it
      begin with a B?"
"Fourth," continues Belinda relentlessly, arriving at her third finger— "fourth, old Lord
      Blucher, who was so deaf that I could not get him to understand what I meant."
But Sarah's light mind is still on the track of her lover's lost initial.
"I am almost sure that it began with an L!" she says thoughtfully.
"Fifth"—extending her little finger— "Mr. Brabazon."
"You counted him before!"
"I did not!"
"I think you did."
"I am sure I did not; but, to make certain, we will begin all over again. First"—returning
      to her thumb—"poor young Manners—"

"Stop!" cries Sarah loudly, putting her fingers in her ears, and abandoning the search for
      the young clergyman's name. "I will grant that there were six, sixteen, sixty—anything to put
      an end to that intolerable arithmetic of yours!"
Belinda is preparing to begin on her other hand, but at this concession she lets them both
      drop in her lap, and ceases counting. There is a silence. Sarah's roving eyes are despondently
      fastened on the white earthenware stove, and Belinda's large grave gaze is straying through
      the window, taking in at once the poetry of the blooming pear-tree and the prose of the
      Bohemian railway, and the ugly straight stuccoed houses beyond it.
"What could have been your inducement in this case," she says presently, turning with a
      judicial air to the offender, "I am quite at a loss to conjecture; it certainly could have
      been neither pleasure nor profit!"
"It certainly could not," answers Sarah, sighing profoundly, and wagging her head
       from side to side; "anyone who saw him would exonerate me from the suspicion of
      either motive!"
"Such a conquest could not have even gratified your vanity!" pursues Belinda
      relentlessly.
"Yes, but it did!" replies Sarah, abandoning her dispirited pose, and speaking with an
      animation which shows that she does not altogether relish this wholesale depreciation of her
      latest victim; " you may not think much of him, but I can assure you that he is
      considered a great luminary at Oxbridge. At the house where I met him they could not make
      enough of him; it seems he has written a book upon the Digamma!"
"And what is the Digamma?" asks Belinda curtly, totally unmoved by this evidence of
      erudition.
"You do not know what the Digamma is?" cries Sarah, lifting her eyebrows, and speaking with
      an air of pompous astonishment. "Well, then," breaking into a laugh, and even demeaning
      herself so far as to
       be guilty of the faintest possible shadow of a wink, "to tell you a secret, no
      more do I!"
"You cannot live upon the Digamma, I suppose!" says Belinda grimly, not much infected by her
      sister's mirth.
"I should be very sorry to try!" still laughing.
"Then I am quite as much in the dark as ever!" rejoins the other, inexorably grave.
"Well, it was not only the Digamma, of course," says Sarah, frowning in reluctant
      retrospect; "though, as far as I could make out, that appeared to be his cheval de
       bataille ; but he was looked upon as a genius generally. You should have seen how they
      all sat at his feet—such feet!— and hung on his words. There was one girl—she was at
      Girton—who waited on him hand and foot; she always warmed his great-coat for him, and helped
      him on with his goloshes!"
"Well?"
"Well, you know," impatiently, as if
       stating something too obvious to be contradicted, "one would not have been human
      if one could have stood calmly by, and looked on. I rushed into the fray. I too warmed his
      great-coat and put on his goloshes. Ugh! what a size they were! I could have lived roomily and
      commodiously in one of them!"
"Well?"
" Well , indeed! I do not call it at all well! I call it very ill!"
"There I have the good fortune thoroughly to agree with you."
"Well, as I was saying," resuming the thread of her narrative with a heavy sigh, "I rushed
      into the fray. I was successful, dreadfully successful! You know the sequel, as they say in
      books."
"I do not know the sequel," replies Belinda sternly; "all I know is that I will have neither
      part nor lot in it!"
"No? and yet," fawningly, "it would come so much better from you."
"Better or worse, it will not come from me."

"When you break it to them," sidling up with a cajoling air, "it does not hurt them
      nearly so much! I declare I think they almost like it!"
No answer. A silence cut into only by the uncouth shriek of a departing engine.
"Why at least did you drag him here?" asks Belinda presently, still opposing a front of
      granite to her sister's blandishments.
"I am afraid I cannot quite defend it," replies Sarah, in a small voice, and again hanging
      her head; "but, to tell the truth— which indeed I always try to do—times were slack! There was
      nobody else much just then, and I thought I could at least make him fetch and carry!" Then,
      with an acute change of key and access of emotion: "I was grossly deceived; he is too
      disobliging to fetch, and too much afraid of over-fatiguing himself to carry!"
Another pause. A quick wind-whiff tosses through the window a little strom of pear-petals,
      and throws them on Belinda's lap.

"Now if the cases were reversed," says Sarah, kneeling down at her senior's elbow, and
      folding her hands with an extremely insinuating gesture of supplication, "if you were
      in difficulties—"
"I never am in difficulties."
I do not see much to brag of in that, for my part!" springing to her feet again.
"No more do I," replies Belinda drily. "I am never in difficulties, as you call them,
      because I never have any temptation to be; perhaps if I had I might; but as you are well
      aware," stifling a sigh, "I have not, and never had, any charm for men!"
"It is very odd, is not it?" says Sarah, not attempting to combat this assertion, but
      looking at her sister with an expression of compassionate curiosity. "I cannot think why it
      is. I have often wondered what the reason could be; sometimes I think it is your nose!"
"My nose?" repeats Belinda hastily, involuntarily glancing round in search of
       a mirror, and putting up her hand to her face; "what is the matter with my
      nose?"
"There is nothing the matter with it," rejoins Sarah, still speculatively gauging her
      sister's attractions; "perhaps it would be better for you if there were; it is only too good!
      I cannot fancy any man venturing to love such a nose; it looks too high and mighty to inspire
      anything short of veneration!"
"It is not so very high either!" cries Belinda hurriedly, drawing from her pocket a
      very fine handkerchief, and applying a corner of it in careful measurement to her traduced
      feature. "There!" marking off a small portion with her thumb; "only that much."
"It is not a case of measurement," says Sarah gravely; "I have seen noses several hands
      higher that were not nearly so alarming. It is a case of feeling; somehow yours makes them
      feel small. Take my word for it," with a shrewd look, "the one thing that they never can
      either forgive or forget is to be made to feel small."

Belinda laughs, a little bitterly.
"It is clear, then that nothing short of amputation could make me attractive, and I am
      afraid even that might fail; but I do not know why we digressed to me at all."
"I had a little plan," says Sarah, her airy gaiety giving sudden place again to gloom at the
      returning thought of her own sorrows; "but you have frightened it away."
"What is it?" very shortly.
"Well, you know," instantly resuming her wheedling air and her coaxing posture at her
      sister's knees, "that we are going to drive to Moritzburg to-day, you and I. Of course
      Professor Forth," with a slight grimace, "will be on duty there to meet us; equally of course,
      young Rivers, who seems to have contracted a not altogether reprehensible habit of dogging our
      steps, will be there too,"
"Well?" averting her head a little.
"Well, I thought—but you are not a pleasant person to unfold one's little
       schemes to—I thought that for once you might be obliging, and pair off casually
      with my dear, and take an opportunity of softly breathing to him that nobody—I least of
      all—will try to stop him if he effects a graceful retreat to Oxbridge and the Digamma!"
"And meanwhile you?" in a rather low and suppressed voice, and with face still turned
      away.
"And meanwhile I," replies Sarah, jovially, "killing two birds with one stone— keeping the
      coast clear, that is to say, and marking my gratitude for that haystack of gardenias—shall be
      straying hand-in-hand through the vernal woods with—"
But that sentence is destined never to be ended.
Belinda has risen from her seat with a gesture so sudden and violent as almost to destroy
      the equilibrium of the girl so caressingly propped against her, and has thrust head and neck
      out of the window, as if, even in this fresh room, she gasped for air.

It is a moment before she speaks; and even then her voice sounds odd.
"I have already told you that I utterly decline to be mixed up in your entanglements. I
      forbid you to mention the subject to me again."
"Whew-w-w-w!" says Sarah by-and-by, in a low key, when she has recovered the breath reft
      from her by stupefaction at her sister's procedure, enough to speak at all; remaining seated
      meanwhile in stunned isolation on her lonely stool. "Forbid! What an ugly word! After all,"
      speculatively, "I am not much surprised that men are frightened at you. I am frightened at you
      myself sometimes; and so no wonder that they shake in their shoes, and dare not call their
      harmless souls their own."
"How many times are you going to tell me that?" cries Belinda, veering round in sudden
      passion. "Do you think that it can be very pleasant to hear that I can never inspire anything
      but alarm and aversion? I am as well aware of it as you can be; but I am a little tired of
      hearing it."

"And you might inspire such different feelings," says Sarah, in a tone of the purest
      artistic regret; "it is a pity to see advantages which would have made me famous if I
      had them, absolutely thrown away upon you! I suppose," with a sigh, "that it is the old story
      of the people with large appetites and nothing to eat, and the people with plenty to eat and
      no appetities."

