
CHAPTER V.

"He knew whose gentle hand was at the latch
Before the door had given her to his eyes;
And from her chamber window he would catch
Her beauty farther than the falcon spies.
And constant as her vespers would he watch,
Because her face was turned to the same skies;
And with sick longing all the night outwear
To hear her morning step upon the stair."
Upon the fair town of Dresden a new morning has opened— opened in sunshine, joy,
      and lusty growth. For one blossom-bunch that swung fragilely on the pear-tree yesterday, there
      are twenty to-day. The slow small leaves are beginning to break less timorously from their
      outgrown sheaths.

I do not suppose that Belinda can have grown in the night; but about her, too, this morning
      there is a look of expansion and spring: as if she also were uncurling her leaves and
      disclosing her shy buds to her sun.
The two girls are sitting together in the pretty be-hyacinthed, be-china'd, Anglicised salon
      that looks to the street. The morning sun does not shine on that side of the house, and it
      makes the room dark; but so it is, that all the blinds are drawn to the bottom; nor does
      either, as would seem natural, make any attempt to pull them up again.
"So you never did it after all yesterday?" Belinda is saying in a tone of disapproving
      surprise.
Sarah shakes her head.
"No; Love's chain still binds us!" she answers, making a face.
"You will do it to-day?"
"No!"
"To-morrow?"
"I think not."

"The day after?"
"It is improbable."
"If you are waiting," says Belinda, stopping in mid-row of the stocking she is knitting to
      look severely at her sister, and speaking with an extremely clear and decided accent, "for me
      to do it for you, you will wait, as I told you yesterday, a very long time."
"I am aware of it," replies Sarah calmly. "Since I realised that you are engaged in a little
      pursuit of your own, I have abandoned the idea."
"Pursuit!" cries Belinda, with a shocked start, and crimsoning. "You are the first person
      who ever dared to say that I pursued anyone!"
"You would have been much pleasanter if you had," rejoins Sarah coolly. "Well, do not let us
      quarrel over a word! I did not say what part you took in the pursuit— whether you were the
      hunter or the hare!"
But Belinda has stooped her angry, blonde head over her stocking, and is speechlessly
      knitting her resentment into it.

"After all," says Sarah, discourteously jerking the slumbering pug off the sofa, and
      throwing herself down on it, "it is very unselfish of me. Nobody gives me the credit for any
      virtues, but in point of fact it is almost entirely in your interest that I am acting!" She
      pauses for a moment, expecting to be asked for an explanation, but Belinda deigns no syllable.
      "Supposing that I did give my Solomon the sack—by-the-bye, what a neat alliteration! Swinburne
      might have made it," continues Sarah, yawning—"what would become of me during all those rural
      excursions that I see stretching ahead of us in long perspective? We could not let you and
      young Rivers set off upon them tête-à-tête ! we really could not! It would pass even
      Granny's and my latitude! I search the horizon in vain for a sail! —I mean for anyone else to
      pair off with! My life would be spent in trying to look the other way, and in intercepting
      fond glances that were not meant for me!"

"And so," says Belinda, lifting a head whose cheeks still blaze, and speaking in a withering
      voice, "and so he is to wriggle on the hook a little longer? How much longer, pray?"
"How much longer?" repeats Sarah, with a malicious look; "why, you can answer that better
      than I! As long as young Rivers wriggles on yours!"
Belinda winces.
Who—high-strung and palpitating in young love's first ecstasy—would not wince at such a
      phrase?
"Come, now," says Sarah, sliding off the sofa again, assuming her cajoling voice, and
      sitting down on the parquet at her sister's feet, "tell me a little about him! I have confided
      to you so many touching traits about my beloved, and if you are good I will tell you plenty
      more; but confidence should be reciprocal: what is he doing here? Why has he come to
      Dresden?"
"He is learning German," replies Belinda reluctantly.

"H'm! I wonder how much he has learnt?" with a dry laugh.
Belinda's sole response to this pleasantry is to push her chair back very decidedly, and
      isolate her sister on the floor.
"What does he do when he is at home?" continues Sarah, taking no notice of this evidence of
      displeasure, and obstinately pursuing her catechism.
"He has just left Oxbridge," rather sulkily.
"Where, no doubt, he took several Double Firsts!" with an ironical smile.
"He rowed stroke in the University Eight last year," very precipitately, and reddening under
      this fleer.
"Is he his own father, or has he a father?"
"He has a father."
"And what is the father—what does the father do?"
"I believe—he is in business," grudgingly.

"In business?" with raised eyebrows, and an accent of surprise and dissatisfaction. "Well,"
      more cheerfully, "there is business and business! Have you any idea what sort of business it
      is?"
"Not the slightest," very curtly.
"It is a liberal age," says Sarah philosophically, "but one must draw the line somewhere. I
      draw the line at artificial manure! Come, now, have you any reason for supposing that it is
      artificial manure?"
Belinda laughs a little, but most unwillingly.
"I dare say it is. I never asked."
"Do you remember," says Sarah, "the little Frenchman, covered with orders— Legions of Honour
      and Saint Esprits by the gross—that we met at the ball at Cannes, who told me that he was '
       dans le commerce ,' and when I inquired what branch, and suggested that perhaps he
      was ' dans les vins ?' answered grandiosely, ' Non, mademoiselle; le suis dans
       les bougies !'"

A pause.
The pug has arisen from the cold par quet, and, with her tail still half-mast high in the
      enervation of slumber, has stepped delicately on to Sarah, and cast herself with a deep, slow
      sigh upon her warm lap.
"Your friend does not look as if he were ' dans les bougies ,'" says Sarah
      presently, with an air of thoughtful generosity; "still less dans le — I declare I do
      not know what is the French for artificial manure! How Granny has neglected our
      educations!"
But Belinda is not attending. Belinda's head is raised, and upon her face has come a look of
      blissful listening. Her fine ear has detected a footfall in the anteroom outside —a footfall
      that not even Slutty, the pug, has yet suspected; a step that she has discriminated from that
      of the flat foot Gustel.
"It is you, is it?" says Sarah, in a not particularly exhilarated voice, scrambling to her
      feet as Rivers, ushered in by an
       infant English page who divides the cares of the ménage with Gustel,
      enters.
She gives him two contemptuous fingers.
Of what use to give more to a man who holds them as if they were a bundle of sticks. She
      might have given him ten, or twenty, or none, for all he knows. His eyes have strayed away
      over her, to him, totally irrelevant head, and have fastened on his mistress, asking eagerly
      if this can indeed be she, alive and real, whom all night long he has pursued through his
      radiant dreams.
"Perhaps you can help us," says Sarah, with an innocent look. "We have just been wondering
      what the French for artificial manure is?"
He does not hear. Belinda's hand in his is making summer in his veins, and his happy eyes
      are drowned in hers as happy. But Belinda hears.
"Sarah is speaking to you!" she says, low and hurriedly.
He turns round reluctantly with a start.

"I beg your pardon! I—I—did not quite catch what you were saying."
"I was only asking you if you knew the French for artificial manure?" she answers
      demurely.
"For artificial manure!" repeats he, astounded. "Of course I do not! Why should I? Why do
      you want to know what is the French for artificial manure? Is it a riddle?"
Even for his explanation he has turned again to Belinda, as inevitably as the sunflower to
      the sun.
"We were only talking of—of—agriculture; were not we, Belinda?" replies the other, smiling
      malevolently at her sister's obvious, and to Rivers incomprehensible, discomfiture.
That his Egeria could look foolish, as she is indisputably doing, would never, indeed, occur
      to him; but nothing short of total blindness could prevent his seeing the sudden cascade of
      scarlet which has poured over her. For one instant, indeed, the blest idea has darted across
      his mind that
       this lovely flag may be hung out for him; but his humility—for real love is ever
      most humble—at once dismisses the scarcely formed thought as too good to be true.
Perhaps it is his scrutiny, silent and intense, that embarrasses her. Of course he ought to
      say something. On a morning visit one must say something.
"Why are you sitting in the dark?" he asks, glancing at the carefully drawn-down blinds.
      "The sun is not on this side of the house, and there is no glare anywhere to-day."
"It is very gloomy, is not it?" replies Belinda, who is slowly recovering her countenance;
      "and we are so fond of light and air, too. But it cannot be helped; we are obliged to have
      them down because of Miss Watson."
"Because of Miss Watson? I do not understand."
"She lives on the other side of the street, a little farther down, and she has lately set up
      a spy-glass or telescope of some kind in her window, with which
       she rakes us fore and aft. She told us triumphantly on Tuesday that she could see
      everything we did. I believe that she can tell by the movement of our lips what we are
      saying."
"If I thought so," said Sarah viciously, "what things I would say about her!"
"It will end in our being forced to leave the apartment," says Belinda with a shrug. "A
      friend of ours was. She has now taken one that looks upon a blank wall as being her only real
      security."
"Miss Watson combines all the worst qualities of the gnat and the rhinoceros," says Sarah
      gravely; "but I think her most offensive trait—though, indeed, among so many it is invidious
      to give the preference to any one—is her continual persecution of us to go on expeditions with
      her."
"Then I am afraid that you will look upon me as a second Miss Watson," says Rivers bluntly,
      and colouring, as he delivers himself with untold difficulty of his simple errand; "for that
      is exactly what I came here this morning to do!"

" Another expedition?" cries Sarah, in a tone of anything but gratification. "Why,
      it seems as if we had not been back five minutes from the last!"
"It would evidently be an empty civility to ask whether you enjoyed it!" says Rivers, with a
      rather mortified laugh. "And you?"—the sunflower turning again greedily to its sun.
"I was not bored," answers Belinda in a constrained voice. "I enjoy expeditions! I like
      Moritzburg."
This is all that she has to say about the hours that had made him sick with desire in
      anticipation, stammering with bliss in fruition, drunk with joy in retrospect!
He looks at her with an intense wistfulness that is almost incredulity; but she gives him
      back no glance. How can she, knowing, as she does by long experience, that Sarah has eyes in
      the back of her head? Sarah, who is ostensibly, and as he in the innocence of his heart
      believes really, entirely absorbed in making Slutty miserable, by affecting to suppose that
      she
       looks faint and holding smelling-salts to her outraged nose.
"I thought," he says in a chapfallen voice, "that it would not be a bad day for Wesenstein;
      or, if you liked that better, Tharandt."
"You really must be related to Miss Watson!" cries Sarah, bursting out laughing.
      "Wesenstein! Tharandt! Those are her two chevaux de bataille . If we do not go to
      Wesenstein we must go to Tharandt; and if we do not go to Tharandt we must go to Wesenstein!
      Good heavens!" suddenly stopping in mid-laugh; "Unberufen! I hear her on the stairs! Hers is
      the only voice that one can hear through the double doors."
"She has come to make us go to Wesenstein with her!" says Belinda in a low key of
      consternation.
"It is the finger of Providence!" cries Sarah, resuming her merriment. "Mr. Rivers, you want
      to go to Wesenstein. She wants to go to Wesenstein! Why should not you go together? I
      will arrange it for you!"

"If you do," says the young man, stepping threateningly towards her, and speaking in a tone
      of the most genuine alarm and exasperation, "I'll—"
"You will be the death of me!" interrupts Sarah pertly, finishing his sentence for him. "I
      know. So you said yesterday. I wish you would invent a new threat."
For a moment they all listen silently.
"I believe it was a false alarm," says Belinda, drawing a long breath.
"No, it was not!" rejoins Sarah, shaking her head. "There is no mistaking that bison's
      voice. She is only stopping on the stairs to ask Tommy what wages he has, and whether Granny
      gives him enough to eat!"

