
CHAPTER IV.
" He was not far wrong," says Sarah dispassionately, "though I am afraid that it
      was scarcely in a brotherly spirit that he said it; I am eminently well able to take
      care of myself!"
It is next morning, and the girls are beginning the day with a preliminary saunter round the
      narrow bounds of the little garden, and the newly-mown tennis-ground. They are very small
      bounds, but within them is room for undried dew; for a blackbird with a voice a hundred times
      bigger than its body; for a guelder rose, a fine broom-bush, and a short-lived lilac. What
      more would you have? Beneath
       one Turkey-red sunshade they stroll in slow contentment along.
"I have no foolish false pride," continues Sarah complacently. "When I realized that I was
      left behind, I saw that the only thing to be done was to make some one give me a lift home.
      They did not much like it at first, but they were very glad afterwards, when they found that
      they had 'entertained an angel unawares!'"
"And how did they find out that they had?" asks Belinda drily.
"They were delighted with my conversation," rejoins the other importantly. "I could not have
      done it if you had been by," breaking into a laugh; "but I talked about the Higher Education
      of Women!"
Belinda joins in the laugh; nor is there any evidence of her mirth being less spontaneous
      and bubbling than her sister's. Ahead of them the little dogs are frisking. At least, to speak
      more correctly, Punch is. What little frisk time and fat have left to Slutty has been stamped
      out of her by mortification at Punch's reappearance on
       the scene. When you are no longer in your first youth, there is really not much
      amusement in having one of your hind-legs continually pulled, mouthed, and facetiously worried
      from behind.
"And you," says Sarah, standing on tip-toe to reach a lilac bough, and rub her face
      luxuriously against it; "how did you get home?"
A red sunshade always diffuses a glow over the face beneath it.
"Oh, I walked," with an assumption of inattention.
"Alone?"
There is a second's hesitation before the answer comes. Belinda is naturally veracious; but,
      after all, there is nothing incompatible with literal veracity in answering:
"Yes, alone."
"Were not you frightened?" asks Sarah.
Her tone is careless; but she has loosed the lilac bough, and her shrewd eyes are— perhaps
      accidentally—bent upon her sister's.
"Frightened!" repeats Belinda, with an impatience that seems out of proportion to
       the occasion, eagerly following her junior's example, and thrusting her hot
      cheeks among the cool and sugared lilac-clusters; "what a silly question! Why should I be
      frightened? What was there to be frightened at?"
But to this heated inquiry Sarah makes no answer; a reticence which causes a feverish
      misgiving to dart across Belinda's mind. But no! her sister's room looks towards the back.
      Sarah has an eye like a greyhound, an ear like a stag, and a nose like a truffle dog, but even
      she cannot see and hear through deal boards.
"I must leave you to your own devices this morning," she says, changing the subject with
      some precipitation; "you must amuse yourself as well as you can till luncheon-time."
Sarah lifts her eyebrows. "Do you mean to say that you intend to take three hours in
      ordering dinner?"
"Ordering dinner!" echoes the other ironically; "ordering dinner indeed! Did you ever happen
      to hear of Menander?"

"Never."
"Nor of his Fragments?"
"Never."
"Nor of his Notes, Philological, Critical, and Archæological?"
"Never."
"Happy you!" says Belinda drily, beginning to walk towards the house.
"If I were you," cries Sarah irreverently, calling after her, "he should be in still smaller
      'fragments' before I had done with him!"
Belinda laughs.
"Bah!" she says; "it is all in the day's work. Perhaps it is better to have too much to do,
      like me, than too little, like you."
There is such a strong tincture of cheerfulness in the tone with which she speaks, it
      differs so widely from the dogged submission of yesterday, that Sarah eyes her
      suspiciously.
"You take a rosy view of life this morning," she says, with a streak of sarcasm.
Belinda changes colour.

"It is a matter of weather," she says quickly. "I am very much influenced by weather; you
      know that you always used to say that I was a Weatherglass!"
But is it a matter of weather? Is it the weather that sends her humming with irresistible
      gaiety to her desk and Menander? Spring-time, it is true, is exhilarating; morning is
      exhilarating; life's morning is exhilarating: why, then, should she not be exhilarated? But is
      it of these three innocent stimulants only that she is drinking? There must be something
      different from her wont in the very quality of her step as she enters her husband's study, for
      he looks up.
"You are late," he says briefly.
"Only three minutes," she answers pleasantly; "and I will make it up at the other end."
She seats herself at her escritoire, forcibly and with difficulty swallowing down the end of
      the tune that she has been singing to herself, under her breath, all the way upstairs. Even
      the very room—the hated
       task-work room—looks different from what it ordinarily does. Usually it is quite
      sunless; but this morning a long, slant dart of gold has squeezed itself in, taking no denial,
      and on it how the dust-motes are dancing! Must everything dance to-day?
The Professor, at least, is an exception to the general rule. He shows no signs of any wish
      to dance. While dictating, he is in the habit of walking up and down. She knows the exact
      square in the carpet from which he will start, and that at which he will pause and turn. He
      has begun his diurnal course; but there is a moment's interval before the first words of the
      first sentence leave his lips.
She pauses, pen in hand, awaiting them; and as she pauses, following him with her eyes, a
      feeling of genuine and potent compassion passes through her heart and brain.
"How dreadful to be old! How hideous to be ugly, cantankerous, unloved!"
"I think," she says, under this impulse, speaking in a gentle, hesitating voice,
       "that I owe you an apology for my rude speech about you to Sarah, after dinner
      yesterday. I dare say," laughing nervously, "that you have forgotten it. I am sure it was not
      worth remembering; but, at all events, it makes me easier in my mind to tell you that I regret
      it."
The intention of this speech is excellent; as a mere question of judgment and tact, it is
      doubtful whether it had not been wiser to have let her stinging jest lie, without
      resuscitating it even to repent of it.
The expression of his face shows whether or no he has forgotten it.
"I think," he says aridly, "that since we are already late, we had better keep to the
      subject in hand."
For a moment or two she bows her crimsoned face and bitten lips over her desk, in furious
      annoyance at having laid herself open to this self-inflicted humiliation. But, ere long, her
      serenity returns. It is only wounds inflicted by those we love whose sting lasts.
After all, she has done her part; she
       has made the amende . Of what least consequence is it how he has taken
      it? But her compassion is dead. He may look as old, as pinched, as bloodless as he chooses. No
      smallest throb of pity stirs her heart again; nor does any other word, unrelating to the
      subject of her labour, cross her lips.
Through all the fresh bright morning hours, he travels from his one carpet-square to his
      other carpet-square, elaborating careful, classic phrases as he goes; and she, in docile
      silence, follows him with her pen.
The sun soars high; the drowsy flies inside the shut window make their futile journeys up
      and down the pane. The swallows sweep across outside, bells ring, butchers and bakers drive up
      and drive away; but not one of these distracting objects does she allow to beguile her for one
      instant of her toil. She will do her task-work conscientiously, thoroughly, wholly, so that
      hereafter neither he nor she herself may have anything to reproach her with; and then, when it
      is ended
       —she allows herself one long breath of prospective enjoyment—why then the sun
      will still be high; the swallows will still be darting; the lengthy May afternoon, with
      probabilities too bright to be faced in its green lap, will still be hers.
And, meanwhile, how well the pens write! how clear her own apprehension seems! She has even
      suggested a verbal emendation or two, which his nice ear has accepted. How quickly the morning
      is passing! Can it indeed be a quarter to one that the College clocks are striking? After all,
      there is no great hardship in being amanuensis to a savan afflicted with weak eyes; it is a
      great matter to be able to be of use to some one!
She looks up, smiling rosily; if not forgetful, forgiving, of her former snub.
"We have done a good day's work!" she says congratulatingly. "You have been in vein this
      morning."
"It is fortunate if it is so," replies he grudgingly, "for we have large arrears of work to
      make up."

"Have we?" she says, a little blankly, rubbing her cramped right finger and thumb; "but—but
      not to-day ?"
"And why not to-day?" rejoins he firmly. "I have promised that my 'Essay upon the Law of
      Entail among the Athenians' shall be in the printers' hands by to-morrow, and it is therefore
      necessary that the proofs should be corrected before post-time to-day."
"Not to-day!" cries she feverishly; "not to-day!"
The smile and the short-lived roses have together left her face. She looks fagged and
      harried, but obstinate.
"And why not to-day?" repeats he, regarding her with slow displeasure.
"You forget," she says,—"You seem to forget that we have a guest."
"She will, no doubt, provide herself with amusement," replies he disagreeably; "she will, no
      doubt, amuse herself perfectly without your aid."
"And I?" she says in a low voice, turning very white, and looking at him with
       concentrated dislike (is it possible that she could ever have pitied him?) "how
      am I to amuse myself? does it never occur to you that I, too, may wish to be
      amused?"
"I put no impediment in your way," he answers frostily; "you are at liberty—with the
      exception of the hours during which I am compelled to claim your services—to choose your own
      pursuits, your own associates!"
"Am I?" she says, hastily catching him up, while the dismissed carnation colour pours in
      flood back into her cheeks again. "You give me leave?"
He looks at her with such unfeigned and unadmiring astonishment in his cold eyes, that she
      turns away in confusion.
"How long will you want me for?" she asks faltering; "how many hours will the correcting of
      these proofs take?"
"It is impossible to say, exactly," replies he, tranquilly leaving the room; satisfied with
      her acquiescence, and indifferent as to the spirit in which that acquiescence has been
      given.

The afternoon is three hours old, and Belinda still sits at her desk. The dew is dried, the
      long sunbeam has stolen away, but though it does not cheer her by its visible presence, she is
      aware, by the augmented heat of the close room, that the sun is beating hard and hotly on roof
      and wall. And on these thinly-built houses it does beat very hotly. At her side lies
      a heap of corrected slips, but before her is piled another, scarcely less bulky. She has been
      at work upon them for an hour and a half, and still she sees no end to her toil. Her head
      aches with long stooping; she has inked her tired fingers, and her eyes are dull and dogged.
      Now and again the door-bell ringing makes her give a nervous start. Is it come again—that time
      of strained continuous listening? those twenty-one months, during which all her life-power
      seemed to have passed into her ears?
It is the hour when visitors may be with the most probability expected. But is there not
      also a probability that they may
       be sent away again? Sometimes, when harder worked or gloomier spirited than
      usual, she has bidden her servant deny her. Is it not but too possible that, seeing her close
      slavery of to-day, that servant may take upon herself to conclude that such is her mistress's
      wish now also.
The idea throws her into a fever. She does not listen. She makes an unaccountable mistake.
      Again the bell rings. Is it her fancy, or has this ring a different sound from the former
      ones? Is there in it a mixture of violence and timidity, as of a person who had had to screw
      up his courage to ring at all in the first instance, and had then overdone it?
She writes on mechanically, dully aware that her husband is rebuking her for the
      illegibility of her last words. Even if the moral blows he is giving her were physical ones,
      she would feel them none the more.
The door opens, and the servant enters, with a man's card upon a salver. She scarcely needs
      to glance at it to tell that
       it is HIS ; but for a moment her pale lips cannot frame the question that has
      sprung to them: "Has he been sent away?"
"Is he gone?" she asks, stammering, taking the card, and, with a senseless, involuntary
      movement, hiding it in her hand.
"I told him that you were engaged, ma'am," replies the maid apologetically; "but he asked me
      to bring you this card. Shall I say that you are engaged, ma'am?"
The Professor looks up, cross at the interruption, to give a brief "Yes;" but his wife
      strikes athwart him.
"Show him in," she says, with precipitate decision. "Say that I will be down directly; tell
      Miss Churchill."
She takes up her quill again, as the servant leaves the room, but apparently her hand shakes
      to a degree that is beyond her control; for in a moment a great blot has defaced the printed
      page.
"Pray be careful!" cries her husband
       fretfully. "You have a hair in your pen."
She throws it down, and takes another. The room in which they are sitting is over the
      drawing-room. Evidently he has been ushered in, and Sarah has joined him; for there
      is a murmur of voices. What are they saying? What are they likely to be saying?
"You have spelt allegorical with one l !" says the Professor, in a voice
      of resentful wonder.
"Have I?" she answers, bewildered and inattentive. "And how many ought it to have?"
The voices have grown more distinctly audible. They have left the drawing-room; it is
      obvious that Sarah is taking him out into the garden—the pleasant, little, cool garden, with
      its blackbird and its broom-bush, and its bees. She draws a hot, long, envious breath at the
      thought.
"A child of five years old would have been ashamed to perpetrate so gross a
       blunder!" resumes he, taking the sheet from before her, and indignantly holding
      it up for reprobation.
She heaves a heavy, furious sigh, and a sombre light comes into her great, gloomy eyes. From
      the garden is heard a peal of laughter. Sarah is always laughing. It is well to be merry
      sometimes, but Sarah is too much of a buffoon.
"In errors so palpable, it is difficult not to see intention," continues he, exasperated by
      a silence that is so plainly not repentance—a silence which she still observes.
Another burst of laughter from the garden—not Sarah's this time; a man's wholesome,
      unfeigned mirth. He , too, can laugh, can he?
"I should really be disposed to recommend a return to the writing-master," says Mr. Forth,
      still ironically regarding the blurred page.
For all answer, she rises to her feet, and throws her pen with violence down upon the
      floor.
"Your machine has broken down for to-day,"
       she says, with a pale, rebellious smile. "Legible or illegible, writing-master
      or no writing-master, I will write not one word more to-day!"

