
CHAPTER XI.
"Till Eulenspiegel war vergnügt wenn er Berg aufstieg, weil er sich darauf freute, wenn es
      wieder Berg abgehen würde, und traurig wenn es Berg abging, weil er das Aufsteigen fürchtete—
      Was wird mir Schlimmes begegnen da ich heute im Gemüth so heiter bin: welche Freude steht mir
      bevor da mich Traurigkeit so niederdrückt?"
Can it be possible that August is here? Not even early August —July's hot
      equivalent—but late August, that has shaken hands with September. The mornings have a taste of
      autumn, though high summer still rules the noons; and as Belinda paces along her garden walk,
      the damp dews wet her gown, and the swinging gossamers tickle her nose.

Oxbridge is at its emptiest. In a week or so people will be beginning to return; but for the
      present it is a desert. It is a pity that they should not return to see with what a kingly red
      pomp the Virginian creeper is decking the sad-coloured beauty of their town. Over their
      worn-grey shoulders the Colleges are throwing a cope of shaded crimson; and from underneath a
      necklace of rubies, the Renaissance porch of the great University church looks out.
And alone, among the waxing autumnal splendour, Mrs. Forth pursues her way. Still she walks
      to the rural villages; still she gardens; still she makes out her catalogue, and reads aloud
      her collects; and still on Sunday she sits upon her bench in St. Bridget's walk, every
      alternate Sunday alone, every alternate Sunday not alone. Although no further permission than
      that recorded has been either asked or given, she has grown to take it as an accepted fact,
      that, on every second Sunday, she shall
       find him there as surely as she finds the green elm trees and the Cardinal's
      Tower. Doubtless the "greenth and blueth," as Horace Walpole called them, the repose and
      country fresh air, are an almost necessary tonic to him after the din and labour of his week.
      If he think them worth the money spent in railway travelling upon them, surely that is his
      affair, and one in which, without officious ill-taste, she cannot further meddle. There is no
      slightest mystery about their meetings. Anyone may know of them. Nor does she ever fail, in
      her letters to the Professor, to record among miscellaneous items of news that she has met Mr.
      Rivers. Why then should she abstain from a pleasure so innocent? We are creatures of habit;
      and she could not well do without her Sundays now.
At the mere suggestion of such an abstinence she shivers coldly. She has pitched their
      intercourse in a key with which no one can quarrel; has set their intimacy upon a footing from
      which it need
       never swerve. If it were anyone's place to object, it would surely be her
      husband's; but so far is he from so doing, that he has not thought her communication worth
      even a comment. He has devoted a couple of closely-written pages to directions where she is to
      find a volume of Origen; but apparently he could not spare speech or time for a mention of
      Rivers.
If anything could have lulled her into a greater security than that which she already
      enjoys, it would be this fact. Serene and blooming, with a silent conscience, she walks
      entranced through the dreamful days. By a sort of subtlety, such as Till Eulenspiegel's, she
      has grown to look forward to the Sundays on which he does not come, because they lead up to
      those on which he does.
To-day is one of these latter Sundays, and she is sitting down to her solitary luncheon, too
      happy to eat, when a ring at the front-door makes her start. Can it be Rivers? Unlikely that
      he, who has long
       tacitly abstained from even meeting her on her way home from church should
      present himself at a door which he has always shown such a silent energy of repulsion against
      entering. Can it be her husband, unexpectedly restored to her? She turns suddenly very cold.
      Can it be—
There is no use in repeating a question which is already answered.
"Just in time!" cries Miss Watson, thrusting aside the baffled parlour-maid and seeming
      instantly to fill the whole room with her presence, and her plaid gown and her fringe. "What a
      good smell of roast beef! I am as hungry as a hunter."
Belinda has risen, leaving her untouched plate; the consternation which the sight of Miss
      Watson does and must always inspire, in this case diluted and modified by relief. At all
      events, she is not the Professor.
"I can spend a good four or five hours with you!" cries the guest, with loud cheerfulness;
      beginning to divest herself
       of bonnet, gloves, and pelerine. "I am on my way to Wrenbury, to the Sampsons.
      They do not expect me; I am going to take them by surprise. They have always bragged so much
      about their place down in Blankshire, that I was determined to find out how much truth there
      was in it; and the Sunday trains are so awkward that I cannot get on till late in the
      afternoon. However, it is an ill wind that blows nobody good. I can spend pretty nearly four
      hours with you."
Through Belinda's head there darts immediately a calculation. It is now one o'clock. In four
      hours it will be five o'clock: an hour later, therefore, than that one which usually finds her
      pacing down St. Bridget's walk. He will have to wait a full hour for her. At this thought a
      dismay, so disproportionate to the occasion as to frighten even herself, takes hold of
      her.
"Is not it rather a wild-goose chase?" she asks, forcing herself to speak. "How
       do you know that you will find the Sampsons? Are you sure that they are at
      home?"
"Pooh!" replies Miss Watson carelessly; "if they are not, the housekeeper will give me a
      shake-down. One gets to know the ins and outs of a place better when the owners are away."
Belinda's only answer is a faint shrug of acute dissent.
"I never ate a better piece of beef in my life!" pursues Miss Watson warmly. "Goes to the
      servants, I suppose, eh? Else I cannot imagine how you would ever get through such a large
      joint all alone. Why are you alone? No screw loose, I hope, eh? It seems a little odd your
      being here all alone, when the town is such a desert. By-the-bye, what is Rivers doing up
      here?"
If her life here, and her salvation elsewhere, depended upon her remaining motionless,
      Belinda could not help the start which she can only hope looks slighter than it feels.

"Mr. Rivers?" she repeats stammeringly.
"Yes, Mr. Rivers, if you like to call him so!" with her strident laugh. "David Rivers; our
      old friend, David Rivers! Did not you know that he was here? Has not he been to see you?"
Belinda draws a long gasping breath, then answers distinctly:
"No!"
After all it is not a lie—not all a lie! He has not been to see her; and she has made a
      mental reservation as to her answer applying only to the second clause of her companion's
      speech.
"H'm!" says Miss Watson, biting her nails; "that in itself looks odd."
Since this last remark is not a question, and since she is by no means assured of having
      even a tolerable mastery over her voice, Mrs. Forth allows it to go by uncommented upon.
"What can he be doing up here?" continues the other, still biting her nails, and
       in a tone of the most poignant inquisitiveness. "The very deadest time of the
      long vacation; not a soul to be seen about! Why, you might drive a coach-and-four along the
      side walk from St. Ursula's to King's! I shall never rest till I have got to the bottom of
      it!"
Her guest's eyes are riveted upon Mrs. Forth with such an unwinking energy of stare, that
      she must needs form some halting answer.
"Will not you?" she says, with a sickly smile; "you had better ask him!"
"I only wish he would give me the chance," replies the other stoutly; "but he knows a great
      deal too well for that. I came face to face with him in Church Street, and before I could get
      my breath he had slipped away like an eel. If you remember, we used to think him a little deaf
      at Dresden, but I never heard that he was blind, too! There is always something
       louche in a man obviously avoiding the
       respectable women of his acquaintance, is not there?"
She repeats the question with such a pertinacity of inquiry, that Belinda is obliged to
      murmur that, "Yes, there is."
When the beef has gone to fulfil that destiny which Miss Watson had prophesied for it—she,
      at least, has done full justice to it—they move to the drawing-room.
"I am afraid that I must ask you to excuse me," says Belinda, with formality. "I always
      devote the next two hours to my mother-in-law."
"Pooh! do not mention it," replies the other cordially; "it would be very odd if such an old
      soldier as I did not know how to make herself comfortable. Do not trouble to entertain me.
      Books? magazines? eh?" turning over the objects on the table; "there is no fear but that I
      shall find something to amuse myself with!"
Nor is there. At intervals during the
       two hours Belinda catches sight of her from the window, bustling round the
      garden, pinching the few plums on the garden wall, trying to look into the windows of the next
      houses; hears her opening and shutting doors, pulling out drawers, etc.
For a moment a pang of apprehension crosses Mrs. Forth's mind. Can she ferret out anything?
      any letter? any paper? But no; a smile of pride and reassurance crosses Belinda's face. What
      in all her poor archives is there that might not be exposed to the eyes of the whole world? to
      the gimlet eyes of (if imagination could grasp the idea of such a hideous multiplication) a
      hundred Miss Watsons?
The two hours are gone. It is a quarter to four; the time at which she usually begins to put
      on hat and gloves, and saunter, deliberately blissful, towards St. Bridget's. It is clear that
      it is not the hour at which she will begin to saunter thither to-day. Nothing looks less like
       departure, more like a prolonged stay, than Miss Watson's bonnetless attitude,
      plunged recumbent in the Professor's chair.
"I have been having a look round," she says cheerfully; "I like to get the bearings of a
      house. There was one door locked; the Professor's sanctum, eh?"
"He likes me to keep it locked in his absence," replies the Professor's wife icily, "as he
      does not wish his books and papers to be disturbed."
"You shall show it me by-and-by," returns Miss Watson comfortably; "after all, there is no
      hurry. I have half a mind to stay till the late train, and have a bit of dinner with you;
      nothing extra; a cutlet, a grill—whatever you have ordered for yourself."
"It is a very slow train," says Belinda precipitately.
"I wonder what train Rivers came down by," continues the other thought-fully; "of course he
      has only run down for the day. I have been thinking it over,
       and the more I look at it the more louche it looks!"
Belinda has not sat down; in the forlorn hope, perhaps, that the maintenance of a standing
      attitude may give a less established tone to her guest's presence. She now hastens to the
      window, and begins to fidget with the blind-cord, which pulls up and down perfectly, and needs
      no rearrangement.
"It is an odd place to choose for an intrigue, too," continues the other reflectively. "I
      have always been told that the men are so strictly looked after; but perhaps it was its very
      unlikelihood that made him pitch upon it, eh?"
Possibly Belinda makes some answer, and that it is drowned in the rattling of the blind,
      which she is feverishly jerking up and down. Every drop of blood in her body seems to have
      given its fellow rendezvous in her face. An intrigue ! Does he indeed come to
      Oxbridge for an intrigue ? An intrigue with whom? An

intrigue ! Is that what other people beside Miss Watson would call it?
"I shall certainly mention it to his mother, Lady Marion, when next I meet her," says Miss
      Watson resolutely; "I do not think that it would be acting a friend's part not to do so. I do
      not actually know her, but there is a sort of connection between us; I was at school for six
      months once at Brussels with a cousin of hers, and there is no doubt that there is something
      uncommonly louche about it."
Judging by the frequency with which during the next hour she repeats this phrase, it must be
      a favourite one of hers. By five o'clock its recurrence has driven Belinda to the verge of
      desperation. It seems to her (though that is a figment of her guilty fancy) that there is a
      dreadful meaning and significance in the unblinking look at her with which each repetition of
      the word is accompanied.
Five o'clock! He has been waiting for her a whole hour beneath St. Bridget's
       elms, straining his eyes up the long straight walk. At length:
"I think," she says, looking overtly at the clock—at which she has long been stealing covert
      glances of agonized impatience —"that if you wish to catch this train—and you would find the
      later one extremely tedious—you should be setting off!"
"Should I?" replies the guest indifferently. "It is of no consequence if I am late; I am a
      good walker, and I enjoy running it fine; I see no use in kicking one's heels at a
      station!"
She ties on her bonnet, and adjusts her strong grey fringe with a maddening deliberation;
      stops in the middle to examine and inquire the history of a piece of bric-à-brac ,
      which she had not before noticed; and finally (it is said that no Englishwoman ever knows how
      to take leave) expends herself in an immense farewell speech, from which the word
       louche is by no means absent. But she is gone at last.
       Before she is well round the corner—before there is any real security of her not
      returning, according to her usual custom, to pounce afresh upon her just-freed prey, Belinda
      has fled to her room; and—her trembling preparations hurriedly made—is speeding, like an arrow
      shot from a bow, to St. Bridget's. There is no leisureliness about her walk to-day; no feigned
      indifference, no loitering, no counterfeit indecision, as to her goal. To-day she cannot
      afford to play her little comedy.
Is not she an hour and a quarter late? Will she find him gone? Will he still be there? Will
      his patience have held out? In the whole of life, in the whole scheme of nature, there seems
      to her no other question in the least worth answering.
People look at her oddly, she thinks, as she passes. Hitherto she has not minded how many
      people she met, or who knew whither, and to what end, her steps were tending. To-day it seems
      as if they all glance meaningly at her, as who should
       read her guilty secret in her face. Until to-day she has never thought it either
      a secret, or guilty. An intrigue ! That is what they call it! She is engaged in an
       intrigue ; and by some means they know it.
As she enters St. Bridget's a couple of humble lovers meet her face to face. As they pass
      her they happen to expand into a grin, provoked, probably, by some ponderous joke of their own
      making; but she takes it to herself. They know that she is a married woman hastening to an
      assignation. The very birds seem to chirp, and the boughs to rustle meaningly. Well, let
      them!
It will be a dreadful memory to face by-and-by; but for the moment there is no room for any
      other question but the one— "Will he be there?"
Before she reaches their trysting bench it is answered. She comes upon him so suddenly, that
      she has no time to tone down her pace to a decent saunter. He
       has seen the speed with which she was hasting towards him; her breathlessness,
      her pallor, the desperate anxiety of her eyes.
There is no use in shamming to-day. But, indeed, his own condition leaves him no right to
      criticize hers. Perhaps he is in even worse case than she; for she can speak, and he
      cannot.
"You are not gone!" she says with a gasp, such as one might give whose reprieve met him at
      the scaffold-foot. "I thought you would be gone!"
For answer, he grips her two hands in his (never before in all his life has he been master,
      and for how few poor minutes, but of one), and looks at her with a white fixity of passion, to
      whose relief no words come. Even when they are both seated on their bench—neither ever quite
      knows how they reached it—it is still she who speaks; nor when she does so, is it to ask him
      to release her hands. Perhaps in her agitation she is not aware that they are still in his
      keeping.

"It was Miss Watson!" she says, with that gasping staccato utterance, as of one who, after
      long running, has not yet recovered his wind. "She came—she stayed four hours. She had seen
      you!"
He nods his head in acquiescence.
"Yes."
He is plainly incapable of anything beyound a monosyllable.
"She asked why you came here," says Belinda; the words fluttering out on greatly quickened
      breath, but still with more coherence.
"Yes?"
One would say that he were scarcely attending, so distant and dreamful is his voice. He is
      conscious of nothing but the warmth of those wonderful sweet hands lying in his. If he could
      realize Miss Watson at all, it would probably be with gratitude; for it is she virtually who
      has given them to him.
"She said," continues Belinda, trembling exceedingly, and looking guiltily down on
       their locked hands, "that you must come here for some intrigue." She pauses, and
      then adds in a whisper, "She must not say that again."
He is attending now. There is a significance both in her look and in her low words that
      cannot escape him.
"What do you mean?" he says thickly.
"I mean," she says, still scarcely above a whisper, "that you must not come here again."
She looks away from him as she says it, unwilling, perhaps, to see the immense consternation
      that her fiat will have brought into his face; but he observes for so long a dead silence,
      that she grows uneasy. Has her blow killed him? or is it possible (this latter suggestion is a
      scarcely less bitter one than the former) that he already acquiesces?
She is just making up her mind to steal a glance at him, when he speaks, and the tone of his
      voice tells her that her first idea
       of his case was nearer the mark than her last.
"I am not to come here again?"
"No, I think not; no!"
"I am not to come to Oxbridge again?"
"No."
"I am not to meet you again?"
"No."
"Not anywhere?"
She bows her head, unable to speak.
" Never ?"
She repeats the gesture.
There is such a rising strain of unbelieving agony in his voice, culminating in his last
      words, that speech has wholly forsaken her.
"We are to live out the rest of our lives without each other?"
Again that acquiescent motion of the head.
"And you can bear it?—of course," correcting himself, with a bitter humility, "why should
      not you? it is not much for
       you to bear. Well, then, I suppose I must bear it too!"
He has let go her hands, and covered his face with his own. She is free to depart. He has
      always obeyed her; and he is obeying her now. What is there to keep her? And yet she does not
      stir. Her aching eyes stare vacantly down the long straight alley. Sweet green walk! Dear
      solemn tower! Kind chattering birds! Good-bye! for never, never can she bear to look upon any
      of you again!
She stirs restlessly in her misery; and in an instant he has dropped his shrouding hands,
      and is looking at her with a haggard apprehension in his eyes.
"Are you going now?"
"Not at once—not this moment," she answers faintly; "there is no hurry. I can stay as long
      as usual, if you wish."
If he wishes ! He laughs outright in his pain.
There is a long, long silence.
St. Bridget's is even emptier than its
       wont. Not one visitor besides themselves breaks its entire seclusion. Only the
      grave tower-clock deals out time's little parcels.
She speaks first.
"I do not want you to be unhappy," she says, with a sort of sob of compassion for his spoilt
      youth. "I should like you to be happy."
"So should I. Will you show me how?"
"Oh, if I could!" she cries, in a heart-wrung accent. "Oh, if we could but be as we were
      before—"
She stops.
"Before Wesenstein?" he says.
The word seems to have roused him out of his lethargy of wretchedness. Ere she knows it, he
      has won back her hands; and before the strangeness of his eyes her own waver.
"We might almost fancy ourselves at Wesenstein, might not we?" he says, with a thrilling
      feverish smile; "it was a green, quiet, woody place like this. Do you remember it well? It is
      odd that we have
       never talked of it since—is not it? Why should not we talk of it now? You sat on
      the grass, and I lay at your feet! Do you recollect? Yes" (with a heart-rending inflection),
      "I see that you do. You gave me your hand! No! my Ice Queen, you would never have given it me!
      I took it and kissed it; shall I show you where I kissed it? Just there—and there—and there!"
      (passionately fastening his lips upon palm and fingers); "and then— then I took you
      in my arms! Can you believe it?— and yet I am speaking truth—once I had you in my arms, and
       I let you go !— I let you go ! Would to God" (with a terrible burst of
      agony) "that I had been struck dead there before I let you go!"
The storm of his passion has carried her away.
"Would to God you had!" she says, frenziedly; and so unresisting—nay, passionately
      complying—she gives him that two years and a half ago foregone kiss. One kiss! That is all.
      One drunk,
       oblivious moment, and then the awaking! She, but now so consentingly embraced,
      has wrenched herself out of his arms.
"What—has—happened—to—us?" she says, staggering away from him.
But he awakens slowlier than she.
"You have owed it me, since Wesenstein!" he cries wildly, and with a sort of triumph.
And there is silence. If indeed the loud blood dinning in their ears and hammering their
      temples can be so called.
"I suppose," she says, after a while, speaking as if speech were a new weapon, and she ill
      at handling it, "that—it—has been—coming to this—all along—only— I did not—see it. I suppose
      that no one would believe me—but I did not see it; did you?"
He makes no answer.
He is still lapped in the Elysium of that long-promised and at last fulfilled embrace.
"Is it possible," she says, looking piercingly at him, and with a sombre reproach in
       her voice, "that you saw all along—you knew—you thought—"
"I thought nothing!" he cries, brought back to his senses by the sternness of her tone. "Oh,
      my dear, do you think so ill of me as to suppose that I was willingly leading you on? I tell
      you, I thought nothing! I only knew, that for two hours in every fortnight you allowed me to
      live! you let me into the heaven of your sweet company!—was not that enough for me? Was I
      likely to look beyond?"
She has tottered to the bench, and now sits half-crouched in the corner of it.
"I suppose," she says, shaking her head hopelessly, "that, in point of fact, we have both
      been living upon our Sundays." Then after a pause, with a sort of groan, "Oh, I thought we
      might have been trusted!"
He has not sat down again, but stands before her in guilty, miserable humility, waiting for
      his doom.
"I am not very sorry for you," she says, after a while, lifting her dull eyes to his
       face. "You are mistaken if you think that I pity you very much. You have your
      work—often before now have I been jealous of it, and of the hold it is gaining over you! This
      is the best thing that could have happened to you—a sort of thing that your mother would
      rejoice at— the best test after all. No more distractions! No more senseless outlay in railway
      journeys! it is almost as good as being taken into partnership!"
She glances up at him at intervals, as she plants her stabs, to see how much he can bear. He
      is not yet at the end of his endurance apparently, for he still stands before her, bent-headed
      and ash-white, in motionless patience.
"But will anyone tell me," she says, dropping her arms hopelessly to her sides, and looking
      distractedly upwards, as if to win a response from that sky to which we, in trouble never
      answered, ever look, "what is to become of me ?"
Her cruelty towards himself he had
       taken like a man; but her self-pity is beyond his sufferance.
"I will tell you what will become of you," he says in a rapid broken whisper, sitting down
      again beside her. "Will you let me tell you? Are you listening? After all, they are only a few
      beggarly hours that we have had to live upon: I do not know how we have subsisted upon such a
      pittance for so long. What is there to prevent us—why should not we—"
"Stop!" she cries hoarsely, thrusting out her spread hands, and pushing him away from her.
      "I know what you are going to say! I know it as well as if you had already said it."
The terror in her eyes, the shrinking gesture, have set him almost beside himself.
"You say that you are not at all sorry for me," he says, with a sort of hard sob, and I dare
      say you are right; but I must ask you to—to—make a little allowance for me! I am not in my
      right wits. It
       was unmanly of me—I had no right to shock—to outrage you."
"I am not in the least shocked," she says with a slow distinctness; " that shows, I
      suppose, to what a depth I must have fallen. I stopped you because—because I knew that if I
      let you finish your sentence I should—not—have—said—no—to you: I—should—have—said—yes."
She pauses, unable to fetch her breath. And yet, despite the confession in her words of her
      own defeat and his victory, something in her air holds him aloof.
"But if—" she goes on presently, fixing him with the terrible appeal of her eyes, while her
      face grows sharp and thin—"if you are—what I have always thought you —if I know you right,
      you—will—never —finish it!"
There is a dead dead silence; she still holding him with that look, until she knows that in
      her dreary battle she has vanquished.
"And now," she says with a tearless
       decision, "go! I did not tell the truth when I said I was not sorry for you! Oh,
      I am sorry! I AM ! There! go!—what is the use of crying? I hate to see a man cry! God
      bless you! God be with you! Go!"
And he, obedient, goes.

