
CHAPTER IX.
The week and Rivers are both gone. Belinda's life has returned to its old channel,
      the channel in which it ran before the party at St. Ursula's. The weather has ceased to be a
      matter of the slightest interest. It is not of the least consequence what weather there is, or
      whether there is any weather at all! Done with are all tappings of weather-glasses, watchings
      of the march of clouds. The door-bell may ring itself off its wire, without making her
      attention swerve by one hair's-breadth from Menander, or interfering at all with the coherence
      and patience of her answers to her mother-in-law
       as to the date at which they are going to bury that mother-in-law's husband,
      whose obsequies appear to have been unaccountably deferred for twenty-five years. There is no
      more talk of water-parties. Sarah herself, too late convinced of the peril of those
      excursions, confines herself and her followers to safe games of tennis in well-overlooked
      public places, where they will have no chance of reading her eyes either right or wrong, or,
      at all events, of telling her the result of their readings. Mrs. Forth's life has resumed the
      tame course which it was taking on the day of Sarah's arrival; but how different a spirit now
      guides it! Whither have flown the sullen discontent, the dull revolt, the rare mirth that bit,
      and the frequent irony that pricked and stung? Now , if the Professor be cross, she
      shrugs her shoulders good-humouredly. He is old! He means nothing by it! It is an infirmity.
      After all, why should she mind? How does it hurt her? If he keeps her slaving long
       beyond her canonical hours in his close study, why so much the more does she
      enjoy afterwards the breath of the garden and the white pinks bursting so quickly into spicy
      bloom? If he complain of his affection of heart, liver, or spleen, she is equally ready to
      believe in and sympathize with each and all, to suggest remedies, or apply them.
Never has Sarah been more puzzled, or her sagacity put more at fault, than by her sister's
      behaviour. For it is not the mood of a day. The consciousness of being observed and of the
      necessity for self-control might have lent her for a while a spurious cheerfulness; but could
      it have given her that easy, unforced serenity which lasts undimmed through Sarah's
      stay—which, indeed, shows every symptom of holding out indefinitely beyond it? It is not from
      the post, as Miss Churchill at first suspected, that she derives her support.
The postman's arrival obviously causes her not a flutter; nor does she exhibit the
       slightest tendency towards a surreptitious posting of her own letter's—worst sign
      that can appear in a connubial heaven. It is not, then, upon a clandestine correspondence that
      she is feeding and blooming, so fair and fine. That an undoubtedly hard-working common hand,
      or, still more, foreman in an iron foundry, would be likely soon to have another leisure week
      at his disposal, seems to her improbable. That Belinda can be nourishing any hopes of a visit
      to Milnthorpe seems to her more improbable still. That, satisfied with the sight of her lost
      love, she can have settled down contentedly into the perennial jogtrot of an existence without
      him, seems to her most improbable of all.
She watches her sister narrowly; sees her severe lips surprised now and then into an
      apparently causeless smile; catches her singing under her breath, as she waters her drouthy
      plants; sees her staid walk about the garden occasionally inclined to degenerate into a
      light-hearted run with the
       dogs. But she does not surprise her secret. And meanwhile time goes on. The
      yearly gaieties with which the summer Term at Oxbridge concludes are over and gone Mrs. Forth,
      chaperoning her sister, has taken part in them all—balls, fêtes , theatre; has seen
      the masons dance in their aprons, and heard the undergraduates in all the glory of their
      immemorial screeching. She has taken part in all, and has apparently enjoyed them with a
      wholesome temperate gaiety; as far removed from the unnatural elation of the Blind Man's Buff,
      as from the inert gloom of the previous period.
With Term is to end Sarah's visit; and on the day following her departure the Professor is
      to shoulder his valise for the Bernese Oberland.
The morning on which Mrs. Forth is to lose her sister has come. Sarah is taking her last
      stroll round the flower-beds, and across the square of sward over which she and Belinda have
      walked so many miles.
       Mrs. Forth has just joined her, issuing from the house with the end of a laugh
      still lingering about her mouth and eyes.
"You seem amused," says the other, turning to meet her. "May I be permitted to inquire the
      cause?"
"It is nothing!" replies Belinda, bubbling over again with mirth. "It is a shame to laugh at
      her, only it is so difficult to help it. Mr. Forth has just been reading the Collect for the
      day to his mother; and at the end she said to him, 'You read very nicely, my dear; and, when
      you are a little older, you will read better still!'"
Sarah joins in the laugh, but not warmly.
"And this," she says indignantly, "is the companion with whom you are to be left
       tête-à-tête for four months!"
Belinda bends her charming head in a nod of cheerful acquiescence.
"It is monstrous!" continues Miss Churchill, with a growing energy of ire. "It is beyond
      belief! I have a good
       mind, now , at the last moment, to give him a piece of my mind! Where is
      he?" glancing threateningly towards the windows of the house. "Let me take him redhanded, in
      the act of packing his portmanteau!"
There is such a doughty purpose in her voice and her pink porcelain face, that Belinda,
      seizing her arm in apprehensive detention, cries:
"Do not! It would be no use. Do you remember the proverb about putting the finger entre
       l'arbre et l'écorce ? And I—I do not want to go with him."
At the last words, she has turned her head slightly aside.
"Do you think that he would be a pleasant travelling-companion?" she goes on rapidly,
      perceiving that her sister does not make any rejoinder, but only looks at her searchingly. "Do
      you remember how ashamed we used to be when he haggled over the groschen at Dresden? A tour
      with him would be one colossal blush."

"It is a choice of evils, of course," says Sarah dispassionately. "Perhaps my early passion
      blinds me, but, personally, I should prefer him."
"Should you?"
"Four months!" repeats Miss Churchill, in almost awed reflection. "How many times, at a
      rough calculation, in four months will you tell her who you are; and that there is a foolish
      prejudice in favour of burying people before they have been dead twenty-five years?"
"Perhaps I shall end by joining her in the belief that my father-in-law is still above
      ground," replies Belinda; but she says it in a tone of such unassumed equanimity, that again
      Sarah regards her with astonishment.
"Four months!" she repeats, a third time. "Do you mean to tell me that you are not
       desperate at such a prospect?"
"Of course I am—desperate!"
But there is not a touch of desperation, or even of milder sadness, in her voice.

"How do you mean to live thorough it?"
"How do people endure existence on these occasions?"
She has knelt on the springy turf, and is cutting, one after one, a score of young and dewy
      pinks, to comfort her sister during her dusty up-journey; carefully, and with the grudging
      hand of a real flower-lover, choosing those that are budless: no easy feat, for there is
      scarcely one that has not a grey-green successor beneath its perfumed wing.
"Eating, drinking, sleeping, yawning!"
"Are you quite sure that you will have no other support?" asks Sarah abruptly, and
      yet slowly.
For a moment the garden-scissors in Mrs. Forth's hand cease their clipping, and remain
      suspended and open, like that other pair which snipped her namesake's love-lock, while a dye
      as opulent as that of the new peony, whose birth the garden-border this morning greeted,
      stains even the milk-coloured nape of her stooped neck.

"I—I—do not know what you mean," she says coldly; "what—what other support should I
      have?"
"Belinda," says the other, dropping down on the sward beside her, and griping her shaking
      hand—scissors, pinks, and all—in her own little eager clasp, "why should not I come back and
      keep you company? I may not be a very intellectual companion, but at least I have a firmer
      hold upon my few facts than has your poor mamma-in-law. Let me come back; we will have Jane
      down, and Punch shall show her the University"—with a not very assured laugh. "Let me
      come!"
But the hands so urgently pressed give no answering pressure. Upon the half-averted face
      comes no glow of sisterly pleasure or acceptance. A senseless suspicion has flashed across
      Mrs. Forth's mind, that the present proposition on Sarah's part may be an impormptu fait à
       loisir ; that it may have been arranged between her and Rivers; that here may
       lie the secret of his eagerness to repeat his visit; that—in fact whatever angry
      gibberish jealousy may whisper to a mind ripe and ready for its reception.
Under pretext of resuming her pinkcutting, she has withdrawn her unwillingly-captured hand;
      but she is no longer careful: the unblown buds fall as freely as the opened flowers.
"And give up Cowes and Scotland?" she says in a dry voice; "and what would granny say?"
"It would not be of the slightest consequence what she said," replies Sarah, smothering
      bravely a disappointment none the less sharp for being mastered at her sister's reception of
      her proposal. "You are aware that my grandmother's words have always been to me as the idle
      wind; which, I believe, is one main reason of the sincere regard and respect that she
      cherishes for me. If granny is the only stumbling-block—"
"I could not think of being so selfish!"
       interrupts Belinda hastily, not allowing her sister to finish her sentence.
"There would be no selfishness if I liked it," says Sarah persistently; "and— you may wonder
      at my taste, but I should like it."
Belinda has risen from her knees, and has turned to a damask rose-bush, to lay it under
      contribution for her nosegay.
"It is so perfectly unneccessary," she says, cutting feverishly away; "you are tilting
      against windmills. I make no complaint; I think it no hardship to be alone. I am not like you,
      miserable if I am left five minutes to my own society!"
There is such a strain of impatience through her speech, that Sarah reluctantly desists, nor
      are many more words exchanged between them. The cab is at the door. The luggage—cursed of
      cabmen— has been hoisted on the top. Punch is, at Mrs. Forth's petition—a petition certainly
      not backed up by Slutty—to be left on a visit to her.

The moment of parting has come. Sarah apparently wishes that that parting shall take place
      without witnesses. She draws her sister back into the drawing-room, and shuts the door.
"Belinda," she says, when she has somewhat coldly kissed her, looking in her face with a
      gravity that only once or twice before in the course of their lives has Mrs. Forth seen
      written on those small gay lineaments. "Belinda, I wash my hands of you; I would have helped
      you if I could. I have no reason for saying so—I know nothing, and you will tell me nothing;
      but I cannot help thinking that you are going to the devil, and that you are taking David
      Rivers with you!"
Then, without another word, she is gone. Without one last look from the cab window, without
      a farewell friendly handwave; forgetting even to bid good-bye to the dogs, or take their
      messages to Jane, she is gone. For some minutes Belinda
       remains standing on the exact spot at which her sister had left her; remains
      standing, still and stunned. Then she suddenly throws herself into the Professor's armchair,
      and spreads her hands over her face. She would like not to let a quarter of an inch of it
      remain uncovered. The light is strong and brutal. She would like to draw the blinds down and
      shut the shutters. " Going to the devil, and taking David Rivers with you !" The
      blood is singing loudly in her ears. It seems to take the form of these words. Over and over
      again. The moment the sentence is ended, it begins afresh. How long she lies there—outwardly a
      log, inwardly a shameful fire—she neither knows nor cares. But after a while a tide of
      indignation sets in through all her being, chasing before it the shame, and she sits up.
What disgraceful words for her own sister to apply to her! and what slightest ground,
      excuse, palliation even, had she for
       so insulting her? Going to the devil ! And pray, what is it to go to the
      devil? Is it to fulfil with nice scrupulosity every tasteless or even nauseous duty of a most
      dreary life? To sing as she walks her treadmill? To smile patiently over her oakumpicking? To
      forego her own hot bright youth, and clip down its rich proportions to the meagre pattern of
      the dry and crabbed age with which it is mismated? To be a secretary without pay, a drudge
      without wage, a souffre douleur without hope of enlargement, a prisoner the term of
      whose incarceration lies in the hands of arbitrary death? If this be to go to the devil, then
      she is not only going there, but has long ago gone.
She laughs sarcastically, and her feverish limbs carry her up and down the room. If Sarah
      had given her time, this is how she would have answered her—thus and thus. For a while she
      walks to and fro, muttering under her breath, framing withering sentences of self-exculpation,
      that must
       carry conviction to any mind. But that mood, too, passes. As her wrath—spent and
      exhausted—subsides, another voice, lower yet more penetrating, takes its place. Going to
       the devil ! Is going to the devil to have a husband whose pursuits you abhor, whose
      infirmities you secretly deride, at whose accidental touch you shiver? Is going to the devil
      to be speeding with disloyal alacrity that husband's departure, to be counting the hours to
      the end of your only sister's visit, to be living and feeding and flourishing upon a hope that
      you dare not look in the face, that you would sooner die than impart to any soul that
      breathes? Is this to be going to the devil?
She has again wholly hidden her face with her hands. Again the light seems over-strong and
      pushing. And plain and distinct, beyond possibility of misapprehension, the answer comes—"Yes!
      yes! yes!"


A couple of hours later the Professor lifts a head, a good deal reddened and exasperated by
      long burrowing in the bowels of a portmanteau, to see his pale wife enter his room.
"I came to see whether I could help you," she says gently, though in a spiritless flat
      voice.
"The idea has occurred to you somewhat late in the day," replies he ungraciously.
"It was fortunate for me that I did not depend upon your offers of assistance, volunteered
      this morning."
"I was bidding Sarah good-bye," she answers apologetically, and without any trace of
      resentment at his tone.
"She has been gone exactly three hours and a half," replies he drily, glancing at the
      clock.
She offers no further justification, but kneeling down on the floor, lets her hands, which
      tremble perceptibly, stray rather purposelessly over the books strewn upon the carpet.

"Pray, mind what you are about!" he cries sharply "you are doing more harm than good."
"They are to go, are not they?" she says, lifting a heavy folio, and looking humbly up at
      him.
"I am obliged to omit Augustine, Irenæus, and several books of reference, as they would
      entail very considerable expense upon me in excess of weight," he replies, peering down
      through his spectacles at his strewn treasures. "I the less regret it as, since I am taking no
      secretary with me—"
How very white her face is! Has she had some sudden scare?
"Why are not you taking a secretary?" she asks in a very low voice. "Why— why do not you
      take me ?"
He shifts the focus of his vision from Irenaeus to her face; but apparently the latter
      object gives him less tranquil pleasure than did the former.
"You have never expressed the slightest
       desire to accompany me," he answers chillingly.
She hangs her head, a guilty conscious ness staining her pallor red.
"Have not I? Perhaps I thought that you did not want me."
There is a deliberate pause before he answers, and her heart goes down, down. He is about to
      accept her offer! But his first words reassure her.
"I can see no object that would be gained by such a change of plan," he replies, in a key
      that plainly shows his annoyance at the suggestion having been made. " I go in search
      of health; a quest which you, happily for yourself, have no need to pursue."
She draws a long breath of relief; but now that the danger of acceptance seems less
      imminent, her scruples return. Sarah's stinging phrase begins to ring again in her ears.
"You—you forget that I shall be all alone here," she says, nervously fidgeting
       with the already packed portion of the portmanteau.
"You will have my mother."
She shrugs her shoulders.
"She can hardly be reckoned as a companion."
At her capricious and untimely opposition, his forehead gathers into vexed wrinkles.
"Since it appears that your own society has such terrors for you, you are at liberty to
      invite your sister to come and share your solitude."
Again the guilty head stoops.
"She—she has engagements of her own."
"So I should have imagined," replies he with a disagreeable smile; "but you can scarcely
      hold me responsible for them."
Another pause. She is aimlessly wrapping paper round one of the volumes that are not wanted,
      that are not to be taken eruditely tripping to the Alps. She will make one more effort. If
      that fail, no one, not even Sarah, can blame her.

"Does not it strike you that I shall be very dull here, all by myself?" she asks, timorously
      eyeing him.
"I have always understood, upon your own authority, that you were indifferent to, if not
      averse from, amusements," he answers irritably.
"Not now—not now!" she cries feverishly. "Even if I were so formerly, I am not now; and even
      if I were—to be alone for four months!"
"You exaggerate grossly," returns he sharply. "There are many residents who do not leave
      Oxbridge until the end of July, and many who return at the beginning of September."
"They will do me no good," she says excitedly. "How will they help me?"
He shrugs his shoulders silently, as who should say that upon one lost in such mazes of
      inconsequence and irrationality breath would be wasted.
"Do you remember that I am young?"
       she says, in a hard low voice, rising from her knees and approaching him.
"It is certainly not your fault if I do not," replies he peevishly; "for you are good enough
      to remind me of the fact often enough."
"It is because you always act as if you forgot it," retorts she, her temper rising under his
      tone.
"I confess that I fail to see how your juvenility affects the present case," he says
      satirically.
"Do you?" she answers with a scorching blush, that seems to burn inside as well as outside
      her. "Some men might think that I was too young to be left to my own devices; that I—I might
      get into mischief!"
He has taken off his spectacles in order to rub their glasses. He now deliberately replaces
      them, and regards her attentively through them.
"I presume," he says deliberately, "that that last remark is to be regarded as a
       pleasantry, though I fail to see the point of it."
"I am so much given to pleasantries," she says bitterly. "We are so apt to joke with one
      another: are not we?"
"It seemed difficult to treat such an observation seriously," returns he, in a measured
      voice of displeasure. "What mischief, may I ask, are you likely to get into, here under the
      shelter of your own roof, and in the quiet performance of your regular duties? I cannot but
      think that the alarm under which you labour is an unnecessary one."
For all answer, she turns abruptly away. The infinitely difficult confession which she was
      half-heartedly struggling to make to him, frozen back by his gibe.
"You have evidently a most flattering confidence in me," she says, adopting his tone. "I do
      not quite know what I have done to deserve it."
As a reply, the Professor turns thoughtfully back to his folios, weighing the dispensability
       or indispensability as a travelling companion of each, with an air of having
      dismissed the subject, and of resolutely waiving further consideration of so senseless a
      matter.
His wife stands dubiously watching him.
"I do not know why we are sneering at each other," she says at last, in a disturbed voice.
      "I had not any intention of sneering when I came here. I came to ask you in all—good faith"
      (he does not perceive the slight hesitation which prefaces the last two words) "to take me
      with you—will you?"
To so point-blank an appeal he must provide an answer of some kind; though nothing can be
      clearer than that he would rather have relegated the affair to the limbo of a contemptuous
      silence.
"I am unable to understand you," he says, with slow annoyance. "At the last moment, and when
      my plans are fully matured, and could only be remodelled at great inconvenience to myself, you
      suddenly appear
       with a proposal entirely to disintegrate them. Had you any good reasons to show—"
      (She has good reasons enough, God wot! but looking at the unlovely and unloving rigour of his
      face, she feels that to die, to be flayed alive—whatever things in short have been reckoned
      hardest of endurance since the world was—are but as child's play compared to what the telling
      them to him would be.) "Since, then," he continues, with an air of judicial coldness, and not
      thinking it worth while to finish his former sentence, "it is dictated merely by a puerile
      caprice—"
"It is not caprice," she stammers urgently, in puissant excitement.
"If it is not caprice, nothing can be easier than to prove it," rejoins he coolly, and so
      turns again on his heel.
Behind his back she makes a gesture as of one that throws up a game. Is not he in the right?
      Has not he a show of reason and justice on his side? Why not acquiesce without further kicking
      against the pricks?
       But yet something drives her to a last attempt. Although thrice baffled, although
      at each new discomfiture her heart has sprung up in joyful relief, she will press her suit
      once more.
"You know that women never have any reasons to give," she says with a laugh that has
      borrowed something from its opposite —a sob, and in a gentler voice than that which she is
      wont to think soft enough for converse with him; "but sometimes their instincts lead them
      right. I—I think that you had better take me with you!"
Envenomed by her pertinacity, he wheels round upon her viciously.
"Perhaps you will be good enough to expose your reasons," he says, "premising, that is to
      say, that they are such as a person of ordinary common sense can permit himself to listen
      to."
"I should not be much in your way," she says humbly, and going so far—for her it is
      immensely far—as to lay her fair hand on his coat-sleeve. "Of course my
       society would be no great gain to you, but I could make myself useful; I could
      pack and unpack for you; I have learned your ways thoroughly by this time. It would be odd,"
      with a sad little laugh, "if I had not; and if you had one of your attacks I could nurse
      you!"
She has made her plea, and with eyes that feel dry, and breath that comes short, awaits its
      prosperity or miscarriage. For a while he eyes her with silent suspicion.
"It would be a most unnecessary expense," he says at last, shortly.
"I should not expect, I should not wish for, any luxuries," she answers, her pleading
      growing, perhaps, the more earnest from her consciousness of the intensity of the wish for its
      ill-success that goes with it. "I drink no wine, and I do not eat much."
"Pshaw!" retorts he, with angry ridicule; "are you simple enough to suppose that the hotel
      tariffs vary according to the number of mouthfuls you swallow?"

"I have no objection to travelling third-class; I should never ask for a sitting-room; I am
      quite capable of roughing it," she urges tremulously.
"No doubt! no doubt!" he answers tartly; "all the same, you would more than double the
      expense."
"And if I did?" she says firmly—for is not this her last appeal, and is not she bound to
      make it no pretence, but a real and thoroughly earnest one?—"what need that matter to you? You
      are well off, and"—lowering her voice a little—"you have no one to come after you."
Perhaps the plea is an injudiciously chosen one. No man likes to be reminded that he will
      stand or fall alone; that he is without a stake in the generations to come. At all events, on
      hearing it, his features assume a look even more acrid than that which they wore before.
"I must request you to consider the subject as closed," he says with a decision against
      which there is no appeal. "I
       have, for reasons which appear sufficient to myself—and I ask no other
      arbiter—come to a final decision upon it; pray let us hear no more of it."
"As you please," she answers, bowing acquiescently a head whose cheeks have suddenly resumed
      their carnations, and its eyes their young dance; "I suppose, as you say, that you know your
      own affairs best, but I think I have heard that there is such a thing as being 'penny wise and
      pound foolish.'"

