
CHAPTER VI.
CECIL GRAHAME'S PHILOSOPHY.—AN ERROR AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.—A MYSTERY AND A
      CONFIDENCE.
A few days after the events of the last chapter, Mrs. Hamilton, accompanied by Percy, called
      at Moorlands. Cecil Grahame was playing in the garden, and Percy remained with him, his
      good-nature often making him a companion, though there was nearly six years' difference in
      their age.
"Are you going to T— on Thursday, Percy? There will be such fine doings. Races and the
      county fair, and wild beasts and shows, and every thing delightful; of course, you will
      go?"
"I do not think it at all likely," replied young Hamilton.
"No!" repeated Cecil, much astonished. "Why, I was only saying the other day how much I
      should like to be as old as you are; it must be so delightful to be one's own master."
"I do not consider myself my own master yet, Cecil. Sometimes I wish I were; at others, I
      think I am much better as I am. And, as for this fair, Mr. Howard will be back to-morrow, so
      there is no chance of my going."
"Why is there no such thing as the possibility of a holiday, Percy?" replied Cecil, with
      great glee; "or perhaps," he added, laughing, "your papa is like mine, and does not allow such
      freaks; thinks it wrong to go to such places, acting against morality, and such out of the way
      ideas."
"Are these Mr. Grahame's opinions?" inquired Percy, almost sternly.
"Why ye—yes—why do you look at me so, Percy? I am sure I said no harm; I only repeated what
      I have heard mamma say continually."
"That is not the very least excuse for your disrespect to your father; and if he think thus,
      I wonder you should talk of going to the races; you can not have his permission."
"Oh, but mamma has promised if I am a good boy till then and she can manage it, I shall go;
      for she can not see any harm in it. And as for waiting for papa's permission—if I did, I
      should never go any where. He is so unkind, that I am always afraid of speaking or even
      playing, when he is in the room."
"You are a silly boy, Cecil," replied young Hamilton; "Believe me, you do not know your best
      friend. I should be very sorry to feel thus toward my father."
"Oh! but yours and mine are very different sort of people. Your papa never punishes you, or
      refuses you his permission, when you wish particularly to do any thing, or go any where."
"If papa thinks my wishes foolish, or liable to lead me into error, he does refuse me
      without scruple, Cecil. And though I am old enough now, I hope, so to conduct myself as to
      avoid actual punishment: when I was as young as you are, papa very frequently punished me,
      both for my violence and pride."
"But then he was kind to you afterward. Now I should not so much mind papa's severity when I
      am naughty, if he would only be kind, or take some notice of me when I am good. But has Mr.
      Hamilton told you not to go to the races?"
"Not exactly: he has merely said he thinks it a day most unprofitably wasted; and that the
      gambling and excesses, always the attendant of races, are not fit scenes for young persons.
      Were I to take my horse and go, he would not, perhaps, be actually displeased, as I am old
      enough now, he says, in some things, to judge for myself; but I should be acting against his
      principles, which, just now, I am not inclined to do, for I am sure to suffer from it
      afterward."
"Well, all I can say, is, that when I am as old as you are, Percy, I shall certainly
      consider myself under no one. I hope I shall be at Eton by that time, and then we shall see if
      Cecil Grahame has not some spirit in him. I would not be tied down to Oakwood, and to Mr.
      Howard's humdrum lessons, as you are, Percy, for worlds."
"Take care that Cecil Grahame's spirit does not effervesce so much, as to make him, when at
      Eton, wish himself back at Moorlands," replied Percy, laughing heartily at his young
      companion's grotesque attempts at self-consequence, by placing his cap dandily on his head,
      flourishing his cane, and trying to make himself look taller. Cecil took his laugh, however,
      in good part, and they continued in amicable conversation till Mrs. Hamilton summoned Percy to
      attend her home.
Our readers have, perhaps, discovered that Percy, this day was not quite as lively as usual.
      If they have not his mother did; for, strange to say, he walked by her side silent and
      dispirited. His thoughtlessness very often led him into error and its disagreeable
      consequences; and, fearing this had again been the case, she playfully inquired the cause of
      his most unusual abstraction. He colored, but evaded the question, and successfully roused
      himself to talk. His mother was not anxious, for she had such perfect confidence in him, that
      she know if he had committed error, he would redeem it, and that his own good feelings and
      high principles would prevent its recurrence.
It so happened, however, that young Hamilton, by a series of rather imprudent actions, had
      plunged himself into such a very unusual and disagreeable position, as not very well to know
      how to extricate himself from it, without a full confession to his father; which, daringly
      brave as in general he was, he felt almost as if he really had not the courage to make. One of
      Mr. Hamilton's most imperative commands was, that his sons should never incur a debt, and, to
      prevent the temptation, their monthly allowance was an ample one, and fully permitted any
      recreative indulgences they might desire.
Now Percy was rather inclined to extravagance, from thoughtlessness and a profuse
      generosity, which had often caused him such annoyance as to make him resolve again and again
      to follow his father's advice, and keep some accounts of his expenditure, as a slight check on
      himself. The admiration for beauty in the fine arts, which his mother had so sedulously
      cultivated, had had only one bad effect; and that was that his passion for prints and
      paintings, and illustrated and richly-bound volumes, sometimes carried him beyond bounds, and
      very often occasioned regret, that he had not examined the letter-press of such works, as well
      as their engravings and bindings. He had given orders to Mr. Harris, a large fancy stationer,
      librarian, and publisher of T—, to procure for him a set of engravings, whose very interesting
      subjects and beautiful workmanship, Mr. Grahame had so vividly described to him, that young
      Hamilton felt to do without them till his father or he himself should visit the metropolis,
      and so judge of their worth themselves, was quite impossible. The order was given without the
      least regard to price. They arrived at the end of the month, and the young gentleman, to his
      extreme astonishment, discovered that his month's allowance had been so expended, as not to
      leave him a half-quarter of the necessary sum. What to do he did not very well know. Mr.
      Harris had had great difficulty in procuring the prints, and of course he was bound in honor
      to take them. If he waited till he could pay for them, he must sacrifice the whole of one
      month's allowance, and then how could he keep free from debt till the next? As for applying to
      his father, he shrank from it with actual pain. How could he ask his ever kind and indulgent
      parent to discharge a debt incurred by such a thoughtless act of unnecessary extravagance? Mr.
      Harris made very light of it, declaring that, if Mr. Percy did not pay him for a twelvemonth,
      it was of no consequence; he would trust him for any sum or any time he liked. But to make no
      attempt to liquidate his debt was as impossible as to speak to his father. No, after a violent
      struggle with his pride, which did not at all like the idea of betraying his inability to pay
      the whole, or of asking a favor of Mr. Harris, he agreed to pay his debt by installments, and
      so in two or three months, at the very latest, discharge the whole.
One week afterward he received his month's allowance, and riding over directly to the town
      relieved his conscience of half its load. To have only half his usual sum, however, for
      monthly expenditure caused him so many checks and annoyances as to make him hate the very
      sight of the prints whose possession he had so coveted, but he looked forward to the next
      month to be free at least of Mr. Harris. The idea of disobedience to his father in incurring a
      debt at all, causing him more annoyance than all the rest.
Again the first day of the month came round, and putting the full sum required in his purse,
      he set off, but on his way encountered such a scene of distress, that every thought fled from
      his mind, except how to relieve it. He accompanied the miserable half-famished man to a hut in
      which lay a seemingly dying woman with a new-born babe, and two or three small half-starved,
      half-naked children—listened to their story, which was really one of truth and misfortune, not
      of whining deceit, poured the whole contents of his purse into their laps, and rode off to T—,
      to find not Mr. Harris but Mr. Maitland, and implore him to see what his skill would do for
      the poor woman. He encountered that gentleman at the outskirts of the town, told his story,
      and was so delighted at Mr. Maitland's willing promise to go directly, and also to report the
      case to those who would relieve it, that he never thought of any thing else till he found
      himself directly opposite Mr. Harris's shop, and his bounding heart sunk suddenly down, as
      impelled by a weight of lead. The conviction flashed upon him that he had been giving away
      money which was actually not his own; and the deed which had been productive of so much
      internal happiness, now seemed to reproach and condemn him. He rode back without even seeking
      Mr. Harris, for what could he tell him as the reason of his non-payment? Certainly not his
      having given it away.
The first of May, which was his birthday, he had been long engaged to spend with some young
      men and lads who were to have a grand game of cricket, a jovial dinner, an adjournment to some
      evening amusement, and, to conclude the day, a gay supper, with glees and songs. Mr. Hamilton
      had rather wished Percy to leave the party after dinner, and had told him so, merely, however,
      as a preference, not a command, but giving him permission to use his own discretion. Percy
      knew there would be several expenses attendant on the day, but still he had promised so long
      to be one of the party, which all had declared would be nothing without him, and his own
      inclinations so urged him to join it, that it seemed to him utterly impossible to draw back,
      especially as he could give no excuse for doing so. How could he say that he could not afford
      it? when he was, or ought to have been, nearly the richest of the party; and what would his
      father think?
He went. The day was thoroughly delightful, and so exciting, that though he had started from
      home with the intention of leaving them after dinner, he could not resist the pleadings of his
      companions and his own wishes, and remained. At supper alone excitement and revelry seemed to
      have gained the upper hand, and Percy, though steady in entirely abstaining from all excess,
      was not quite so guarded as usual. A clergyman had lately appeared at T—, whose appearance,
      manners, and opinions had given more than usual food for gossip, and much uncharitableness.
      His cloth indeed ought to have protected him, but it rather increased the satire, sarcasm, and
      laughter which he excited. He was brought forward by the thoughtless youths of Percy's party,
      quizzed unmercifully, made the object of some clever caricatures and satires, and though young
      Hamilton at first kept aloof, he could not resist the contagion. He dashed off about
      half-a-dozen verses of such remarkably witty and clever point, that they were received with
      roars of applause, and an unanimous request for distribution; but this he positively refused,
      and put them up with one or two other poems of more innocent wit, in which he was fond of
      indulging, into his pocket.
The day closed, and the next morning brought with it so many regrets, and such a confused
      recollection of the very unusual excitement of the previous evening, that he was glad to
      dismiss the subject from his mind, and threw his satire, as he believed, into the fire. In
      fact, he was so absorbed with the disagreeable conviction that he could only pay Mr. Harris a
      third of his remaining debt, trifling as in reality it was, that he thought of nothing else.
      Now Mr. Harris was the editor and publisher of rather a clever weekly paper, and Percy
      happened to be in his parlor waiting to speak to him, while he was paying a contribution.
"I wish my head were clever enough to get out of your debt in that comfortable way," he
      said, half laughing, as the gentleman left them together.
"I wish all my customers were as desirous of paying their large debts as you are your small
      ones," was Mr. Harris's reply. "But I have heard something of your clever verses, Mr. Percy;
      if you will let me see some, I really may be able to oblige you, as you seem so very anxious
      to have nothing more to do with me—"
"In the way of debt, not of purchases, Mr. Harris; and I assure you, I am not thinking so
      much about you, as of my own disobedience. I will lend you my papers, only you must give me
      your word not to publish them with my name."
"They will not be worth so much," replied Mr. Harris, smiling.
"Only let me feel they have helped to discharge my debt, or at least let me know how much
      more is wanted to do so, and I will worship the muses henceforth," replied Percy, with almost
      his natural gayety, for he felt he wrote better verses than those Mr. Harris had been so
      liberally paying for; and the idea of feeling free again was so very delightful, that, after
      receiving Mr. Harris's solemn promise not to betray his authorship, he galloped home, more
      happy than he had been for some days.
Mr. Harris had said he must have them that evening, and Robert was leaving for the town, as
      his young master entered the house. He hastily put up his portfolio, and sent it off. His
      conscience was so perfectly free from keeping any thing that he afterward had cause to regret,
      that he did not think of looking them over, and great was his delight, when a few lines
      arrived from Mr. Harris, speaking in the highest terms of his talent, and saying, that the set
      of verses he had selected, even without the attraction of his name, would entirely liquidate
      his trifling debt.
For the next few days Percy trod on air. He had resolved on waiting till the poem appeared,
      and then, as he really had discharged his debt, take courage and confess the whole to his
      father, for his idea of truth made him shrink from any farther concealment. He hoped and
      believed that his father would regard the pain and constant annoyance he had been enduring so
      long, as sufficient penalty for his disobedience, and after a time give him back the
      confidence, which he feared must at his first confession be withdrawn.
What, then, was his grief, his vexation, almost his despair, when he recognized in the poem
      selected, the verses he thought and believed he had burned the morning after they were
      written; and which in print, and read by his sober self, seemed such a heartless, glaring,
      cruel insult, not only on a fellow-creature, but a minister of God, that he felt almost
      overwhelmed. What could he do? Mr. Harris was not to blame, for he had made no reservation as
      to the contents of his portfolio. His name, indeed, was not to them, and only having been read
      lightly once to his companions of that hateful supper—for so he now felt it—almost all of whom
      were not perfectly sober, there was a chance of their never being recognized as his, and as
      their subject did not live near any town where the paper was likely to circulate, might never
      meet his eye. But all this was poor comfort. The paper was very seldom seen at Oakwood, but
      its contents were often spoken of before his parents, and how could he endure a reference to
      those verses, how bear this accumulation of concealment, and, as he felt, deceit, and all
      sprung from the one thoughtless act of ordering an expensive and unnecessary indulgence,
      without sufficient consideration how it was to be paid. To tell his father, avow himself the
      author of such a satire, and on such a subject, he could not. Could he tell his mother, and
      implore her intercession? that seemed like a want of confidence in his father—no—if he ever
      could gain courage to confess it, it should be to Mr. Hamilton alone; but the more he thought,
      the more, for the first time, his courage failed. It was only the day before his visit to Lady
      Helen's that he had discovered this accumulation of misfortune, and therefore it was not much
      wonder he was so dispirited. Two days afterward Herbert, with a blushing cheek and very timid
      voice, asked his father to grant him a great favor. He was almost afraid to ask it, he said,
      but he hoped and believed his parent would trust his assurance that it was for nothing
      improper. It was that he might be from home next day unattended for several hours. He should
      go on horseback, but he was so accustomed to ride, and his horse was so steady, he hoped he
      might be allowed to go alone. Mr. Hamilton looked very much surprised, as did all present.
      That the quiet, studious Herbert should wish to give up his favorite pursuits, so soon too
      after Mr. Howard's return, and go on what appeared such a mysterious excursion, was something
      so extraordinary, that various expressions of surprise broke from his sisters and Edward.
      Percy did look up but made no observation. Mr. Hamilton only paused, however, to consult his
      wife's face and then replied—
"You certainly have mystified us, my dear boy; but I freely grant you my consent, and if I
      can read your mother's face aright, hers is not far distant. You are now nearly fifteen, and
      never once from your birth has your conduct given me an hour's pain or uneasiness; I have
      therefore quite sufficient confidence in your integrity and steadiness to trust you, as you
      wish, alone. I will not even ask your intentions, for I am sure they will not lead you into
      wrong."
"Thank you, again and again, my own dear father. I hope I shall never do any thing to
      forfeit your confidence," replied Herbert, so eagerly that his cheeks flushed still deeper,
      and his eyes glistened; then throwing himself on the stool at his mother's feet, he said,
      pleadingly, "Will you, too, trust me, dearest mother, and promise me not to be anxious, if I
      do not appear till after our dinner-hour?—promise me this, or I shall have no pleasure in my
      expedition."
"Most faithfully," replied Mrs. Hamilton, fondly. "I trust my Herbert almost as I would his
      father; I do not say as much for this young man, nor for that," she added, playfully laying
      her hand on Percy's shoulder, and laughing at Edward, who was so excessively amused at the
      sage Herbert's turning truant, that he was giving vent to a variety of most grotesque antics
      of surprise. Percy sighed so heavily that his mother was startled.
"I did not intend to call such a very heavy sigh, my boy," she said. "In an emergency I
      would trust you quite as implicitly as Herbert; but you have often yourself wished you had his
      steadiness."
"Indeed I do, mother; I wish I were more like him in every thing," exclaimed Percy, far more
      despondingly than usual.
"You will be steady all in time, my boy, I have not the very slightest fear; and as I like
      variety, even in my sons, I would rather retain my Percy, with all his boyish errors, than
      have even another Herbert. So pray do not look so sad, or I shall fancy I have given you pain,
      when I only spoke in jest."
Percy threw his arm round her waist, and kissed her two or three times, without saying a
      word, and when he started up and, said, in his usual gay tone, that as he was not going to
      turn truant the next day, he must go and finish some work, she saw tears in his eyes. That
      something was wrong, she felt certain, but still she trusted in his candor and integrity, and
      did not express her fears even to her husband.
The morrow came. Percy and Edward went to Mr. Howard's, and Herbert at half-past nine
      mounted his quiet horse, and after affectionately embracing his mother, and again promising
      care and steadiness, departed. He had risen at five this morning, and studied till breakfast
      so earnestly that a double portion was prepared for the next day. He had said, as he was
      starting, that, if he might remain out so long, he should like to call at Greville Manor on
      his way back, take tea there, and return home in the cool of the evening.
"Your next request, my very modest son, will be, I suppose, to stay out all night," replied
      Mrs. Hamilton; "and that certainly will be refused. This is the last to which I shall
      consent—off with you, my boy, and enjoy yourself."
But Herbert did not expect to enjoy himself half as much as if he had gone to Mr. Howard's
      as usual. He did not like to mention his real object, for it appeared as if the chances were
      so much against its attainment, and if it were fulfilled, to speak about it would be equally
      painful, from its having been an act of kindness.
The day passed quietly, and a full hour before prayers, Herbert was seen riding through the
      grounds, and when he entered the usual sitting-room, he looked so happy, so animated that, if
      his parents had felt any anxiety—which they had not—it would have vanished at once. But though
      they were contented not to ask him any questions, the young party were not, and, except by
      Percy (who seemed intently engaged with a drawing), he was attacked on all sides, and, to add
      to their mirth, Mr. Hamilton took the part of the curious, his wife that of her son.
"Ah, mamma may well take Herbert's part," exclaimed the little joyous Emmeline; "for of
      course she knows all about it; Herbert would never keep it from her."
"Indeed I do not!" and "Indeed I have not even told mamma!" was the reply from both at the
      same moment, but the denial was useless; and the prayer-bell rung, before any satisfaction for
      the curious could be obtained, except that from half-past six Herbert had been very quietly at
      Mrs. Greville's.
That night, as Percy sat in gloomy meditation in his own room, before he retired to bed, he
      felt a hand laid gently on his shoulder, and looking up, beheld his brother—
"Have you lost all interest in me, Percy?" asked Herbert, with almost melancholy reproach.
      "If you had expressed one word of inquiry as to my proceedings, I should have told you all
      without the slightest reserve. You have never before been so little concerned for me, and
      indeed I do not like it."
"I could not ask your confidence, my dear Herbert, when for the last three months I have
      been wanting in openness to you. Indeed, annoyed as I am with my own folly, I was as deeply
      interested as all the rest in your expedition, though I guessed its object could be nothing
      but kindness; but how could I ask your secret when I was so reserved with you."
"Then do not let us have secrets from each other any longer, dearest Percy," pleaded
      Herbert, twining his arm round his neck, and looking with affectionate confidence in his face.
      "I do not at all see why my secret must comprise more worth and kindness than yours. You talk
      of folly, and I have fancied for some days that you are not quite happy; but you often blame
      yourself so much more than you deserve, that you do not frighten me in the least. You said,
      last night, you wished you were more like me; but, indeed, if you were, I should be very
      sorry. What would become of me without your mirth and liveliness, and your strength and
      ever-working care to protect me from any thing like pain, either mentally or bodily? I should
      not like my own self for my brother at all."
"Nor I myself for mine," replied Percy, so strangely cheered, that he almost laughed at
      Herbert's very novel idea, and after listening with earnest interest to his story, took
      courage and told his own. Herbert in this instance, however, could not comfort him as
      successfully as usual. The satire was the terrible thing; every thing else but that, even the
      disobedience of the debt, he thought might be easily remedied by an open confession to his
      father; but that unfortunate oversight in not looking over his papers before he sent them to
      Mr. Harris, the seeming utter impossibility to stop their circulation, was to both these
      single-hearted, high-principled lads something almost overwhelming. It did not in the least
      signify to either that Percy might never be known as their author. Herbert could not tell him
      what to do, except that, if he could but get sufficient courage to tell their father, even if
      he could not help them, he was sure it would be a great weight off his mind, and then he
      gently reproached him for not coming to him to help him discharge his debt; it was surely much
      better to owe a trifle to his brother than to Mr. Harris.
"And, to gratify my extravagance, deprive you of some much purer and better pleasure!"
      replied Percy, indignantly. "No, no, Bertie; never expect me to do any such thing; I would
      rather suffer the penalty of my own faults fifty times over! I wish to heaven I were a child
      again," he added with almost comic ruefulness, "and had mamma to come to me every night, as
      she used to do, before I went to sleep. It was so easy then to tell her all I had done wrong
      in the course of the day, and then one error never grew into so many: but now—it must be out
      before Sunday, I suppose—I never can talk to my father as I do on that day, unless it is;—but
      go to bed, dear Herbert; I shall have your pale cheeks upon my conscience to-morrow, too!"
