<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>
<head>ADVANCE AND RETROSPECT.</head>
<p>Our readers must imagine that two years and four months have elapsed since our last visit to
      the inmates of Oakwood. It was the first week in March that Edward Fortescue (only wanting ten
      days for the completion of his fourteenth year) quitted a home, which was happier than any he
      had ever known, to enter the world as a sailor; and it is the 7th of June, two years later,
      the day on which Ellen Fortescue completes her fifteenth year, that we recommence our
      narrative.</p>
<p>Over this interval, however, much as we are anxious to proceed, we must take a brief glance,
      clearly to understand the aspect of the Oakwood home affairs, which, from the increasing age
      of the younger members, had undergone some slight change. The greatest and most keenly felt
      was the departure of Percy and Herbert for college, the October twelvemonth after Edward had
      gone; the house seemed actually desolate without them. Percy's wild jokes and inexhaustible
      spirits, and Herbert's quiet, unobtrusive kindness, much as they had always been truly
      appreciated by their home circle, still scarcely seemed to have been fully felt till the young
      men were gone; and the old house actually seemed enwrapped in a silence, which it required
      very determined effort on the part of all who remained in the least degree to dispel.</p>
<p>Our readers who are mothers, and earnest ones, will easily understand the anxious tremblings
      of Mrs. Hamilton's heart, when she parted from her boys for the world: for such, to spirits
      fresh, boyish, unsophisticated, as they still were, Oxford could not fail to be. For Herbert,
      indeed, she had neither fear nor doubt: no sneer, no temptation, no bad example, would affect
      him, in whom every passing year seemed to increase and deepen those exalted feelings which, in
      his earliest childhood, had "less in them of earth than heaven." His piety was so real, his
      faith so fervent, his affections so concentrated in his home and in one other individual, his
      love and pursuit of study so ardent and unceasing, his one aim, to become worthy in heart and
      mind to serve God as his minister, so ever present, that he was effectually guarded even from
      the world. Percy had none of these feelings to the same extent, save his ardent love for home
      and its inmates—his mother, above all. He did, indeed, give every promise that the principles
      so carefully instilled had taken firm root, and would guide his conduct in the world; but Mrs.
      Hamilton was too humble-minded—too convinced that every human effort is imperfect, without the
      sustaining and vitalizing grace of God, to rest in security, as many might have done, that
      <hi>because</hi> she had so worked, so prayed, she <hi>must</hi> succeed. She was hopeful,
      indeed, very hopeful—how could she be otherwise when she beheld his deep, though silent,
      reverence for sacred things—his constant and increasing respect and love for his father—his
      devoted affection for herself—his attachment to Herbert, which seemed so strangely yet so
      beautifully to combine almost reverence for his superior mind and holier spirit, with the
      caressing protectiveness of an older for a younger—a stronger for a weaker? There was much in
      all this to banish anxiety altogether, but not from such a heart as Mrs. Hamilton's, whose
      very multiplicity of blessings made her often tremble, and led her to the footstool of her
      God, with a piety as humble, as constant, as fervent, as many believe is the fruit of
      adversity alone.</p>
<p>Caroline had sufficiently improved as greatly to decrease solicitude on her account: though
      there was still a want of sufficient humility, a too great proneness to trust implicitly in
      her own strength, an inclination to prejudice, and a love of admiration, which all made Mrs.
      Hamilton fear would expose her to some personal sorrow ere they were entirely overcome. To
      produce eternal good, she might not murmur at temporal suffering; but her fond heart, though
      it could anticipate it calmly for herself, so shrunk from it, as touching her child, that the
      nearer approached the period of Caroline's introduction to the gay world, the more painfully
      anxious she became, and the more gladly would she have retained her in the retirement of
      Oakwood, where all her better and higher qualities alone had play. But she knew this could not
      be; and she could only <hi>trust</hi> that her anxiety would be proved as groundless with
      Caroline, as every letter from Oxford proved it to be with Percy, and <hi>endeavor</hi> to
      avert it by never wavering in her watchful and guiding love.</p>
<p>Emmeline, at fifteen, was just the same sportive, happy, innocent child as she had been at
      twelve. Her feelings were, indeed, still deeper, her imagination more vivid, her religion more
      fervid. To her every thing was touched with poetry—it mattered not how dull and commonplace it
      might seem to other people; but Mrs. Hamilton's judicious care had so taught that
      <hi>Truth</hi> alone was poetry and beauty—the Ideal only lovable when its basis was the
      Real—that she was neither romantic nor visionary. Keen as her sensibilities were, even over a
      work of fiction, they prompted the <hi>deed</hi> and <hi>act</hi> of kindness, not the tear
      alone. For miles round her father's large domain she was known, loved, so felt as a guardian
      spirit, that the very sound of her step seemed to promise joy. She actually seemed to live for
      others—making their pleasures hers; and, withal, so joyous, especially in her own home and at
      Greville Manor, that even anxiety seemed exorcised when she was near. Before strangers,
      indeed, she would be as shy as a young fawn; though even then natural kindliness of heart
      prompted such kindness of word and manner, as always to excite the wish to see her again.</p>
<p>Edward, in the two years and a quarter which he had been away, had only once occasioned
      anxiety. Two or three months after he had sailed, he wrote home in the highest terms of a
      certain Gilbert Harding, one of the senior midshipmen of his ship, from whom he had received
      kindness upon kindness; and who, being six or seven years older than himself, he jestingly
      wrote to his aunt and uncle, must certainly be the very best friend he could have chosen, as
      he was much too old to lead him into mischief. Why he (Harding) had taken such a fancy to him,
      Edward could not tell; but he was so excessively kind, so taught him his duty, and smoothed
      all the difficulties and disagreeables which, he owned, had at first seemed overwhelming, that
      he never could be grateful enough. He added, that, though not a general favorite with his
      immediate messmates, he was very highly esteemed by Sir Edward Manly and his other superior
      officers, and that the former had much commended him for his kindness to the youngest boy on
      board, which Edward was. It was very easy to perceive that young Fortescue's susceptible
      affections had all been not only attracted, but already riveted by this new friend. All the
      young party at Oakwood rejoiced at it; Mrs. Hamilton would have done so also, had she not
      perceived an anxious expression on her husband's face, which alarmed her. He did not, however,
      make any remark till he had spoken to Mr. Howard, and then imparted to his wife alone (not
      choosing to create suspicion in the open hearts of his children) that this Gilbert Harding,
      though very young at the time had been one of the principal actors in the affair which had
      caused Mr. Howard to dismiss his pupils, as we related in a former page; that his very youth,
      for he could scarcely have been more than eleven or twelve, and determined hardihood, so
      marked natural depravity, that Mr. Howard had had less hope for him than for any of the
      others. This opinion had been borne out by his after conduct at home; but the affair had been
      successfully hushed up by his family; and by immense interest he been permitted to enter the
      navy, where, it was said, his youthful errors had been so redeemed, and his courage and
      conduct altogether had so won him applause, that no farther fears were entertained for him.
      Mr. Howard alone retained his opinion, that the disposition was naturally bad, and doubted the
      <hi>internal</hi> response to the seeming <hi>outward good</hi>; and he was grieved and
      anxious beyond measure, when he heard that he was not only on board the same ship as Edward,
      but already his favorite companion and most trusted friend. His anxiety, of course, extended
      itself to Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton to such a degree, that at the first moment they would gladly
      have endeavored to exchange his ship; but this would have seemed very strange to Sir Edward
      Manly, who was one of Mr. Hamilton's most valued friends. He had, in fact, actually delayed
      Edward's becoming a midshipman till Sir Edward could take him in his own ship and now to place
      him elsewhere was really impossible; and, after all, though he might be removed from Harding's
      influence, how could his anxious guardians know all with whom he might be thrown? They were
      obliged to content themselves with writing earnestly and affectionately to Edward; and,
      painful as it was, to throw a doubt and shade over such youthful confidence and affection,
      implored him not to trust too implicitly in Harding; that his character had not always been
      free from stain; that he (Edward) was still so young and so susceptible, he might find that he
      had imbibed principles, and been tempted to wrong almost unconsciously, and suffer from its
      effects when too late to escape. They wrote as affectionately and indulgently as they
      could—Mr. Howard, as well as his aunt and uncle; but still they felt that it certainly did
      appear cruel to warn a young, warm heart to break off the first friendship it had formed;
      especially as he beheld that friend approved of by his captain, and looked up to by the crew.
      And that Edward's reply was somewhat cold, though he did promise caution, and assure them he
      had not so forgotten the influences and principles of Oakwood as to allow any one to lead him
      into error, did not surprise them. He never referred to Harding again, except sometimes
      casually to mention his companionship, or some act which had won him approval; and they really
      hoped their letters had had at least the effect of putting him on his guard. Sir Edward
      Manly's own reply to Mr. Hamilton's anxious appeal to him, however, succeeded in quieting
      their fears; he assured them he had seen nothing in Harding's conduct, since he had been at
      sea, to render him an unfit companion for any boy: that he had heard of some boyish faults,
      but it was rather hard he was to suffer from them as a man; and he assured his friends that he
      would keep a strict look-out after young Fortescue, and the first appearance of a change in a
      character which, young as he was, he could not help loving, should be inquired into, and the
      friendship ended by sending Harding to some other ship. So wrote Sir Edward Manly, with the
      fullest possible intention to perform; and Edward's anxious friends were happy, more
      especially as letter after letter brought praises of the young sailor from captain, officers,
      and crew, and his own epistles, though brief, were affectionate and satisfactory.</p>
<p>It was happy for Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, and Mr. Howard, too, that they were ignorant of the
      multiplicity of great and little things which could not fail to engross the mind of Sir Edward
      Manly, who was not only captain of the Prince William, a gallant seventy-four, but commander
      of the little flotilla which accompanied him, or they could not have rested so secure. Happy
      for them too, during those years of separation, that they were not perfectly acquainted with
      Edward's real weakness of character, or of the fearful extent of mischief which the influences
      of his first twelve years had engendered. Had he remained at Oakwood till nineteen or twenty,
      it <hi>is</hi> probable they would have been insensibly conquered, and the impressions of
      good, which he had appeared so readily to receive, really taken root and guided his after
      life, but eighteen months could not do this, as Mrs. Hamilton would have felt, had she known
      <hi>all</hi> the effect of her sister's ill-judged partiality and indulgence; but this, as we
      have already mentioned, was concealed from her by the bright, lovable, winning qualities,
      which alone were uppermost. Our readers, in fact, know more of Edward (if they have at all
      thought of his conduct in so frequently allowing his sister to suffer for him) than his aunt,
      penetrative as she was; and, therefore, in the events we shall have occasion to relate, we
      trust that Mrs. Hamilton will not appear an inconsistent character, inasmuch that one in
      general so successfully observant, should fail in penetration when most needed.</p>
<p>Edward's life at Oakwood had been so very happy, its pleasures and indulgences so innocent,
      so numerous, that he did not himself know his liability to temptation, from the excessive love
      of pleasure which his mother's indiscreet indulgence had originally infused. The control which
      his uncle and Mr. Howard exercised over him had been so very gentle and forbearing, that he
      had scarcely ever felt the inclination to exert self-will, and when it so chanced that he had,
      Ellen had covered his fault, or borne its penalty for him. He thought he had guided himself,
      when, in fact, he was guided; but this could no longer be the case when one of the little
      world which thronged a first-rate man-of-war. Outward actions were, indeed, under control; but
      what captain, the most earnest, most able in the world, could look into and guide the
      <hi>hearts</hi> of all those committed to his care? And almost the first action of Edward's
      unbiased will was indignantly to tear into shreds, and scatter to the winds and the waves,
      those affectionate and warning letters, and cling the more closely to, rest the more
      confidingly on Harding, for the wrong that he thought he had done him, by allowing his eye
      even to rest for a moment on such base, unfounded aspersions on his name.</p>
<p>When Mrs. Hamilton told Ellen that her letters to her brother, and his to her, should never
      be subjected to any scrutiny but their own, she acted on a principle which many parents and
      guardians would consider as high-flown and romantic, and which she herself had most painful
      reason to regret—the effects, at least, but not the principle itself, for that was based on
      too refined a feeling to waver, even though she suffered from it. She could not bear, nor
      could her husband, the system which prevailed in some families of their acquaintance, that
      their children could neither receive nor write letters to each other, or their intimate
      friends, without being shown to their seniors. As for opening and reading a letter directed to
      one of them, before its possessor saw it, as they had seen done, it was, in their estimation,
      as much dishonor and as mean, as if such a thing had been done to an adult. Perfect confidence
      in their home they had indeed instilled, and that confidence was never withheld. There was a
      degree of suspicion attached to a demand always to see what a child had written or received,
      from which Mrs. Hamilton's pure mind actually shrunk in loathing. In the many months the
      Grahame family passed in London, Annie and Caroline corresponded without the least restraint:
      no doubt many would pronounce Mrs. Hamilton very unwise, knowing Annie so well, and trembling
      for Caroline as she did; but, as she told Miss Harcourt, she had some notions peculiar to
      herself (they always had the sanction and sympathy of her husband, however), and this was one
      of them. She was always pleased and interested in all that her children read to her, either
      from their own epistles or those they received, and if they wished it, read them herself, but
      she never asked to do so, and the consequence was, that the most perfect confidence was
      given.</p>
<p>When Ellen and Edward parted, they were both so young, that Mr. Hamilton had hesitated as to
      whether his wife was quite justified in the perfect trust with which she treated them, and
      whether it would not be wiser to overlook their correspondence; but Mrs. Hamilton so argued
      that their very youth was their safeguard, that they were all in all to each other, and as
      such she wished them to feel they were bound by even a closer and a fonder tie than that of
      brother and sister under other circumstances, so won over her husband that he yielded; and
      from the long extracts that Ellen would read of Edward's letters to the family in general, and
      of her own to her aunt, he was quite satisfied as to the wisdom of his wife's judgment.</p>
<p>For full a year after Edward's departure, Ellen's conduct and general improvement had given
      her aunt nothing but pleasure; even Miss Harcourt's and Caroline's prejudice was nearly
      removed, though, at times, the fancy would steal over both that she was not exactly what she
      seemed, and that that which was hidden was not exactly that which Mrs. Hamilton believed it;
      and this fancy strengthened by a certain indefinable yet <hi>felt</hi> change in Ellen,
      commencing about thirteen months after she had parted from her brother. Mrs. Hamilton herself,
      for some time strove against belief, but at length she could no longer conceal from herself
      that Ellen <hi>was</hi> becoming reserved again, and fearful, at times almost shrinking, and
      sad, as in her childhood. The openness, and almost light-heartedness, which for one brief year
      had so characterized her, seemed completely but so insensibly to have gone, that Mrs. Hamilton
      could not satisfy herself as to the time of the commencement, or reason of the change. Her
      temper, too, became fitful, and altogether her aunt's anxiety and bewilderment as to her real
      character returned in full force. Once, when gently questioned as to why her temper was so
      altered, Ellen confessed with tears, that she knew it was, but she could not help it, she
      believed she was not well; and Mrs. Hamilton called in Mr. Maitland, who said that she really
      was in a highly nervous state, and required care and quietness, and the less notice that was
      taken of her momentary irritability or depression the better. Little did the worthy man
      imagine how his young patient blessed him for these words; giving a reason for and so allowing
      the trepidation which paled her cheek, parched her lips, and made her hand so tremble, when
      she received a letter from her brother, to pass unnoticed.</p>
<p>But change in manner was not all; almost every second or third month Ellen's allowance of
      pocket-money (which was unusually liberal, as Mrs. Hamilton wished to accustom her girls, from
      an early age, to purchase some few articles of dress for themselves, and so learn the value of
      money) most strangely and mysteriously disappeared. Ellen either could not or would not give
      any account of it; and, of course, it not only exposed her to her aunt's most serious
      displeasure, but inexpressibly heightened not only Mrs. Hamilton's bewilderment and anxiety,
      but Miss Harcourt's and Caroline's unspoken prejudice. From the time of Edward's departure,
      Ellen had never been discovered in or suspected of either uttering or acting an untruth; but
      her silence, her apparent determined ignorance of, or resolution not to confess the cause of
      the incomprehensible disappearance of her allowance, naturally compelled Mrs. Hamilton to
      revert to the propensity of her childhood, and fear that truthfulness was again deserting her.
      Her displeasure lasting of course, the longer from Ellen's want of openness, and the air of
      what almost appeared to her anxious yet still affectionate aunt like sullen defiance (in
      reality, it was almost despair), when spoken to, caused a painful degree of estrangement
      between them, always, however, giving place to Mrs. Hamilton's usual caressing manner, the
      moment Ellen seemed really repentant, and her month's expenditure could be properly
      explained.</p>
<p>For six or eight months before the day on which we recommence our narrative, there had been,
      however, nothing to complain of in Ellen, except still that unnatural reserve and frequent
      depression, as if dreading something she knew not what, which, as every other part of her
      conduct was satisfactory, Mrs. Hamilton tried to comfort herself was physical alone. No
      reference to the past was ever made: her manner to her niece became the same as usual; but she
      could not feel secure as to her character, and, what was most painful, there were times when
      she was compelled to doubt even Ellen's affection for herself, a thing she had never had the
      slightest cause to do even when she was a little inanimate child.</p>
<p>But very few changes had taken place in the Greville and Grahame families. Mrs. Greville's
      trial continued in unmitigated, if not heightened bitterness: the example, the companionship
      of his father had appeared to have blighted every good seed which she had strenuously
      endeavored to plant in the bosom of her son. At sixteen he was already an accomplished man of
      the world, in its most painful sense: he had his own companions, his own haunts; scarcely ever
      visiting his home, for a reason which, could his poor mother have known it, would have given
      her some slight gleam of comfort. He could not associate either with her or his sister,
      without feeling a sort of loathing of himself, a longing to be to them as Percy and Herbert
      Hamilton were at Oakwood; and not having the moral courage sufficient to break from the
      control of his father, and the exciting pleasures in which that control initiated him, he
      shrunk more and more from the only spot in which better feelings were so awakened within him
      as to give him pain. To deaden this unacknowledged remorse, his manner was rude and unfeeling,
      so that his very visits, though inexpressibly longed for by his mother, brought only increase
      of grief.</p>
<p>Mrs. Greville seemed herself so inured to suffering, that she bore up against it without any
      visible failing of health; struggling against its enervating effects, more, perhaps, than she
      was aware of herself, for the sake of one treasure still granted her—her own almost angel
      Mary—who, she knew, without her love and constant cheerfulness, must sink beneath such a
      constant aggravated trial. Yet that very love brought increase of anxiety from more than one
      cause. As yet there was no change in their manner of living, but Mrs. Greville knew that, from
      the excesses of her husband and son, there very soon must be. Ruin, poverty, all its fearful
      ills, stood before her in perspective, and how could Mary's fragile frame and gentle spirit
      bear up against them? Again and again the question pressed upon her—Did Herbert Hamilton
      indeed love her child, as every passing year seemed to confirm? and if he did, would—could his
      parents consent to his union with the child of such a father, the sister of such a brother?
      There were always long messages to Mary in Herbert's letters to his mother, which Mrs.
      Hamilton not only delivered herself, but sometimes even put the whole letter into Mary's hand,
      and at last laughingly said, she really thought they had much better write to each other, as
      then she should chance to get a letter all to herself, not merely be the medium of a
      communication between them; and Mary, though she did slightly blush, which she was in the
      habit of doing for scarcely any thing, seemed to think it so perfectly natural, that she
      merely said, if Herbert had time to write to her, she should like it very much, and would
      certainly answer him.</p>
<p>"My dear Emmeline, what are you about?" was Mrs. Greville's anxious appeal, the moment they
      were alone.</p>
<p>"Giving pleasure to two young folks, of whom I am most excessively fond," was Mrs.
      Hamilton's laughing reply. "Don't look so terrified, my dear Jessie. They love each other as
      boy and girl now, and if the love should deepen into that of man and woman, why, all I can say
      is—I would rather have your Mary for my Herbert than any one else I know."</p>
<p>"She is not only <hi>my</hi> Mary!" answered the poor mother, with such a quivering of the
      eye and lip, that it checked Mrs. Hamilton's joyousness at once.</p>
<p>"She is <hi>your</hi> Mary, in all that can make such a character as my Herbert happy," was
      her instant reply, with a pressure of Mrs. Greville's hand, that said far more than her words.
      "I am not one of those who like to make matches in anticipation, for man's best laid schemes
      are so often overthrown by the most trifling but unforeseen chances, that display a much wiser
      providence than our greatest wisdom, that I should consider it almost sinful so to do; but
      never let a thought of suffering cross your mind, dearest Jessie, as to what my husband's and
      my own answer will be, if our Herbert should indeed ever wish to choose your Mary as his wife,
      and, certainly a most important addition, should she wish it too. Our best plan now is to let
      them follow their own inclinations regarding correspondence. We can, I am sure, trust them
      both, for what can be a greater proof of my boy's perfect confidence in my sympathy with his
      feelings toward her, than to make me his messenger, as he has done, and as he, no doubt, will
      continue to do, even if he write. I have not the smallest doubt, that he will inclose me his
      letters to her unsealed, and I rather think your Mary will send me her replies in the same
      unreserved manner."</p>
<p>And she was right. Nor, we think, did the purity and innocence of those letters, so
      intensely interesting to each other, give place to any other style, even when they chanced to
      discover that Mrs. Hamilton was utterly ignorant of their contents, except that which they
      chose to read or impart to her themselves.</p>
<p>But even this assurance on the part of one so loved and trusted as Mrs. Hamilton, could not
      entirely remove Mrs. Greville's vague anticipations of evil. Mr. Greville always shunned, and
      declared he hated the Hamilton family; but as he seemed to entertain the same feeling toward
      herself and her poor Mary, she tried to comfort herself by the idea that he would never
      trouble his head about his daughter; or be glad to get her out of his way, especially if she
      married well. Still anxiety for the future would press upon her; only calmed by her firm,
      unchanging faith in that gracious, ever-watchful Providence, who, if in spite of her heavy
      troubles she still tried to trust and serve, would order all things for the best; and it was
      this, this faith alone, which so supported her, as to permit her to make her child's home and
      heart almost as happy as if her path had all been smooth.</p>
<p>In the Grahame family a change had taken place, in Master Cecil's being sent to Eton some
      time before his father had intended; but so many cases of Lady Helen's faulty indolence and
      ruinous indulgence had come under his notice, that he felt to remove the boy from her
      influence must be accomplished at any cost. Cecil was quite delighted, but his mother was so
      indignant, that she overcame her habitual awe of her husband sufficiently to vow that she
      would not live so far from her son, and if he must go to school, she must leave Moorlands.
      Grahame, with equal positiveness, declared that he would not give up a home endeared to him so
      long, nor to entirely break off his companionship with his dearest friends. A very stormy
      dialogue of course took place, and ended by both parties being more resolved to entertain
      their own opinion. The interposition of Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, however, obtained some
      concession on Grahame's part, and he promised that if Lady Helen would make Moorlands her home
      from the middle of July till the end of October, November and December should be spent in the
      vicinity of Eton, and she should then have six months for London and its attractions. This
      concession brought back all Lady Helen's smiles, and charmed Annie, though it was a source of
      real regret to Caroline, who could not help feeling a little pained at her friend's small
      concern at this long separation from her. But still she loved her; and, as Annie wrote
      frequently, and when she was at Moorlands never tired of her society (the eight months of
      absence giving her so much interesting matter to impart), Caroline was not only satisfied, but
      insensible to the utter want of sympathy which Annie manifested in <hi>her</hi> pursuits,
      <hi>her</hi> pleasures. Mrs. Hamilton often wished that Caroline had chosen one more deserving
      of her friendship, but she trusted that time and experience would teach her Annie's real
      character, and so did not feel any anxiety on that score.</p>
<p>There was only one member in Grahame's family, that Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton hoped might bring
      joy and comfort to their friend, and that was his little Lilla. She was five years younger
      than Annie, and being much less attractive, seemed almost forgotten, and so was spared the
      dangerous ordeal of flattery and indulgence to which Annie had been subject; and from being
      more violent and less agreeable than Cecil, was not so frequently spoiled by her mother. They
      feared the poor child would have much to endure from her own temper, Annie's overbearing
      insolence, and Lady Helen's culpable indolence; but Mrs. Hamilton hoped, when she resided part
      of the year in London, as she felt she would very soon be called upon to do, to be enabled to
      rouse Grahame's attention toward his youngest child, and prevail on him to relax in his
      sternness toward her; and by taking notice of her continually herself, instill such feelings
      in her as would attract her toward her father, and so increase the happiness of both. Every
      visit of the Grahame family to Moorlands, she resolved to study Lilla well, and try all she
      could to make one in reality so estimable, as her husband's friend, happy, in one child at
      least.</p>
<p>It had been Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton's intention to go to London the January after Caroline was
      seventeen, and give her the advantage of finishing masters, and a partial introduction to the
      world, by having the best society at home, before she launched into all its exciting
      pleasures; to return to Oakwood in July or August, and revisit the metropolis the following
      February or March, for the season, when, as she would be eighteen and a half, she should be
      fully introduced. Caroline, of course, anticipated this period with intense delight. She was
      quite satisfied that in her first visit she should study as much as, if not more than before;
      and content and thankful that her mother would allow her to enter so far into society, as
      always to join dinner or evening parties at home, and go to some of her most intimate friends,
      when their coteries were very small and friendly; and, another eagerly anticipated delight,
      sometimes go to the opera and the best concerts, and visit all the galleries of art.</p>
<p>To poor Emmeline these anticipations gave no pleasure whatever; she hated the very thought
      of leaving Oakwood, firmly convinced that not the most highly intellectual, nor the most
      delightful social enjoyment in London, could equal the pure delights of Devonshire and home.
      Ellen seemed too engrossed with her own thoughts to evince a feeling either way, much to her
      aunt's regret, as her constant quietness and seeming determined repression of her sentiments,
      rendered her character still more difficult to read.</p>
<p>But a heavy disappointment was preparing for Caroline, in the compelled postponement of her
      bright anticipations; to understand the causes of which, we must glance back on an event in
      the Hamilton family, which had occurred some years before its present head was born. In the
      early part of the reign of George the Third, Arthur Hamilton, the grandfather of our friend of
      the same name, had been sent by government to the coast of Denmark: his estimable character so
      won him the regard of the reigning sovereign, Christian VII., that, on his departure, the
      royal wish was expressed for his speedy return.—On his voyage home, he was wrecked off the
      Feroe Islands, and rescued from danger and death by the strenuous exertions of the islanders,
      who entertained him and the crew with the utmost hospitality, till their ship was again
      seaworthy. During his involuntary detention, Mr. Hamilton became deeply interested in the
      Feroese, a people living, it seemed, in the midst of desolation, a cluster of small rocky
      islets, divided by some hundred miles of stormy sea from their fellows. He made the tour of
      the islands, and found almost all their inhabitants possessing the same characteristics as
      those of Samboe, the island off which he had been wrecked; kind, hospitable, honest,
      temperate, inclined to natural piety, but so perfectly indifferent to the various privations
      and annoyances of their lot, as to make no effort toward removing them. Traveling either by
      land or sea was so dangerous and difficult, that in some parishes the clergyman could only
      perform service twice a year,<ref target="#note3">[3]</ref> or once every one, two, or three
      months. The islands in which the clergyman resided were, Mr. Hamilton observed, in a much
      higher state of civilization and morality than Samboe and some others, and an earnest desire
      took possession of him, to do some real service for those who had saved him from danger and
      treated him so hospitably. He very speedily acquired their language, which gave him still more
      influence. He found, also, that if their ancient customs and traditions were left undisturbed,
      they were very easily led, and this discovery strengthened his purpose.—His departure was
      universally regretted; and his promise to return imagined too great a privilege to be
      believed.</p>
<p>As soon as his political duties in England permitted, Mr. Hamilton revisited Denmark, and
      was received with such cordiality as to encourage him to make his petition for the improvement
      of his majesty's poor subjects of Samboe. It was granted directly; the little island so far
      made over to him, that he was at liberty to introduce and erect whatever he pleased within it;
      and Mr. Hamilton, all eagerness for the perfection of his plans, returned with speed to
      England; obtained the valuable aid of a poor though worthy clergyman, who, with his wife,
      voluntarily offered to make Samboe their home, and assist their benefactor (for such Mr.
      Hamilton had long been), to the very best of their ability. A strong-built vessel was easily
      procured, and a favorable voyage soon transported them to Feroe. The delight of the Samboese
      at beholding their former guest again, prepossessed Mr. and Mrs. Wilson in their favor, and
      Mr. Hamilton, before his six months' sojourn with them was over, beheld the island in a fair
      way of religious and moral improvement.—Schools were formed and masters appointed—houses were
      made more comfortable—women and young children more cared for, and employments found, and
      sufficiently rewarded to encourage persevering labor. Three or four times Mr. Hamilton visited
      the island again before his death, and each time he had more reason to be satisfied with the
      effect of his schemes. Mr. and Mrs. Wilson were perfectly happy. Their son was united to the
      pretty and excellent daughter of one of the Danish clergymen, and a young family was blooming
      round them, so that there seemed a fair promise of the ministry of Samboe continuing long in
      charge of the same family.</p>
<p>Mr. Hamilton, on his death-bed, exacted a promise from his son that he would not permit the
      island to fall back into its old habits; but that, if required, he would visit it himself. The
      visit was not required, but Percy Hamilton (the father of the present possessor of Oakwood),
      from respect to his father's memory, made a voyage to Samboe on the demise of the elder
      Wilson. He found every thing flourishing and happy; Frederic Wilson had been received as their
      pastor and head, with as much joy as their regret for his father would permit; and Mr.
      Hamilton returned to England, satisfied with himself, and inexpressibly touched by the
      veneration still entertained in that distant island for his father. The same promise was
      demanded by him from his son, and Arthur Hamilton had visited Feroe directly after the loss of
      his parent, and before his engagement with Miss Manvers. He found it in the same satisfactory
      condition as his predecessors had done, and the letters he regularly received confirmed it;
      but for the last year and a half he had received no tidings. Frederic Wilson, he knew, was
      dead, but his last account had told him his eldest son, who had been educated in Denmark, had
      been gladly received by the simple people, and promised fair to be as much loved, and do the
      same good as his father and grandfather. The silence then was incomprehensible, and Mr.
      Hamilton had resolved, if another year passed without intelligence, it would be a positive
      duty to visit it himself.</p>
</div>