<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER I.</head>
<head>A LAUNCH.—A PROMISE.—A NEW RELATION.</head>
<p>In a very beautiful part of Wales, between the northern boundaries of Glamorgan and the
      southeastern of Carmarthenshire, there stood, some twenty or thirty years ago, a small
      straggling village. Its locality was so completely concealed that the appearance of a
      gentleman's carriage, or, in fact, any vehicle superior to a light spring-cart, was of such
      extremely rare occurence as to be dated, in the annals of Llangwillan, as a remarkable event,
      providing the simple villagers with amusing wonderment for weeks.</p>
<p>The village was scattered over the side of a steep and rugged hill; and on the east,
      emerging from a thick hedge of yews and larches, peeped forth the picturesque old church,
      whose tin-coated spire, glittering in the faintest sunshine, removed all appearance of gloom
      from the thick trees, and seemed to whisper, whatever darkness lingered round, light was
      always shining there. The churchyard, which the yews and larches screened, was a complete
      natural garden, from the lowly cottage flowers, planted by loving hands over many a grassy
      grave, and so hallowed that not a child would pluck them, however tempted by their luxuriance
      and beauty. A pretty cottage, whose white walls were covered with jasmine, roses, and
      honeysuckle, marked the humble residence of the village minister, who though in worldly rank
      only a poor curate, from his spiritual gifts deserved a much higher grade.</p>
<p>A gurgling stream ran leaping and sparkling over the craggy hill till it formed a deep, wide
      bed for itself along the road leading to the nearest town, embanked on one side by a tall
      leafy hedge, and on the other by rich grass and meadow flowers. By the side of this stream
      groups of village children were continually found, sometimes reaching for some particular
      flower or insect, or floating pieces of wood with a twig stuck upright within them as tiny
      fleets; but this amusement had given place the last ten days to the greater excitement of
      watching the progress of a miniature frigate, the workmanship of a young lad who had only very
      lately become an inmate of the village. All had been at length completed, sails, ropes, and
      masts, with a degree of neatness and beauty, showing not only ingenuity but observation; and
      one lovely summer evening the ceremony of launching took place. For a few minutes she tottered
      and reeled amid the tiny breakers, then suddenly regained her equilibrium and dashed gallantly
      along. A loud shout burst from the group, from all save the owner, a beautiful boy of some
      twelve years, who contented himself with raising his slight figure to its full height, and
      looking proudly and triumphantly round him. One glance would suffice to satisfy that his rank
      in life was far superior to that of his companions, and that he condescended from
      circumstances, not from choice, to mingle with them. So absorbed was the general attention
      that the very unusual sound of carriage-wheels was unremarked until close beside them, and
      then so astounding was the sight of a private carriage and the coachman's very simple question
      if that road led to the village, that all hung back confused. The owner of the little vessel,
      however, answered proudly and briefly in the affirmative. "And can you direct me, my good
      boy," inquired a lady, looking from the window, and smiling kindly at the abashed group "to
      the residence of Mrs. Fortescue, it is out of the village, is it not?"</p>
<p>"Mrs. Fortescue!" repeated the boy eagerly and gladly, and his cap was off his head in a
      moment, and the bright sunshine streamed on a face of such remarkable beauty, and withal so
      familiar, that though the lady bent eagerly forward to address him, emotion so choked her
      voice that the lad was enabled to reply to her inquiry, and direct the coachman to the only
      inn of the village, and they had driven off before words returned.</p>
<p>The boy looked eagerly after them, then desiring one of his companions to meet the lady at
      the inn, and guide her to the cottage, caught up his little vessel, and darted off across some
      fields which led by a shorter cut to the same place.</p>
<p>It was a very humble dwelling, so surrounded by hills that their shadow always seemed to
      overhang it: yet within, the happy temper of a poor widow and her daughter kept up a perpetual
      sunshine. Three weeks previous to the evening we have mentioned, a lady and two children had
      arrived at Llangwillan, unable to proceed farther from the severe indisposition of the former.
      They were unattended, and the driver only knew that their destination was Swansea; he believed
      they had been shipwrecked off Pembroke, and that the poor lady was very ill when she commenced
      her journey, but the curious inquiries of the villagers could elicit nothing more. Mr. Myrvin,
      with characteristic benevolence, devoted himself to insuring, as far as he could, the comfort
      of the invalid; had her removed from the inn to Widow Morgan's cottage, confident that there
      she would at least be nursed with tenderness and care, and so near him as to permit his
      constant watchfulness. But a very few days too sadly convinced him, not only that her disease
      was mortal, but that his presence and gentle accents irritated instead of soothed. Ill-temper
      and self-will seemed to increase with the weakness, which every day rendered her longing to
      continue her journey more and more futile. It was some days before she could even be persuaded
      to write to the relative she was about to seek, so determined was she that she would get well;
      and when the letter was forwarded, and long before an answer could have been received (for
      twenty years ago there were no railroads to carry on epistolary communication as now),
      fretfulness and despondency increased physical suffering, by the determined conviction that
      she was abandoned, her children would be left uncared for. In vain Mr. Myrvin assured her of
      the impossibility yet to receive a reply, that the direction might not even have been distinct
      enough, for her memory had failed her in dictating it; she knew she was deserted, she might
      have deserved it, but her Edward was innocent, and it was very hard on him. As self-will
      subsided in physical exhaustion, misery increased. A restless torturing remembrance seemed to
      have taken possession of her, which all the efforts of the earnest clergyman were utterly
      ineffectual to remove. She would not listen to the peace he proffered, and so painfully did
      his gentle eloquence appear to irritate instead of calm, that he desisted, earnestly praying,
      that her sister might answer the letter in person, and by removing anxiety prepare the mind
      for better thoughts.</p>
<p>One object alone had power to bring something like a smile to that altered but still most
      beautiful countenance, conquer even irritation, and still create intervals of pleasure—it was
      her son, the same beautiful boy we have already noticed, and whose likeness to herself was so
      extraordinary that it would have been almost too feminine a beauty, had it not been for the
      sparkling animated expression of every feature, and the manly self-possession which
      characterized his every movement. That he should be his mother's idol was not very surprising,
      for the indiscreet and lavish indulgence which had been his from birth, had not yet had power
      to shake his doating fondness for his mother, or interfere with her happiness by the visible
      display of the faults which her weakness had engendered. Caressingly affectionate,
      open-hearted, generous, and ever making her his first object, perhaps even a more penetrating
      mother would have seen nothing to dread but all to love. His uncontrolled passion at the
      slightest cross, his haughty pride and indomitable will toward all save her, but increased her
      affection. And when he was with her, which he was very often, considering that a sick close
      room would have been utterly repugnant to him had it not contained his mother, Mrs. Fortescue
      was actually happy. But it was a happiness only increasing her intensity of suffering when her
      son was absent. Hide it from herself as she might, the truth would press upon her that she was
      dying, and her darling must be left to the care of relations indeed, but utter strangers to
      him, and unlikely to treat him as she had done. She knew that he had, what strict
      disciplinarians, as she chose to regard her sister and her husband, would term and treat as
      serious faults, while she felt them actually virtues; and agony for him in the dread of what
      he might be called upon to endure, would deluge her pillow with passionate tears, and shake
      her slight frame as with convulsion.</p>
<p>The day we have mentioned, Edward had been absent longer than usual, and toward evening Mrs.
      Fortescue awoke from a troubled sleep to brood over these thoughts, till they had produced
      their usual effect in tears and sobs, the more painful to witness from the increasing physical
      incapacity to struggle with them.</p>
<p>A little girl, between ten and eleven years old, was seated on a low wooden stool, half
      concealed by the coarse curtain of the bed, employed in sewing some bright gilt buttons on a
      blue jacket. It seemed hard work for those small, delicate hands; but she did not look up from
      her task till roused by the too familiar sound of her mother's suffering, and then, as she
      raised her head, and flung back the heavy and somewhat disordered ringlets, the impulse seemed
      to be to spring up and try to soothe, but a mournful expression quickly succeeded, and she sat
      several minutes without moving. At length, as Mrs. Fortescue's sobs seemed almost to suffocate
      her, the child gently bent over her, saying, very timidly, "Dear mamma, shall I call widow
      Morgan, or can I get any thing for you?" and, without waiting for a reply, save the angry
      negative to the first question, she held a glass of water to her mother's lips and bathed her
      forehead. After a few minutes Mrs. Fortescue revived sufficiently to inquire where Edward
      was.</p>
<p>"He has gone down to the stream to launch his little frigate, mamma, and asked me to fasten
      these buttons on his jacket, to make it look like a sailor's meanwhile; I do not think he will
      be very long now."</p>
<p>Mrs. Fortescue made no rejoinder, except to utter aloud those thoughts which had caused her
      previous paroxysm, and her little girl, after a very evident struggle with her own painful
      timidity, ventured to say:</p>
<p>"But why should you fear so much for Edward, dear mamma? Every body loves him and admires
      him, so I am sure my aunt and uncle will."</p>
<p>"Your aunt may for my sake, but she will not love or bear with his childish faults as I have
      done; and your uncle is such a harsh, stern man, that there is little hope for his forbearance
      with my poor Edward. And he is so frank and bold, he will not know how even to conceal his
      boyish errors, and he will be punished, and his fine spirit broken, and who will be there to
      shield and soothe him!"</p>
<p>"I may be able sometimes, mamma, and indeed, indeed, I will whenever I can," replied her
      child, with affecting earnestness. "I love him so very, very much, and I know he is so much
      better than I am, that it will be very easy to help him whenever I can."</p>
<p>"Will you promise me, Ellen, will you really promise me to shield him, and save him from
      harshness whenever it is in your power," exclaimed Mrs. Fortescue, so eagerly, that she half
      raised herself, and pressed Ellen to her with an appearance of affection so unusual, and a
      kiss so warm, that that moment never passed from the child's mind, and the promise she gave
      was registered in her own heart, with a solemnity and firmness of purpose little imagined by
      her mother, who when she demanded it, conceived neither its actual purport nor extent; she
      only felt relieved that Edward would have some one by him, to love him and enable him to
      conceal his errors, if he should commit any.</p>
<p>Had she studied and known the character of Ellen as she did that of her son, that promise
      would perhaps never have been asked; nor would she so incautiously and mistakenly have laid so
      great a stress upon <hi>concealment</hi>, as the only sure means of guarding from blame. From
      her childhood Mrs. Fortescue had been a creature of passion and impulse, and maternity had
      unhappily not altered one tittle of her character. In what manner, or at what cost, Ellen
      might be enabled to keep that promise, never entered her mind. It had never been her wont,
      even in days of health, to examine or reflect, and present weakness permitted only the morbid
      indulgence of one exaggerated thought.</p>
<p>For several minutes she lay quite silent, and Ellen resumed her seat and work, her temples
      throbbing, she knew not why, and a vain longing to throw her arms round her mother's neck, and
      entreat her only for one more kiss, one other word of love; and the consciousness that she
      dared not, caused the hot tears to rush into her eyes, and almost blind her, but she would not
      let them fall, for she had learned long ago, that while Edward's tears only excited soothing
      and caresses, hers always called forth irritation and reproof.</p>
<p>"Joy, joy! Mother, darling!" exclaimed an eager voice, some minutes afterward, and Edward
      bounded into the room, and throwing himself by his mother's side, kissed her pale cheek again
      and again. "Such joy! My ship sailed so beautifully, I quite longed for you to see it, and you
      will one day when you get well and strong again; and I know you will soon now, for I am sure
      aunt Emmeline will very soon come, and then, then, you will be so happy, and we shall all be
      happy again!"</p>
<p>Mrs. Fortescue pressed him closer and closer to her, returning his kisses with such
      passionate fondness, that tears mingled with them, and fell upon his cheek.</p>
<p>"Don't cry, mamma, dear! indeed, indeed, my aunt will soon come. Do you know I think I have
      seen her and spoken to her, too?"</p>
<p>"Seen her, Edward? You mean you have dreamed about her, and so fancy you have seen her;" but
      the eager, anxious look she fixed upon him evinced more hope than her words.</p>
<p>"No, no, mamma; as we were watching my ship, a carriage passed us, and a lady spoke to me,
      and asked me the way to the cottage where you lived, and I am sure it is aunt Emmeline from
      her smile."</p>
<p>"It can not be," murmured his mother, sadly; "unless—" and her countenance brightened. "Did
      she speak to you, Edward, as if she knew you, recognized you, from your likeness to me?"</p>
<p>"No, mamma, there was no time, the carriage drove off again so quickly; but, hush! I am sure
      I hear her voice down stairs," and he sprung up from the bed and listened eagerly. "Yes, yes,
      I am right, and she is coming up; no, it's only widow Morgan, but I am sure it is my aunt by
      your face," he added, impatiently, as Mrs. Morgan tried by signs to beg him to be more
      cautious, and not to agitate his mother. "Why don't you let her come up?" and springing down
      the whole flight of stairs in two bounds, he rushed into the little parlor, caught hold of the
      lady's dress, and exclaimed, "You are my aunt, my own dear aunt; do come up to mamma, she has
      been wanting you so long, so very long, and you will make her well, dear aunt, will you
      not?"</p>
<p>"Oh, that I may be allowed to do so, dear boy!" was the painfully agitated reply, and she
      hastened up the stairs.</p>
<p>But to Edward's grief and astonishment, so little was he conscious of his mother's exhausted
      state, the sight of his aunt, prepared in some measure as she was, seemed to bring increase of
      suffering instead of joy. There was a convulsive effort for speech, a passionate return of her
      sister's embrace, and she fainted. Edward in terror flung himself beside her, entreating her
      not to look so pale, but to wake and speak to him. Ellen, with a quickness and decision, which
      even at that moment caused her aunt to look at her with astonishment, applied the usual
      restoratives, evincing no unusual alarm, and a careless observer might have said, no feeling;
      but it was only a momentary thought which Mrs. Hamilton could give to Ellen, every feeling was
      engrossed in the deep emotion with which she gazed on the faded form and altered face of that
      still beloved though erring one: who, when she had last beheld her, thirteen years previous,
      was bright, buoyant, lovely as the boy beside them. Her voice yet, more than the proffered
      remedies, seemed to recall life, and after a brief interval the choking thought found
      words.</p>
<p>"My father! my father! Oh, Emmeline I know that he is dead! My disobedience, my ingratitude
      for all his too indulgent love, killed him—I know it did. But did he curse me, Emmeline? did
      all his love turn to wrath, as it ought to have done? did—"</p>
<p>"Dearest Eleanor," replied Mrs. Hamilton, with earnest tenderness, "dismiss such painful
      thoughts at once; our poor father did feel your conduct deeply, but he forgave it, would have
      received your husband, caressed, loved you as before, had you but returned to him; and so
      loved you to the last moment, that your name was the last word upon his lips. But this is no
      subject for such youthful auditors," she continued, interrupting herself, as she met Edward's
      bright eyes fixed wonderingly upon her face, and noticed the excessive paleness of Ellen's
      cheek. "You look weary, my love," she said, kindly, drawing her niece to her, and
      affectionately kissing her. "Edward has made his own acquaintance with me, why did you not do
      so too? But go now into the garden for a little while, I am sure you want fresh air, and I
      will take your place as nurse mean while. Will you trust me?"</p>
<p>And the kind smile which accompanied her words gave Ellen courage to return her kiss, but
      she left the room without speaking. Edward required more persuasion; and the moment he was
      permitted he returned, seated himself on a stool at his aunt's feet, laid his head on her lap,
      and remained for nearly an hour quite silent, watching with her the calm slumbers which had
      followed the agitating conversation between them. Mrs. Hamilton was irresistibly attracted
      toward him, and rather wondered that Ellen should stay away so long. She did not know that
      Edward had spent almost the whole of that day in the joyous sports natural to his age, and
      that it had been many weary days and nights since Ellen had quitted her mother's room.</p>
</div>