
CHAPTER VII.
THE LIGHT GLIMMERS.
The earnest wishes and prayers of Mrs. Hamilton and her faithful Ellis were disappointed.
      The latter part of the month of September had been exceedingly stormy, and though there was a
      lull from about the 3d to the 9th of October, the equinoctial gales then set in with the
      utmost fury; continuing day after day, night after night, till the ear seemed almost to tire
      of the sound, and the mind, anxious for friends at sea, despair of their cessation. During the
      few calm days, the young party at Oakwood had scarcely been absent from the windows, or from
      that part of the park leading to the Plymouth road, above an hour at a time. Percy and Herbert
      rode over to Plymouth, but were told the frigate could not be in for a full week. The late
      storms must have detained her, though she was a fast-sailing craft. It was a great
      disappointment to them, for on the 10th of October college term began, and they were compelled
      to return to Oxford. The cause of their mother's intense desire for Edward's return, indeed,
      they did not know; but they were most impatient to see him, and they hoped, they did not
      exactly know what, with regard to his influence with Ellen. However, the day of their
      departure came, and still he had not arrived, and the storms had recommenced. Percy had gone
      to say good-by to Ellis, with whom Ellen chanced at that moment to be. Full of spirits and
      jokes, he determinately looked away from his cousin, took both Ellis's hands, and shook them
      with his usual heartiness.
"Good-by, dear Ellis. I wonder if I shall ever feel myself a man when talking to you. How
      many tricks I have played you in this room, and you were always so good-natured, even when one
      of my seat-crackers set your best gown on fire, and quite spoiled it; do you remember it? I do
      think you were nearly angry then, and quite enough to make you; and papa made me save up my
      money to buy you a new dress. I did not play such a practical joke in a hurry again."
Ellis laughed and perfectly remembered it, and with another hearty good-by he turned
      away.
"You have forgotten your cousin, Mr. Percy," she said, disregarding Ellen's imploring
      look.
"When she remembers her duty to my mother, I will remember that she is my cousin," was his
      hasty answer, and he hurried from the room as Herbert entered. His good-by to Ellis was quite
      as warm as Percy's, and then turning to Ellen, he put his arm round her, kissed her cheek, and
      said, with impressive earnestness—
"God bless you, dear Ellen! I hope you will be happier when we meet again, and that it will
      not be so long before we do, as we fancy now;" and, affected almost to tears at the grateful,
      humble look she raised to his, he left her.
Overcome as much by the harshness of the generous, warm-hearted Percy, whom she so dearly
      loved, as by the gentle kindness of Herbert, Ellen remained for several minutes with her arms
      on the table, her face hid upon them. She thought she was quite alone, for Ellis had gone
      about some of her business, when she was startled by Percy's voice.
"I am a brute, Ellen, nothing less; forgive me, and say good-by. I can't understand it at
      all, but angry as I am with you, your pale face haunts me like a specter, so we must part
      friends;" and as she looked hastily up, he kissed her warmly twice, and ran away without
      another word.
Days passed heavily, the gales seeming to increase in violence, and causing Mrs. Hamilton
      more terrible anxiety and vague dread than she allowed to be visible. The damage among the
      shipping was fearful, and the very supposed vicinity of the frigate to the Channel increased
      the danger. The papers every morning presented long lists of ships wrecked, or fatally
      dismantled, loss of crews or part of them, mails and cargoes due but missing: and the vivid
      recollection of the supposed fate of her own brother, the wretchedness of the suspense before
      the fate of his vessel was ascertained, returned to heighten the fears that would gain
      ascendency for her nephew, and for the effect of this terrible suspense on Ellen, more
      especially—if indeed she had endured all these weeks, nay, months, of misery for him.
At first Ellen seemed unconscious that there was any thing remarkable in the delay, the
      thought of her own departure being uppermost; but when the thought did press upon her, how it
      came she knew not—that of the given month the weeks were passing, and Edward had not arrived,
      and that there must be some reason for the long delay—storm, shipwreck, death, all flashed
      upon her at once, and almost maddened her. The quiet calm of endurance gave way. She could not
      sleep at night from the tremendous winds; not even when Ellis had a bed put up in her room,
      and remained with her all night herself; she never complained indeed, but hour after hour she
      would pace her room and the passage leading to Ellis's, till compelled to cease from
      exhaustion; she would try steadily to employ herself with some difficult study, and succeed,
      perhaps, for half an hour, but then remain powerless, or recommence her restless walk. Mrs.
      Hamilton made several attempts without any apparent interference on her part, to get her to
      sit occasionally with her and Miss Harcourt, and her cousins, but she seemed to shrink from
      them all. Emmeline, indeed, when once aware of the terrible trial she was enduring, would sit
      with her, drawing or working as if nothing had occurred to estrange them, and try to cheer her
      by talking on many topics of interest. Caroline would speak to her kindly whenever she saw
      her. Miss Harcourt alone retained her indignation, for no suspicion of the real cause of her
      silence ever entered her mind.
Poor Ellen felt that she dared not indulge in the comfort this change in her aunt's and
      cousins' manner produced. She wanted to wean herself quite from them, that the pang of
      separation might be less severe, but she only seemed to succeed in loving them more. One
      thought, indeed, at length took such entire possession of her mind, as to deaden every
      other:—it was the horrible idea that as she had sinned to save Edward, perhaps, from merited
      disgrace, he would be taken from her; she never breathed it, but it haunted her night and day.
      Mr. Maitland saw her continually, but he plainly told Mrs. Hamilton, while the cause of
      anxiety and mental suffering lasted he could do her no good. It was a constant alternation of
      fearful excitement and complete depression, exhausting the whole system. Repose and
      kindness—alas! the latter might be given, but the former, in the present position of affairs,
      how could it be insured?
The month of grace was waning; only two days remained, and Edward had not arrived, and how
      could Mrs. Hamilton obey her husband—whose every letter reiterated his hope that she had not
      been prevailed on to alter his sentence, if Ellen still remained silent—and send her niece
      from her? She came at length to the determination, that if another week passed and still there
      were no tidings, not to let this fearful self-sacrifice, if it really were such, last any
      longer, but gently, cautiously, tenderly as she could, prevail on Ellen to confide all to her,
      and promise, if Edward really had been erring and in difficulties, all should be forgiven for
      her sake, and even his uncle's anger averted. Once her determination taken, she felt better
      enabled to endure an anxiety which was injuring her almost as much as Ellen; and she turned to
      Ellis's room, which she had lately very often frequented, for she scarcely felt comfortable
      when Ellen was out of her sight, though she had full confidence in Ellis's care.
Ellen was asleep on a sofa, looking so wan, so haggard—so altered from the Ellen of five
      short months back, that Mrs. Hamilton sat down by her side, pondering whether she was doing
      right to wait even another week, before she should try to bring relief by avowing her
      suspicions—but would it bring relief? and, after all, was it for Edward? or, had she been
      allowing affection and imagination to mislead and soften, when sternness might still be
      needed?
Ellen woke with a start as from some fearful dream, and gazed at Mrs. Hamilton for a full
      minute, as if she did not know her.
"My dear Ellen, what is it? You have been sleeping uncomfortably—surely you know me?"
"I thought I was at—at—Seldon Grange—are you sure I am not? Dear aunt Emmeline, do tell me I
      am at Oakwood, I know I am to go, and very soon; but I am not there now, am I?" and she put
      one hand to her forehead, and gazed hurriedly and fearfully round her, while, with the other,
      she held tightly Mrs. Hamilton's dress. There was something alarming both in her look and
      tone.
"No, love, you are with me still at Oakwood, and you will not go from me till you have been
      with Edward some little time. You can not think I would send you away now, Ellen?"
The soothing tone, her brother's name, seemed to disperse the cloud, and bursting into
      tears, she exclaimed—
"He will never come—I know he will never come—my sin has killed him!"
"Your sin, Ellen, what can that have to do with Edward?"
"Because," the words "it was for him" were actually on her lips; but they were checked, and,
      in increasing excitement, she continued—"Nothing, nothing, indeed, with him—what could it
      have? But if he knows it—oh, it will so grieve him; perhaps it would be better I should go
      before he comes—and then, then, he need not know it; if, indeed, he ever comes."
"I do not think you quite know what you are saying, my dear Ellen; your uncomfortable dream
      has unsettled you. Try and keep quiet for an hour, and you will be better. Remember, suffering
      as this dreadful suspense is, your brother is still in a Father's gracious keeping; and that
      He will listen to your prayers for his safety, and if it be His good pleasure, still restore
      him to you."
"My prayers," answered Ellen, fearfully. "Mr. Howard said, there was a barrier between Him
      and me, while I would not confess; I had refused His mercy."
"Can you confess before God, Ellen? Can you lay your whole heart open before Him, and ask
      Him in his infinite mercy, and for your Saviour's sake, to forgive you?"
"I could, and did do so," answered Ellen, returning Mrs. Hamilton's earnestly inquiring
      look, by raising her large, expressive eyes, steadily and fearlessly, to her face; "but Mr.
      Howard told me it was a mockery and sin to suppose God would hear me or forgive me while I
      refused to obey Him, by being silent and obdurate to you. That if I wished His forgiveness, I
      must prove it by telling the whole to you, whom His commandments desired me to obey,
      and—and—as I dared not do that, I have been afraid to pray." And the shudder with which she
      laid her head again upon the pillow, betrayed the misery of the fear.
"And is it impossible, quite impossible that you can confide the source of your grief and
      difficulty to me, Ellen? Will you not do so, even if I promise forgiveness, not merely to you,
      but to all who may have erred? Answer me, my sweet child; your silence is fearfully
      injuring your mind and body. Why do you fancy you dare not tell me?"
"Because, because I have promised!" answered Ellen, in a fearful tone of returning
      excitement, and, sitting upright, she clasped her hands convulsively together, while her cheek
      burned with painful brilliancy. "Aunt Emmeline—oh, do not, pray do not speak to me in that
      kind tone! be harsh and cold again, I can bear it better. If you did but know how my heart and
      brain ache—how they long to tell you and so rest—but I can not—I dare not—I have
      promised."
"And you may not tell me whom you have promised?" replied Mrs. Hamilton, every former
      thought rendered apparently null and vain by these words, and painfully disappointing her; but
      the answer terrified her.
"Mamma—I promised her, and she stands by me so pale, so grieved, whenever I think of telling
      you," answered Ellen, clinging to Mrs. Hamilton, but looking with a strained gaze of terror on
      vacancy. "I thought I must have told you, when you said I was to go—to go to Seldon Grange—but
      she stood by me and laid her hand on my head, and it was so cold, so heavy, I don't remember
      any thing more till I found you and Ellis leaning over me; but I ought not to tell you even
      this. I know I ought not—for look—look, aunt Emmeline!—don't you see mamma—there—quite close
      to me; oh, tell her to forgive me—I will keep my promise," and shuddering convulsively, she
      hid her face in her aunt's dress.
Mrs. Hamilton was dreadfully alarmed. Whatever the foundation, and she had no doubt that
      there was some, and that it really had to do with Edward and his poor mother's mistaken
      partiality, Ellen's imagination was evidently disordered. To attempt obtaining the truth,
      while she was in this fearful state of excitement, was as impossible as cruel, and she tried
      only to soothe her to composure; speaking of her mother as happy and in Heaven and that Ellen
      had thought of her so much, as was quite natural in her sorrow, that she fancied she saw
      her.
"It is not reality, love; if she could see and speak to you, I am sure it would be to tell
      you to confide all your sorrow to me, if it would make you happier."
"Oh, no, no—I should be very wicked if it made me happier; I ought not even to wish to tell
      you. But Mr. Myrvin told me, even when mamma went to Heaven, she would still see me, and know
      if I kept my promise, and tried to win her love, by doing what I know she wished, even after
      she was dead; and it was almost a pleasure to do so till now, even if it gave me pain and made
      me unhappy; but now, now, aunt Emmeline, I know you must hate me; you never, never can love me
      again—and that—that is so hard to bear."
"Have you forgotten, my dear Ellen, the blessed assurance, there is more joy in Heaven over
      one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-and-nine who have not sinned? and if our Father in
      Heaven can so feel, so act, are His creatures to do less? Do you think, because you have given
      me pain, and trouble and disappointment, and compelled me to use such extreme severity, and
      cause you so much suffering, that it will be quite impossible for me to love you again, if I
      see you do all you can to win back that love?"
Ellen made no answer; but the alarming excitement had so far subsided, as to raise the hope
      that quietness would subdue it altogether. Mrs. Hamilton remained with her till she seemed
      quite calm, and would not have left her then, but he had promised Caroline to drive with her
      into T—— that afternoon, to make some purchases; Emmeline and Miss Harcourt were spending the
      day at Greville Manor, and her daughter depending on her, she did not like to disappoint her.
      But the difficulty to think of other things, and cheerfully converse on comparatively
      indifferent topics, was greater than she had ever found it. That Ellis's surmise was correct,
      she had no longer the smallest doubt. Ellen was sacrificing herself, not merely for the love
      she bore her brother, but from some real or imaginary promise to her poor mother. What its
      exact nature was, she could not indeed satisfy herself, but that it had something to do with
      concealing Edward's faults seemed to flash upon her, she hardly knew how. Ellis's words "that
      she had seen enough of that work when they were children," returned to her, and various
      incongruities in Ellen's character and conduct which she had been unable to reconcile at the
      time, all seemed connected with it. But to arrive at the truth was much more difficult than
      ever; still, how could she send Ellen away? and yet, if still silent, would mere surmise
      satisfy her husband? There was but one hope, one ray of light—Edward's own honor, if indeed he
      were permitted to return; and even while driving and talking with Caroline, her heart was one
      fervent prayer that this might be, and the fearful struggle of her devoted Ellen cease.
Her aunt's gentle and unexpected kindness had had such a beneficial effect on Ellen, that,
      after her early dinner, about three o'clock, she told Ellis she would go in the school-room,
      and try and read there for an hour; she knew all the family were out, and therefore would be
      quite undisturbed. Ellis willingly acquiesced, rejoicing that she should seek any change
      herself, and advised her, as it was such a mild, soft afternoon, after the late storms, to
      take a turn on the terrace, on which a glass-door from the school-room opened; it would do her
      good. Ellen meant to take her advice, but as she looked out from a window over a
      well-remembered landscape, so many painful thoughts and recollections crowded on her, that she
      lost all inclination to move. She had not stood there for many weeks, and it seemed to her
      that the view had never looked so very lovely. The trees all had the last glories of
      autumn—for it was early in November—the grass was of that beautiful humid emerald which always
      follows heavy rain, and though the summer-flowers had all gone, the sheltered beds of the
      garden, lying beneath the terrace, presented many very beautiful still. The end of the
      terrace, a flight of stone steps, overlooked the avenue, leading from the principal lodge to
      the main entrance, and where Ellen stood, she could distinguish a few yards of the path where
      it issued from some distant trees. She gazed at first, conscious only that she was banished
      from it all, and that, however long her departure might be deferred, she must go at last, for
      her uncle's mandate could not be disobeyed; but gradually her eye became fixed as in
      fascination. A single figure was emerging from the trees, and dressed in the uniform of a
      midshipman—she was sure it was! but it was a figure so tall, so slim, his step so lingering,
      it could not be Edward, most likely some one of his messmates come to tell his fate. He was
      taller even than Percy, but so much slighter, so different to the boy from whom she had
      parted, that, though her heart bounded and sunk till faintness seemed to overpower her, she
      could not convince herself it was he. With an almost unconscious effort she ran out, through
      the glass-door, to the steps of the terrace; she could now see him distinctly, but not his
      face, for his cap was low over his forehead; but as he approached, he paused, as if doubting
      whether to go up to the hall door, or the well-known terrace, by which he had always rushed
      into the school-room, on his daily return from Mr. Howard's; and as he looked hastily up, his
      cap fell back, and his eyes met Ellen's. A wild but checked scream broke from her lips, and
      all was an impenetrable mist till she found herself in her brother's arms, in the room she had
      quitted, his lips repeatedly pressing her cheek and forehead, and his voice, which sounded so
      strange—it did not seem like Edward's, it was so much more deep and manly—entreating her to
      speak to him, and tell him why she looked so ill; but still her heart so throbbed she could
      not speak. She could only cling close to him and look intently in his face, which was so
      altered from the happy, laughing boy, that had he not been, from his extreme paleness and
      attenuation of feature, still more like their mother when she was ill, his sister would
      scarcely have known him.
"Dearest Ellen, do speak to me; what has been the matter, that you look so pale and sad? Are
      you not glad to see me?"
"Glad! oh, Edward, you can not know how glad; I thought you would never, never come, the
      storms have been so terrible; I have been ill, and your sudden appearance startled me, for I
      had thought of such dreadful things, and that was the reason I could not speak at first; but I
      am sure you are as pale as I am, dear, dear Edward; you have been wounded—have you not
      recovered them yet?"
"My wounds, Ellen! oh, they were slight enough; I wished and tried for them to be severer,
      to have done for me at once, but they would not, they only bought me praise, praise which
      maddened me!"
"Sir Edward," murmured Ellen, in a low, fearful voice, "how did he part with you?"
"As he has always treated me, a kind, too kind father! oh, Ellen, Ellen, if he did but know
      the deceiving villain that I am!"
"Would he indeed not forgive, Edward, if he so loves you? not if he knew all, the
      temptation, the—"
"Temptation, Ellen! what excuse ought there to be in temptation? Why was I such a fool, such
      a madman, to allow myself to be lured into error again and again by that villain, after I had
      discovered his double face, and I had been warned against him, too? Why did I so madly
      disregard Mr. Howard's and my uncle's warning letters, trusting my self-will and folly,
      instead of their experience? Brave! I am the veriest coward that ever trod the deck, because I
      could not bear a sneer!"
"And he? are you still within his power?" inquired Ellen, shrinking in terror from the
      expression of her brother's face.
"No, Ellen, no; God forgive me—I have tried not to rejoice; the death was so terrible, so
      nearly my own, that I stood appalled, and, for the first time these two years, knelt down to
      my God for pardon, mercy to repent. The lightning struck him where he stood, struck him beside
      me, leaving the withering smile of derisive mockery, with which he had that moment been
      regarding me, still on his lips. Why, and where had he gone? he, who denied God and his holy
      Word, turned the solemn service into mockery, and made me like himself—and why was I spared?
      Oh, Ellen, I have no words to describe the sensation of that moment!" He stopped, and
      shuddered, then continued, hurriedly, "Changed as I am in appearance, it is nothing to the
      change within. I did not know its extent till now that I am here again, and all my happy
      boyhood comes before me; aunt Emmeline's gentle lessons of piety and goodness—oh, Ellen,
      Ellen, what have been their fruits? For two years I have given myself up to passion,
      unrestrained by one word, one thought of prayer; I dared, sinful madman as I was, to make a
      compact with my own conscience, and vow, that if I received the relief I expected from you,
      and was free from Harding, I would reform, would pray for the strength to resist temptation,
      which I had not in myself; and when, when the man that was dispatched by Sir Edward from the
      shore, with the letters for the crew, sunk beneath the waves, bearing every dispatch along
      with him, I cursed him, and the Fate, which had ordained his death. Ellen, Ellen! why was I
      saved, and Harding killed!"
"And you never received my letter, Edward? Never knew if I had tried to relieve you from
      Harding's power?" answered Ellen, becoming so deadly pale, that Edward forced himself to
      regain composure; the nature of his information causing such a revulsion of feeling in his
      sister as to deaden her to the horror of his words. For what had all this suffering been?
"I was sure you had, Ellen, for you always did, and I could trust you as I could myself. A
      sudden squall had upset the boat, and the man was so encumbered by a large great-coat, every
      pocket filled with letters and papers, that he sunk at once though every help was offered. I
      threw myself into the sea to save him, and Lieutenant Morley praised my courage and
      benevolence—little did he know my motive! Besides, Sir Edward told me there was an inclosure
      for me in my uncle's to him, and regretted he had not kept it to give it me himself—would to
      Heaven he had! Till Harding's death I was in his power; and he had so used it, that I had
      vowed, on our arrival in England, to abscond, hide myself forever, go I cared not where, nor
      in what character! But he is dead, and I am free: my tale need be told to none, and if I can I
      will break from this fatal spell, and redeem the past; but it seems, as if fiends urged me
      still to the path of evil! Would that I had but courage to tell all to Mr. Howard, I should be
      safer then; but I can not—can not—the risk is too great. Carriage wheels!" he added, starting
      up—"my aunt and Caroline; oh, how I rejoiced when they told me at the lodge that my uncle was
      not here!" And in his extreme agitation at the thought of meeting his aunt, he forgot his
      sister, or he might have been startled at the effect of his words.
