
CHAPTER IX.
ILLNESS AND REMORSE.
It was indeed a fearful night which followed the close of our last chapter. Illness,
      sufficient to occasion anxiety, both in Herbert and Ellen, had been often an inmate of
      Oakwood, but it had merely called for care, and all those kindly sympathies, which render
      indisposition sometimes an actual blessing, both to those who suffer and those who tend. But
      illness, appearing to be but the ghastly vehicle of death, clothed in such fearful pain that
      no control, even of reason and strong will, can check its agonized expression, till at last,
      reason itself succumbs beneath it, and bears the mind from the tortured frame, this is a trial
      of no ordinary suffering, even when such illness has been brought about by what may be termed
      natural causes. But when it follows, nay, springs from mental anguish, when the sad watchers
      feel that it might have been averted, that it is the consequence of mistaken treatment, and it
      comes to the young, to whom such sorrow ought to be a thing unknown, was it marvel that Mrs.
      Hamilton, as she stood by Ellen's bed, watching the alternations of deathlike insensibility
      with paroxysms of pain, which nothing could relieve (for it was only the commencement of brain
      fever), felt as if she had indeed never known grief or anxiety before. She had looked forward
      to Edward's confession bringing hope and rest to all; that the aching head and strained nerves
      of her poor Ellen, only needed returning love, and the quietness of assured forgiveness for
      herself and Edward, for health and happiness gradually to return; and the shock of such sudden
      and terrible illness, betraying, as it did, an extent of previous mental suffering, which she
      had not conceived as possible in one so young, almost unnerved her. But hers was not a
      character to give way; the anguish she experienced might be read in the almost stern quiet of
      her face, in her gentle but firm resistance to every persuasion to move from Ellen's bed, not
      only through that dreadful night, but for the week which followed. The idea of death was
      absolute agony; none but her God knew the struggle, day after day, night after night, which
      she endured, to compel her rebellious spirit to submission to His will, whatever it might be.
      She knew earth's dearest, most unalloyed happiness could not compare with that of Heaven, if
      indeed it should be His pleasure to recall her; but the thought would not bring
      peace. She had no reason to reproach herself, for she had acted only as imperative duty
      demanded, and it had caused her almost as much misery as Ellen. But yet the thought would not
      leave her, that her harshness and cruelty had caused all the suffering she beheld. She did not
      utter those thoughts aloud, she did not dare give words to that deep wretchedness, for she
      felt her only sustaining strength was in her God. The only one who would have read her heart,
      and given sympathy, strength, comfort, without a word from her, her husband, was far away, and
      she dared not sink; though there were times when heart and frame felt so utterly exhausted, it
      seemed at if she must.
Mr. Howard's presence had been an inexpressible relief. "Go to Edward, my dear friend," she
      had said, as he lingered beside the bed where Ellen had been laid, longing to comfort, but
      feeling at such a moment it was impossible; "he wants you more than any one else; win him to
      confide in you, soothe, comfort him; do not let him be out of your sight."
Not understanding her, except that Edward must be naturally grieved at his sister's illness,
      Mr. Howard sought him, and found him still in the library, almost in the same spot.
"This is a sad welcome for you, Edward," he said, kindly laying his hand on his shoulder,
      "but do not be too much cut down. Ellen is very young, her constitution, Mr. Maitland assures
      us is good, and she may be spared us yet. I came over on purpose to see you, for late as it
      was when I returned from Exeter, and found you had arrived, I would not defer it till
      to-morrow."
"You thought you came to see the pupil you so loved," answered Edward, raising his head, and
      startling Mr. Howard, both by his tone and countenance. "You do not know that I am the cause
      of my poor sister's suffering, that if she dies, I am her murderer. Oh, Mr. Howard," he
      continued, suddenly throwing himself in his arms, and bursting into passionate tears, "why did
      I ever leave you? why did I forgot your counsels, your goodness, throw your warning letter to
      the winds? Hate me if you will, but listen to me—pity me, save me from myself."
Startled as he was, Mr. Howard, well acquainted with the human heart, its errors, as well as
      its better impulses, knew how to answer this passionate appeal, so as to invite its full
      confidence and soothe at the same time. Edward poured out his whole tale. It is needless to
      enter upon it here in detail; suffice it, that the artful influence of Harding, by gradually
      undermining the good impressions of the home he had left, had prepared his pupil for an
      unlimited indulgence in pleasure, and excitement, at every opportunity which offered. And as
      the Prince William was cruising off the coast of British America, and constantly touching at
      one or other of her ports, where Harding, from his seniority and usefulness, and Edward, from
      his invariable good conduct, were often permitted to go ashore, these opportunities,
      especially when they were looked for and used by one practiced in deceit and wickedness, were
      often found. It does not require a long period to initiate in gambling. The very compelled
      restraint, in the intervals of its indulgence, but increased its maddening excitement, and
      once given up to its blind pursuit, Harding became more than ever necessary to Edward, and of
      course his power over him increased. But when he tried to make him a sharer and conniver in
      his own low pleasures, to teach him vice, cautiously as he thought he had worked, he failed;
      Edward started back appalled, and though unhappily he could not break from him, from that hour
      he misdoubted and shrunk away. But he had given an advantage to his fell tutor, the extent of
      which he knew not himself. Harding was too well versed in art to betray disappointment. He
      knew when to bring wine to the billiard-table, so to create such a delirium of excitement,
      that Edward was wholly unconscious of his own actions; and once or twice he led him into
      scenes, and made him sharer of such vicious pleasures, that secured him as his slave; for when
      the excitement was over, the agony of remorse, the misery, lest his confiding captain should
      suspect him other than he seemed, made him cling to Harding's promises of secrecy, as his only
      refuge, even while he loathed the man himself. It was easy to make such a disposition believe
      that he had, in some moment of excitement, done something which, if known, would expel him the
      Navy; Edward could never recall what, but he believed him, and became desperate. Harding told
      him it was downright folly to think about it so seriously. It was only known to him, and he
      would not betray him. But Edward writhed beneath his power; perpetually he called on him for
      pecuniary help, and when he had none, told him he must write home for it, or win it at the
      billiard-table, or he knew the consequences; and Edward, though again and again he had
      resolved he would not touch a ball or cue (and the remorse had been such, that he would no
      doubt have kept the resolve, had it not been for dread of betrayal), rather than write home,
      would madly seek the first opportunity, and play, and win perhaps enough, all but a few
      pounds, to satisfy his tormentor, and for these he would appeal to his sister, and receive
      them, as we know; never asking, and so never hearing, the heavy price of individual suffering
      at which they were obtained.
The seven or eight months which had elapsed before his last fatal appeal, had been
      occasioned by the ship being out at sea. Sir Edward had mentioned to Mr. Hamilton, that
      Edward's excellent conduct on board had given him a longer holiday on shore, when they were
      off New-York, to which place he had been dispatched on business to the President, than most of
      his companions. Edward thought himself safe, for Harding had been unusually quiet; but the
      very day they neared land, he told him he must have some cash, sneered at the trifling sum
      Edward had by him, told him if he chose to let him try for it fairly, they should have a
      chance at billiards for it; but if that failed, he must pump his rich relations for it, for
      have it he must. Trusting to his luck, for he had often won, even with Harding, he rushed to
      the table, played, and as might be expected, left off, owing his tormentor fifty pounds.
      Harding's fiendish triumph, and his declaration that he must trouble him for a check to that
      amount, signed by the great millionaire, Arthur Hamilton, Esq., goaded him to madness. He
      drank down a large draught of brandy, and deliberately sought another table and another
      opponent, and won back fifteen; but it was the last day of his stay on shore, as his enslaver
      knew, and it was the wretchedness, the misery of this heavy debt to the crafty, merciless
      betrayer of his youthful freshness and innocence, who had solemnly sworn if he did not pay it
      by the next letters from his home, he would inform against him, and he knew the consequences,
      which had urged that fearful letter to Ellen, from which all her suffering had sprung. Edward
      was much too young and ignorant of the world's ways to know that Harding no more dared execute
      his threat against him, than he could put his own head in the lion's mouth. His remorse was
      too deep, his loathing of his changed self too unfeigned, to believe that his errors were not
      of the heinous, fatal nature which Harding taught him to suppose them; and the anguish of a
      naturally fine, noble, independent spirit may be imagined. All his poor mother's lessons of
      his uncle's excessive sternness, and determined pitilessness, toward the faults of those less
      firm and worthy than himself, returned to him, completely banishing his own experience of that
      same uncle's excessive kindness. The one feeling had been insensibly instilled in his boyhood,
      from as long as he could remember, till the age of twelve; the other was but the experience of
      eighteen short months. Oh, if parents would but think and tremble at the vast importance of
      the first lessons which reach the understanding of the young beings committed to their care!
      Let them impress TRUTH, not prejudice, and they are safe. Once fix a false
      impression, and they know not, and it is well, perhaps, they do not, the misery that tiny seed
      may sow.
Mr. Howard listened with such earnest, heartfelt sympathy, such deep commiseration, that his
      young penitent told him every error, every feeling, without the smallest reserve; and in the
      long conversation which followed, he felt more comforted, more hopeful of himself, than he had
      done for long, long months. He told with such a burst of remorseful agony, his cruelty to his
      devoted sister, that Mr. Howard could scarcely hear it unmoved, for on that subject there
      seemed indeed no comfort; and he himself, though he would not add to Edward's misery by
      confessing it, felt more painfully self-reproached for his severity toward her than his
      conduct as a minister had ever excited before.
"Be with me, or rather let me be with you, as much as you can," was Edward's mournful
      appeal, as their long interview closed; "I have no dependence on myself—a weak, miserable
      coward! longing to forsake the path of evil, and having neither power nor energy to do so. I
      know you will tell me, pray—trust. If I had not prayed, I could not have confessed—but it will
      not, I know it will not last."
"It will, while enduring this heavy trial of your poor sister's terrible illness, and God's
      infinite mercy may so strengthen you in the furnace of affliction, as to last in returning
      joy! Despair, and you must fall; trust, and you will hope and struggle—despite of pain or
      occasional relapses. Your faults are great, but not so great as Harding represented them—not
      so heavy but that you can conquer and redeem them, and be yet all we have believed you, all
      that you hoped for in yourself."
"And my uncle—" said Edward, hesitatingly.
"Must be told; but I will answer for him that he will be neither harsh nor unjust, nor even
      severe. I will write to him myself, and trust to convince him that your repentance, and
      resolution are sufficiently sincere, to permit you a second trial, without referring to Sir
      Edward. You have done nothing to expel you from your profession; but it depends on yourself to
      become truly worthy of its noble service."
There was much in the sad tale he had heard to give hope, and Mr. Howard longed to impart
      its comfort to Mrs. Hamilton; but he felt she could not listen. While day after day passed,
      and the poor sufferer for another's errors lay hovering between life and death, reason so
      utterly suspended, that even when the violent agony of the first seven days and nights had
      subsided into lethargic stupors, alternating with such quiet submission and gentle words,
      that, had it not been for their wandering sense, one might have fancied intellect returning;
      still reason was absent—and, though none said it aloud, the fear would gain dominion, that
      health might return, but not the mind. The first advice had been procured—what was distance,
      even then, to wealth?—every remedy resorted to. Her luxuriant hair cut close, and ice itself
      applied to cool that burning, throbbing pain; but all had seemed vain, till its cessation, at
      the end of seven days, somewhat renewed Mr. Maitland's hope.
Not one tear had Mrs. Hamilton shed, and so excessive had been her fatigue, that Miss
      Harcourt and her children trembled for her; conjuring her, for their sakes, for her husband's,
      to take repose. Mr. Maitland's argument, that when Ellen recovered her senses (which he
      assured her now he had little doubt she would eventually), she would need the soothing comfort
      of her presence still more than she could then, and her strength must fail before that—if she
      so exhausted it—carried more weight than all the rest; and her daughters had the inexpressible
      relief of finding that when, in compliance with their tearful entreaties, she did lie down,
      she slept, and slept refreshingly, for nature was exhausted. There was much of comfort in
      those days of trial, which Mrs. Hamilton fully realized, when Ellen's convalescence permitted
      her to recall it, though at the time it seemed unnoticed. That Caroline's strong mind and good
      heart should urge her to do every thing in her power to save her mother trouble, even to
      entreat Ellis and Morris to show her, and let her attend to the weekly duties with them, and
      accomplish them so earnestly and well, that both these faithful domestics were astonished and
      delighted, was not surprising; for hers was a character to display its better qualities in
      such emergencies. But that Emmeline should so effectually rouse herself from the overwhelming
      grief, which had at first assailed her at Ellen's fearful sufferings and great danger, as to
      be a comfort alike to her mother and Edward, and assist Caroline whenever she could, even
      trying to be hopeful and cheerful for others' sakes, till she actually became so, was
      so unexpected, from the grief she had indulged in when she parted from her father, that it did
      surprise. To be in the room with Ellen had so affected her at first, that she became pale, and
      so evidently terrified, that Mrs. Hamilton half desired her not to come, especially as she
      could do no good; and Mrs. Greville and Mary had tried to prevail on her to stay with them,
      but she would not hear of it.
"If I can do no good, can neither help mamma in nursing Ellen, nor do as Caroline does, I
      can, at least, try to comfort poor Edward, and I will not leave him. If I am so weak as not to
      be able to endure anxiety and sorrow without showing it, it shall not conquer me. No, no, dear
      Mary; come and see me as often as you like, but I can not leave home till mamma and Ellen and
      we are all happy again!"
And she did devote herself to Edward, and so successfully—with her gentle sympathy with his
      grief, her tender feeling toward his faults, her conviction of her father's forgiveness, her
      unassuming but heart-breathing piety, which, without one word unduly introduced of a subject
      so holy, for she felt herself much too lowly and ignorant to approach it—yet always led up his
      thoughts to God, and from one so young, so humble, and, in general, so joyous, had still
      greater effect in confirming his returning religious hope, than had his teachers been only
      those who were older and wiser than himself. However miserable he might be before she came, he
      looked to her society, her eloquence, as comfort and hope; and soon perceiving this, she was
      encouraged to go on, though quite astonished—for she could not imagine what she had done to
      deserve such commendation—when Mr. Howard, one day meeting her alone, took both her hands in
      his, and with even unusual fervor bade God bless her!—for young, lowly as she was, she not
      only comforted the erring, but raised and strengthened the penitent's trembling faith and
      hope.
Poor Edward! harder than all seemed to him his aunt's silence. He knew his sister entirely
      engrossed her—ill as Ellen was, it could not be otherwise; but he passionately longed only for
      one word from her: that she forgave him the misery she was enduring. Not aware that such was
      his feeling, conscious herself that her sole feeling toward him was pity, not anger, and
      looking to herself alone as the cause of her poor child's sufferings, she did not think for a
      moment that he could imagine her never referring to his confession originated in
      displeasure.
Ten or twelve days had so passed, when one afternoon, completely exhausted with two nights'
      watchfulness—for though nurse Langford and Fanny were in constant attendance on Ellen, she
      could not rest if she heard that harrowing cry for her, even though her presence brought no
      comfort—she went to lie down for a few hours on a couch in her dressing-room. Caroline had
      taken a book, though with not much inclination to read, to sit by her, and watch that her
      sleep should not be disturbed. How in those moments of quiet did she long for her father!
      feeling intuitively how much heavier was her mother's trial without his loved support. He had
      been written to by them all since Edward's confession. Mrs. Hamilton had done so in Ellen's
      room, only to beseech him to write forgivingly, forbearingly, to the unhappy cause of all. She
      did not dare breathe her feelings, even on paper, to him, convinced that if she did so,
      control must give way, and she was powerless at once; but her husband knew her so well that
      every suppression of individual emotion betrayed more forcibly than the most earnest words,
      all she was enduring.
Caroline had kept her affectionate vigil nearly two hours, when Edward's voice whispered,
      "Miss Harcourt wants you, dear Caroline; let me take your place, I will be quite as watchful
      as yourself; only let me stay here, you do not know the comfort it will be."
To resist his look of pleading wretchedness was impossible. She left him, and Edward drawing
      a low stool to the foot of the couch, as if not daring to occupy his cousin's seat, which was
      close by the pillow, gazed on the mild, gentle features of his aunt, as in their deep repose
      they showed still clearer the traces of anxiety and sorrow, and felt more keenly than ever the
      full amount of misery, which his errors and their fatal concealment had created. "Why is it,"
      he thought, "that man can not bear the punishment of his faults without causing the innocent,
      the good, to suffer also?" And his heart seemed to answer, "Because by those very social ties,
      the strong impulses of love for one another, which would save others from woe, we may be
      preserved and redeemed from vice again, and yet again, when, were man alone the sufferer, vice
      would be stronger than remorse, and never be redeemed."
Mrs. Hamilton woke with that painful start which long watchfulness always occasions, and
      missing Caroline, yet feeling as if she were not alone, her eyes speedily fixed themselves in
      some surprise on the figure of her nephew, who, unable to bear the thoughts the sight of her
      exhaustion produced, had bent his head upon the couch. Inexpressibly touched, and glad of the
      opportunity to speak to him alone, she called him to her, and there was something in the tone
      that encouraged him to fling himself on his knees by her side, and sob like an infant, saying,
      almost inarticulately—
"Can you, will you, ever forgive me, aunt Emmeline? Your silence has almost broken my heart,
      for it seemed to say you never could; and when I look at my poor Ellen, and see how I have
      changed this happy home into sorrow and gloom and sin, for it is all my work—mine, whom you
      have loved, treated, trusted, as a son—I feel you can not forgive me; I ought to go from you;
      I have no right to pollute your home."
"Hush, Edward! do not give utterance or indulgence to any such thoughts. My poor unhappy
      boy! your errors have brought such fearful chastisement from the hand of God himself, it is
      not for me to treat you harshly. May His mercy avert yet severer trial! I will not hear your
      story now; you are too agitated to tell it, and I am not at this moment strong enough to hear
      it. I am satisfied that you have confided all to Mr. Howard, and will be guided by him. Only
      tell me how came you first to apply to Ellen? Did the thought never strike you, that in
      sending relief to you, she might be exposing herself to inconvenience or displeasure? Was
      there no consideration due to her?"
"I never seemed to think of her, except as glad and willing to help me, at whatever cost to
      herself," was his reply. "I feel now the cruel selfishness of the belief—but, oh, aunt
      Emmeline, it was fostered in me from my earliest childhood, grew with my growth, increased
      with my years, received strength and meaning from my poor mother's utter neglect of her, and
      too indulgent thought for me. I never thought so till now, now that I know all my poor
      sister's meek and gentle worth, and it makes me still more miserable. I never could think her
      my equal; never could fancy she could have a will or wish apart from mine, and I can not trace
      the commencement of the feeling. Oh! if we had been but treated alike! but taught to so love
      each other, as to think of each other's happiness above our own, as you taught my
      cousins!"
"Do you know any thing of the promise to which poor Ellen so constantly refers?" inquired
      Mrs. Hamilton, after gently soothing his painful agitation.
He did not; but acknowledged that from the time they had become inmates of Oakwood, Ellen
      had constantly saved him from punishment by bearing the penalty of his faults; recalling
      numerous incidents, trifling in themselves, but which had always perplexed Mrs. Hamilton, as
      evincing such strange contradictions in Ellen's childish character, and none more so than the
      disobedience which we related in our second part, and which Edward's avowal of having himself
      moved the flower-stand, now so clearly explained. He said, too, that Mr. Howard had thought it
      necessary, for Ellen's perfect justification, to examine her letters and papers, but that all
      his appeals to her had been destroyed but one—his last fatal inclosure, the exact contents of
      which he had so utterly forgotten, written, as they were, in a moment of madness, that he
      shuddered himself as he read it. He placed the paper in Mrs. Hamilton's hand, conjuring her
      not to recall her forgiveness when she read it; but she must see it, it was the only amends he
      could make his poor Ellen, to exculpate her fully. Was it any wonder it had almost driven her
      wild? or that she should have scarcely known the means she adopted to send him the relief,
      which, as he deserved, had never reached him.
Mrs. Hamilton read the letter, and as thought after thought rose to her mind, connecting,
      defining, explaining Ellen's conduct from her fifteenth birthday, the day she received it, to
      the discovery of her sin, and her devoted silence afterward, trifling incidents which she had
      forgotten returned to add their weight of evidence, and increase almost to agony her
      self-reproach, for not seeing the whole before, and acting differently. She remembered now
      Ellen's procrastination in writing to Edward, the illness which followed, and could well
      understand her dread lest the finding the notes should be traced to that day, and so throw a
      suspicion on her brother, and her consequent firmness in refusing to state the day she had
      found them.
That long interview was one of inexpressible comfort to Edward; but though his unfeigned
      repentance and full confession gave his aunt hope for him, it did but increase her individual
      trial, as she returned to Ellen's couch, and listened to wanderings only too painfully
      explained by the tale she had heard.
