
CHAPTER II.
GLIMPSES INTO A CHILD'S HEART.—A DEATHBED.
On leaving the cottage, Ellen hastily traversed the little garden, and entered a narrow
      lane, leading to Mr. Myrvin's dwelling. Her little heart was swelling high within her, and the
      confinement she had endured, the constant control she exercised for fear she should add to her
      mother's irritation, combined with the extreme delicacy of natural constitution, had so
      weakened her, as to render the slightest exertion painful. She had been so often reproved as
      fretful and ill-tempered, whenever in tears, that she always checked and concealed them. She
      had been so frequently told that she did not know what affection was, that she was so
      inanimate and cold, that though she did not understand the actual meaning of the words, she
      believed she was different to any one else, and was unhappy without knowing why. Compared with
      her brother, she certainly was neither a pretty nor an engaging child. Weakly from her birth,
      her residence in India had increased constitutional delicacy, and while to a watchful eye the
      expression of her countenance denoted constant suffering, the heedless and superficial
      observer would condemn it as peevishness, and so unnatural to a young child, that nothing but
      confirmed ill-temper could have produced it. The soft, beautifully-formed black eye was too
      large for her other features, and the sallowness of her complexion, the heavy tresses of very
      dark hair, caused her to be remarked as a very plain child, which in reality she was not.
      Accustomed to hear beauty extolled above every thing else, beholding it in her mother and
      brother, and imagining it was Edward's great beauty that always made him so beloved and
      petted, an evil-disposed child would have felt nothing but envy and dislike toward him. But
      Ellen felt neither. She loved him devotedly; but that any one could love her, now that the
      only one who ever had—her idolized father—was dead, she thought impossible.
Why her heart and temples beat so quickly as she left her mother's room—why the promise she
      had so lately made should so cling to her mind, that even her aunt's arrival could not remove
      it—why she felt so giddy and weak as to render walking painful, the poor child could not have
      told, but, unable at length to go farther, she sat down on a grassy bank, and believing
      herself quite alone, cried bitterly. Several minutes passed and she did not look up, till a
      well-known voice inquired:—
"Dear Ellen, what is the matter? What has happened to grieve you so to-day? won't you tell
      me?"
"Indeed, indeed, I do not know, dear Arthur; I only feel—feel—as if I had not so much
      strength as I had a few days ago—and, and I could not help crying."
"You are not well, Ellen," replied her companion, a fine lad of sixteen, and Mr. Myrvin's
      only son. "You are looking paler than I ever saw you before; let me call my father. You know
      he is always pleased when he sees you, and he hoped you would have been to us before to-day;
      come with me to him now."
"No, Arthur, indeed I can not; he will think I have forgotten all he said to me the last
      time I saw him, and, indeed, I have not—but I—I do not know what is the matter with me
      to-day."
And, in spite of all her efforts to restrain them, the tears would burst forth afresh; and
      Arthur, finding all his efforts at consolation ineffectual, contented himself with putting his
      arm round her and kissing them away. A few minutes afterward his father appeared.
"In tears, my dear Ellen!" he said, kindly; "your mother is not worse, I hope?"
"I do not know, sir," replied the child, as well as her tears would permit; "she has been
      very ill just now, for her faint was longer than usual."
"Did any thing particular occasion it?"
"I think it was seeing my aunt. Mamma was very much agitated before and afterward."
"Mrs. Hamilton has arrived then! I am rejoiced to hear it," replied Mr. Myrvin, gladly. Then
      sitting down by Ellen, he took one of her hands in his, and said, kindly, "Something has
      grieved my little girl this evening; I will not ask what it is, because you may not like to
      tell me; but you must not imagine evils, Ellen. I know you have done, and are doing, the duty
      of a good, affectionate child, nursing your suffering mother, bearing with intervals of
      impatience, which her invalid state occasions, and giving up all your own wishes to sit
      quietly by her. I have not seen you, my child, but I know those who have, and this has pleased
      me, and, what is of much more consequence, it proves you have not forgotten all I told you of
      your Father in Heaven, that even a little child can try to love and serve Him."
"But have you not told me those who are good are always happy?" inquired Ellen; "then I can
      not be good, though indeed I try to be so, for I do not think I am happy, for I can never
      laugh and sing and talk as Edward does."
"You are not in such strong health as your brother, my dear little girl, and you have had
      many things to make you unhappy, which Edward has not. But you must try and remember that even
      if it please God that sometimes you should be more sorrowful than other children, He loves you
      notwithstanding. I am sure you have not forgotten the story of Joseph that I told you a few
      Sundays ago. God so loved him, as to give him the power of foretelling future events, and
      enabling him to do a great deal of good, but when he was taken away from his father and sold
      as a slave and cast into prison among cruel strangers, he could not have been very happy,
      Ellen. Yet still, young as he was, little more than a child in those days, and thrown among
      those who did not know right from wrong, he remembered all that his father had taught him, and
      prayed to God, and tried to love and obey Him; and God was pleased with him, and gave him
      grace to continue good, and at last so blessed him, as to permit him to see his dear father
      and darling brother again."
"But Joseph was his father's favorite child," was Ellen's sole rejoinder; and the tears
      which were checked in the eagerness with which she had listened, seemed again ready to burst
      forth. "He must have been happy when he thought of that."
"I do not think so, my dear Ellen," replied Mr. Myrvin, more moved than he chose to betray,
      "for being his father's favorite first excited the dislike and envy of his brothers, and
      caused them to wish to send him away. There was no excuse indeed for their conduct; but
      perhaps if Joseph had always remained near his father he might have been spoiled by too great
      indulgence, and never become as good as he afterward was. Perhaps in his solitary prison he
      might even have regretted that his father had not treated them all alike, as then the angry
      feelings of his brothers would not have been called forth. So you see, being a favorite will
      not always make us happy, Ellen. It is indeed very delightful to be loved and caressed, and if
      we try to do our duty and love as much as we can, even if we are not sure of being loved at
      first, we may be quite certain that we shall be loved and happy at last. Do you understand me,
      my child?"
The question was almost needless, for Ellen's large eyes had never moved from his face, and
      their expression was so full of intelligence and meaning, that the whole countenance seemed
      lighted up. "Then do you think mamma will recover?" she eagerly exclaimed; "will she ever love
      me?—oh, if I thought so, I could never, never be naughty again!"
"She will love you, my dear Ellen," replied Mr. Myrvin, now visibly affected, "I can not, I
      dare not tell you that she will recover to love you on earth, but if indeed it be God's will
      that she should go to Him, she will look down on you from Heaven and love you far more than
      she has done yet, for she will know then how much you love her."
"And will she know if I do all she wishes—if I love and help Edward?" asked Ellen, in a low,
      half-frightened voice; and little did Mr. Myrvin imagine how vividly and how indelibly his
      reply was registered in the child's memory.
"It is a question none can answer positively, Ellen, but it is my own firm belief, that the
      beloved ones we have lost are permitted to watch over and love us still, and that they see us,
      and are often near us, though we can not see them. But even to help Edward," he continued
      somewhat anxiously, "you must not be tempted—"
He was interrupted by the appearance of a stranger, who addressing him courteously,
      apologized for his intrusion, and noticing the children, inquired if both were his.
Mr. Myrvin replied that he could only lay claim to one; the little girl was Miss
      Fortescue.
"And my name is Hamilton, so I think I have an uncle's privilege," was the reply; and Ellen,
      to her astonishment, received an affectionate embrace from the unknown relative, whom her
      mother's ill-judged words had taught her actually to dread. Mr. Myrvin gladly welcomed him,
      and, in the interest of the conversation which followed, forgot the lesson he had been so
      anxious to impress upon Ellen. Arthur accompanied her to the garden gate, and the gentlemen
      soon afterward entered the cottage together.
Days merged into weeks, and still Mrs. Fortescue lingered; but her weakness increasing so
      painfully from alternate fever and exhaustion that to remove her was impossible. It was the
      first time that Mrs. Hamilton had ever been separated from her children, and there were many
      disagreeables attendant on nursing a beloved invalid in that confined cottage; and with only
      those little luxuries and comforts that could be procured (and even these were obtained with
      difficulty, for the nearest town was twenty miles distant), but not a selfish or repining
      thought entered Mrs. Hamilton's mind. It was filled with thankfulness, not only that she was
      permitted thus to tend a sister, whom neither error, nor absence, nor silence could estrange
      from her heart, but that she was spared long enough for her gentle influence and enduring love
      to have some effect in changing her train of thought, calming that fearful irritability, and
      by slow degrees permitting her to look with resignation and penitent hope to that hour which
      no human effort could avert. That Mr. Myrvin should seek Mrs. Hamilton's society and delight
      in conversing with her, Mrs. Fortescue considered so perfectly natural, that the conversations
      which took place in her sick room, whenever she was strong enough to bear them, excited
      neither surprise nor impatience. Different as she was, willfully as she had always neglected
      the mild counsels and example of her sister, the years of separation and but too often excited
      self-reproach had fully awakened her to Mrs. Hamilton's superiority. She had never found any
      one at all like her—so good and holy, yet so utterly unassuming; and the strong affection,
      even the deep emotion in one usually so controlled, with which her sister had met her,
      naturally increased these feelings.
"Ah, you and Emmeline will find much to converse about," had been her address to Mr. Myrvin,
      on his first introduction to Mrs. Hamilton. "Talk as much as you please, and do not mind me.
      With Emmeline near me, I can restrain irritability which must have frightened you away. I know
      she is right. Oh, would to God I had always been like her!" and the suffering betrayed in the
      last words was a painful contrast with the lightness of her previous tone.
Mr. Myrvin answered soothingly, and for the first time his words were patiently received.
      From listening listlessly, Mrs. Fortescue, by slow degrees, became interested in the
      conversations between him and Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, and so a change in sentiments was
      gradually wrought, which by any other and harsher method of proceeding would have been sought
      for in vain.
One evening as Mrs. Hamilton sat watching the faded countenance of her patient, and
      recalling those days of youth and buoyancy, when it seemed as if neither death nor care could
      ever have assailed one so bright and lovely, Edward, before he sought his favorite stream,
      threw his arms round her neck, and pressed his rosy lips on her cheek, as thus to wish her
      good-by.
"He will repay you for all your care, dearest Emmeline," his mother said, with a heavy sigh,
      as he left the room; "I know he has what you and your husband will think faults, but, oh, for
      my sake, do not treat him harshly; his noble spirit will be broken if you do!"
"Dearest Eleanor, dismiss all such fears. Am I not a mother equally with yourself? and do
      you think when your children become mine I shall show any difference between them and my own?
      You would trust me even in former years, surely you will trust me now?"
"Indeed, indeed, I do; you were always kind and forbearing with me, when I little deserved
      it. But my poor Edward, it is so hard to part with him, and he loves me so fondly!" and a few
      natural tears stole down her cheek.
"And he shall continue to love you dearest Eleanor; and oh, believe me, all that you have
      been to him I will be. I have won the devoted affection of all my own darlings, and I do not
      fear to gain the love of yours; and then it will be an easy task to make them happy as my
      own."
"Edward's love you will very quickly obtain, if it be not yours already; but Ellen you will
      have more trouble with. She is a strange, cold, unlovable child."
"Are the dispositions of your children so unlike? I should not have fancied Ellen cold; she
      is timid, but that I thought would wear off when she knew me better."
"It is not timidity; I never knew her otherwise than cold and reserved from her birth. I
      never could feel the same toward her as I did toward Edward, and therefore there must be
      something in Ellen to prevent it."
Mrs. Hamilton did not think so, but she answered gently, "Are you quite sure, my dear
      Eleanor, that you have equally studied the characters of both your children? because you know
      there are some cases which require more study and carefulness than others."
"I never was fond of studying any thing, Emmeline, as you may remember," replied Mrs.
      Fortescue, painfully trying to smile, "and therefore I dare say I have not studied my children
      as you have yours. Besides, you know I always thought, and still think, the doctrine of
      mothers forming the characters of their children, and all that good people say about the
      importance of early impressions, perfectly ridiculous. The disposition for good or bad, loving
      or unloving, is theirs from the moment of their birth, and what human efforts can alter that?
      Why, the very infancy of my children was different; Edward was always laughing, and animated,
      and happy; Ellen fretful and peevish, and so heavy that she never seemed even to know when I
      entered the room, while Edward would spring into my arms, and shout and laugh only to see me.
      Now what conduct on my part could have done this? Surely I was justified in feeling
      differently toward such opposite dispositions; and I know I never made more difference between
      them than—than papa did between us, Emmeline, and I have had greater reason to be partial; you
      were always better than I was."
She ceased, from exhaustion, but the flush which had risen to her temples, and the trembling
      hands evinced the agitation always called for by the mention of her father, which Mrs.
      Hamilton, with earnest tenderness, endeavored to soothe.
"I must speak, Emmeline," she continued, natural impetuosity for the moment regaining
      ascendency; "how did I repay my fond father's partiality? his too great indulgence? Did I not
      bring down his gray hairs with sorrow to the grave? Did I not throw shame and misery upon him
      by my conduct to the ill-fated one he had chosen for my husband? Did I not?—oh, my God, my
      God! Death may indeed be merciful!—my Edward might do the same by me!" and, shuddering
      violently, she hid her face on her sister's bosom.
It was long before Mrs. Hamilton could calm that fearful agitation, long before her
      whispered words of heavenly hope, and peace, and pardon—if indeed she believed—could bring
      comfort; but they did at length, and such fearful paroxysms returned at longer and longer
      intervals, and at length ceased, in the deep submission and clinging trust to which she was at
      last permitted to attain. Though Mrs. Hamilton was detained six weeks at Llangwillan, her
      devoted attendance on her sister prevented any thing more than occasional observation of the
      children so soon about to be committed to her care. That Edward was most engaging, and riveted
      her affection at once, and that Ellen was unlike any child she had ever known or seen, she
      could not but feel, but she was not one to decide on a mere feeling. Her present mournful task
      prevented all actual interference with them, except the endeavor by kindly notice to win their
      confidence and love. His mother's illness and his uncle's presence, besides, for the present,
      his perfect freedom with regard to employment, had deprived Edward of all inclination to rebel
      or exert his self-will, and Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton both felt that he certainly had fewer
      faults, than was generally the consequence of unlimited indulgence. Whether Ellen's extreme
      attention to her mother, her silent but ever ready help when her aunt required it, proceeded
      from mere cold duty, or really had its origin in affection, Mrs. Hamilton could not
      satisfactorily decide. Her sister had avowed partiality, but that neglect and unkindness could
      have been shown to such an extent by a mother as to create the cold exterior she beheld, was
      so utterly incomprehensible, so opposed to every dictate of maternal love, which she knew so
      well, that she actually could not even imagine it. She could believe in the possibility of a
      preference for one child more than another, but not in utter neglect and actual dislike. She
      could imagine that Ellen's love for her mother might be less warm than Edward's, believing, as
      she did, that a parent must call for a child's affection, not be satisfied with leaving all to
      Nature; but if it were not love that dictated Ellen's conduct, it was strange and almost
      unnatural, and so unpleasing, that so young a child should have such an idea of duty. But
      these were only passing thoughts; cost what trouble it might, Mrs. Hamilton determined she
      would understand her niece as she did her own children.
But though to her Ellen was a riddle, to her sister Nature was resuming her sway, too late,
      alas! for all, save the mother's own reproaches. Her weakness had become such that days would
      pass when speech, save a few whispered words, was impossible; but she would gaze upon her
      child, as hour after hour she would sit by the bed, resisting all Edward's entreaties, and
      sometimes even her aunt's to go and play, and long to fold her to her heart, and confess she
      had been cruelly unjust, and that she did love her now almost as much as Edward, but she was
      much too weak to do more than feel. And Ellen remained unconscious of the change, except that
      now and then, as she would bring her nourishment or bend over to bathe her forehead, her
      mother would, as if involuntarily, kiss her cheek and murmur some caressing word. And Ellen
      longed to cling to her neck and say how much she loved her, but she did not dare and she would
      hurry out of the room to conceal her tears, instead of returning the caress, thus unhappily
      confirming the idea of natural coldness.
Even the comfort of sitting by her mother was at length denied her. Mrs. Fortescue became so
      alarmingly and painfully ill, that Mrs. Hamilton felt it an unnecessary trial for her children
      to witness it, especially as they could be no comfort to her, for she did not know them. The
      evening of the fourth day she recovered sufficiently to partake of the sacrament with her
      sister and Mr. Hamilton, and then entreat that her children might be brought to her. She felt
      herself, what the physician had imparted to her sister, that the recovery of her senses would
      in all human probability be followed in a few hours by death, and her last thoughts were on
      them.
Edward, full of glee at being permitted to see her again, bounded joyfully into the room,
      but the fearful change in that beloved face so startled and terrified him, that he uttered a
      loud cry, and throwing himself beside her, sobbed upon her bosom. Mrs. Fortescue was fearfully
      agitated, but she conjured her sister not to take him from her, and her heavy eyes wandered
      painfully round the room in search of Ellen.
"Come to me, Ellen, I have done you injustice, my sweet child," she murmured in a voice that
      Ellen never in her life forgot, and she clung to her in silent agony. "I have not done my duty
      to you, I know—I feel I have not, and it is too late now to atone. I can only pray God to
      bless you, and raise you up a kinder parent than I have been! Bless, bless you both."
      Faintness overpowered her, and she lay for several minutes powerless, in Mrs. Hamilton's arms.
      Edward, in passionate grief, refused to stir from the bed; and Ellen, almost unconsciously,
      sunk on her knees by Mr. Myrvin.
"My own sister, bless you—for all you have been to me—all you will be to my children—may
      they repay you better than I have done, Emmeline! You are right, there is but one hope, our
      Saviour, for the sinner—it is mine—" were the broken sentences that, in a voice which was
      scarcely audible, and uttered at long intervals, escaped Mrs. Fortescue's lips, and then her
      head sunk lower on Mrs. Hamilton's bosom, and there was a long, long silence, broken only by
      Edward's low and half-suffocated sobs. And he knew not, guessed not, the grief that was
      impending. He only felt that his mother was worse, not better, as he had believed she would
      and must be, when his aunt arrived. He had never seen death, though Ellen had and he had
      passionately and willfully refused either to listen or to believe in his uncle's and Mr.
      Myrvin's gentle attempts to prepare him for his loss. Terrified at the continued silence, at
      the cold heavy feel of his mother's hand, as, when Mr. Myrvin and the widow gently removed her
      from the still-supporting arm of Mrs. Hamilton, it fell against his, he started up, and
      clinging to his aunt, implored her to speak to him, to tell him why his mother looked so
      strange and white, her hand felt so cold, and why she would not speak to and kiss him, as she
      always did, when he was grieved.
Mrs. Hamilton raised her head from her husband's shoulder, and struggling with her own deep
      sorrow, she drew her orphan nephew closer to her, and said, in a low, earnest voice, "My
      Edward, did you not hear your mother pray God to bless you?"
The child looked at her inquiringly.
"That good God has taken her to Himself, my love; He has thought it better to remove her
      from us, and take her where she will never know pain nor illness more."
"But she is lying there," whispered Edward, in a frightened voice, and half hiding his face
      in his aunt's dress, "she is not taken away. Why will she not speak to me?"
"She can not speak, my sweet boy! the soul which enabled her to speak, and smile, and live,
      was God's gift, and it has pleased Him to recall it."
"And will she never, never speak to me again? will she never kiss me—never call me her own
      darling, beautiful Edward again?" he almost screamed in passionate grief, as the truth at
      length forced itself upon him. "Mamma, mamma, my own dear, pretty, good mamma, oh! do not go
      away from me—or let me go with you—let me die too; no one will love me and kiss me as you have
      done." And even the natural awe and terror of death gave way before his grief; he clung to the
      body of his mother so passionately, so convulsively, that it required actual force to remove
      him. And for hours his aunt and sister watched over and tried to soothe and comfort him in
      vain; he would only rouse himself angrily to ask Ellen how she could know what he felt; she
      had never loved their mother as he had—she did not know what he had lost—she could not feel as
      he did, and then relapse into tears and sobs. Ellen did not attempt reply. She thought, if it
      were such pain to her to lose her mother, who had only the last few weeks evinced affection
      for her, it must indeed be still more suffering to him; and though his angry words grieved and
      hurt her (for she knew she did love her mother most fondly, her idea of her own extreme
      inferiority acquitted her unconsciously of all injustice toward her, and made her believe that
      she had loved Edward best only because he was so much better than herself), his very grief
      caused her to love and admire him still more, and to believe that she really did not feel as
      much as he did. And yet before they quitted Llangwillan, which they did the second day after
      Mrs. Fortescue's funeral, Edward could laugh and talk as usual—except when any object recalled
      his mother; and poor Ellen felt that though she had fancied she was not happy before, she was
      much more unhappy now. Her fancy naturally vivid, and rendered more so from her having been
      left so much to herself, dwelt morbidly on all that had passed in her mother's illness, on
      every caress, every unusual word of affection, and on Mr. Myrvin's assurance that she would
      love her in Heaven; the promise she had made to love and help Edward returned to her memory
      again and again, and each time with the increased determination to keep it solemnly. It was
      not for her mother's sake alone, and connected only with her; perhaps, had it not been for the
      careful instructions of her father, whom, as we shall presently see, she had cause almost to
      idolize, Ellen might have become indifferent to her mother and envious of Edward. But his
      repeated instructions, under all circumstances to love, cherish, and obey her mother had been
      indelibly engraved, and heightened natural feeling. She believed that to keep the promise,
      which had so evidently pleased her mother, would be also obeying her father, and this double
      incentive gave it a weight and consequence, which, could Mrs. Hamilton have known it, would
      have caused her great anxiety, and urged its removal. But Ellen had been too long accustomed
      to hide every thought and feeling to betray that which, child as she was, she believed sacred
      between herself and her mother. Mrs. Hamilton watched her in silence, and trusted to time and
      care to do their work; and by enabling her to understand her character, permit her to guide it
      rightly.
The morning of their intended departure was bright and sunny, and before even widow Morgan
      was moving, Ellen had quitted her little bed and was in the churchyard by her mother's grave.
      She sat there thinking so intently, that she did not know how time passed, till she was roused
      by her favorite Arthur Myrvin's voice.
"Up so early, Ellen, why, I thought I should have been first, to show you I had not
      forgotten my promise." And he displayed some choice flower-roots, which he commenced planting
      round the grave.
"Dear Arthur, how very kind you are; but you look so sad—what is the matter? Does not Mr.
      Myrvin like you to do this—pray don't, then."
"No, no, Ellen, my father said I was right, and that he would take care of the flowers also
      himself. I am only sorry you are going away, and to live so differently to what we do—you will
      quite forget me."
"Indeed, indeed I shall not, dear Arthur; I can never forget those who have been so kind to
      me as you and dear Mr. Myrvin. I would much rather stay here always with you, than go among
      strangers again, but I heard my aunt say last night, that perhaps Mr. Myrvin would let you
      come and see us sometimes—and you will like that, will you not?" Arthur did not seem quite
      sure whether he would like it or not; but they continued talking till his task was completed,
      and Arthur, at Ellen's earnest request, for she suddenly feared her aunt would be displeased
      at her having staid out so long, returned with her to the cottage; the silent kiss, however,
      which she received, when Arthur explained what had detained them, reassured her, and bound her
      yet closer to the kind relative, whom, if timidity had permitted, she would already have so
      loved.
The novelty of his situation, the rapid and pleasant movement of his uncle's carriage, the
      idea of the new relations he was about to meet, and an unconfessed but powerful feeling of his
      own increased consequence in being so nearly connected with wealth and distinction, all had
      their effect upon Edward, and his eye sparkled and his cheek glowed, as if all sorrow had
      entirely passed away; not that he had ceased to think of his mother, for the least reference
      to her would fill his eyes with tears and completely check his joy—but still delight
      predominated. Ellen felt more and more the wish to shrink into her self, for the farther they
      left Llangwillan, the more painfully she missed Mr. Myrvin and his son, and the more she
      shrunk from encountering strangers. Edward she knew would speedily find companions to love,
      and to be loved by, and he would think still less of her. Her aunt would soon be surrounded by
      her own children, and then how could she expect to win her love? And Ellen looked intently and
      silently out from the carriage-window—her uncle believed on the many-flowered hedge and other
      objects of interest by which they passed—his wife imagined to hide a tear that trembled in her
      eyes, but which she had determined should not fall.
