<div type="chapter">
<head>CHAPTER V.</head>
<head>A HEART AND HOME IN ENGLAND.—A HEART AND HOME IN INDIA.</head>
<p>From the moment Arthur Hamilton returned to Cheltenham with the painful intelligence that he
      had arrived at Leith only in time to witness the departure of the beautiful vessel which
      contained Captain Fortescue and the exquisitely lovely bride who had, it seemed, turned the
      heads of all the usually quiet Scotsmen who had seen her, Lord Delmont gradually sunk. The
      agony of losing her forever—for so he regarded her departure for, and residence in India for
      an indeterminate time—conquered every other feeling. Her conduct had caused emotions of
      anguish far too deep for the relieving sensation of anger. The name of the lady from whose
      house and by whose connivance she had eloped, he was never heard to breathe; but, if ever
      casually mentioned before him, every feature would become convulsed, and he would instantly
      leave the room. Often and often he accused his own harshness as the cause of driving her from
      him, and then came, with overwhelming bitterness, the thought that if he lately had been
      harsh, surely the recollection of all the indulgent fondness he had shown demanded some
      gratitude in return. If she had but written, had but expressed one wish for his continued
      love, one regret for his present pain! But no letter came, and the contending but
      all-depressing emotions so completely undermined a constitution never very strong, and already
      worn by care, that when another and still heavier trial came, he sunk at once beneath it.</p>
<p>Though Eleanor had been his favorite, his feelings of pride and hope had greatly centered in
      his son, whose career, in five years' active service on board a man-of-war, had been such as
      to raise him already to a lieutenancy, and excite every gratifying emotion, not only in his
      immediate family, but in a large circle of admiring friends. Mrs. Hamilton's love for her
      brother had naturally increased, strong as it always had been, even in childhood—and the
      visits which Charles had been enabled to make to Oakwood, brief in duration as they were
      compelled to be, had always been fraught with heartfelt, joyous happiness, not only to herself
      but to her husband. The pain and anxiety attendant on Eleanor's elopement, and the dread of
      its effects on Lord Delmont, had for two or three months been the sole subject of thought; but
      at length, and, like a fearful flash bringing a new sorrow to light, it pressed upon them that
      it was long after the period that intelligence of Charles ought to have been received. Still
      hoping against hope, not only the Delmont family, but all who had friends and relatives on
      board the Leander, imagined that she might have drifted from her course, or been engaged on
      some secret and distant expedition, but that intelligence concerning her would and must soon
      come. Alas! after months of agonizing suspense, information was received that several planks
      and masts, bearing evidence of fire as well as water, and some sea-chests, bearing names, only
      too soon recognized as those of some of the Leander's crew, had been cast off the coast of
      Barbary, and there could be no more doubt that death or slavery—that fearful slavery which the
      bombardment of Algiers had so displayed to European eyes—was the portion of all those beloved
      ones, for whom so many aching hearts and eyes had watched and wept in vain. It was a trial so
      terrible that Mrs. Hamilton felt at first as if even submission had departed from her; and she
      could almost have rebelled in spirit against the inscrutable decree, that had consigned one so
      free from vice and evil, so full of happiness and worth, to a doom so terrible. Much as she
      had loved and reverenced her husband before, she seemed never to have felt his worth and
      tenderness till then. It was his sympathy, his strength, that recalled her to a sense of her
      duty, and gave her power to endure, by a realization once more of that submissiveness to a
      Father's will, which had never before failed her. But time, though it softened the first
      anguish, had no power over the memories of this brother, not even when the increasing cares
      and joys of maternity so fully engrossed her, that the present and the future of her children
      appeared to have banished all of her own past.</p>
<p>Lord Delmont did not survive the mournful tidings of the certain wreck of the Leander above
      two months; but his released spirit did not meet that of his son. Charles was not dead. He
      toiled as a slave long years in living death, before there was even a partial amelioration of
      his sufferings. But no tidings of him ever came, a young child of three years old, a distant
      branch of the Manvers family, became Lord Delmont.</p>
<p>Years rolled on, and Mrs. Hamilton's lot was so full of tranquil happiness, so fraught with
      the innumerable daily joys of a loving wife and devoted mother, that her prayer was ever
      rising for guidance, and gratitude, that prosperity might not unfit her for the dark days of
      trial and adversity, when they should come. That she had cares as well as joys could not be
      otherwise, when so intensely anxious to bring up her children with more regard to their
      spiritual and moral welfare, than even the cultivation of their intellect. She was one of
      those who thought still more of the training of the heart than of the mind, believing that
      were the first properly awakened, the latter would need little incitement to exertion. Two
      girls had been the sole addition to her family.</p>
<p>One other wish, and one of many years' standing, Mrs. Hamilton had it in her power to
      fulfill. From childhood she had been accustomed to think of Lucy Harcourt as one, to whom it
      might one day be in her power to return the heavy debt of gratitude she owed her mother; she
      had been accustomed to correspond with her from very early years; Mrs. Harcourt delighting in
      creating a mutual interest between her pupil and the child from whom circumstances had so
      sadly separated her. When therefore an event of a very painful nature to Miss Harcourt's
      individual feelings compelled her—as the only hope of regaining peace, and strengthening her
      for the arduous duty of instruction, which she knew, as a single woman, was her sole source of
      independent subsistence—she had no scruple in accepting that friendship which Mrs. Hamilton
      had so warmly proffered. A very few days of personal intercourse sufficed for mutual
      conviction, that correspondence had not deceived in the favorable impressions of either. Miss
      Harcourt found, indeed, the friend her aching spirit needed; and Mrs. Hamilton, long before
      the months of repose which she had insisted should forestall the commencement of exertion were
      over, rejoiced in the conviction that the daughter of her beloved and regretted friend was
      indeed well-fitted for that position in her family—her helper in the moral and intellectual
      training of her daughters—which her vivid fancy had often pictured as so filled. They were
      indeed but infants when Miss Harcourt arrived; but Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton found means to
      overrule the honorable scruples which, on the part of Lucy, seemed at first against their
      plan, and in her gradually returning health and peace, Mrs. Hamilton not only rejoiced, but
      felt gratefully thankful that the wish of so many years' standing, and which had seemed so
      little likely to be fulfilled, was absolutely accomplished, and she could prove how deeply she
      had loved and mourned her truly maternal friend. It is astonishing how often, if an earnest,
      heartfelt desire for the gratification of some good feeling or for the performance of some
      good deed be steadily and unvaryingly held before us, without any regard to its apparent
      impossibility, its accomplishment is at length obtained. It is supposed to be only done so in
      books, but this is a mistaken supposition, arising from the simple fact of individuals so
      often forgetting their own past, and failing steadily to pursue one object, regardless of the
      lapse of years. If they looked into themselves more often and more carefully, if they sought
      consistency in desire and pursuit, they would often be startled at their connection, and that
      it is not so useless to <hi>wish</hi> and <hi>seek</hi>, when both are of such a nature as can
      be based on and strengthened by prayer, as it may seem. Human life presents as many startling
      connections and contingencies as romance—only, as the <hi>actors</hi> not the
      <hi>observers</hi> of this world's busy scene, we can not trace them as we do in books.</p>
<p>The thought of Eleanor was the only dark shade in Mrs. Hamilton's life. She had written to
      her often, but communication with India was not then what it is now, and her letters might not
      have reached their destination; especially as being in active service, Captain Fortescue was
      himself constantly changing his quarters. Whatever the cause (for Eleanor's letters, Mrs.
      Hamilton thought, might also have miscarried), she heard nothing of her till the hurried
      epistle commenced by her sister, and finished by Mr. Myrvin, brought the startling
      intelligence that she was a widow and dying, unable to reach Oakwood, where she had hoped at
      least to have sufficient strength to bring her children, and implore for them protection and
      love and conjuring Mrs. Hamilton to come to her without delay. The letter, imperfectly
      directed, had been days on its journey, and it was with the most melancholy forebodings Mr.
      and Mrs. Hamilton had started for Llangwillan.</p>
<p>But though it was not till many years after Edward and Ellen Fortescue became inmates of her
      family that Mrs. Hamilton became acquainted with all the particulars of their childhood, it is
      necessary that our readers should be rather more enlightened; otherwise the character of Ellen
      may be to them as unnatural and as incomprehensible as it was to her aunt.</p>
<p>That Eleanor could realize true happiness in a marriage entered into only because she could
      not bear the torture of her own thoughts, and her constant dread of the world's contumely, was
      not likely. At first, indeed, it was a very delightful thing to find herself the object not
      only of devotion to her husband (whom, could she entirely have forgotten Fitzclair, she might
      have really loved), but a still more brilliant star in India than she had even been in
      England. Though Captain Fortescue was often engaged in marches and countermarches, where
      Eleanor sometimes, though very rarely, accompanied him, still there were intervals of rest for
      him in the larger cities, where his wife ever shone pre-eminent. For the first three or four
      years, the pride he felt in seeing her so universally admired, in the greater attention he
      received for her sake, compensated for, or concealed the qualities, which, as a soldier's
      wife, he had fondly believed she would possess. But as his health, always delicate, became
      more and more undermined, and compelled him to relinquish society, at least in a great
      measure, and to look for the quiet pleasures of domestic life, he found, and bitter was that
      first awakening, that his wishes, his comfort, were of no importance. She could not resign the
      pleasures of society—of still being enabled to pursue the dangerous amusement of her girlhood
      (though so guardedly that not a rumor against her ever found breath), for the dullness of her
      home. Yet still he loved her; and when Eleanor, with all the fascinating playfulness of her
      former self, would caress and try to persuade him to go out with her, and not sit moping at
      home, and that if he would, she would behave just as he liked, and if he did not care to see
      her surrounded, as she knew she was, by red coats, she would dismiss them all, and devote
      herself to him—but indeed she could not stay at home—he would feel that it would be cruel
      indeed to chain such a being to his side, and sometimes make the exertion (for which he was
      little fitted) to accompany her; at others, with kind words and indulgent love, permit her to
      follow her own wishes, and remain alone. But little did he think the real reason that Eleanor
      could not rest in quiet at home. The recollection of Lord Fitzclair was at such times so
      fearfully vivid, that the very agony she had endured when first told of his fearful end would
      return in all its intensity; the thought: Had her father really cursed her for her
      disobedience, and was it that forever hovering round her, preventing any thing like lasting
      happiness. And yet, by a strange contradiction, while the idea of her father's curse shook her
      whole frame at times with convulsive sobs, pride, that most fatal ingredient of her character,
      utterly prevented all attempt on her part to communicate with her relations. She said, as they
      had made no effort to conciliate, she would not; and yet the longing for Emmeline sometimes
      became actually painful.</p>
<p>Eleanor was never intended for the heartless, reckless being she had tried to become. It was
      a constant and most terrible struggle between the good and evil parts of her nature, and
      though the evil triumphed—in the determination that nothing should change her course of
      action, nothing compel her to acknowledge she had ever been in the wrong, and was really not
      the perfect creature which flattery was ever ready to pour into her ear—the good had yet so
      much power as to make her miserable, by the conviction, that she was not what she might have
      been—that she never could be happy—that every pleasure was hollow, every amusement vain. Again
      and again the memories of Emmeline's gentle, sustaining, ever active piety would come before
      her, as if beseeching her to seek the only fount of peace; but so terrible was the
      self-reproach, the anguish which the thought called up, that she always turned from it with a
      shudder, resolved that religion was never meant for such as herself, and that its restrictions
      should never enter her mind, or its dictates pass her lips.</p>
<p>With the awakening intelligence of her son, however, there seemed one pleasure not wholly
      hollow—one enjoyment without the shadow of alloy; and she grasped it with an avidity and a
      constancy, that in a character generally so wavering and inconsistent was almost incredible.
      That her son was from his earliest infancy the image of herself, might have added strength to
      the feeling; but the intense love, almost idolatry, she felt toward him, increasing with his
      growth, did much toward banishing the unpleasant feelings of remorse and home-sickness. She
      devoted herself to her boy, not judiciously indeed, for she was not one to practice
      self-denial in education; and as Edward's disposition was not one to cause her annoyance, even
      from over-indulgence, there was not even the check of his ill-temper or rudeness toward
      herself, to whisper the fearful evil she was engendering.</p>
<p>What was the emotion which had so riveted her to her son, it might have been difficult to
      ascertain; it could scarcely have been the mere instinct of maternity, for then it would have
      extended to her daughter; but as complete as was her indulgence to Edward, so was her neglect
      of Ellen.</p>
<p>Colonel Fortescue (for he had gradually attained that rank) had borne, without complaint,
      neglect of himself; nay, it had not had power in the least degree to diminish his love, though
      it might have awakened him to the consciousness that his wife was indeed not perfect. Her
      devotion to Edward, even undertaking the toilsome task of instruction, had delighted him; for,
      at first, having been much from home, he was not conscious of the lonely fate of his little
      girl; but when the truth became evident, that she was an object almost of dislike—that she was
      left entirely to the tender mercies of a hireling, and Eleanor only alluded to her, to
      contrast her peevishness and stupidity with Edward's happiness and intellect, all the father
      was roused within him, and, for the first time, he felt and expressed serious displeasure. He
      acknowledged that his son might, indeed, be superior in beauty and talent, but he would not
      allow that Ellen's affections were less warm, or her temper less capable of guidance. To him,
      and to all who had in the least attended to childhood, Ellen's face, even from infancy,
      expressed not ill-temper, but suffering. Continually ill, for she inherited her father's
      constitution, the poor little infant was constantly crying or fretful; which Eleanor; never
      having known what illness was, attributed at once to a naturally evil temper which annoyed
      her. The nurse, as ignorant as she was obsequious, adopted the same opinion; and, before she
      was even three years old, harshness, both by nurse and mother, had been constantly used, to
      make Ellen as good a child as her brother.</p>
<p>In vain did the colonel, when he became aware of this treatment, remonstrate that it was the
      illness of the poor child—neither obstinacy nor ill-temper: his wife would not understand him,
      and at length he sternly and peremptorily declared, that as she had her will with Edward, he
      would have his with Ellen, and that no chastisement should be inflicted. If she did wrong, he
      was to be told of it, and if necessary he would reprove her, but he would allow no other
      interference. Mrs. Fortescue made not the least objection, believing that as her husband had
      thus taken her in charge, she was exonerated from all blame if she left her entirely to
      him.</p>
<p>Only too quickly did the poor child discover that the lovely being whom she called mother,
      and whom she loved so fondly, had no love, no caress for her. Repeated punishment, though it
      had only extended to her fifth year, had completely crushed the gentle, tender spirit, that
      had required such judicious nursing; and combined with physical suffering, instead of
      deadening the feelings, as in some dispositions it would have done, had rendered them morbidly
      acute—an effect which constant loneliness naturally deepened. Her father's love and caresses
      had caused her to cling to him so passionately, that every word he said, every request he made
      her, was treasured and thought upon, when he was away from her, with a tenacity many would
      have fancied unnatural in a child. He taught her, though his heart often bled as he did so
      (for what claim had her mother upon the feelings he sought to inculcate), to love, honor, and
      obey her mother in all things; that if she did so, she would be as happy as Edward in time,
      and Ellen, though she did not understand him, obeyed; but Colonel Fortescue little imagined
      the evil which was accruing from these very natural lessons.</p>
<p>Ellen learned to believe that, as her mother never noticed her, except in accounts of anger
      or irritation, it must be her own fault. She longed to be beautiful and buoyant as Edward; and
      that she was neither, marked her in her own young mind as so inferior, it was no wonder her
      mother could not caress or love her. Had Edward presumed on his favoritism, and been unkind or
      neglectful, she might, perhaps, have envied more than she loved him; but his disposition was
      naturally so noble, so open-hearted, so generous, that he always treated her with affection,
      and would share with her his playthings and sweets, even while he could not but believe her in
      all things his inferior; and that as such, of course, her wishes could never cross with his.
      Poor child, she scarcely knew what it was to wish, except that she might cling to her mother
      as she did to her father, and that she could but be good and beautiful enough to win her love!
      The lesson of concealment of every feeling is but too easily and too early learned. Tears do
      not flow even from childhood, when always rudely checked, and angrily reproved. Affection can
      not display itself unless called forth; and so the very outward seeming of children is more in
      a parent's hand than mere superficial observers may believe: and Mrs. Fortescue blamed and
      disliked the cold inanimate exterior which she had never tried to warm.</p>
<p>Ellen's extreme difficulty in acquiring knowledge, compared with Edward's extraordinary
      quickness, only confirmed her painful conviction of her great inferiority, the impossibility
      of her ever winning love—and the consequent increased intensity of her affection for her
      father and brother, who loved her notwithstanding. That the child herself could not have
      defined these sensations is true, but that they had existence, even before she was nine years
      old, and that they influenced many years of her after-life, causing error and suffering, and
      rendering Mrs. Hamilton's task one of pain and difficulty, before these mistaken influences
      could be eradicated, is equally so. The power over early years is so immense, its
      responsibility so extensive, its neglect or abuse may indeed make the earnest thinker tremble;
      less, perhaps, for the actual amount of general evil, for that circumstances in after life are
      sometimes graciously permitted to avert, but for individual suffering and individual joy—and
      especially is this the case in the training of girls. More enduring in their very fragility
      than boys, they may be compared to those precious metals which fire and water and pressure
      have no power to break, but simply to draw out to a thinner and thinner thread, dwindling more
      and more, but to its last spider-woven fineness capable of tenuity and vitality. While boys,
      like men, are often crushed at once—the frame of the one and the spirit of the other equally
      unable to endure.</p>
</div>