
CHAPTER VI.
THE SENTENCE, AND ITS EXECUTION.
The excitement which reigned in the servants' hall, after they had withdrawn, in the most
      respectful silence, from the library, was extreme. Robert, utterly unable to realize relief in
      this proof of his own innocence, could only pace the hall in agony, deploring his mad
      carelessness, which, by exposing to temptation, had caused it all; and Morris and Ellis
      deepened the remorse by perfectly agreeing with him. Before they separated, the old steward
      called them all together; and, his voice trembling with agitation, the tears actually running
      down his furrowed cheeks, told them that even as their mistress had done her duty to the
      utmost, ay, more than the utmost by them—for it must have well-nigh broken her heart to do
      it—a solemn duty was demanded from them to her, and that if either man, woman, or child failed
      in it, he should know that they had neither feeling, honor, nor gratitude in their hearts, and
      deserved and should be scouted by them all; and that duty was never to let the event of that
      night pass their lips, even to each other. It was enough that all mystery and suspicion had
      been taken from them, and that time would clear up the remainder; he never would believe the
      grandchild of his mistress's father, one she had so loved and cared for, could willfully act
      as appearances seemed to say; that he was sure, one day or other, they would all find there
      was much more to pity than to blame; and till then, if they had the least spark of generous or
      grateful feeling, they would forget the whole affair, and only evince their sense of their
      mistress's conduct, by yet greater respect and attention to their respective duties.
The old man's speech was garrulous, and perhaps often faulty in grammar, but it came from
      the heart, and so went to the heart at once, and not one held back from the pledge of silence
      he demanded. There are some who imagine that the refinement of feeling which alone could
      actuate Morris's speech, and its warm and immediate response, is only to be found among the
      educated and the rich: how little those who thus suppose understand the human heart! Kindness
      begets kindness; and if superiors will but think of, and seek the happiness, temporal and
      eternal, of their inferiors—will but prove that they are considered us children of one common
      Father—there needs no equality of rank to create equality of happiness, or equality of
      refined, because true feeling.
The next morning, when Mrs. Hamilton had occasion to speak to Morris about some farm
      receipts, which had not been forthcoming the preceding day, she recalled him as he was
      departing; but the words she had to say seemed unusually difficult, for her voice audibly
      faltered, and her face was completely shaded by her hand. It was simply to ask that which
      Morris's loving reverence had already done; and when the old man, in those earnest accents of
      heartfelt respect and kindness which never can be mistaken, related what had passed, his
      mistress hastily extended her hand to him, saying, in a tone he never forgot—
"God bless you, Morris! I ought to have known your love for your master's house would have
      urged this, without any request from me. I can not thank you enough." The kiss he ventured to
      press upon the delicate hand which pressed his rough palm, was not unaccompanied, though he
      did force back the tear, and most respectfully, yet very earnestly, beseech his mistress not
      to take on too much. There must be some cause, some mystery; no one belonging to her could so
      have acted without some very fearful temptation, some very powerful reason, and it would all
      come straight one day.
But whatever the future, the present was only suffering; for, to obtain a full confession
      from Ellen, Mrs. Hamilton felt so absolutely incumbent on her, that she steadily refused to
      listen to either pity or affection, which could shake her firmness; and the opinion and advice
      of Mr. Howard strengthened the determination. He had a private interview with Ellen, but it
      was attended with so very little success, that he left her far more bewildered and grieved
      than he had sought her; but fully convinced it was mere hardihood and obstinacy, which caused
      her incomprehensible and most guilty silence. Not even allowing, as Mrs. Hamilton had, that
      there was any evidence of misery and remorse; perhaps she had been more quiet, more resolutely
      calm, and if it had not been for the strong appearances against her, he surely must have seen
      it was the strength and quiet of despair, not the defiance he believed.
"This rebellious spirit must be conquered," he said, on rejoining Mrs. Hamilton, who, with
      her children and Miss Harcourt, had most anxiously and yet hopefully awaited the result of his
      interference. "We should actually be sharing her sin, if we permit her to conquer us by
      obduracy and self-will. Solitary confinement and complete idleness may bring her to a better
      temper, and, in fact, should be persisted in, till a full confession be made. If that fail, my
      dear Mrs. Hamilton, your niece should be banished from Oakwood. She must not remain here, a
      continual source of anxiety and misery to you, and of successful hardihood to herself; but of
      that there will be time enough to think when you have an answer from Mr. Hamilton; his
      judgment from a distance may be wiser than ours on the spot, and irritated as we are by such
      unaccountable obstinacy in one we have always thought almost too yielding."
And it was this incomprehensible change of character, in seeming, that still more perplexed
      Mrs. Hamilton, and so made her believe there must be some worse fault, or dangerous
      entanglement, demanding such resolute pertinacity in concealment.
Closely connected with Ellis's private apartments, and having neither inlet nor outlet, save
      through the short passage opening from her sitting-room, were two small but not uncomfortable
      apartments, opening one into the other, and looking out on a very pretty but quite
      unfrequented part of the park. They had often been used when any of Ellis's children or
      grandchildren came to see her, and were in consequence almost sufficiently habitable, without
      any further preparation, except the turning one into a sitting-room, which Ellis's active care
      speedily accomplished. Her mistress inspected them, at her desire, suggested one or two
      additional comforts, and then held a long confidential conversation with her. She had such
      perfect confidence in her (for Ellis had been from a child—married, and become mother and
      widow, and married her children—all as an inmate of the Hamilton family, and had held the
      confidential post of housekeeper for sixteen years), that she did not hesitate one moment to
      commit Ellen entirely to her care, at least till she could receive an answer about her from
      her husband. She depended on her to watch over her health, to see that she took daily exercise
      with her, in those parts of the park where she was not likely to attract notice, as being with
      her instead of with any member of her family, and that she took her regular meals; to be with
      her whenever she took them, and at casual times in the day, not so as to remove the impression
      of solitude and disgrace, but to be enabled to watch her closely, and the least symptom of a
      softening spirit to report instantly to her.
"She will, of course, join us in the hours of devotion, though not occupying her usual
      place, for she who has lowered herself, in the sight of God and man, beneath the humblest of
      my domestics, may no longer kneel above them," she said in conclusion. "But of my
      determination on that point she is already aware; and she will go with us as usual to church;
      I will have no remark made, further than I can avoid. Be as kind to her as you can, Ellis,
      consistent with your character as a wise and watchful guardian. God in mercy grant that her
      heart may be so softened, that you will not fill that painful position long. And now to see
      her."
But Percy's watchful care had so quietly interposed, that his mother found herself in their
      usual sitting-room, and in the midst of them all, before she could seek Ellen; and when, with
      half reproach, she told him, that she had still a most painful duty to accomplish, therefore
      he ought not to have prevented it, he answered impetuously—
"Mother, you shall not see Ellen any more alone! she has made you miserable enough already,
      and each time that she sees you, her deceitful appearance of remorse and suffering, for they
      can not be real, or she would speak, but add to it; send for her here, and tell her
      your decision before us all."
And Mrs. Hamilton complied, for she felt as if her firmness would be less likely to fail,
      than if Ellen attempted any thing like supplication with her alone. But not a word of
      supplication came. Ellen had answered the summons, by quietly accompanying Ellis, who had been
      sent for her, to her aunt's presence, pale, indeed, as marble, but so tearless and still, as
      to seem unmoved. An expression of actual relief stole over her features as she heard her
      sentence, undisturbed even when told that this would only be, till Mr. Hamilton's sentence
      came; as, if she continued silent until then, of course whatever severer measures he might
      dictate would be instantly obeyed. But when Mrs. Hamilton proceeded to say that she intended
      writing the whole affair to Edward, that his influence might awaken her to a sense of the
      fearfully aggravated guilt she was incurring by her silence, an expression of the most intense
      agony succeeded the previous calm, and sinking down before her, Ellen wildly implored—
"Oh, aunt Emmeline, in mercy spare him! do not, oh, do not throw such shame upon him, he who
      is so brave, admired, honored! do not, oh, if you have any pity left, do not make him hate me,
      loathe me too, my own only brother! he must throw me off. How can he bear such shame upon his
      name! Oh, do with me more than you have said, any thing, every thing, but that. Spare
      him!"
"Spare him yourself," interposed Percy, sternly.—(He was standing, with his arms crossed, by
      a window; Herbert was leaning at the back of Mrs. Hamilton's chair; Caroline and Miss Harcourt
      trying very steadily to work, and Emmeline bending over a drawing, which her tears were
      utterly spoiling).—"If the knowledge of your sin make him miserable, as it must, be yourself
      the one to save him—you alone can. Speak—break this determined and most guilty silence, and
      his influence will not be needed, and my mother will be silent to him concerning what has
      passed, now and forever, as we will all. If you so love him, spare him the shame you have
      brought on all of us; if not, it is mere words, as must be the love you have professed all
      these years for my mother."
Ellen turned her face toward him for a single minute, with such an expression of unutterable
      misery, that he turned hastily away, even his anger in part subdued, and Mrs. Hamilton could
      scarcely reply.
"I can not grant your request, Ellen, for to refuse it, appears to me the only means of
      softening you. It may be a full fortnight before I can write to Edward, for we must receive
      letters first. If during that interval you choose to give me the only proof of repentance that
      can satisfy me, or bring the least hope of returning happiness to yourself, I shall now know
      how to act. I would indeed spare your brother this bitter shame, but if you continue thus
      obdurate, no entreaties will move me. Rise, and go with Ellis. Punishment and misery,
      repentance and pardon, are all before you; you alone can choose. I shall interfere no more,
      till your uncle's sentence comes." And longing to end this painful scene, for her mistress's
      sake, Ellis led Ellen from the room, and conducted her to the apartments assigned her. She
      felt much too angry and annoyed at the pain and trouble Ellen, was giving her mistress, to
      evince any thing like kindness toward her at first, but she had not been under her care above
      a week before her feelings underwent a complete change.
Suffering as she was enduring, more especially from the conviction, that to every one of
      those she loved (for affection for each one of the family had now returned with almost
      passionate violence) she must be an object of hate and loathing, yet that her sin was known,
      was a relief so inexpressibly blessed, she felt strengthened to endure every thing else. She
      knew, and her God knew, the agonized temptation to the momentary act, and the cause of her
      determined silence. She felt there was strange comfort in that; though she knew no punishment
      could be too severe for the sin itself, and she prayed constantly to be enabled to bear it,
      and still not to betray her brother; and the consequence of these petitions was a calm,
      gentle, deeply submissive demeanor. Not a murmur ever passed her lips, and Ellis scarcely ever
      saw the signs of tears, which she longed for; for the quiet, but fearfully intense suffering,
      Ellen's very evident daily portion, alarmed her for its effect upon her always delicate
      health. As yet, however, there was no outward appearance of its failing, it rather bore up,
      from the cessation of the nervous dread and constant terror, which she had endured before; and
      before Mr. Hamilton's letter arrived, a month after the fatal discovery, Ellis had drawn her
      own conclusions, and her manner, instead of being distant and cold, had become so excessively
      kind and feeling, that the poor girl felt some heavy change must be impending, she dared not
      look to the continuance of such comfort.
But Mrs. Hamilton never saw her niece, save when no words could pass between them; and she
      could not judge as Ellis did. She could only feel, as each day passed, without bringing the
      desired proof of sorrow and amendment, more and more bewildered, and very wretched. Though,
      for her children's sake, she so conquered the feeling as, after the first week, to restore
      cheerfulness, and promote the various amusements they had all so enjoyed. Ellen's
      disappearance had of course to be accounted for, to the intimate friends with whom they so
      constantly were; but her acknowledgment that she had been disappointed in her, and that her
      conduct would not allow her any social or domestic indulgence, at least for a time, satisfied
      the elder members. Annie, for the first time, discovered that Caroline was her match in
      cleverness, merely from her excessive truth and simplicity, and that, manœuvre as she might,
      she could not discover the smallest clew to this sudden mystery. And Mary, for the first time,
      and on this one subject alone, found Herbert and Emmeline impenetrably reserved.
As soon as Mrs. Langford had been informed by her son, at his mistress's desire, of the
      unanswerable proof of his innocence, she hastened to the Hall, and requesting a private
      interview with Mrs. Hamilton, placed at once in her hands all the trinkets and watch, with
      which she had been at different times intrusted; related all that had passed between her and
      Miss Fortescue, the excessive misery she seemed to be enduring; and confessed that the few
      pounds she had given her, as the sums obtained by the sale of the trinkets, she had advanced
      herself, having resolved that nothing should induce her to dispose of them; and that of course
      it was the difficulty she had in advancing their right value, which had occasioned the length
      of time that had elapsed since Ellen had first sought her.
"Would it not go far to prove she really did wish to return the money?" Mrs. Hamilton
      thought, long after the widow had left her, and the sums she had advanced returned with
      interest. "Was it to return the fatally appropriated sum, or because she needed more? Ellen
      had so positively, and with such agony asserted the first, that it was scarcely possible to
      disbelieve her; but what was this fearful difficulty, this pressing demand by one so young for
      so much money? Why, if it were comparatively innocent, would she not speak?" The more she
      thought, the more perplexed and anxious she seemed to become. The act itself of endeavoring to
      dispose of the trinkets, especially those that had been given and received, as doubly valuable
      because they had been worn by her mother, would have been sufficiently faulty to have
      occasioned natural displeasure, but compared with other known and unknown faults, it sunk into
      almost nothing. Mrs. Hamilton collected them all together, those Mrs. Langford had returned,
      and the few remaining in her niece's drawer, and carefully put them away, till circumstances
      might authorize her returning them to Ellen, and determined on saying nothing more on the
      subject either to Ellen or her own family.
One thing Ellis reported to her regarding Ellen, which certainly seemed like a consciousness
      of the wrong she had done Robert, and a wish to atone for it. She begged Ellis so earnestly
      that she might see him, if it were only for five minutes, that she could not resist her; and
      when he came, she implored him so touchingly, so pleadingly to forgive her long silence
      himself, and entreat his mother to do so too; assuring him, that it was the hope of being able
      to restore the notes to him, without revealing her identity, which had caused the silence,
      that it was scarcely possible to listen to her unmoved. It was no false humility, but the
      deepest, most unfeigned contrition for having been the cause of injury.
Ten days after Ellen's imprisonment, the letter arrived from Sir Edward Manly, which Mrs.
      Hamilton had alluded to as necessary to be received, before she could write to her nephew, and
      the news it brought, though somewhat alloyed, would at another time have been received with
      the greatest delight. Edward was returning. In three weeks, or a month at the utmost, after
      the receipt of his commander's letter, he might be with them all; invalided home for a three
      or four months' leave. There had been another, and rather severe engagement, in which young
      Fortescue had still more distinguished himself; but from his headlong courage had been
      severely, but not at all seriously, hurt. Sir Edward intended sending the pirate frigate which
      they had taken to England, as she was a tight-built, well looking craft enough, he wrote, if
      manned with honorable men instead of desperate villians; and had nominated Harding and
      Fortescue to accompany the second lieutenant, as her officers.
The name of Harding produced no disagreeable reminiscences in Mrs. Hamilton's mind. It had
      been so very long since Edward had even mentioned him, that she had almost forgotten his early
      fancy for him. Her only thought now was thankfulness that her gallant nephew had been
      preserved, and that he was coming home. It could scarcely be pleasure she felt, though all the
      young party did, for there was such an excitement in Edward's courage, and in his having been
      in two desperate engagements, and seen so much, that, with the buoyancy happily natural to
      well-disposed youth, they could only think and talk of his return, forgetting the alloy that
      must cloud it. Percy and Herbert hoped he would arrive within the three weeks, as then they
      should be with him at least a week or ten days. If delayed, he would very provokingly just
      arrive as they would be returning to college.
After much painful deliberation, Mrs. Hamilton determined on making Herbert her messenger
      with these unexpected tidings to Ellen; hoping more than she expressed that his gentle
      eloquence in bringing before her the misery to which she must condemn her brother if she would
      persist in this silence, and so compel an appeal to him, would have some effect; especially as
      she charged him to impress upon her that even now confession should bring pardon, and
      concealment of all from Edward. Herbert gladly undertook the mission, and so feelingly, so
      earnestly discharged it, that poor Ellen felt more heart-broken than she had done yet, and
      almost incapable of retaining her firmness. But she did; for danger to Edward seemed more
      imminent now that he was coming home, to the very vicinity of his dreaded uncle, than when he
      was at a distance. She could only feel thankful—if concealment were indeed so absolutely
      necessary as he had declared it to be—that Mr. Hamilton was still from home, and might
      continue to be so during Edward's visit. It was difficult to repress the sickening shudder,
      when Herbert chanced to mention that Harding was her brother's companion in his voyage home,
      and difficult, not to express more disappointment than the occasion warranted, that Edward had
      not answered her last letter. He must have received it, Herbert said, for Sir Edward
      acknowledged his father's in which hers to Edward had been inclosed. He left her after a very
      long interview, deeply grieved at the failure of all his persuasions, all his remonstrances,
      but compelled, he could not satisfactorily explain why, either to himself or to his family, to
      pity far more than to blame. Percy declared, as did Caroline and Miss Harcourt, that it must
      be only his own too kind and gentle disposition, which never could blame anybody or any thing.
      Mrs. Hamilton was bitterly disappointed; Mr. Howard insisted that such obduracy demanded
      nothing but the sternest treatment, and he only wished Mr. Hamilton's letter could arrive at
      once. He saw Ellen again himself twice in the five weeks, which elapsed between the discovery
      of her sin and the arrival of Mr. Hamilton's answer; but if kindness had so failed, it was
      comparatively easy to resist his well-intentioned, but in this case utterly mistaken
      sternness. He was in general so kind even in his judgments, that Mrs. Hamilton thought he must
      have some reason to believe Ellen so thoroughly hardened, and from his report of her was
      enabled to impart her husband's sentence with more firmness, than had she listened to her own
      kind, still loving heart.
It was as she and Mr. Howard had both expected. Ellen was no longer to remain at Oakwood,
      but to be placed under the care of a maiden lady, living in Yorkshire, a relation of Mr.
      Hamilton, and one who had occasionally visited Oakwood, and was, therefore, well known to Mrs.
      Hamilton, and to Ellis too, and regarded with such dislike by the latter, as to make her
      actually venture to entreat her mistress not to send Miss Ellen to her; she was sure it would
      break her heart. Now Miss Seldon was one of the worthiest women that ever breathed—honest,
      straightforward, truth-speaking literally to a fault, but as hard as she was true. Whether she
      ever had any feelings or not, Mrs. Hamilton, with all her penetration, never could discover;
      but the good she did was immense in practical benevolence, though the quick sympathy, the
      kindly word, the indulgent thought, seemed utterly unknown. She had no pity for faults or
      failings, always declaring forbearance and love were all folly; "if a branch were in the
      slightest degree decayed, cut it off; if the blight extend to the root, destroy it," she was
      fond of saying. As for youthful follies or errors, she had no patience with them, for never
      having been, or rather felt young herself, she could not understand the age in others. Ellis
      had not discrimination enough to discern the good which lay under this very disagreeable
      exterior; Mrs. Hamilton had; and suffering as she knew a residence with her must be to Ellen,
      if indeed she were really the character she had seemed in childhood—though the last few months
      had so contradicted it—she felt her husband had decided wisely, spite of the misery which
      still even the very thought of sending her orphan niece so completely from her, was to
      herself. Mr. Hamilton's letter read harshly, but his wife knew his high, almost stern
      principles; he had not seen Ellen's evident anguish; he could only judge from the relation
      which had been sent him, and all which that told was indeed against her. Of course he said, if
      she had confessed, and her confession in any degree, pleaded for her, his wife would use her
      own judgment as to the period of her banishment; but he could not imagine any cause for her
      conduct sufficiently excusing, as to demand the avoidance of his sentence altogether.
Miss Seldon's last visit to Oakwood was sufficiently well remembered by the young Hamiltons
      (though, it was before their cousins had arrived from India), for them all—even Percy and
      Caroline, the most indignant against Ellen—to think of their father's sentence with the
      deepest regret, and with almost dread for its effect on Ellen.
"If she did but know her, she must speak," was Emmeline's exclamation. "I did not feel quite
      sure that I was my own happy self, all the time she was with us."
"The atmosphere was frozen twenty degrees below zero in all the rooms she frequented, though
      it was otherwise a hot summer," rejoined Percy; "and in Yorkshire—"
"Pray do not joke, dear Percy; I can not bear to think of Ellen going away from us at all,
      much less to such a guardian, though I know she is very good," answered Herbert.
"Now, my good fellow, do not attempt to say a word for Nancy Seldon; she was the only person
      in the world I ever heard you acknowledge you disliked; so what must she be? Worthy! no doubt,
      or my father would not have trusted Ellen to her, but for any thing else—"
"Poor Ellen! she little knows to what her obstinacy is condemning her," rejoined Caroline;
      "I wish she did and then she might spare herself and mamma, too; though I fear even confession
      would not help her much now."
Mrs. Hamilton might and did think with them all, but she could not swerve from her duty. She
      wrote at once to Miss Seldon, not entering into particulars, but merely asking if she would
      consent to take charge of a relative, whose conduct demanded more rigid watchfulness and care,
      and an entire cessation of indulgence, than could be the case in the family circle at Oakwood.
      She and her husband had such perfect confidence in her, she said, that if she could oblige
      them by undertaking the duty, they knew, without any assurance on her part, that she would
      discharge it faithfully. The yearly sum they offered was large, because they wished their
      young relative to have all the comforts and appurtenances of a gentlewoman, and the advantages
      of the best education, the city near which she resided, could afford. Mrs. Hamilton had no
      doubt of the affirmative nature of the reply, for Miss Seldon owed the recovery of her fortune
      and position entirely to the exertions of Mr. Hamilton; and she had told him, once for all,
      that if she could but serve or oblige him in any way, great or small, it would make her far
      happier than she had ever been, or was likely to be in her solitary life. The letter written
      and dispatched, Mrs. Hamilton summoned Ellen once more to her presence.
The scene was again the library, where she had been writing, and the time nearing the short
      twilight of October. It was three weeks, rather more, since Sir Edward Manly's letter had been
      received, and Edward was, therefore, almost daily expected. The feelings with which his
      unhappy sister looked to his return it would be a vain attempt to define. At times the intense
      longing to see him again, caused a wild, almost sick feeling of pleasure, that she might,
      perhaps, so soon do so; then came all that had passed, and she pictured his anger, his
      loathing—true it had been for him, but he had not thought of such a deed. He would, he must
      hate and spurn her, too; and the idea of meeting him became absolute agony. Then—and she
      shuddered in dread—would he think that he must acknowledge it was for him she had thus acted?
      and, if so, had she not betrayed instead of saving him? Incident after incident in their
      childhood rose before her, to give her hope that he would be silent now as then, and not
      betray himself; but these contending terrors, united with the constant though silent suffering
      of her banishment from all she loved, the utter hopelessness as to the end of this trial, had
      not been without their effect on the outward frame. Ellis did not see it, from so constantly
      watching her, and from Ellen never refusing to take the exercise she desired her, and not
      making a single complaint as to the pain it was sometimes to walk, and always to swallow her
      meals; but as she stood opposite to her aunt, in the full light of the oriel window—her
      approach had been so noiseless, Mrs. Hamilton, who was bending over some papers, did not see
      her till she chanced to look up—the attenuation of form and feature was so very visible, that
      her aunt could not prevent herself from starting painfully, and the words with which she had
      intended to address her froze on her lips. It was with the utmost difficulty she refrained
      from folding her to her heart, and trying, by every means affection could devise, to soothe or
      remove that anguish, whatever its nature, far too deep and constant for one so very young; but
      how dared she do this, when, by this determined silence, Ellen so defied her authority, and
      seemed so resolved that neither severity nor kindness, nor her own sufferings should humble
      her spirit, though they had even affected her frame?
Conquering with a powerful effort the pleadings of affection, Mrs. Hamilton calmly entered
      on the subject for which she had summoned her, reading to her a greater part of her uncle's
      letter, hoping that its severity would spare her the pain of any additional remarks. Every
      word seemed to burn itself on Ellen's brain. What she had hoped she knew not, for she thought
      she had never hoped at all, but the words, "No cause can be excusing enough to justify the
      entire setting aside this sentence," seemed by its agony to tell her that the thought
      had entered her mind, if the real cause were by any chance discovered would she be
      forgiven, and in time restored to confidence and love? And now it was over, even that hope was
      gone.
Mrs. Hamilton paused for a reply or an observation, but none came, and she continued,
      impressively—"I can scarcely hope, Ellen, that as even the idea of sparing your only brother
      shame and misery, on his return home, expecting nothing but joy, after nearly three years'
      separation and exposure to danger, has had no effect in softening you, that your uncle's
      sentence will. Once I should have believed that only the thought of leaving me, and going to
      the care of a stranger, would have urged you to speak directly. I can believe this no longer;
      but as I wish you to be with Edward, at least part of his stay with us, I shall postpone your
      leaving us, one month from to-day. If, indeed, Edward's influence be such that, for his sake,
      you will make me a full confession and answer clearly and distinctly every question I put to
      you, your residence with Miss Seldon shall be limited to three, six, ten, or twelve months,
      according to the nature of the motive of this incomprehensible and, apparently most sinful
      conduct. If you leave us still obdurate, years will, in all probability, pass before we can
      feel sufficiently confident in the restored integrity and openness of your character to permit
      your return to us. The pain you are inflicting upon me it is useless to dwell upon. As the
      child of my only and most dearly loved sister, I have loved you, hoped for you, with little
      less intensity of affection than that I have borne toward my own; for I felt that, with the
      sole exception of your brother, I was the only being you had on earth united to you by ties of
      blood. How this conduct repays my love and care you must answer to yourself; I can only be
      sensible of bitter disappointment."
Again she stopped, evidently expecting a reply, but Ellen still remained silent. The short
      twilight of autumn had set in so suddenly, that Mrs. Hamilton was not aware her niece's cheek
      had become still paler, and that her white lips quivered repeatedly, as if she several times
      tried to speak, but could not. After a silence of some minutes, she said—
"If you are determined not to speak, Ellen, you may retire. I have told you all I wished to
      say, except that till you leave us though you will still occupy your present rooms, and be
      still under Ellis's care, you are at liberty to employ yourself, and go about the house and
      grounds as usual."
Ellen turned to go, still in that unbroken silence; she had reached the low step dividing
      the upper part from the lower part of the room, and whether she did not see it, or from some
      other cause, the room suddenly reeled before her, and she fell heavily forward. To spring
      toward her, raise her tenderly, bear her to the nearest couch, though she so trembled herself
      at finding Ellen quite insensible, as to render the task unusually difficult, and to ring
      hastily for Ellis, was the work of a minute, but it was many minutes before their united
      efforts could bring back consciousness.
"I knew it would break her heart, poor lamb!" was Ellis's exclamation, in a tone of most
      unusual excitement; "thank God, thank God! Master Edward's coming home, and that she is not to
      go till he does."
"Have you so much confidence in his influence?" asked her mistress, as, unable to resist the
      impulse, she bent down and repeatedly kissed the cold brow and cheek, to which she was so
      earnestly striving to restore warmth, "God in mercy grant you may be right!"
"Right? Dear my lady!" (whenever Ellis was strongly moved, she always so addressed her
      mistress;) "I would stake your confidence in me, which is all my life's worth, if Master
      Edward is not at the bottom of it all, and that this poor child is sacrificing herself for
      some fancied danger to him! I saw enough of that work when they were young children, and I
      have noticed enough since she has been under my care."
"Edward!" repeated Mrs. Hamilton, so bewildered, as to stop for the moment chafing Ellen's
      cold hand; "Edward! bearing the high character he does; what can he have to do with it?"
"I don't know, my lady, but I am sure he has. Young men, ay, some of the finest and bravest
      among us, get into difficulties sometimes, and it don't touch their characters as their
      officers see them, and Master Edward was always so terrified at the mere thought of my master
      knowing any of his faults; but—hush! we must not let her know we suspect any thing, poor lamb;
      it will make her still more miserable. You are better now, dear Miss Ellen, are you not?" she
      added, soothingly, as Ellen feebly raised her hand to her forehead, and then slowly unclosed
      her eyes, and beheld her aunt leaning over her, with that same expression of anxious
      affection, which her illness had so often caused in her childhood. Sense, or rather memory,
      had not quite returned, and her first words were, with a faint but happy smile—
"I am better, dear aunt, much better; I dare say I shall soon be well." But it was only a
      momentary forgetfulness; swift as thought came the whole of what had so lately passed—her
      uncle's letter, her aunt's words, and murmuring, in a tone how painfully changed! "I
      forgot—forgive me," she buried her face in the pillow.
"Ellen, my dear Ellen! why will you persist in making yourself and me so miserable, when a
      few words would make us happier?" exclaimed Mrs. Hamilton, almost imploringly, as she bent
      over her.
"Do not urge her now, dear my lady, she is not well enough; give her till Master Edward
      comes; I am sure she will not resist him," answered Ellis, very respectfully, though
      meaningly, as her look drew her mistress's attention to the shudder which convulsed Ellen's
      slight frame, at the mention of her brother.
Pained and bewildered more than ever, Mrs. Hamilton, after waiting till the faintness seemed
      quite gone, and thinking that if the restraint of her presence were removed, Ellen might be
      relieved by tears, left her, desiring Ellis to let her know in a short time how she was. The
      moment the door closed, Ellen threw her arms round Ellis's neck, exclaiming passionately—
"Take me away—take me away, dear Ellis; I can not bear this room—it seems all full of
      misery! and I loved it so once, and I shall love it again, when I am miles and miles away, and
      can not see it—nor any one belonging to it. Oh, Ellis, Ellis! I knew you were too kind. I was
      too glad and contented to be with you; it was not punishment enough for my sin—and I must go
      away—and I shall never, never see my aunt again—I know I shall not. Oh! if I might but die
      first! but I am too wicked for that; it is only the good that die."
And almost for the first time since her sin had been discovered, she gave way to a long and
      violent fit of weeping, which, though terrible while it lasted, as the anguish of the young
      always is, greatly relieved her, and enabled her after that day not to revert in words (the
      thought never left her till a still more fearful anxiety deadened it) to her uncle's sentence
      again.
Mrs. Hamilton sat for a very long time alone after she had left Ellen. Ellis's words
      returned to her again and again so pertinaciously, that she could not break from them. Edward!
      the cause of it all—could it be possible?—could it be, that he had plunged himself into
      difficulties, and afraid to appeal to his uncle or her, had so worked on Ellen as not only to
      make her send relief, but actually so to keep his secret, as to endure every thing rather than
      betray it? Circumstance after circumstance, thought after thought, so congregated upon her, so
      seemed to burst into being, and flash light one from the other, that her mind ached beneath
      their pressure. Ellen's unhappiness the day his last letter had been received, her sudden
      illness—had it taken place before or after Robert had lost the money? She could not satisfy
      herself, for her husband's sudden summons to Feroe, hasty preparations, and departure, had
      rendered all the month confused and unsatisfactory in its recollections. So intense was the
      relief of the idea, that Mrs. Hamilton feared to encourage it, lest it should prove a mere
      fancy, and urge softer feelings toward her niece than ought to be. Even the supposition made
      her heart yearn toward her with such a feeling of love, almost of veneration, for the
      determined self-devotion, so essentially woman's characteristic, that she resolutely checked
      its ascendency. All her previous fancies, that Ellen was no ordinary child, that early
      suffering and neglect had, while they produced some childish faults, matured and deepened the
      capabilities of endurance and control, from the consciousness (or rather existence, for it was
      not the consciousness to the child herself) of strong feeling, returned to her, as if
      determined to confirm Ellis's supposition. The disappearance of her allowance; her assertion,
      that she was seeking Mrs. Langford's cottage, by that shorter but forbidden path, to try and
      get her to dispose of her trinkets, when the wind blew the notes to her hand—all now seemed
      connected one with the other, and confirmed. She could well understand, how in a moment of
      almost madness they might have been used without thought, and the after-effect upon so
      delicate a mind and conscience. Then, in contradiction to all this (a mere hypothesis raised
      on nothing firmer than Ellis's supposition), came the constantly favorable accounts of Edward;
      his captain's pride and confidence in him; the seeming impossibility that he could get into
      such difficulties, and what were they? The name of Harding rushed on her mind, she knew not
      why or how—but it made her tremble, by its probable explanation of the whole. A coarse or even
      less refined mind, would have either appealed at once to Ellen, as to the truth of this
      suspicion, or thought herself justified in looking over all Edward's letters to his sister, as
      thus to discover the truth; but in Mrs. Hamilton's pure mind the idea never even entered,
      though all her niece's papers and letters were in her actual possession. She could only feel
      to her heart's core with Ellis, "Thank God, Master Edward's coming home!" and pray earnestly
      that he might be with them, as they hoped and anticipated, in a few, a very few days.
