
MY SECOND STAGE

Bear not false witness, slander not, nor lie; 
Truth is the speech of inward purity.The Light of Asia.
In my first stage the reader will perceive that I was a comparatively weak and harmless
     little slander, with merely that taint of original sin which was to be expected in one of such
     parentage.  But I developed with great rapidity; and I believe men of science will tell you
     that this is always the case with low organisms.  That, for instance, while it takes years to
     develop the man from the baby, and months to develop the dog from the puppy, the baby monad
     will grow to maturity in an hour.
Personally I should have preferred to linger in Mrs. O’Reilly’s pleasant drawing-room, for,
     as I said before, my victim interested me, and I wanted to observe him more closely and hear
     what he talked about.  But I received orders to attend evensong at the parish church, and to
     haunt the mind of Lena Houghton.
As we passed down the High Street the bells rang out loud and clear, and they made me feel
     the same slight sense of discomfort that I had felt when I looked at Zaluski; however, I went
     on, and soon entered the church.  It was a fine old Gothic building, and the afternoon sunshine
     seemed to flood the whole place; even the white stones in the aisle were glorified here and
     there with gorgeous patches of colour from the stained glass windows.  But the strange
     stillness and quiet oppressed me, I did not feel nearly so much at home as in Mrs. O’Reilly’s
     drawing-room—to use a terrestrial simile, I felt like a fish out of water.
For some time, too, I could find no entrance at all into the mind of Lena Houghton.  Try as I
     would, I could not distract her attention or gain the slightest hold upon her, and I really
     believe I should have been altogether baffled, had not the rector unconsciously come to my
     aid.
All through the prayers and psalms I had fought a desperate fight without gaining a single
     inch.  Then the rector walked over to the lectern, and the moment he opened his mouth I knew
     that my time had come, and that there was a very fair chance of victory before me.  Whether
     this clergyman had a toothache, or a headache, or a heavy load on his mind, I cannot say, but
     his reading was more lugubrious than the wind in an equinoctial gale.  I have since observed
     that he was only a degree worse than many other clerical readers, and that a strange and
     delightfully mistaken notion seems prevalent that the Bible must be read in a dreary and
     unnatural tone of voice, or with a sort of mournful monotony; it is intended as a sort of
     reverence, but I suspect that it often plays into the hands of my progenitor, as it most
     assuredly did in the present instance.
Hardly had the rector announced, “Here beginneth the forty-fourth verse of the sixteenth
     chapter of the book of the prophet Ezekiel,” than a sort of relaxation took place in the mind I
     was attacking.  Lena Houghton’s attention could only have been given to the drearily read
     lesson by a very great effort; she was a little lazy and did not make the effort, she thought
     how nice it was to sit down again, and then the melancholy voice lulled her into a vague
     interval of thoughtless inactivity.  I promptly seized my opportunity, and in a moment her
     whole mind was full of me.  She was an excitable, impressionable sort of girl, and when once I
     had obtained an entrance into her mind I found it the easiest thing in the world to dominate
     her thoughts.  Though she stood, and sat, and knelt, and curtseyed, and articulated words, her
     thoughts were entirely absorbed in me.  I crowded out the Magnificat with a picture of Zaluski
     and Gertrude Morley.  I led her through more terrible future possibilities in the second lesson
     than would be required for a three-volume novel.  I entirely eclipsed the collects with
     reflections on unhappy marriages; took her off viâ Russia and Nihilism in the State
     prayers, and by the time we arrived at St. Chrysostom had become so powerful that I had worked
     her mind into exactly the condition I desired.
The congregation rose.  Lena Houghton, still dominated by me, knelt longer than the rest, but
     at last she got up and walked down the aisle, and I felt a great sense of relief and
     satisfaction.  We were out in the open air once more, and I had triumphed; I was quite sure
     that she would tell the first person she met, for, as I have said before, she was entirely
     taken up with me, and to have kept me to herself would have required far more strength and
     unselfishness than she at that moment possessed.  She walked slowly through the churchyard,
     feeling much pleased to see that the curate had just left the vestry door, and that in a few
     moments their paths must converge.
Mr. Blackthorne had only been ordained three or four years, and was a little younger, and
     much less experienced in the ways of the world, than Sigismund Zaluski.  He was a good
     well-meaning fellow, a little narrow, a little prejudiced, a little spoiled by the devotion of
     the district visitors and Sunday School teachers; but he was honest and energetic, and as a
     worker among the poor few could have equalled him.  He seemed to fancy, however, that with the
     poor his work ended, and he was not always so wise as he might have been in Muddleton
     society.
“Good afternoon, Miss Houghton,” he exclaimed.  “Do you happen to know if your brother is at
     home?  I want just to speak to him about the choir treat.”
“Oh, he is sure to be in by this time,” said Lena.
And they walked home together.
“I am so glad to have this chance of speaking to you,” she began rather nervously.  “I wanted
     particularly to ask your advice.”
Mr. Blackthorne, being human and young, was not unnaturally flattered by this remark.  True,
     he was becoming well accustomed to this sort of thing, since the ladies of Muddleton were far
     more fond of seeking advice from the young and good-looking curate than from the elderly and
     experienced rector.  They said it was because Mr. Blackthorne was so much more sympathetic, and
     understood the difficulties of the day so much better; but I think they unconsciously deceived
     themselves, for the rector was one of a thousand, and the curate, though he had in him the
     makings of a fine man, was as yet altogether crude and young.
“Was it about anything in your district?” he asked, devoutly hoping that she was not going to
     propound some difficult question about the origin of evil, or any other obscure subject.  For
     though he liked the honour of being consulted, he did not always like the trouble it involved,
     and he remembered with a shudder that Miss Houghton had once asked him his opinion about the
     ‘Ethical Concept of the Good.’
“It was only that I was so troubled about something Mrs. O’Reilly has just told me,” said
     Lena Houghton.  “You won’t tell any one that I told you?”
“On no account,” said the curate, warmly.
“Well, you know Mr. Zaluski, and how the Morleys have taken him up?”
“Every one has taken him up,” said the curate, with the least little touch of resentment in
     his tone.  “I knew that the Morleys were his special friends; I imagine that he admires Miss
     Morley.”
“Yes, every one thinks they are either engaged or on the brink of it.  And oh, Mr.
     Blackthorne, can’t you or somebody put a stop to it, for it seems such a dreadful fate for poor
     Gertrude?”
The curate looked startled.
“Why, I don’t profess to like Mr. Zaluski,” he said.  “But I don’t know anything exactly
     against him.”
“But I do.  Mrs. O’Reilly has just been telling me.”
“What did she tell you?” he asked with some curiosity.
“Why, she has found out that he is really a Nihilist—just think of a Nihilist going about
     loose like this, and playing tennis at the rectory and all the good houses!  And not only that,
     but she says he is altogether a dangerous, unprincipled man with a dreadful temper.  You can’t
     think how unhappy she is about poor Gertrude, and so am I, for we were at school together and
     have always been friends.”
“I am very sorry to hear about it,” said Mr. Blackthorne, “but I don’t see that anything can
     be done.  You see, one does not like to interfere in these sort of things.  It seems officious
     rather, and meddlesome.”
“Yes, that is the worst of it,” she replied, with a sigh.  “I suppose we can do nothing. 
     Still, it has been a great relief just to tell you about it and get it off my mind.  I suppose
     we can only hope that something may put a stop to it all—we must just leave it to chance.”
This sentiment amused me not a little.  Leave it to chance indeed!  Had she not caused me to
     grow stronger and larger by every word she uttered?  And had not the conversation revealed to
     me Mr. Blackthorn’s one vulnerable part?  I knew well enough that I should be able to dominate
     his thoughts as I had done hers.  Finding me burdensome, she had passed me on to somebody else
     with additions that vastly increased my working powers, and then she talked of leaving it to
     chance!  The way in which mortals practise pious frauds on themselves is really delightful! 
     And yet Lena Houghton was a good sort of girl, and had from her childhood repeated the
     catechism words which proclaim that, “My duty to my neighbour is to love him as myself . . . To
     keep my tongue from evil-speaking, lying, and slandering.”  What is more, she took great pains
     to teach these words to a big class of Sunday School children, and went, rain or shine, to
     spend two hours each Sunday in a stuffy school-room for that purpose.  It was strange that she
     should be so ready to believe evil of her neighbour, and so eager to spread the story.  But my
     progenitor is clever, and doubtless knows very well, whom to select as his tools.
By this time they had reached a comfortable-looking, red-brick house with white stone
     facings, and in the discussion of the arrangements for the choir treat I was entirely
     forgotten.
