
CHAPTER I.
"Unser Sommer ist nur ein grün-angestrichener Winter."
The lives of the Professor, of Mrs. Forth, of Sarah—of all those with whom we have
      had any concern—are poorer by a full year than when we left them. The "Fragments of Menander"
      have been given to the world; and as certainly not less than three people have read them, they
      may be said to have been a success. So much so, at all events, as to encourage the Professor
      to delve and grub in the entrails of the Fathers for new Fragments. For the present, however,
      he has to delve and grub alone. For the
       present his secretary has broken down; for the present the pack-horse has sunk
      down beneath its pack. Doubtless it will soon be set on its legs again, and enabled to resume
      it; but, for the present, its back is unladen, and it is turned out to grass. Months of
      unlightened, hopeless, joyless labour! Her only wonder in looking back afterwards upon them is
      that they did not sooner work their inevitable effect. Months of unrelenting application, of
      chest-contracting bending over manuscript and proof; of entire absence of exercise and
      relaxation—for of her own will she has forsworn both. Thought is deader, memory fainter—and
      for what object but to kill both does she now live?—in the exhaustion consequent on overwork.
      Why and for whom should she spare herself? She will go until she drops. And the Professor,
      delighted to acquiesce unquestioningly in a metamorphosis so greatly to his advantage, always
      incurious as to interests that lie out of his own beat, and
       with the professed invalid's radical incredulity as to the possibility of anyone
      else being either sick or weary, drives his willing horse merrily along, until one fine day
      she falls down between the shafts. How glad she is when the breakdown comes! How intensely she
      prays that it may be the final one! But it is not so. By whatever door Mrs. Forth is to leave
      this world, it is certainly not by that of the entire derangement of the nervous system, for
      which attentive doctors unanimously prescribe immediate change, idleness, pleasure. The
      Professor is always angry with anyone for being ill; but against a sickness which involves
      undone work, expensive medicine, and a costly move, his indignation is too deep for words. He
      is scarcely more angry with her, however, for falling sick, than she is with herself for
      recovering. For as long as possible she has discredited it. Her physic bottles vex him hardly
      more than do her returning appetite, restored slumber, waxing flesh, and waning
       fever, herself. She had wished to die; and he, since she has turned out so
      unhealthy, would not be sorry to be rid of her. And so she lives; lives to put him to the
      expense of a migration to the English Lakes. He seems unable to shake off the idea that she
      has done it on purpose.

It has been as usual a wet morning, and to the bounds of the Lowood Hotel on Windermere all
      its impatient guests have been confined. Now that afternoon has come, it has brought with it a
      sort of doubtful fairness; more a cessation of storm than anything approaching positive fine
      weather. Wray's Castle, lifting its grey towers from its woods exactly opposite, has come into
      sight again. The Langdale Pikes have just shaken the rain-clouds off their notchy crests; but
      they hang poised above them, ready at once to descend and clip them. They have still fast hold
      of Wetherlam, though their lucent lightness shows that the sun is just behind them,
       and will presently drive his brave bright car over their vaporous bodies. It is
      very clear, from the high-flung windows of a sitting-room on the second floor, and also from
      the fact of its being a sitting-room at all, firstly that Professor Forth is not in it, and
      secondly that it is not his. Since his wife's sister and grandmother have thought it necessary
      to give her the meeting here, he has no objection to her taking advantage of their salon,
      since he is quite unequal to the expense of providing her with one of her own.
In a horse-hair arm-chair of that peculiar lodging-house build which pinions the arms and
      forces the head forward, sits Mrs. Churchill, placidly watching an unlading coach. At a
      certain somewhat early period of old age, given an easy temper and an entire absence of
      feeling, a person often appears for a few years to stand stationary. Since we last saw her,
      Mrs. Churchill has stood stationary. Not one more has been added to the number of her
       few wrinkles, and her old dimple still goes and comes with her agreeable smile.
      On the sofa, by right of her invalidhood, Belinda is lying, with a crop head of little curls;
      and out of the window not occupied by Mrs. Churchill, Sarah is hanging most of her body,
      alternately watching with feverish interest, and looking back over her own shoulder to
      chronicle the doings of the family who occupy the floor beneath them, and who, happily for
      her, have a balcony upon which they now and then emerge.
"There are two brothers, and two sisters, and a wife," cries she animatedly. "I cannot make
      out to whom the wife belongs; none of them seem to care much about her!"
"Perhaps she had money," rejoins Mrs. Churchill. "Dear me!" returning to the contemplation
      of her coach, "what a load for those poor horses, and how they are smoking!"
"They are all out on the balcony now,"
       says Sarah, delighted; "come quick, Belinda, and look!"
"I will take your word for it," replies Belinda lazily.
"It makes one quite wretched to see such cruelty!" says Mrs. Churchill, in a thoroughly
      comfortable voice, pursuing her own subject.
"They have been playing battledore and shuttlecock," says Sarah narratively. "I wish we had
      a battledore and shuttlecock."
"Whom would you expect to play with you?" asks her grandmother drily; "the Professor, or
      me?"
"They have dropped the shuttlecock into the road," continues Sarah narratively, and in a
      tone of breathless interest. "There is another man with them now; he cannot be a third
      brother; they are betting him a shilling that he will not climb over the balcony and swarm
      down the iron leg to fetch it. What a fool he will be if he does! Surely I have seen him
      before somewhere! I wish he would look up.
       Why, granny! Belinda! granny!—it is— it must be—young Bellairs!"
This time both obey her summons; but whether it be that their footsteps make more noise than
      they are aware of, or for whatever other reason, some of the party below choose this
      unfortunate moment to look up; and in a second they have all three slunk shamefacedly back
      again.
"Young Bellairs! Poor young Bellairs!" cries Sarah, throwing herself into a chair, and
      chuckling. "Young Bellairs, and the dinghey! do you remember, Belinda?"
(It is not very likely that Belinda has forgotten.)
"I wonder is there a dinghey here that I could take him out in?" says Miss Churchill
      thoughtfully. "Granny, are you aware that a dinghey only holds two? but if you insist upon it,
      in the interests of propriety, we will squeeze you in as well."
Mrs. Churchill laughs.
"I need not decide at once, need I?"
       says she, entering into the joke; "and as the dinghey is not here, and the
      carriage is, we may as well be setting off on our drive."
"He will see me get in!" cries Sarah, skipping to the glass, and adjusting her hat; "they
      watch us quite as much as we watch them. Well, let him! I flatter myself that I can get into a
      carriage with any woman in England!"
They are gone (not, however, before Miss Churchill has one again put in her head to say
      urgently, "Mind that you keep a good look-out upon them!"), and Belinda has the sitting-room
      and all the horse-hair chairs to herself. Perhaps the better to comply with her sister's
      exhortations, she abandons the sofa, and drawing up her grandmother's chair yet closer to the
      window, looks dreamily out on the lake, from which the hotel is parted only by the road, a
      quickset hedge, and a strip of grass. Upon the lower foreground hills opposite —so dark a
      second ago—what a nation of
       sunbeams has swooped! and now, as quickly they are gone again, and only the lawn
      that slopes to the water has become dazzling-green as any chrysoprase.
If she had died as she wished, she would not have seen that chrysoprase-green; nor the
      masterless wavelets sucking in riot in among the stakes of the little pier; nor the small
      white yacht curtseying and congeeing along over them. Is it worth while to have kept alive, in
      order to be looking at them here—alone?
What a noise the family below are making? What can they be doing? Surely they must
      be engaged in some pastime more violent than battledore and shuttlecock. They sound as if they
      were throwing chairs at each other. How plainly she can distinguish Bellairs's voice.
It was at St. Ursula's party that she first heard that voice. It was in answer to some
      sentence addressed to her by that voice, that her own suddenly broke down; it was while that
      voice was still in her ears that
       she caught sight once again of him who made her inattentive to all voices! She
      moves uneasily in her chair. She wishes that Bellairs had not come.
What a sudden spurt of daring glory on the stern necks of the Langdale Pikes! She can see
      their hollow deep clefts, and their scattered verdure, broken through by green rock-masses.
      She discovers a waterfall hanging unmoving on the mountain flank. How they are giving up their
      grey secrets to the sun! It is cruel to be looking at them all alone! to have to look now and
      for ever at all fair sights alone! She should be used to the thought by now, surely. What is
      it that is giving it such new and pricking life to-day? Is it Bellairs's voice? She will hear
      it less, perhaps, if she have some occupation to distract her.
She takes up the advertisement-sheet of the Times , lying near her, on the floor,
      and throws her eyes over the Births, Deaths, and Marriages.

For months she has been unable to read the Obituary without envying every one of the dead
      people recorded in it: the old man gently extinguished at eighty; the deeply-mourned wife,
      torn away in her prime; the strong man violently perishing in flood or field; the tiny
      sister-children swept away within two days of each other by the hot fever. There is not one
      among them all that she does not envy! They are out of it! They have done with it! done with
      the tangle, done with the heart-break, done with the strife! She envies them now. And through
      them all she still hears plainly the voice of Bellairs.
Thank Heaven, however, she will not hear it any more for the present. He has gone out.
      Surely that is he sauntering down to the little pier, with a smart girl in a red cotton gown—a
      red cotton gown that but now incarnadined the balcony beneath Mrs. Forth.
He is unfastening a little boat; he is helping his companion in! Belinda laughs
       aloud. Some one has been too quick for Sarah! Some one has stepped down into the
      dinghey before her!
The incident gives a lighter turn to her meditations, and she drops the obituary, and
      follows with her eyes the little boat and its two occupants, with as eager an attention as her
      sister might have given it, until it becomes a speck upon the water. She laughs again. There
      is a sound of wheels. Is it her grandmother and Sarah returning? She longs for them to come
      back, to have the pleasure of telling them. She leans her charming cropped head out of the
      window. No! it is a coach changing horses; next a char-à-banc disgorging its
      stiff-legged load; and now, for variety of interest, a steamer is coming churning up to the
      little pier. Will anyone get out of it? Anyone to form a new element at the
       table-d'hôte to night, and be speculated about as one speculates upon the lives and
      habits of those with whom an hotel life brings one into brief and jostling contact?
       The steamer is crowded, black with thick-packed heads. But it seems as if no one
      were minded to alight from her.
Yes, one man has landed; a man now crossing the pier with a knapsack on his back; a
      pedestrian tourist, obviously. Very likely an Oxbridge man, with a Plato in his wallet, come
      to woo philosophy in the heart of the hills. If he is so, perhaps she may know him—by sight at
      all events. She rubs her eyes. What tricks they play one! Do they see ill, or is there a
      little something in the man's gait that might remind her of—but no! it is the sight of
      Bellairs, and the memories he has roused, that have put such an insanity into her head.
      Perhaps sickness has left her vision weak and deceptive. He is drawing nearer—very near, past
      the strip of grass, through the wicket, across the road. She has been thrusting her head out
      of window to have a nearer view, and the better to correct her delusion. But suddenly she
      draws it in again, and with a small, choked cry, falls
       back in the horse-hair chair. It is not corrected! It is confirmed, and turned
      into truth and certainty. For a few moments she lies stock-still. Has her face caught from
      Wetherlam and the Pikes some of their stormy illumination? If she had died, she would not have
      seen him crossing that pier, treading that path, unlatching that wicket-gate!
It has been hitherto only in her dreams that he has ever walked towards her. She is glad—oh,
      glad—that she did not die! And what has brought him hither? Is it possible that he has heard
      of her presence here, and, unable any longer to endure those torments which had so nearly laid
      her low, has fled hither in madness to rejoin her? But in a second she has exonnerated him
      from the suspicion. She has told him to go, and he had gone; and she knows him well enough to
      feel sure that, without her bidding—cost him what it might—he would not return. It is, then,
      an accident! a happy, most happy accident!
       What pleasant accidents can and may happen! For an accident no one can be
      blamed. For an accident no one's conscience need smite them. All the consequences of an
      accident may be taken with an easy mind.
Her eyes stray away towards the high mountains, but once again they are grasped so close in
      the clouds' moist arms, that not a glimpse of crest or ridge is to be caught. Are not they
      tired of their centenary—nay, aeon-long fight with the vapours? Worsted, worsting, will there
      never be an end to it? It is like her fight with her own heart. Vapours, sunbeams, waterfalls;
      to-morrow —to-morrow she will be looking at you not alone. To-morrow! But will he be still
      here to-morrow? Unless she give him leave to stay (and how dare she give that leave?) may not
      he be off before day-dawn?
By the noise below her window, she knows that another coach has driven up, and is changing
      horses. A panic seizes her. What security has she that he may
       not have halted here for only ten minutes, and be going on by it? She springs to
      her trembling legs, and returning to the window again, looks out, but this time in hiding
      behind the curtain. Two or three of the passengers have got down, and are beginning to climb
      back into their places again. Some luggage is being hauled from the roof. She scans narrowly
      the crowded travellers, and then draws a long breath. There is not one among them that bears
      the most fugitive resemblance to him. She is reprieved. He will be here, at all events, till
      to-morrow. He will dine, almost certainly, at the table-d'hôte.
A hot, excited smile breaks over her face. She will have the advantage over him. She will
      expect to see him; and he will not expect to see her. Will the shock be too much for him? Will
      he be betrayed by its suddenness into any too evident and overt emotion? But no! He is a man,
      now; strong and self-contained. How much older he has grown to look! Even
       her one cursory glance has told her that. A pang of regret for that passionate
      gone boyhood, which was so absolutely hers, contracts her heart. No! he will show no emotion.
      Perhaps he will turn a shade paler. As for her, she will not be pale, neither red.
Her thought breaks off abruptly, dispersed and banished by a knock at the door. Ere she can
      cry "Come in!" forestalling her permission of admittance, one of the heated and hurried hotel
      waiters, chronically rushing from Sunday morning to Saturday night, has entered—has deposited
      a note before her, and has disappeared ere she has time to put any question as to its source
      and origin. Not that there is much need for such, although only twice before in all her life
      has she seen that handwriting. A mixed memory of the two former occasions rushes storming back
      upon her mind; a memory of the misery of that early summer morning in Dresden; of the hell of
      that Folkestone winter evening. She
       has come in for a good deal of misery in her day. She looks in procrastination
      at the device on the seal—it is sealed—and at the address. Surely his handwriting, too, is
      changed; more virile, steadier, less emotional. She holds the note between her two palms (how
      lately he has held it in his!) in a trembling luxury of delay. It is only the recollection of
      how soon, how immediately, how at once, her solitude may be put an end to by the return of her
      sister and grandmother, that at length decides her to open it. What can he have to say to her?
      Not much, whatever it is. It will not take her long to read.
"I have just seen your name in the Visitors' Book; believe me, it is by a pure accident that
      I am here; must I go? If I do not see you at the table-d'hôte I shall understand that
      I must.
"D.R."
Long after she has mastered its contents —surely not difficult of comprehension—
       she remains staring at the page with wide dull eyes: a feeling of blankest
      disappointment at her heart. And yet, had she expected him, in writing, on a paper committed
      to a careless hand—a paper that might easily go astray, or be lost—to break out into
      compromising, culpable endearments? She would be outraged by the suggestion. But oh! it is
      cruel, cruel of him to have thrust the weight of the decision upon her; to have taken
      their meeting out of the province of accident into which she had joyfully recognised it as
      having fallen!
Since he has forced choice upon her, there is but one way in which she can choose. He must
      have known it! He must have done it on purpose! Honourable of him? Perhaps! Her mind gives a
      frigid assent. But oh, cold, cold , and most cruel! His very face had told her that
      he was changed. He has grown wise at last. Well, he shall never know that she was not as wise
      as he.

She has crumpled the paper angrily in her hand, and begun to walk agitatedly up and down the
      room, pressing and kneading it with her fevered fingers. Then her mood changes, and she stops
      and anxiously smooths out the letter again. Perhaps she is wronging him. Perhaps in the first
      stun of that surprise he has scarcely known what he wrote; has not perceived the drift of his
      own words. Perhaps, on a closer examination, she may find, by the tremulousness of his
      characters, that he had not his wits about him. But no. There is no tremulousness. Strong and
      decided is each up and down stroke. The man who penned that note was obviously in fullest
      possession of his intellect and mastery over his nerves. She is still poring over the few
      matter-of-fact words, vainly trying to wrench them into a sense that they cannot bear, when a
      high, light laugh, which cannot be ascribed to anyone but Miss Churchill, heard on the landing
      outside, makes her, in guilty haste,
       thrust the document into her pocket. It is only just in time; for there is
      always a sort of whirlwind suddenness about Sarah's entries.
"Well!" cries she, in high excitement, "have you kept a good look-out, as I told you? Has he
      discovered that I am here? Where is he? what has he been doing?"
It is a proof how far Mrs. Forth's thoughts have been straying from the young gentleman in
      question, that at first she looks back at her sister in blank stupidity, not understanding to
      what or whom she alludes.
"Who?" she says thickly; "what?— Oh!" (with a forced laugh; comprehension coming tardily
      back), "of course! but I have bad news for you: he went out at once in a dinghey —I
      do not think they call them dingheys here—but at all events in a little cockboat—with
      the girl in red."
"Did he?" replies Sarah, simulating the first symptoms of a swoon, and falling in a
       heap upon the sofa; "then, granny, cut my stay-laces, and burn every goose-quill
      you can find in the room under my nose; for there is nothing left me but to faint!"

