
CHAPTER IX.

"Es ist eine alte Geschichte,
Doch bleibt sie immer neu;
Und wem sie just passiret,
Dem bricht das Herz entzwei."
At first it seems so; but as she looks there rises in her memory, from which indeed
      it is never long absent, the image of another letter, to whose superscription this one, though
      less ill-written, has surely a strange likeness.
She continues to look at it; a fear too terrible for words rising in her heart, and
      depriving her of the power of opening it. The fire crackles comfortably. The Professor turns
      the page of his letter. It is his third; and she has not yet opened her first.

"I hope you have good news from home?" he says politely.
"I—I believe so," she answers stammering. "I am not quite sure yet."
She must conquer this ridiculous hesitation. Probably, certainly, she is the victim of
      hallucination—of an accidental resemblance. The likeness is no doubt confined to the address.
      As soon as she sees the letter itself, she will laugh at her own foolish fancies. She tears it
      open, and tremblingly turns to the signature.
There was no hallucination—no accidental resemblance! She was right. "David Rivers." For the
      first moment she is drowned in a rush of insensate joy, followed in one instant by such an
      anguish of horror as makes her for a while unconscious of everything around her—everything but
      that rending, burning, searing pain.
He has written to her at last! What has he to say to her now ? To congratulate her
      upon her marriage? He might have spared her that thrust! She
       will not read it! She will burn it unread!—by-and-by—not now!—when she can do it
      unobserved.
Her shaking fingers refold the paper, hide it on her lap beneath the fur, and take up
      another letter—Sarah's. She goes straight through it, nor till reaching the last sentence does
      she discover that not one word of its contents has found entry to her brain. It is no use!
      That letter must be read. It burns her knee as it lies on it. It is burning, burning all
      through her. It is better to know the worst! But to read it here under her husband's eyes—
       her husband 's!
She casts at him one desperate look, and then, suddenly rising, flies out of the room. He
      may call after her—she thinks that he does so—but she makes no kind of answer. Up the draughty
      stairs she flies into her bedroom; turning the key in the lock, as she shuts the door behind
      her. The Professor, relenting, has given her leave to have a fire there; but the chimney
      smokes so furiously that it has had to be long ago
       let out. The room is piercingly, savagely, truculently cold; but though she has
      been thinking of the cold all day, she is now not aware of it. How can one be cold with a
      red-hot iron in one's heart?
In a moment she has turned up the gas and lit the candles. It is well to have plenty of
      light by which to read one's death-warrant. But she cannot spare time to sit down. A frantic
      haste to possess the contents of that letter which, five minutes ago, she had thought herself
      capable of burning unread, has laid hold of all her trembling being.
Standing, she reads it; and this is what she reads:
'5, Paradise Row, Milnthorpe, 'Yorkshire.
' January 10 th.
January 10 th ! Why, that was her wedding-day! It is not to congratulate
      her upon her marriage, then; he could not have known it!
"Thank God! I may write to you at
       last, though I do not suppose that it will be much good even now, as I am so mad
      with joy that I doubt whether I shall be able to make any sense of it. You will have
      understood—you always understand everything—what has kept me from you hitherto. Of course you
      heard, as everybody did, of the bankruptcy that preceded and caused my poor father's death.
      Whatever you may have heard, do not for a moment believe that he was to blame for it. I am
      such a bad hand at writing, that I can explain to you better when we meet; but I cannot bear
      you to remain in such an error for a moment longer than I can help. His ruin was caused by a
      sudden and most unexpected rise in iron, just after he had undertaken an enormous contract to
      deliver many thousand tons of iron rails in America at a low price. It was a misfortune that
      might have happened to anyone, however long-sighted and cautious. You know what he was to me:
      I have often thought since of how I must have bored you bragging about him. You may
       think what that home-coming was to me! Well, if there had been time for it, I
      think I should have given in altogether then. Happily for me there was not. If I broke down,
      where would mother and the young ones be? No sooner was the funeral over, than we discovered
      that the smash was so complete that, at all events until the affairs could be wound up—a
      matter probably of several years—there would be scarcely enough for mother to keep body and
      soul together. The boys must be educated; three of them quite little chaps. There was nothing
      for it but to give up whatever hopes one had of one's own! God alone knows whether or not that
      was a wrench. We took a little house in a dirty back street in Milnthorpe—I am writing in it
      now; but to-day it looks to me like a palace. I was fortunate enough to obtain a clerkship in
      a house, one of the partners in which had been an early friend of my father's; a clerkship
      which, as I was always very bad at quill-driving, and the confinement, to which I had not been
      used,
       knocked me up, I soon exchanged for a place in the works. We got on as well as
      we could: mother has infinite pluck, and the young ones did their best. Sometimes I thought of
      writing to you. If you had ever answered a note I scrawled to you just before I left Dresden,
      I think I should have done so; but you did not: of course you were right. For eighteen months
      I worked without a holiday. Not having been brought up to it, I was at such a disadvantage
      with the other men. I scraped along from day to day, not daring to look much ahead, until, two
      posts ago, we received a letter from the lawyer of an old and distant connection of ours, of
      whom we knew little, and expected less, to say that he was dead, and had left £30,000 by will,
      to be divided amongst us. This of course makes a very fair provision for mother and the
      children, and leaves my arms free to work for myself. You must decide whether they are to work
      for you too. Is it any wonder that I cannot write sense? May I come? When may I
       come? Do not keep me waiting long, or I shall come without leave. Darling!
      darling! darling! I suppose that I have no right to call you that, but do not be angry; I did
      not write it! it wrote itself, and I cannot scratch it out, it looks so pretty written! After
      twenty months, one might be afraid that many women had forgotten one; but you are not of those
      that forget! Love! have you forgotten Wesenstein?
" David Rivers ."
She has read it through, without a break or a pause, to the signature. There is no more, but
      yet she still stands looking at it. For one all-happy moment the present is dead to her; only
      the past wholly lives. Has she forgotten Wesenstein ? She smiles rosily; such a smile
      as has scarcely been seen to visit her face since that very Wesenstein day. "Darling! darling!
      darling!" She counts them. There are three. He says that they look pretty written. He is
      right: they have a pretty look.

A slight noise breaks her trance. It is only the Professor poking the fire in the
      sitting-room below; a sound plainly audible through the thin flooring. But if it had been the
      great Trump of Doom, it could not have more effectually blared and shivered away her visions.
      There is a growing wildness in her eyes, as they retrace the sentences of the just-read
      letter. It is a good letter. No woman need wish to have an honester or a fonder one from her
      own true love. It has only the one trifling drawback of having come just three days too late.
      It is scarcely tactful to have thrust itself thus untimely between her and the husband of her
      choice!
"It is my own choice," she says; "there lies the point of the joke!" and she laughs aloud.
      Something in the sound of her own laugh frightens her. "Am I going mad?" she asks herself.
As she speaks, she staggers to the window, and throws up the sash; whether —even in this
      icehouse atmosphere— gasping for yet more air, or driven by
       some darker impulse. For the moment the hurricane has lulled. Outside it is all
      white with snow and moonshine: the moon herself not absolutely visible, too low to cut even
      her accustomed track upon the silvered sea, betrayed only by the sudden pale flash that each
      loud wave gives in turning over on the strand. Ceaselessly, as it has been snowing all day,
      the devilish wind has swept the pavement clean and bare. She can see the flagstones' fierce
      wet shine immediately beneath her. How hard they look! and at what a distance below her! One
      step from that easily accessible sill, and she will be for ever healed of that pain, than
      which none worse ever made dying man in deadly straits call upon death to set him free. But
      Death, the gentle genius with the reversed torch laying his soft hand, coolly liberating, on
      the over-weary heart, is not akin to the grisly, gory, murderous phantom that she in her
      misery invokes. For that dread step even her perfect woe has not yet ripened her. She
       shivers moaning back from the razoredged outer air, and shuts the window. She
      sits down by the table, and spreading out the letter before her, reads it deliberately through
      again. Not a tear dims her dry eye. They say that the worst of a thunder-storm is past when
      the rain comes. The worst of a human sorrow is past when the tear-rain comes. But Belinda's
      grief is far indeed from having reached that better stage. What would she not give for a few
      tears, or that this hideous keenness of consciousness might melt away blurred into a merciful
      swoon! But she is as far from the one relief as the other. If it had been written one day
      earlier! If she had yielded to Sarah's passionate persuasions to delay her marriage for one
      month! If—if! There are a hundred ifs; any one of which might have opened heaven to her! But
      not one of them did.
"It is my own choice!" she keeps repeating, half aloud; and then comes again that terrible
      impulse to laugh loudly at the
       ghastly irony of it! the mirth of it! Her own choice to be sitting here
      alone and marrow-chilled—chilled, yet with a red-hot sword slowly turning and turning in her
      heart; afraid even to groan aloud, lest she should be overheard, instead of—
But the reverse of that picture she dare not face. That is the road that lies straight to
      madness. Her eye wanders wildly yet again over the page. Even it, in cruelty, seems always to
      fasten on the fondest phrases:
"I am so mad with joy!" "Is it any wonder that I cannot write sense?"
As she looks at the words, written in such pure, glad, good faith, but that seem to stare
      back at her now in grinning mockery, a great dry sob rocks her whole body to and fro. The
      pity, lavished hitherto on herself alone, now changes its current, and pours in bitterest
      flood over him. " Mad with joy !" until when? Until casually taking up the newspaper,
      he reads that on the 10th of January James Forth, Professor of Etruscan in the
       University of Oxbridge, took to wife at St. Jude's Church, — Street, Mayfair,
      Belinda, elder daughter of the late John Churchill, Esq., of Churchill Park, Loamshire. He
      will not believe it! He will think that some one has inserted it as a joke. In humiliating
      torrent, and with a retentiveness of memory of which she had not believed herself capable,
      there rushes back into her mind the stream of hold-cheap jests and jeers and quips, in which
      they had united the forces of their joint wits, at the expense of him who is now her husband;
      whom at this moment she hears shovelling coal on the fire in the room beneath her. Upon no
      one's testimony but her own will Rivers believe it. And what words can she find in which to
      tell him? Again that fierce sobbing shakes her from head to foot; but she masters it. For a
      few moments she sits in motionless miserable thinking. Then apparently an idea strikes her;
      for she rises, and taking the candle in her hand drags herself to the looking-glass. For a
       moment she peers haggardly into it. At all events her face is not disfigured by
      tears; and the only person to whose scrutiny it will be subjected is no very nice observer of
      its variations.
Apparently she is satisfied with the result of her consultation, for she moves to the door,
      and opening and unlocking it, passes downstairs and re-enters the sitting-room.
Mr. Forth is in exactly the same posture as that in which she had left him, except that,
      having finished his letters, he has been able again completely to entomb himself—hands and
      all—in his wraps; out of which only an elderly face—its wrinkles ploughed deeper by cold and
      crabbediness —now peeps.
"Where have you been? What have you been doing all this time?" he inquires captiously.
"I have been in my room."
She had dreaded lest there may be something so unusual in the sound of her voice that he may
      turn round and look at her.
       But no! he keeps his attitude of peevish crouching over the hearth.
"I hope that the fire was burning well," he says anxiously. "If the grate is of the same
      construction as this one, it will require constant attention."
"I—I—do not think that it was burning at all," replies Belinda uncertainly.
Till this moment it has never struck her how many degrees of frost have been adding physical
      to her mental suffering.
"Not burning? Not lit?"
In a moment he has leapt to the bell and violently rung it; but as Maria's movements in
      responding to it are marked by no greater celerity than usual, there is time for the whole of
      the following little dialogue before her arrival.
"Have you been pasting up the windows? If not, I am at a loss to conceive what can have
      induced you to spend the best part of an hour in such an atmosphere."
"I—I—have not pasted them up; I will if you like."
"You have left the door open."

"I am very sorry; I will shut it."
"What are you doing over there? Why do not you come and sit down?"
"I—I—am looking for the Daily News !"
"The Daily News ! What do you want with the Daily News ? Is it possible
      that you have already forgotten that you made a roll out of all the newspapers to fill the
      aperture under the door? not"—ungratefully—"that it has been of any use."
"I did not take the Daily News ; I laid it aside."
She does not explain why she laid it aside.
"What do you want with the Daily News ?" fretfully, fidgeted by her movements.
She is on her knees before the cupboard to which her husband had planned to confide the
      custody of his bacon, and from which she has been unable wholly to exclude jam-pots and
      pickle-jars. She had forgotten that they were there, and the sight of them—unlikely as it
      would seem that such poor trifles could either add to
       or take aught from the sum of so great a grief—the sight of them seems to be the
      last drop that brims her cup. In after life it seems to her as if nothing had brought her so
      near self-destruction as those picklepots! What does she want with the Daily News ? A
      desperate impulse seizes her. She will tell him.
"I want it in order to cut out the advertisement of our marriage, to send to—"
She pauses. The name sticks in her throat. With the best will in the world, she
       cannot pronounce it.
"To my mother?" suggests the Professor, filling up the blank conjecturally. "I have already
      done so."
Belinda laughs a laugh like the one that had made her question her own sanity upstairs.
"No, not to your mother; to—to—an —acquaintance of my own!"
She has found the journal now—found it in the very spot to which she herself had—as one
      does—unconsciously tidied it away. In an instant, as if it were printed
       in her own red blood, her eye has flashed upon the announcement; picked it out
      from the long list. Her work-basket, in which lie the scissors with which she must cut it out,
      lies on the table at her husband's elbow. She stands quietly beside him, snipping, snipping
      delicately, in the gaslight. There must be no jagged edges; nothing that tells of
      emotion—nothing that will betray to him to whom it is to be sent that each cut of those fine,
      sharp scissors was into her own heart.
"I cannot think what is the use of occupying yourself about it to-night!" says her husband,
      venting the ill-humour engendered by Maria's tardiness in replying to his spells upon the
      nearest object—as many better men than he have done before him. "The country post is long
      gone. Probably all the lines are blocked—"
"I know! I know!" interrupts she harshly; "but I had rather get it done to-night! to-morrow
      I—I—may have forgotten!"


She is back in her own room again, having taken the opportunity to slip out unquestioned,
      afforded by Maria's appearance at last—Maria in that reluctant, grudging humour with which she
      usually offers services, cheered by no hope of final largess; a hope that the Professor has
      seen fit, immediately upon his arrival, to extirpate. Belinda is in her room again alone; but
      alone and undisturbed she knows that she cannot long remain, but that she will be speedily
      followed by Maria with coal-box and shavings to re-light the extinct fire. What she has to do,
      must be done quickly. She opens her writing-case; takes out envelope and paper; directs the
      first, and then writes on the latter, in a large, painstaking, legible hand, "From Belinda
      Forth." It has not taken one minute in the doing: Maria's pursuing foot is not yet heard:
      happily she will be as slow as she can. Belinda blots it carefully; then, after steadfastly
      and with perfect tearlessness considering her own handiwork for the space of a moment, she
       lifts the paper to her dry lips, and lays a solemn good-bye kiss upon her own
      name; upon the "Belinda," that is carefully avoiding the "Forth." She has no manner of doubt
      that he will find it there: and who can grudge them such a parting embrace?
Then, without any further delay, she folds the paper, inserts in it the advertisement,
      closes and stamps the envelope. It is done! accomplished! and now that it is so, an intense
      restless craving seizes her, that it should be on its journey. In any case, it cannot leave
      Folkestone to-night; but at least she might do her part. It might be committed to the post.
      The thought of it lying here all night; meeting her again in the morning—God above her! what
      will that morning waking be!— is more than she can face. But to whom can she confide it? To
      Maria? That high-spirited person would flatly refuse to brave the elements on such a night;
      and neither man nor mouse could blame her. To that grimy Gibeonite—the boot and
       shoe boy? He would infallibly commit it to his breeches-pocket, and dismiss it
      from his mind. Why should not she take it herself? There is a pillar-post not twenty yards
      from their door. The thought has no sooner crossed her mind than it is half way towards
      accomplishment.
In a moment she has taken hat and additional furs from the wardrobe; has fastened them on as
      quickly as her treambling fingers will let her, and has stolen downstairs, creeping on tiptoe
      past the sitting-room door; a needless caution, for the Professor, though not at all deaf, has
      no longer that fineness of hearing which is spared to few of us after forty. Neither does she,
      as she feared she would, meet Maria and the coal-box. The hall-door is not locked, and opens
      easily; rather too easily indeed, for no sooner is it unlatched than a force as of ten
      thousand Titans violently pushing dashes it back. It is all that she can do, after repeated
      efforts, and putting forth her whole strength, to shut it behind her. When she at length
      succeeds,
       it closes with a bang that—as she is aware by former experience—makes every
      floor leap.
Again she laughs out loud. The temporary moonlit lull is over; the cloud-rack has sponged
      out moon and sea. The great hurricane is awake and in wrath again. There seems to be nothing
      in all creation but himself and his terribler snow-sister. The air is so full of the white
      flurry—close and fine as flour—that it makes breathing difficult. Belinda gasps. She has to
      stand still for a moment, that her feet may grasp firm hold of the ground, else will the
      north-easter, in one of its furious freaks, take her bodily off them. Then she staggers
      resolutely on again; a lonely fighter through the raging winter night. Of every slightest lull
      she takes advantage to quicken her pace. Now and again she turns her back upon the suffocating
      snow in order to breathe. But not for one moment does she repent of having come. She feels no
      hostility towards, no fear of, the dreadful elements. Is not she as desperate as
       they? The hand-to-hand fight with them does her good. It seems to lift some of
      the lead from her brain; to set further away from her that madness that had loomed so near.
      But the twenty yards seem more like twenty miles.
She has reached the pillar-post at last— an opportune momentary lifting of the storm
      revealing to her its snow-whitened red—has found the aperture, and has dropped into it the
      letter so carefully, painstakingly kept dry beneath her cloak. Yes! it is gone! gone past
      recall! as past recall as the wood at Wesenstein; as the friend on whose coffin we have seen
      fall the first cruel spadeful of earth. But of this she has no time to think. A fresh frenzy
      of the tornado obliges her to cling half-stunned to the pillar; and the moment that she looses
      her hold, the snow-wind takes her in its fearful hands and hurls her back along the Leas.
For one dread moment it seems to her that it is about to hurl her far away over the cliff
      into the awful lap of the bellowing
       waves that, even now, she can hear in the darkness savagely tearing at the great
      hewn stones of the quay. That one instant reveals to her that the life she had thought herself
      capable of throwing away is still sweet.
By a great effort her feet recover their hold of the ground which has fled from beneath
      them; but not until she has been swept far past the house to which she is struggling to
      return. Battling, blinded, and dizzy; bewildered by the darkness, and by the hopeless
      uniformity of the row of buildings, it is long before, groping for the door that continually
      eludes her, she at length finds it; at length she finds herself within its shelter.
Maria does not recognise her at first, so battered and snow-covered is she; but Belinda pays
      no heed to her expressions of incredulous astonishment. It is possible that she may be so
      deafened by the elemental roar as not to hear them.
Without much consciousness of how the intervening stair-flights were climbed, she
       finds herself again in her room. The gas is still turned high up, as she had
      left it. Maria has at length relit the fire; there is plenty of light for her to see her
      bridal chamber by. Plenty of light, too, to see the blotting-pad on which she had so lately
      blotted the three words of her billet de faire part.
She takes it up, and holds it to the looking-glass. How plainly the three words come out;
      not a letter, not a stroke missed!
" From Belinda Forth ." She mutters them over and over under her breath. "From
      Belinda Forth!" "From Belinda Forth!"
She is roused by a voice calling from below:
"Belinda! Belinda!"
It is her husband. Let him call! The summons is repeated with more stress and urgency:
"Belinda! Belinda!"
Is not it the voice which will go on calling "Belinda!" through life? Is not it
       the voice to which she herself has given the right to call Belinda; to command
      Belinda; to chide Belinda; immeasurably worst of all, to caress Belinda? Of what use,
      then, to break out thus early into senseless, bootless revolt? She hastily shakes the powdery
      snow from her clothes, drags off her soaked shoes, twists afresh her wet and streaming hair,
      and goes decently and orderly down again; decently and orderly to all appearance, for who can
      see the wheels that are whirring in her head, and the flashes of uneasy light before her
      eyes?
She finds her bridegroom in his former attitude: it seems to her as if she could have better
      borne him and it, if he had changed his position ever so little. But no! he is still
       mumping , round-backed, over the fire.
"I called repeatedly," he says, with a not altogether blamable irritation; "is it possible
      that you did not hear me?"
There is no answer, the wheels in her head are going so fast.

"Where have you been? what have you been doing?"
"I have been out."
" Out ! You must be a madwoman!"
"So I sometimes say to myself," replies she very distinctly, and looking straight at him as
      she speaks.
"And may I ask," continues he sarcastically, "what induced you to choose this peculiarly
      tempting evening for a stroll?"
"I went to post my letter."
"Pshaw!"
She has taken her former seat opposite to him. The north-easter's lash has whipped up a
      royal red into her cheeks, usually so far too pale.
"There is no accounting for taste," she says slowly; "mine has often been blamed.
       You , at least, have no right to complain of it. Shall I read to you?"
As she speaks, she takes up the book laid down over-night, and without further permission
      launches into the first paragraph she sees. She has been conscious,
       on coming into the now really warm room out of the frozen stinging air, of an
      odd sensation in her head. It feels light and swimming, but she reads on. Now and then the
      type waves up and down before her like the furrows of a ploughed field; but she reads on. The
      matter of the book and the matter of her thoughts are woven hopelessly together like warp and
      woof, but she reads on:
"'If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed which could not possibly have
      been formed by numerous successive slight modifications' ( in how many years am I likely
       to die ?) 'my theory would absolutely break down. But I can find out no such case. No
      doubt many organs exist of which' ( can the worm that never dies sting more sharply than
       this ?) 'we do not know the transitional grades.'"
How the print is jigging and bowing; but it will come straight and still again just now. She
      reads on.
"Pray repeat that last paragraph; I am
       unable to follow you; you are making nonsense of it!"
But instead of complying, Belinda tumbles the volume noisily down into the fender, and falls
      off her chair after it. Her wish is fulfilled: she has fainted!

