
CHAPTER VIII.

"A whole long month of May in this sad plight
   Made their cheeks paler by the break of June.
'To-morrow will I bow to my delight,
   To-morrow will I ask my lady's boon!'
'O may I never see another night,
   Lorenzo, if thy lips breathe not love's tune.'
So spake they to their pillows; but, alas!
   Honeyless days and nights did he let pass."
What a mercy it is to be alone for a change!" says Sarah; "is not it? You do not
      assent with the warmth I should have expected, eh? And what a much richer and rarer mercy it
      is that we are not to be driven a-pleasuring twenty hot miles at a stretch, and carouse on
      rotten eggs at the end!"

It is near noon, and the sisters are walking in the Grosse Garten, that green and ample
      pleasure-ground, with its tall trees and its intersecting drives, of the Dresden burghers.
      Against a peevish sky the Museum of Antiquities lifts its greenish roof; in its pool, with the
      little swan-house in the middle, there is beginning to come a vernal glow from the reflections
      of the young-leaved horse-chestnuts standing round; in the flower-beds the pansies and
      cinerarias bloom purple and yellow.
Belinda's only answer to her sister's self- gratulations is to stoop and console Slutty, who
      has returned in some disorder from a slight excursion, having been coarsely hustled away by
      the shabby surly Polizei, who guard and pompously warn off profane dogs from the meagre
      blossoms.
"The beauty of these straight drives," continues Sarah, thoughtfully eyeing one of the long
      vistas of trees that gradually lessens away to nothing, "is that you never can be taken by
      surprise in them; nobody can pounce out upon you from
       round a corner; it is merely a question of long sight. Now, if I saw my admirer
      in the distance, I should simply whip behind one of these friendly trees," looking up at an
      oak that, still wintrily brown, rises from the tenderly greening undergrowth. "What would you
      do if you saw yours?"
"I do not know which you mean," answers Belinda, with an awkward attempt at gaiety, for this
      morning she is not gay; "I have so many!"
"No, you have not," replies Sarah calmly; "but you have one. How long you will keep him is
      another question. Judging by the crushed and flattened condition to which you had reduced him
      last evening, I should say probably not long."
"At all events," cries Belinda, whom this chance cut has stung more deeply than it was
      intended—"at all events, I had not reduced him to the condition of foaming rage to which you
      had brought Professor Forth. He said," laughing unwillingly, "that if he had not known that
      you were sincerely attached to him, he should have
       had difficulty in overlooking your conduct!"
"Do you think he will jilt me?" cries Sarah in a delighted voice, and with a radiant smile.
      "No," shaking her head; "no such luck. My conduct was not good," with a candid air; "but it
      had its palliations—he fell asleep!"
"So did you."
"But did I look like him?" drily. "Anyhow, with my good resolutions, it was a case of 'look
      in his face, and you forget them all.'"
A pause. A solitary rider is cantering along the drive. A blue Gardereiter is practising his
      four-in-hand team of chestnuts in a sort of phaeton, up and down, up and down. The girls have
      reached a spot where there is a little quiet peep among the trees; a plot of lush green grass,
      vividly green, backed by sedate high firs, across which a few young birches are throwing their
      infinitely delicate leafage, and stretching their shining white stems.
"It seems he has a mother," says Sarah
       presently, her eyes following the diminishing Gardereiter and his team.
" Has! had , you mean!"
" Has . I am afraid I let him see that I thought it a remarkable instance of
      longevity." She stops to laugh, and then goes on, letting fall each little sentence with
      deliberate serenity. "She lives with him; she is in her dotage; she never stops asking
      questions; and it seems that the chiefest of his wife's married joys is to consist in
      answering them."
"Was it at that stage of his confidences that you cried out, ' Ceci est
       insupportable! ' and took to your heels and left him?" asks Belinda drily.
"It must have been somewhere about then," answers Sarah modestly. "He did not recognise the
      quotation, and he was displeased at the sentiment. However," with a shrug, "I will not do it
      again, for your sake, and in your interests; and if he does not fall asleep, and shoot out his
      under lip, I think I shall be able to hold out until we go. This is the fourth,"reflectively
       checking off the numbers on her fingers; "one, two, three, four, five—in less
      than five weeks we shall be in London."
"In less than five weeks!" repeats Belinda, stopping short and paling, while an expression
      of something very like terror looks out of the pupils of her dismayed eyes.
"In less than five weeks!" assents Sarah, nodding. "I heard granny telling Gustel that she
      would not need her services after the first of June, and courteously adding how glad she would
      be to be rid of her. Pooh!" laying her hand on her sister's shoulder, and giving her a shrewd,
      good-natured glance, "do not look so woe-begone; it is only a case of hurrying the pace a
      little."
Belinda's answer is a gesture of disgust. She walks quickly on.
"It is coarsely worded, I admit," continues the other, briskly following, and keeping up
      with her; "but believe me, the advice is sound."

And so it may be; but as it is addressed to a person who is utterly incapable of making use
      of it, it is, like most other advice, wasted. To hurry the pace a little! For days and days
      afterwards the vile phrase recurs to her, dinning in her ears. As often—and that is not
      seldom— as the terror which had seized her in the Grosse Garten returns, so often does the
      brutal consolation with which her sister had tried to allay it. And as the priceless days slip
      by—slip away out of the fingers stretched forth in such a fever to detain them—it takes in her
      ears a horrible inflection of irony. Over and over and over again it keeps saying itself to
      her, as she lies awake at night, hour after hour—she can lie awake with the best of them now—
      hearing the engines screech and the trains thunder along the Bohmischer Bahn; watching the now
      withering blossoms drop from the pear-tree in the keen moonlight, and reckoning over to
      herself, until her brain grows dull and tardy sleep releases her, the small and diminishing
      hoard of precious
       hours during which there will be any object in living. For that what makes the
      essence of these days may not pass, may last on through a long transfigured lifetime, is a
      hope too glorious for her to dare lift her wet and dazzled eyes to its face. And meanwhile the
      days themselves are passing! Oh, how they are passing! To hurry the pace! How can she
      hurry the pace? she asks herself desperately, in the watches of the night, unconsciously
      accepting the detestable phrase. What can she, being she, do? How can she, tied down by her
      nature, by her stiff-necked virgin pride, by the very force of her dumb, pent passion, put out
      a finger to help herself? As easily can she make the grey irises of her eyes coal-black. Is it
      her fault that all strong emotion with her translates itself into a cold, hard voice, and a
      chill set face? With other women it translates itself into dimples and pink blushes and
      lowered eyes. Ah! but do they feel as she does? Sarah, for instance. When do men ever leave
      Sarah's company with the
       down-faced, baffled, white look with which Rivers has more than once quitted
      hers? Preening themselves rather; with sleeked feathers and cosseted vanity.
"I am not of the stuff of which the women that men love are made!" she says, thinking with
      an envious humility of her sister's graces, and staring blankly at the stove, beginning to
      glimmer white in the dawn. But for such a radical fault of nature and constitution what remedy
      can there be? Tamely to copy her sister's airy charms and light coquetries?
"It would be the donkey playing the lap-dog!" she cries bitterly.
And yet, despite all their mischances, and their agues, and their desperations, what superb
      days these are! Few? Yes, perhaps. But when one reflects how much acute happiness may be
      packed into five minutes, and how many five minutes there are in a month, these two may be
      accounted to have been largely dowered, seeing that to many a one, not held to be specially
      spited by fortune, it is not given
       in all his or her lifetime to attain to one such day. Days when round each
      corner lurks a splendid possibility; days when each ring at the bell may mean that Heaven has
      opened. Very often it means nothing of the kind; it means Miss Watson, or Gustel, or a parcel,
      but it may .
In later life you may be as fortunate as you please; a laurel garland round your head, a
      colossal balance at Coutts', a chaste, fond wife and paragon children, but Heaven can no
      longer pounce upon you from round the street corner.
Yes, superb days! though on one or two of them the east wind blew piercingly, sweeping
      across the wide plain; and on another one or two the rain slid down from the heavy clouds, and
      blurred the windows.
But if it blurred the windows, did it not
       thereby make the task of Miss Watson's spyglass a more difficult one? and could
      the wind reach them in the little pinewood behind the bleak Barracks, where they walked safe
      and warm on strewn fir needles, and listened to its harmless scolding far above their happy
      heads.
How often they meet! how perpetually, how always! In the Alt Markt, buying jonquils of the
      ugly German Fraus, as they sit under their great cotton umbrellas, queening it over their
      carrots and radishes; with the old houses, all different heights and shapes, russet-red
      roofed, endlessly dormer-windowed, standing round; at Plauen under the cool cherry orchards;
      at Meissen, in the hot Fabrik; in the NeuStadt, in the Alt-Stadt—everywhere. If, in after
      years, they revisit the bright city, what spot in all its precincts will be empty and innocent
      of associations to them?
Superb days! But they are going. Racing-pace they gallop by. How will it be when they are
      gone?
As the time passes, she grows ever less
       and less in a condition to face this problem. By-and-by she refuses to face it
      at all. When it comes it comes; but till then let her not be defrauded of her birthright. Let
      her too, like the Mayflies and the Painted Ladies, have her span of careless, giddy bliss.
Whenever the conversation turns upon their departure, their journey, their arrival in
      London, upon anything that lies beyond the horizon of the now and the here, if it be possible,
      she leaves the room; if it be not possible, she feverishly seeks to divert the talk into other
      channels.
But if she can fight thought off pretty well in the day, the variegated, distracting,
      kaleidoscope day, it indemnifies itself at night. At night there it is, and nothing but it; no
      flickering leaves, or scudding clouds, or passers-by; nothing but it: an image drawn on
      night's plain black canvas with a hard, cutting clearness, as of an acid biting into steel; so
      that she must look at it.
As for her, at this time she would be
       thankful that there were no night at all. She does not need its refreshment.
      Without it her every power seems strung up to the highest pitch of efficiency, and she dreads,
      oh how she dreads its solitude and silence! In the daytime, however unconventionally early or
      improbably late may be the hour, there is always a possibility, nay, a likelihood, of seeing
      his strapping figure and his burning eyes following the infant stolidity of the page, Tommy,
      into the salon. But in the night this is impossible. The night, therefore, is time absolutely
      wasted; now, too, when there is so little time left to waste. Of what use is it but for lying
      broad awake in, counting up how many hours the different moments, half-hours, of their
      meetings make? To her, just so much of life is worth reckoning as life at all; the rest is
      unimportant padding.
And he? As to him, the pavement of the quiet Lüttichau Strasse before her door is worn
      hollow by his footsteps; his eyes devour her; his tongue stutters in lame
       speech to her, and altogether omits to answer when addressed by anyone else. He
      has abandoned all other occupations in life but that of dogging her. But he has not asked her
      to be his wife.
To how much more purpose would be that one short practical question than all his resultless,
      love-sick manoeuvres; than all the enormous nosegays with which her room is over-filled and
      over-scented—for she cannot bear to throw away even the dead ones.
Perhaps this thought crosses her mind now and again. It certainly does Sarah's. It not only
      crosses it, but finds not unfrequent egress through her lips.
And meanwhile May is three-parts over. The 24th of that month is reached, and, indeed, is
      almost ended; for dinner is past, and the girls and their grandmother are loitering over their
      light and leisurely dessert.
Their grandmother is an old lady with a bright eye—strangely bright, considering that it has
      wept, or been supposed to weep,
       for a good-natured husband, five promising sons, and three dutiful
      daughters—with a skin that it is still no penance and that, if tradition lies not, it was once
      considered a high treat to kiss, and with a cap whose secret will die with her.
"Granny's religious principles are slack," Sarah is wont to say; "her morality is hazy, and
      in moments of excitement I have even known her let fly an oath; but, on the other hand, she is
      thoroughly clean, and she always laughs at my jokes; so that, taking her all round, I could
      better spare a better woman. One knows that if she were called upon for any of the sublimer
      virtues of life, she would be found wanting. But, after all, the sublimer virtues are the
      thousand- pound notes that one seldom needs to change, and granny has plenty of the
      sixpences."
At the present moment her attention is absorbed in the effort, aided by a cracknel, to
      induce her new pug Punch to give three cheers for the Queen, with the thorough mastery over
      which elegant accomplishment
       he has arrived credited. On the present occasion, however, this talent seems
      inclined to hang fire, for, though in general a remarkably free barker, he is now, relatively
      to his sovereign, either disloyally silent, or irrationally incoherent. He will give ten
      cheers, or one and a half, or five muffled ones and a sneeze, but he will not give three.
"Granny," says Sarah, desisting from a vain effort to make Slutty cheer too, an endeavour
      which the latter frustrates by instantly rolling over on her back, and remaining in that
      position until all attempt at education is suspended—"granny, do you know that we are going to
      have a long and happy day at that everlasting Wesenstein to-morrow?"
"By all means, my dear; so as you do not ask me to go with you."
"I believe," says Sarah, regarding her grandmother with an air of cool dispassionate
      speculation, "that if we were to tell you that we were going to Greenwich Fair, or the Argyle
      Rooms, you would say
       'By all means, my dears!' Only that I am not at all so sure that in that case
      you would add, 'So as you do not expect me to go with you'!"
The old lady laughs pleasantly, as if her granddaughter had paid her a compliment.
"Are you going to take your sweethearts with you?" asks she gaily; "your popinjays? No,
      Punch! three cheers ! Nobody asked you to sneeze for the Queen!"
"Our popinjays?" cries Sarah, delighted. "Not mine, thank God! By-the-bye, granny, as I have
      no further use for him, I am thinking of arranging a marriage between you and him. Your ages
      are suitable; and, though you have slightly the advantage in externals, he is greatly your
      superior in intellect."
"God bless my soul! No, thank you, child!" replies Mrs. Churchill with energy; "I prefer
      Belinda's."
"So do we all!" says Sarah, with a dry look.
At this last speech, Belinda, who has
       been growing ever hotter and more restless since the word "Wesenstein" was
      mentioned, suddenly leaves her seat under the pretext of comforting Slutty. Slutty hates Punch
      and his tricks, and the kudos that attends them, and has now squeezed herself under a
      piece of furniture to which, in general, only Miss Watson's voice has power to banish her, and
      from beneath which there is now nothing visible of her but a small spiteful face, full of
      mortification and ire. As she firmly resists all Belinda's blandishing inducements to her to
      come forth, though the agitated beat of her tail upon the floor proves that she is not wholly
      unmoved by them, the young girl desist, and passes into the neighbouring salon, where, as
      there is no one to comment on her actions, she at once walks rapidly to the window, and looks
      eagerly down the dull and empty street. Not for long, however. Ere many moments have passed, a
      hand is laid on her shoulder; a rallying voice sounds in her ear:
"Come! he cannot be in sight yet! He
       will surely have the good feeling to let us swallow our coffee in peace."
Belinda gives a great start, and angrily shakes off her sister's touch.
"I cannot think how it concerns you," she says testily, in intense vexation at having been
      surprised on the watch; "he does not trouble you much!"
"That is the rub," replies Sarah calmly. "If he did, my nose would probably be flattened
      against the pane as well as yours. But seriously, I should not mind how often he came—not
      much, at least—not more," in candid parenthesis, "than I always hate seeing other people made
      love to, if it seemed to lead to anything; but, as I live, I cannot see that you are a step
      further advanced than you were when I spoke to you in the Grosse Garten three weeks ago. Come
      now, are you?"
For a moment Belinda is silent. Perhaps she has put that question to her own heart before
      now, and been as unable as now to give a satisfactory answer to it.
Instead of replying, "What a mercy it
       would be!" she says irritably, bringing her hands sharply together in a wrathful
      clasp, "If you could be persuaded to mind your own business, and leave me to be happy in my
      own way!"
"Happy in your own way!" repeats Sarah, with a shrewd look. "Yes; and when he has taken his
      twelve German lessons and gone home to his papa, the ironmonger—ironmaster—what is he?— how
      happy you will be in your own way then, eh?"
The other's hands unclasp, her arms drop limply to her sides; a sudden cold pallor chases
      the fierce vermilion from her cheeks.
"I suppose," she says slowly, "that there is a sort of coarse and brutal common sense in
      what you say; but I wonder," her voice breaking a little, "that it does not occur to even you,
      that since I am I, and not you—"
"Granny and I both agree," interrupts Sarah, "that it is the most tedious courtship we ever
      assisted at. Granny's idée

fixe is that it should be arranged by the first, so that he may travel with us and
      look after the luggage: for my own part, I rather doubt if even after the twelve lessons he
      will be able to take our tickets and order our baths; at least," breaking into a laugh, I know
      that my Schatz was not, though he is in correspondence with half the savants of Germany."
Belinda has turned again to the window, but, that her motives may be beyond suspicion, she
      is ostentatiously gazing in the opposite direction to that whence Rivers will come. An
      occasional writhing, shivering movement of her shoulders alone betrays what suffering her
      sister's ruthless and irrepressible rummaging in her holy of holies is causing her.
"We do not blame him," continues Sarah, with a candid air; "in fairness, I must say that we
      do not blame him. He is always trying to pour out his poor little tale like water out of a
      jug; and you, for reasons best known to yourself, are always corking it back again. Mark my
      words,"
       emphasizing the sentence with three pats on Slutty's chest—Slutty lying, as
      usual, reversed and Cleopatra-like upon her lap— "you will do it once too often!"
"What shall I do once too often?" cries poor Belinda in an agonised voice, wheeling suddenly
      round at bay. "What do I do? If you could only explain that to me! I believe,"
      beginning to falter, "that you mean well; I would—would try to take any hints you could give
      me."
"I have always told you that your high and mighty airs would be the death of you," rejoins
      Sarah, not perceptibly conciliated by her sister's humility. "If you could make them up into a
      parcel and toss them into the Elbe, and perhaps throw in your high nose too, you would be a
      better and a happier woman."
"But I cannot!" very regretfully.
"I confess," says Sarah, after a pause, her eyes speculatively fixed on the two smart shoes
      extended before her—shoes whose unnatural altitude of heel, arch of instep, and crowding of
      lacerated toes proclaim
       them of the highest fashion—"I confess that I am a little disappointed that the
      news of our approaching departure did not bring him to the point. I should have thought that
      when that fact transpired, not even you could have iced him into silence."
"He does not yet know that we are going," replies Belinda murmuringly. "I have not told
      him."
"Have not you?" cries Sarah, joyfully leaping up and beginning to frolic about on one toe.
      "Courage! Then our best card is still unplayed!" Suddenly ceasing her frisking, approaching
      her sister, and speaking with great eagerness: "You must tell him to-morrow, at Wesenstein.
      Choose a good place; well in the wood if possible, out of eye and ear and Watson shot. Be a
      little depressed, and make him ask you what is the matter with you. If you could let fall a
      tear or two? No? Ah!" with a gesture of impatience, "I am sure you will spoil the whole
      situation! Dear me!" with an accent of sincere regret, "what a
       charming thing I could have made of it!"
"I will tell him," replies Belinda meekly, yet wincing.
"If it is not brought to a crisis at Wesenstein," pursues Sarah brutally, "I warn you that I
      shall ask him his intentions. I have been trying to spirit up granny to do it, but you know
      how she always shirks every duty. It would have come better from her, but since she will not,
      I must. I shall tell him that you are wasting away! I wonder," with an amused look at her
      sister's firm-fleshed, healthful beauty, "whether he will be idiot enough to believe it?"

