
CHAPTER IX.

"But for the general award of Love,
The little sweet doth kill much bitterness."
Miss Watson has at length had her will. The party to Wesenstein is hers; not,
      indeed, as to the defraying of its expenses, about which she shows no ill-bred
       empressement , but in the inviting of the guests, arranging for their transport,
      etc. And as this arranging includes the right to bounce not only into the sitting-rooms, which
      is a latitude she always allows herself, but into the most secret chambers of the invited
      guests, they begin to look with some eagerness towards the end of this period of license. It
      is true that Miss Watson meets with a good
       many refusals. The older-established among the English residents into whose
      private affairs her nose has been thrust throughout the winter months, the details of whose
      butchers' bills, servants' wages, discreditable members of their family, she has mastered with
      grisly accuracy, combine in one deep and unanimous "No." Not less emphatic is Professor Forth
      in his negative, based on the plea of ill-health. Nor do the very direct questions addressed
      to him as to the nature and locale of his ailments—whether he has anything wrong inside
      him?—nor the confident assurance that it is all fancy, and that what he needs is to have his
      liver well shaken up, by any means avail to change his decision. But with all these deductions
      there is still left a considerable residuum of new- comers, who are at the stage—a very brief
      and early one—of thinking Miss Watson an agreeable woman who has seen a great deal of the
      world, a stage on which they will hereafter look back with indignant incredulity; of girls
      greedy for pleasure,
       and not fastidious as to the source whence it flows; and of handsome, solid,
      German soldiers, ready to follow wherever battle, beer, or maidens lead. To these is, of
      course, added Rivers—Rivers who hitherto has fled through back doors, has squeezed himself
      through attic windows, has bolted round corners, and run like a leveret whenever his
      long-sighted eyes have caught the farthest glimpse of a black-and-white plaid gown! For the
      last week this same Rivers has grovelled at the feet of the black plaid, has told her as
      nearly as he can conjecture the amount of his father's annual commercial gains, his sisters'
      probable portions, and whatever else—there is a good deal else—she may please to ask him. For
      does it not rest with her whether, during all the distance that parts Dresden from.
      Wesenstein, he shall sit in glory and bliss in the same carriage with his mistress, opposite
      to her, so that her lightest movement may be felt thrilling all through him, eye drowned in
      eye, for ten or twelve delirious miles? or, parted from her, pine
       and rage in separation, with some senseless, smirking doll-face for
       vis-à-vis , and only now and again catch distant frenzying glimpses of his lady,
      exposed to the coarse homage of insolent hussar or fire-eating Uhlan?
He has attained his object, or he thinks so. The morning has broken in settled summer
      fairness. He has slept no wink all night. He has not broken his fast. He is first at the
      rendezvous. It is in the Lüttichau Strasse. For how long he kicks his heels in that gloomy
      thoroughfare he never knows. He would tell you that many hours passed before— several other
      unimportant ciphers having in the meanwhile packed themselves into various vehicles and set
      off—she at length comes stepping down the echoing stone stairs in her lofty, leisurely grace,
      clad in one of those lawny, lacy summer gowns, whose apparently inexpensive simplicity men
      innocently admire, and over the bills for which fathers and husbands wag their heads aghast.
      It is, in fact, her best
       gown, far too good for such an excursion, and its fellow is being thriftily
      saved by Sarah for future worthier London occasions. But to Belinda no occasion could ever
      seem worthier. She has taken her seat, and his one impulse is to spring in after her. It is
      only just in time that he saves himself from this fatal error.
Seeing that her companion, another young English girl, has preceded her, it follows that
      unless the Uhlan who is to make a fourth precedes him, the result will be that he, the Uhlan,
      and not Rivers, will sit knee to knee with Belinda through the long drive. As this idea
      strikes him, he takes his foot off the step again as if it had been made of hot iron, and
      hastily retreating, eagerly motions the other forward. But the innocent soldier, attributing
      this movement solely to politeness, and in that determined not to be outdone, smilingly waves
      him on, to which Rivers responds by a more desperate backing. But as in any contest of bows
      and ceremonies and formal civilities an Englishman must
       always go to the wall, the dispute ends in the worsting of the person to whom
      alone it is of any consequence to succeed, who sees himself hopelessly excluded from the post
      which he had watched and fasted to obtain; and who, pale, empty, and miserable, hurls himself
      into his corner over against the blooming miss, who has seen, understood, and resented his
      frantic efforts to avoid her.
They are off; out of the town now; stretching steadily away across the flat country, that is
      now nothing but one gigantic nosegay. Every look they give rests on new flowers. Every
      mouthful of air they draw in is the breath of lilacs.
The cherry-snow is indeed gone, melted away as quickly as its cold prototype in thaw. But
      its crowding successors, the flushed apple-blooms, the horse-chestnuts tardily breaking into
      pale spires, forbid them to remember or deplore it. What mood could be high or sweet enough to
      match the perfumed summer morning? Certainly not Rivers'. He has exchanged
       the stunned silence in which he passed the two first miles for a wild garrulity.
      He talks à tort et à travers . He says foolish things, the sound of which surprises
      even himself. He insists on buttoning his miss's glove: a task which—certainly from no
      pleasure in the employment—his trembling fingers are long in accomplishing. In fact, to be
      exact, he never accomplishes it at all. For the glove being too small, and the hand plump, he
      succeeds at last in giving the latter such a painful nipping pinch, in the effort to effect a
      union between starting button and distant button-hole—not by any means "a lover's pinch that
      hurts and is desired"—that its owner angrily withdraws it.
From his garrulity he sinks back into a feverish dumbness, as apparently causeless as his
      former loquacity. How can his cruel cold lady look so calm and sunshiny under the hideous
      misadventure that has parted them? How dare she listen, with that sweet, high smile of hers,
      to her vis-à-vis's clumsy Teuton compliments? And
       what does he mean by crowding her so? Surely he could give her a little more
      room! And is she deaf, pray, that he must approach his ugly face so close to hers in
      conversation? Would not it be well to give him a hint that these are not the manners to which
      English gentle- women are used? Happily his madness falls a little short of the execution of
      this wise project. And meanwhile the un-conscious Uhlan, sémillant , pleased with
      himself, with his position, with his plain clothes—rare luxury in which the stiff- buckramed
      German soldier is permitted to indulge in expeditions of this nature—airs his imperfect
      English, and slips from it continually back into his guttural mother-tongue, whither Rivers,
      despite the twelve lessons, cannot follow him, nor ascertain what amorous atrocities he may be
      committing in it. He is almost past deriving satisfaction from the perception of how ill-cut
      the plain clothes are, and of how much less comely poor Herr von—
       looks in them than he did yesterday in his showy uniform.
And Belinda? At first her disappointment, though decently hidden, had gone nigh to equalling
      his; but by-and-by the reflection that, once at Wesenstein—two short hours off—nothing but his
      own will can keep him from her side, makes her resign herself peaceably and civilly to the
      inevitable. Women know how to bide their time better than men do. They would pass but ill and
      discreditably through life if they did not. By-and-by, being but human and female, she yields
      herself to the influences around her; the soft and sugared air, the joy-drunk larks, the juicy
      grass fields thronged with bold dandelions and faint ladies'-smocks. What lady could ever be
      sweet or fine enough to deserve such a smock?
Past the rape-fields they go—rape so gloriously yellow that it looks like sown sunlight;
      past the pious-looking little German villages—high red roofs gathered at the church's knees;
      through the pleasant
      
freundlich country, where everything is waxing in lusty length. And yet she is glad
      when Wesenstein is reached. Perhaps she would feel more emotion at arriving than she does, did
      she know the rational and humane intention nourished by Rivers, and which has kept him
      comparatively calm for the last three miles, to knock down the Uhlan upon the first sign of an
      intention on his part to help Miss Churchill from the carriage.
But, happily for the peace of the assemblage, the unconscious offender, attributing to
      insular brutality Rivers' unceremonious shouldering of him from the carriage-door, yields
      gracefully a privilege that he has no particular care to keep, and leaves to the other
      undisputed possession of Belinda's three fingers. They are the last of the party to arrive,
      and so have the advantage of finding preliminaries over, and luncheon spread and tempting
      under the trained linden trees.
Above the lilac-smothered cottages, and the cheerful Gasthof, beetles up the old
       white Schloss out of the solid rock on which it is built.
Between the Gasthof and the garden, where their white table-cloth promisingly glimmers, runs
      a little river, quickened and discoloured by last night's rain. It is spanned by a homely
      wooden bridge; and on this wooden bridge Sarah is standing, employed in dropping bits of
      stick—little lilac sprays, anything floatable that comes handy—into the earth-reddened stream
      on one side, and then rushing headlong over to the other to see them come sailing and whirling
      through. In this mature pastime she is being helped by two large hussars and a Gardereiter.
      She is in the best of spirits, and has already told them all about the Professor, and how
      delighted she is to be rid of him.
The rest of the party are dispersed in summer sauntering about the bowery village, all but
      Miss Watson, who, following that God-given instinct which prompts the mole to delve, the
      beetle to scavenger, and the swallow to fly, is ravaging every-where,
       red-faced and ruthless, making, marring, meddling. She has had a happy and
      instructive drive with some quite new-comers and has succeeded, to their dismay and her own
      satisfaction, in extracting from them that they have a sister in a lunatic asylum. So that it
      is in high good-humour and content that—the complement of guests being now full—they all sit
      down to their homely feast.
It is true, that no sooner are they seated —seated as their own choice or as the lurking
      inclination of any two for each other prompts—than their hostess bustles officiously round to
      dislodge them.
"Three men together here, and two ladies there! Come—come! this will never do; we must
      manage better than this! Mr. Rivers, I must beg you to fly to the rescue: come and part these
      two ladies!"
In what spirit this request is received may be gathered from the fact that Rivers has at
      last attained to the one object and goal of all his hot vigils and fasting-days.
       His wooden chair is drawn up as closely as the legs of both will permit to
      Belinda's, and on her other hand he has successfully arranged an ugly ravenous fledgeling boy,
      of whom not even he can be jealous.
Though such is the quality of Miss Watson's voice, that nothing short of an utterly broken
      drum could prevent its finding entrance into any ear, he adopts the desperate feint of not
      having heard, not even when she repeats her order in a sensibly louder key.
"Had not you better try some one else?" says Sarah drily, coming to the rescue; "it is odd,
      but he does not seem to hear!"
"I cannot have spoken loud enough," rejoins the other with unconscious irony. " Mr.
       Rivers !"
"You will have to put up with Herr von Breidenbach!" says Sarah, this third appeal having
      met with the fate of its predecessors, glancing up at her spare hussar, who—no lady having
      more than two sides, and his brother soldiers having been too quick for him—is hanging
       lingeringly over her chair-back, reluctant altogether to abandon her even for
      beer and Schinken, and having just overtaken her last joke and begun to roar at it. Under
      these circumstances, neither is he particularly keen about obeying Miss Watson's command.
      However, a wily look from his maiden, promissory of far better things after luncheon, sends
      him off fairly contented, and the storm is averted.
"It is sad for a young man, being so deaf, is not it?" says Sarah, with her innocent
      air.
"Is it in his family?" asks Miss Watson eagerly. "It is in some families, you know. In some
      families every member is deaf from childhood. All the Champneys of Nether-Stoney are deaf. I
      must ask him whether it is in his family!"
And this little squall—after all only the threat, not the reality of one—is the sole break
      in the golden halcyon sunshine of what Rivers, though he ate next to nothing—and that next to
      nothing may have been horse, or hippopotamus, for all
       he knew to the contrary—now looks back upon as the most regal banquet of his
      life.
What banqueting-hall, indeed, painted with goddesses and fair sea-women, could equal the low
      linden-roof above their heads? What hall-hangings could come nigh the soft little red
      vine-leaves, and the tiny tendrils just beginning to twist their airy fingers round the wooden
      trellis? What chamber-music could surpass that of the full brook and the larks?
By-and-by, it is true, both are drowned in the noise of the ever-waxing talk and laughter.
      They are almost all young; they are out on a spree; they have been hungry and now are full; is
      it any wonder that it needs but a very little jest to set them all off in clamorous mirth?
There is presently a Babel of tongues. The end of Miss Watson's story of how she sent in her
      card, and finally forced her way in, to the Great Llama of Thibet—a tale which strangers
      regard as a bad and glaring lie, but which her acquaintances feel
       to be not only probable, but true—is lost in the general din.
Sarah is in her glory. She has been nibbling marrons glacés, and teaching her soldiers to
      play bob-cherry with some fine forced fruit contributed by Rivers, regard-less of the famine
      price he paid for them, to tempt his lady's palate.
Rewarded by the succès fou of this accomplishment, she proceeds to exhibit several
      others, not included in the curriculum of an ordinary education; the most admired among which
      is that one—not so widely known as its simple ingenuity deserves —of crossing the fore and
      middle fingers, and slowly passing them down the bridge of the nose, thereby discovering a
      chasm of great depth, apparently parting the nose into two. Before long there is not a soul at
      the table whose fingers are not travelling eagerly down his or her nose, some to verify the
      discovery as new, some to enjoy it as old. Hussars, Gardereiters, Uhlans, combine to cry
      "Famos!" "Kolossal!" And when at length chairs are
       pushed back, and the cherries and the revel are together ended, Sarah finds her
      court swelled by the admirers of almost all the other girls, unable to resist the attractions
      of a maiden who, to such Veilchen Augen and such a figure, adds talents of so varied
      and unusual an order.
They are so occupied in thronging round her, and she is so obliging in promising to teach
      them, one and all, many more tricks by-and-by, that Miss Watson's bawling command that they
      are now all to go over the Schloss passes for some time unregarded.
In time, however, she collects them, the unwilling as well as the willing—the former greatly
      preponderate—and sweeping them off out of the sunshine and the merry summer air, gives them
      into the charge of a surly, high-flavoured, and grasping-minded Verwalter, who leads them
      through an endless enfilade of bare rooms, cold and dank even on this warmly-honeyed May-day,
      and fleeces them at the end.

