
VIII
AS I look back now on the past years, I find that the thing that penetrated most into my
     inner self, shocked me to the heart, and gave me no room and left no desire for any pretence
     about the will of fate and destiny, such as sometimes consoles grief, was the death of my
     friend Louis. Unlike most great friendships, mine with Louis began at school; and those, to
     whom circumstances have not allowed friendships at school, cannot realise the intensity of
     certain few friendships which, beginning on a basis of tomfoolery and ragging, as the general
     relations between schoolboys begin, yet survive them all, and steadily ripen with the years
     into a maturity of companionship, which has such a quality and nobility of its own that no
     other relation, not even that of passionate love, can ever take its place when it is gone.
I have not happened to mention Louis before in these papers for the reason that he
      had actually come very little into my life in London. In fact, we retained our
     intimacy against the aggression of our different lives, which was rather paradoxical for the
     casual people we believed ourselves to be. (Without a sincere belief in his own casualness the
     modern youth would be the most self-important ass of all generations.) Our ways of life lead
     very contrarily; there was nowhere they could rationally touch; he, a soldier; I, a doctor,
     lawyer, or pedlar, I did not know which. But I had the grace, or if you like, the foolishness,
     to envy him the definite markings of his career; I envied him his knowledge of the road he
     wished to tread, and of the almost certainties which lay inevitably along that road.
Later, in those very best of days, I used to talk about him to Shelmerdene. And as I
     described, she listened and wondered. For, she said, such a man as I described Louis to be, and
     myself, could have nothing in common. But I told her that it isn't necessary for two people to
     have anything "in common" but friendship—and as I made that meaningless remark I put on a
     superior air,
      and she did not laugh at me. She continued to wonder during months, and at last
     she said, "Produce this wretched youth." But I would not produce him, "because Louis has never
     in his life met or dreamt of any one like you, and he will fall in love with you straight away.
     And as he is more honest than I am, so he will fall in love with you much more seriously, and
     that will be very bad for him, because you are the sort of woman that you are. It isn't fair to
     destroy the illusions of a helpless subaltern in the Rifle Brigade.... No, I will not produce
     him, Shelmerdene." But of course I did, and of course Louis saw, heard, and succumbed
     delightedly, and all through that lunch and for the half-hour after I had to keep a very stern
     eye on Shelmerdene and take great care not to let her get within a yard of him, else she would
     have asked him to go and see her next time he was in town, and then there would have been
     another wild-eyed ghost wandering about the desert places of Mayfair. As for Louis, he beat
     even his own record for dulness during that lunch. He admired her tremendously and
      obviously, and too obviously he couldn't understand a beautiful woman with beauty
     enough to be as dull as she liked, saying witty and amusing things every few seconds, always
     giving the most trivial remark, the most stereotyped phrase, such a queer twist as would make
     it seem delightfully new. For ever after he pestered me to "produce" him again, and I made
     myself rather unpopular by putting him off; and I never did let him see her again. On
     Shelmerdene's part it was just cussedness to worry me to see him again, for with a disgusted
     laugh at my "heavy father stunt," she forgot all about him; after that lunch she had found him
     "rather dull and a dear, and much to be loved by all women over thirty-five. I am not yet old
     enough to love your Louis," she said. And she retained her surprise at our friendship.
It was, perhaps, rather surprising; surprising not so much that we were friends, but how we
     ever became friends; for there are many people in this world, who could be great friends with
     each other if they could but once surmount the first barrier, if they
      could but wish to surmount that barrier—and between Louis and me
     there was much more than a simple barrier to surmount. We became friends in spite of ourselves,
     then; though Louis, as you may believe, had nothing at all to do with the affair; he just sat
     tight and let things happen, to him, for his was not the nature consciously to defeat an
     invisible aim, a tyrannical decree. As one of England's governing classes, even at the age of
     fourteen when I first met him, such a rebellion as that of forcing God's hand about the
     smallest trifle would somehow have savoured to him of disloyalty to the "Morning Post" which,
     together with the Navy, Louis took as representing the British Empire.
I had been at school already one term when Louis came; and so it was at breakfast on the
     opening day of the winter term that I first noticed his bewildered face, though as we grew to
     prefects that same face aired so absolute a nonchalance that, together with my rather
     sophisticated features, we thoroughly deserved the title of the blasted
      roués. However, at that time,
      we were not prefects, but "new bugs," though Louis was by one term a newer "bug"
     than myself and my friends, and therefore had to sit at the bottom of the "bug" table and take
     his food as he found it. I, of course, took no notice of him at all; I maintained a, so to
     speak, official hauteur about our meal-time relations—one couldn't do
     anything else, you know, if one wished to keep unimpaired the dignity of one's seniority. I
     had, in fact, no use for newer "bugs" than myself; I was quite happy at my own end of the table
     with the three men (ages fourteen to fourteen-and-a-half) with whom I shared a study. We made a
     good and gay study, I remember, for they were three stalwart fellows and I, even at that age
     not taking my Armenianism very seriously, gave a quite passable imitation of an English
     public-school man.
How, as I looked round at my three friends and said to myself "here are companions for life,"
     how was I to know of the irruption into my life of a bewildered face! I despised that face. It
     was the face of a newer "bug" than myself. But the wretched man could play soccer, I noticed;
     his deft
      work at "inside right" to my "center forward" warmed my heart; and, by the time
     the term was half over, he had gained a certain distinction for being consistently at the
     bottom of the lowest form in the school; one rather liked a man for sticking to his convictions
     like that.
Nevertheless we became silently inimical. He ceased to look bewildered; with an English
     cunning he had already found that an air of nonchalance pays best. And his sort of "Oh, d'you
     think so?" air began to irritate me; it was no good doing my man of the world on a man who
     obviously made a point of not believing what I said. I rather felt in speaking to him as an
     irritated and fussy foreign ambassador must feel before the well-bred imperturbability of Mr.
     Balfour; I wasn't then old enough to know I felt like that, but myself and study had reasonable
     grounds for deciding that "that sloppy-haired new long bug was a conceited young swine," and
     that he was trading rather too much on being at the bottom of the school.
There was a dark-haired, sallow-faced youth, one Marsden, who had come the same
      term as we three; he had at first shared our study, but had been fired out for
     being a cub. And, by intimating to the House-Master that if he was put back in our study, new
     bugs or no, we wouldn't answer for his mother's knowing him, we had fired him out in such a way
     that he couldn't ever get back. But he didn't try to get back. He just went into the newest
     bug's study, and there, when Louis came the next term, made firm and fast friends with him.
     Marsden disliked me much more than he disliked any one else, as I had been the instigator of
     his ejection from our study, and so the silent and contemptuous enmity with which Louis eyed me
     wasn't very strange. Those two made common cause in their indifference to anything we three at
     the head of the table might say; and soon, things came to such a pass that we had to put lumps
     of salt into the potato dish before handing it down to them. And even that didn't seem to have
     much effect, for one tea-time I distinctly heard a murmur resembling "Armenian Jew" escape from
     Marsden's lips; that, of course, couldn't be borne, and I couldn't then explain to him
      that there was no such person as an Armenian Jew for I wasn't myself quite
     certain about it—all I knew was that I wasn't a Jew, and it wasn't Marsden who was going to
     call me one in vain. So there and then I upped and threw my pot of jam at his head, striking
     him neatly just above the right eye; I didn't do it in anger, I didn't know why I did it,
     though now I know it was done through a base passion for notoriety, which I still have, though
     in a less primitive manner. I certainly got notoriety then, and also six cuts from a very
     supple cane and a Georgic on which to work off my ardour.
But I gained Louis for a friend. He had, it seemed, admired the deft and unassuming way in
     which I had thrown that pot of jam—he knew even less than I did about that passion for
     notoriety—and when he met me in the passage as I came back from my six cuts in the prefects'
     room, he said, "I say, bad luck," and I suggested that if his friend Marsden's ugly face hadn't
     got in the way of a perfectly harmless pot of jam I wouldn't have got a licking. Thus, in a
     three-minute talk, we became friends; but when we each
      went to our own studies we didn't know we were friends—in fact, I was quite
     prepared to go on treating him as an enemy until, when we met again, we both seemed to find
     that we had something to say to each other. And throughout those years of school we had always
     something to say to each other which we couldn't say quite in the same way to any one else, and
     that seems to me to be the basis of all friendship.... I don't quite know what happened to
     Marsden, or how Louis told him that he had decided to discontinue his friendship. I have an
     idea that Marsden went on disliking me through four years of school, and that if I met him on
     Piccadilly to-morrow would recognise me only to scowl at me, the man who not only hit him over
     the eye with a pot of jam, but also deprived him of his best friend.
Louis and I left school together; he on his inevitable road to Sandhurst, and I, with a
     puckered side glance at Oxford, to Edinburgh University. Even now I don't know why I went to
     Edinburgh and not to Oxford; I had always intended going to Oxford, my family had always
     intended that I should go
      to Oxford, up to the last moment I was actually going to Oxford—when, suddenly,
     with a bowler hat crammed over my left ear and a look of vicious obstinacy, I decided that I
     would go to Edinburgh instead.
Of course it was a silly mistake. The only thing I have gained by not going to Oxford is an
     utter inability to write poetry and a sort of superior contempt for all pale,
     interesting-looking young men with dark eyes and spiritual hair who are tremendously concerned
     about the utter worthlessness of Mr. William Watson's poetry. Of course my own superior
     attitude may be just as unbearable as their anaemic enthusiasm over, say, a newly discovered
      rondel by the youngest son of the local fishmonger; but I at least do
     sincerely try to face and appreciate literature boldly, and frankly, and normally, and not
     self-consciously as they do, attacking literature from anywhere but a sane standpoint, trying
     to force a breach in any queer spot so that it is unusual and has not been thought of before;
     and through this original breach will suddenly appear an Oxford face with a queer unhallowed
     grin of self-conscious
      cleverness; and all this for a thin book of poems in a yellow cover, called, as
     like as not, "Golden Oxygen"!
Louis, down at Sandhurst, was being made into a soldier, and I, up at Edinburgh, was on the
     high road to general fecklessness. I only stayed there a few months; jumbled months of
     elementary medicine, political economy, metaphysics, theosophy—I once handed round programs at
     an Annie Besant lecture at the Usher Hall—and beer, lots of beer. And then, one night, I
     emptied my last mug, and with another side-glance at Oxford, came down to London; "to take up a
     literary career" my biographer will no doubt write of me. I may of course have had a "literary
     career" at the back of my mind, but as it was I slacked outrageously, much to Louis' disgust
     and envy. I have already written of those months, how I walked in the Green Park, and sat in
     picture galleries, and was lonely.
That first loneliness was lightened only by the occasional visits to London of Louis. He was
     by now a subaltern in the Rifle Brigade, with an indefinite but cultured
      growth somewhere between his nose and upper lip, and a negligent way of wearing
     mufti, as though to say, "God, it's good to be back in civilised things again!" They were
     jolly, sudden evenings, those! London was still careless then. Of an evening, a couple of young
     men in dress suits with top hats balanced over their eyebrows and eyes full of a
      blasé vacancy, were not as remarkable as they now are. Life has lost its
     whilom courtesy to a top hat. Red flags and top hats cannot exist side by side; the world is
     not big enough for both. Ah, thou Bolshevik, thou class-beridden shop-steward! When ye die, how
     can ye say that ye have ever lived if, in your aggressive experiences, you have not known upon
     your foreheads the elegant weight of a top hat, made especially to suit your Marxian craniums
     by one Locke, who has an ancient shop at the lower end of St. James's Street and did at one
     time dictate the headwear of the beaux of White's and Crockford's. I warrant the life of my top
     hat, made by that same artist to withstand the impact of the fattest woman on earth, against
     all the battering eloquence of
      all the orators in all the Albert Halls of all the Red Flag countries. With it on
     my head I will finesse any argument whatsoever with you any night of the week. And at the end
     of the argument, if you are still obstinate, I will cram my blessed top hat on your head and,
     lo and behold! you are at once a Labour Minister in the Cabinet, and a most respectable man
     with a most rectangular house in Portman Square!... But I must go back to Louis, who never got
     further in his study of Labour than an idea that all station-masters were labour leaders
     because they took tips so impressively.
Those occasional evenings were very good. I put away from myself writing and books—Louis
     hadn't really ever read anything but Kipling, "Ole-Luk-Oie" and "The Riddle of the Sands"-and I
     temporarily forgot Shelmerdene, and we dined right royally. I don't know what we talked about,
     perhaps we talked of nothing at all; but we talked all the time, and we laughed a great deal,
     and we still had the good old "blasted roué" touch about us. We were very,
     very old indeed, so old that we decided that the first
      act of no play or revue in the world could compensate one for a hurried dinner;
     and we were old enough to know that a confidential manner to maitres
      d'hotels is a thing to be cultivated, else a chicken is apt to be wizened and the
     sweet an unconscionable long time in coming. After dinner, a show, and then perhaps a night
     club, "to teach those gals how to dance."
We founded a Club for Good Mannered People. I, as the founder, was the president of the club,
     and Louis the vice-president; there were no members because we unanimously black-balled every
     one whom, in a moment of weakness, one or other of us might propose. We decided, in the end,
     that the Club could never have any members except the president and vice-president, simply
     because the men of our own generation were the worst mannered crew God ever put within lounging
     distance of a drawing-room.... There must be something wrong, we said, in a world where
     public-school men could be recognised by the muddy footprints they left on other people's
     carpets. So it was obviously left to us to supply the deficiency
      of our generation, both as regards manners and everything else. We made a cult of
     good manners; Louis took to them as a cult where he had never taken to them as a necessity, and
     the happiest moments of his life were when he could work it off on to some helpless woman who
     had dropped an umbrella or a handkerchief. The Club, we decided, must never come to an end, it
     must go on being a Club until one or other of us should die ... and now the Club is no more,
     for suddenly a spring gave way, the world gave a lurch towards hell, and Louis stopped playing
     at soldiers to go away and be a real soldier, to die in his first attack with a bullet in his
     chest....



