
DRIFTWOOD
The river Hara, after skirting the fort, the bathing-steps below the courtyard, the palace,
     and the palace garden, continued its course, still hemmed in to swift current by a high bank on
     the opposite side, and on the near one by a wall set with spiked temples sacred to Siva; for
     Hara is one of his many names. But, on reaching the apex of the triangle formed by the city,
     the banks fell away, the river spread itself out to greater rest, until, at the uttermost end
     of a long spit of sandbank and tamarisk, it met the waters of its twin river, the Hari, in the
     broad placid lagoon which lay between Eshwara and the south; that is the dry stretch of desert,
     against whose barrenness Western ingenuity--aided by Dr. Dillon's horde of fifteen hundred
     ruffians--had been digging defiance for months. From the spit of sand you could see the result.
     A broad seam on the face of patient Mother Earth, a first wrinkle telling of millions to come
     from the ploughshares of men.
As yet, however, the canal was as dry as the desert around it; and was to remain so until the
     great Lord-sahib came in state, on his way to the hills, to open the sluices. There
     was to be a big camp, a big function on the occasion, and even sleepy Eshwara felt a vague
     excitement regarding it. For the older men remembered the days when the Hosts of the
      Lord-sahibs had regularly passed through the city, and had tales to tell about them;
     a fact which prevented the coming event from being too strange even to be thought about! Then
     the opening of the canal was another disturber of primeval calm. True, the idea of it had been
     with Eshwara ever since the first sod had been turned two years before; but now the thing
     stared it in the face. Within a few days the waters of the sacred rivers would have to lie in a
     new bed. Would they like it? Would the gods like it? Would men like it?
Those were the questions being asked from one end of Eshwara to another. Even outside it, on
     the long narrow spit of sand-bank set with sparse tussocks of grass and tamarisk which reached
     beyond the city's triangle into the rivers--and where, after a flood, the white gypsum silt lay
     like a robe of righteousness--they were being discussed; for the strange race who lived on it,
     shifting their wigwams of grass to the low-lying land opposite when the waters rose, lived by
     the river; by the fish in it, and the logs of wood which came floating down it.
So this question of the canal was in the mind of the naked man, attired in the complete suit
     of blue beads which marks an aboriginal race, who, in the dawn following, squatted on the
     highest curve of the spit. He was small, swart to positive inkiness, and his thin legs and arms
     shewed grey lights on their tense muscles, as if these were truly iron. Behind him rose a
     wigwam of reeds, at the entrance to which a spear was stuck in the sand in order to display the
     head of a bottle-nosed alligator impaled on its point. At his right hand was a reed basket, a
     rude net of reed twine. In front of him lay one of those small shark-like scaleless fishes
     which the learned call Silurian, and tell us are relics of a creation older than ours.
So might the man have been. So might have been the background of sand and reed, spear and
     wigwam, the foreground of net and fish. Yet the fisher was not all uncivilized. This little
     survival of an aboriginal race, shifting about in the shifting river-bed, had always had an
     attraction for the Missionaries, who, as a rule, find the inferior races easiest to deal with.
     Gu-gu therefore--his name being as primitive as his appearance, since it is the first effort of
     infant tongues--belied his looks. He had at any rate a civilized eye to business, a civilized
     notion of the relations between supply and demand, for he shook his head at the customer
     opposite him.
"Not a cowrie less, Khân-jee. 'Tis the only one in the market, see you; besides on this day
     the 'Missen' miss comes to us folk, and she never haggles. She will pay the five annas
     gladly to be let read her book to my women."
The mumble-apparently a pious aspiration that the Most High would smite infidels hip and
     thigh--was the only recognizable point in the figure on the other side of the fish; for Akbar
     Khân, doorkeeper, messenger, assistant waiter, had not only discarded Saturn's rings--the loss
     of which about his head made his baldness something of a shock--but also every article of
     clothing except his waist-cloth. The reason for this was, in a way, like many another thing
     about the old sinner, pathetic. Briefly he liked to dissociate his inner self from occupations
     which he considered were beneath the dignity of the Akbar Khân of the past. Therefore being,
     for the nonce, a bazaar coolie in search of fish for his master's breakfast, he got up for the
     part; so finding it, at once, easier to forget, and to remember that past.
He mumbled of it as he strenuously opposed the price.
"Everything grows dearer, every day," yawned the aboriginal Gu-gu. "Even women, as thou
     shouldst know."
Akbar Khân clucked a pious denial. "We spread no nets for that game in the palace nowadays.
     Those evil times are gone; we live sober and virtuous." The piety held a distinct flavour of
     regret.
"And as for fish," continued Gu-gu, "they will be dearer ere they are cheaper. When the deep
     water begins to run canalwards, the fish will run too. Then good-by to our trade, since the
      Huzoors allow us nothing in their waters without payment."
He whined, however, to the wrong quarter for sympathy, the old retainer's views on preserving
     being absolutely those of a Shropshire squire who is also a J. P.
"Neither did we," he replied, indifferently. "Thy like, Gu-gu, would have had to bring thy
     fish to the palace and be satisfied with our leavings. Out on thee for an upstart! Take thy
     four annas, and be thankful--slave!"
Gu-gu's ill-tempered face became aggressive. "Not I!--the Miss will give it; nay! six,
     mayhap, since the child is sick, and she will be wanting leave to dose it. So--hands
     off--eunuch!"
The title, once dignified, was opprobrious now, and old Akbar rose in a perfect fury, his
     bald head wobbling, the flaming fringe of red hairs about his face giving him a ludicrous
     resemblance to a toothless old man-eating tiger, face to face with his lawful prey, yet unable
     to injure it.
"Oh! for the bastinado!" he stuttered, impotently. "Oh, for the cutting off of bodily
     members! Oh! even, for the tying up of heels, and roastings and duckings. But the
      Huzoors have taken them from us, and gifted them to the police, who know not the
     proper methods. Yâh! Gu-gu, had I but had thee fifty years ago!" his anger lessened with sheer
     wistful regret. "Fifty years ago when the Nawab gifted me as body-servant to the new
      Wazeer Bun-avatâr[1]-sahib because he
     brought him a bird that would sing of itself from Italy wilayat."
"But all birds do that," cavilled Gu-gu, feeling nevertheless a reverent curiosity about
     those legendary days.
Akbar gave a crackling, contemptuous laugh. "Not palace birds! they have to be wound up; and
      Bun-avatâr-sahib sent for this across the black water. So he kept favour with the
     Nawab. Birds that sing, and flowers that smell, and boxes that make music, and dolls that dance
     when you wind them. Lo! these, Gu-gu, are the pleasures of palaces; but how canst thou know,
     who hast not lived in them even, as I--"
The sense of his own superiority soothed him still more; he squatted down again, and
     hubble-bubbled for a space at the hookah which was an integral part of all his
     impersonations.
"Yea! those were times," he mumbled half to himself. "Even Pidar Narâyan--may Heaven protect
     him--could not say 'please God' to every mouthful, as he does now--as we all do now, and
     rightly, seeing that we have grown old." Once more the piety smacked of pity, and the old man,
     finding a listener, went on with a certain gusto. "Look you! he had to walk like the tongue
     among thirty-two teeth in those days, with Bun-avatâr-sahib, my master, like two peas
     in one pod with the Nawah. Except for women. Pidar Narâyan took his way there--mostly!"
The interrupting gurgle of the hookah gave time for an elaborate wink of a wicked
     old eye. Possibly this was due to the smoke, for the old voice went on as before almost
     dolorously.
"He had the money-bags, you see, and looked after the rents. But my master, Bun-avatâr--lo!
     thou shouldst have seen him when he came first--the picture of a man!--they say he was a prince
     in his own country, but fell into trouble; so came to make his fortune here with Pidar
     Narâyan--was called Wazeer. And let me tell thee, Gu-gu, it means something to be
     body-servant to a Wazeer! Lo! to think I might have been it still but for that jade,
     Anâri Begum!"
Despite the epithet, he smiled, and his pipe this time gave out quite a chuckling sound.
"As ill to keep within walls as a butterfly!" he muttered. "Up and down the garden, in and
     out the balconies, and the Nawab in two minds to use force, or put her in a sack. For she
     flouted him. The prettiest ones play that game for power always, and she was Walidâd, her
     brother's, last hope of favour. Walidâd, Kanjara, who had been king's caterer for
     years before my master, Bun-avatâr-sahib, came to make all the court cry sour
     buttermilk! Walidâd, who had once stood so high, that, in a drunken bout, the Nawab promised
     him his half-sister to wife. And he got her too! She wept on her wedding day, but we in the
     lower storey heeded not tears in the upper. For, see you, mine uncle was chief eunuch--we kept
     the honour thus in the family from generation to generation--so I was in and out, seeing what
     went on. Until somehow (mine uncle with the bowstring round his neck--as was right, honest
     man--swore he knew not how) Bun-avatâr-sahib caught a sight of her! Some say it was a
     plot, from beginning to end, of Walidâd's; others that his enemies feared lest Anâri
     should succeed. There be balls within balls, even in a plaything, if the workmen are cunning!
     Anyhow, he saw her.
"And I, his body-servant, was able to come and go where Pidar Narâyan hath made his church
     nowadays. But there! what matters it? 'Tis all one. Love and the Faith are in and out of men's
     minds like a shelldrake in weedy water; a body cannot tell which way its head may be and which
     its tail! Nevertheless I felt a choke at my throat, Gu-gu, many a time, as I waited for him in
     the boat below the balcony; yet in the end, it was not my throat, but mine uncle's. He died in
     the faith, Gu-gu, cursing women. His head was that way at the last!--'Tis mostly
      so--he--he--"
The chuckle of his pipe was fiendish, yet his wizened face was wistful. "Still, God knows,
     one could scarce look on at such a wooing, and not beat the drum in time, as musicians to a
     dancer. And it runs in our blood, see you, to watch, and beat the drum. That is our profession;
     and, by mine ancestors! I deemed it enough for mortal man. But Bun-avatâr-sahib, see
     you, was not of our race. He was of Italy wilayat and a prince. So, one day, my liver
     dissolved hearing that the butterfly was over the walls! But, as I said, it was mine uncle's
     neck, not mine. Yet the game ended for me when Bun-avatâr-sahib died."
"They poisoned him, folk say; is't true?" asked Gu-gu. It was a point in the oft-told tale
     which was still discussed by Eshwara gossips.
"That is other folks' news, not mine," replied Akbar, discreetly. "May be, may be not. The
      Huzoors, anyhow, sent the Nawab to die in Calcutta on a pinson[2] for it; but they have ever an excuse to take land! Pidar
     Narâyan had a hard fight to keep Bun-avatâr-sahib's grants--the Nawab was ever
     generous to his favourites, look you--for Anâri Begum's baby; ay! though he showed a writing of
     marriage, and had made the infant Christian after their habit. Still he got them, land and
     palace and all. So I stayed on serving my master's child, and when she died, her child, the
      Miss-baba, even to the haggling for fish. Lo! slave! it grows late. Give it to me and
     have done with it--Thou wilt not. Oh! for the devil that was in her grandmother Anâr to be in
     this Miss-baba, and for her to come to Bun-avatâr-sahib's rights as
      Wazeer--then would there be loppings and--"
"Or if Roshan Khân should come to his," sneered Gu-gu. "The canal sahib's ayah was
     telling me thou didst prostrate thyself in the dust as if he were indeed Nawab! Have a care!
      eunuch-jee, the police are agog nowadays to find disloyalty even in newspapers."
"May her gossiping tongue be slit!" stuttered the old retainer. "Can a body not do obeisance
     to his masters? For look you, Roshan is true grand-nephew to the Nawab through his grandmother,
     Walidâd's wife--ay! and for that matter, cousin to the Miss, through Anâri Begum, Walidâd's
     sister! I did but welcome him; I did but my duty--I did but show my manners--I did but what we
     have done from generation to generation." He moved away muttering, full of virtuous resentment
     that a suspicion of anything save sheer servility should have been imputed to him. After a
     lifetime of trucklings and bootblackings, to be credited with higher motives was too bad. To
     prove his innocence he would that very evening, he told himself, seek out Roshan, not at the
     Fort,--that might be misunderstood,--but at his grandmother's. His grandmother, who, though she
     had been upstart Walidâd's wife, was still the late Nawab's half-sister! His sister!! What
     could be nearer than that!!!
And he would prostrate himself again, and assure the family of his services. That
     was his birthright.
Meanwhile Gu-gu looked after him, and laughed. He was a clever fellow, was Gu-gu, and in a
     previous generation of scholars had been pet pupil in a little school started by another Miss
     from another Missen. He had got pennies for attending it, which had come in useful
     before he was big enough to face the river.
But now he was the best man on either the Hara or the Hari, save one. And he?
Gu-gu's beady black eyes, watching the curve of the current mechanically, gave a sudden
     flash. He was on his feet in a second. There was something dipping, diving, sidling, drifting,
     out yonder which might be secured for his wigwam before anyone else saw it! But as, silently,
     like a seal's, his black head came up from his first forge under water which was to give him a
     fair start from the shore without even a splash to attract notice, another black head showed to
     the right of him, a yard or two behind.
But it was his head! Am-ma's head! Am-ma, the frog-like, Am-ma, whose wide hands and
     feet looked as if webbed in the water. Am-ma, the only man who could touch him. He set his
     teeth, gave up silence, and surged ahead with an overhand stroke, his hand seeming to clutch
     and hold the water. It was a faster stroke than Am-ma's; for a time the swifter. Then with a
     backward glance he drew a quick breath, knowing it would be a race indeed, for the black head
     had gone, and only a faint wale on the smooth water told where his rival, avoiding the slight
     resistance of the air, swam like a fish. Dangerous tactics for most men, ending often in a
     sudden collapse, bleedings from nose and ears, or, at least, time lost in coming to the
     surface. But Am-ma was not as other men. Half-witted, except in river lore, uncouth, misshapen,
     he was practically amphibious.
Gu-gu ground his teeth impotently as the faint wale crept up and up. The man must have air in
     his stomach like a fish! Ah! if the river had been in flood, if this had been a race with air
     bladders, indeed,--one black head of inflated skin under each arm, and your own in the
     middle--the issue would have been certain; for no one, in the whole tribe, knew the backward
     rip of a knife from below which would leave a rival helpless, lopsided, bound to seek safety on
     shore, so well as Gu-gu! But it was not flood time, so he must risk all. Like a porpoise at
     play the curve of his dark back disappeared, and now there were two wales upon the water side
     by side.
And ahead, sidling, dipping, diving to the current was a deodar log with the broad arrow of
     government on it, now visible, now out of sight.
It was a question of steering; steering without eyes, steering by instinct, steering by sheer
     experience of logs and their ways, of the meeting currents of the two rivers and their
     ways.
And over against them, to the right across the broad lagoon, were low brick buildings, and a
     horde of fifteen hundred ruffians with fascines and earth-baskets finishing a dam that was to
     alter the currents, and protect the canal! They looked like swarming ants in the sunshine.
The wales were neck and neck now, side by side, straight as a die on the log. Then suddenly,
     the right-hand one swerved outward. Only a yard or two; a yard or two nearer to the ants in the
     sunshine.
A second after the log swerved also--swerved to the right. The next, two black heads rose
     silently; but one of them was two yards to the left of that dancing, dipping prize!
Gu-gu, breathless as he was, gave an inarticulate cry of rage, and shook his fist at the
     swarming ants. Already their work was altering the currents he had known for so long. That it
     was possible to allow for this, as Am-ma had done, did not comfort him. He swam back sulkily,
     his wrath increased by the knowledge one glance had given him, that the log on which his rival
     was paddling to shore triumphantly bore its broad arrow so lightly, and so near its end, that a
     little dexterous manipulation would have left the runaway unmarked, and so given its captor the
     right, not merely of ransom, but of sale!
Truly, it was an ill world for the poor!
But Lance Carlyon laughed, as he lounged over his early tea and watched the river through his
     field-glass, in a balcony of the fort, dressed in a gorgeous ring-streaked sleeping suit which
     he could only wear when on outpost duty, as the regiment had tabooed it. In truth it made him
     not unlike Tom Sawyer's "Royal Nonsuch."
"The little 'un's got it! I say! Dering, I believe I shall like Eshwara.
     It's--it's--new--don't you know." His eyes rested, as he spoke, on the low, bastioned building,
     all hemmed in by temple spires, at the very point of the city's triangle, which Erda Shepherd
     had told him was the mission house. Truly, he thought, she was in the thick of it!
"New!" echoed Vincent Dering captiously, "I should have called it old. I thought that sort of
     thing had died with the pagoda tree."
"What sort of thing?"
Vincent nodded towards the palace with an odd, cynical laugh. "That; it's ghostly. Doesn't
     belong to the nineteenth century!"
Lance turned curiously. "I said that to--to Pidar Narâyan--I can't call him anything else,
     somehow--when he was showing me over yesterday. And--you know that inscrutable smile of his--he
     just pointed up to the telegraph wires--they go right across the garden you know--and said,
     'There is half the news of half the world over our heads, anyhow.' It knocked me over, I tell
     you, to think of it; and by Jove! Dering, next week when the Lord-sahib comes--"
Vincent Dering laughed boisterously. "There'll be the millennium, of course. Come along,
     Lance! It's time we were off to prepare his way. Dashwood wants it done A1. They are going to
     lay on electric light, and all that. By the way, Mrs. Smith told me to tell you she expected
     you to breakfast."
Ten minutes afterwards they were riding over the boat bridge to superintend the laying out of
     the Vice-regal camp against the coming of the Lord-sahib and his hosts.
