
ECHOES
If the twopenny-halfpenny tambourine--which had been bedaubed with its white lilies and
     rampant butterfly by a suburban maiden lady for a mission sale, and, remaining over from that,
     had been bought in at half price by Mrs. Campbell for the adornment of her drawing-room,--had
     been indeed Jean Ziska's famous drum, Eshwara could hardly have been more restless than it was
     on the night after Vincent Dering had sung, "Oh! dem golden slippers!" to its accompaniment.
     The tune had occurred to him in an instant, without thought, simply as one he had sung more
     than once when doing bones and tambourine in a nigger troupe at a soldiers' sing-song. He had
     meant nothing by; it and yet the words,

"Golden slippers on a golden stair,
Golden slippers dat we'se got to wear,"
fitted their environment; that atmosphere of effort after something beyond, above the real,
     the actual; the inevitable climbing of a golden stair, the inevitable wearing of the golden
     shoes, the inevitable search after the golden gates which, found, will open upon Paradise.
     True, the Paradise differed to each pair of yearning eyes and weary feet; but the longing for
     it as a personal gain, spiritual or bodily, was identical.
For Paradise is the Desire of the World still; whether men find it in the good they lost, or
     the Love which lost it for them.
And in Eshwara that night the desire rose strenuously, militantly.
Erda, packing her boxes in haste, since she and her aunt had arranged to start with the
     others at dawn, felt as if she had, at last, closed her hand firmly on the plough. There could
     be no looking back now. The golden slippers were on her feet, the golden stairs before her, the
     golden gates within sight. She had said good-by to Lance without a quiver. She even smiled
     softly, tenderly, as she set an unopened deal box to go with her others. It was one which the
     Reverend David had brought with him from England, and which had been made over to her, not
     without nods and winks, smiles and suspicions of tears, from her aunt. For it contained the
     wedding dress. It was a Moravian wedding dress of the old style, to suit Erda's fancy; and she
     had been quite anxious to see the delicate white muslin robe and the quaint little cap, with
     its bunch of orange blossoms, which was to mark her as both bride and matron. But it had seemed
     a pity, in careful Mrs. Campbell's opinion, to unpack it only to repack it, and run the
     needless risk of crushing its daintiness. So there in its box it lay still, untouched,
     unseen.
There would be real orange blossoms and to spare, the girl told herself with a smile, in the
     garden at Herrnhut; for so the summer resting-place of the mission had been called in deference
     to the Moravian extraction of those who had built it and started the Christian settlement in
     the tiny valley in which it stood. This lay some thirty miles up the Hara, beyond the first
     range of hills; and the river, fresh from its mad rush from the snows beyond, ran through it
     slackly, peacefully, before beginning its long, swift, yet smooth, slide down the dark ravine
     which cleft the outer range, until it ended in the plains at Eshwara.
It was at Herrnhut that, every year, in turns of two months during the hot weather, the
     missionaries exchanged work in the bazaars for the lighter labor of the agricultural
     settlement. Naturally, therefore, it was looked on as a sort of holiday house; but this year it
     would be something more. It would be the headquarters of fight, the centre of the resistance
     which was to use the Commissioner's order to cease firing as an excuse for a more determined
     skirmishing. For it stood right on the pilgrims' road. Indeed, Erda and the other rebels would
     have to travel a good eight-and-twenty miles along that very road itself before coming to the
     slack water where they could cross the river by a ferry, and finish their journey through the
     level fields on its further side to Herrnhut, with its homelike, peaceful surroundings. The
     memory of them came to Erda, making her sense of that inevitable climbing of the golden stair
     after righteousness more acute; since she had to face a good-by to them also. And sooner than
     she had expected, for the breaking up of winter work a week earlier than usual, owing to this
     secular interference, had made David, eager to begin anew, plead for a speedier wedding. So
     there were only two or three days left, at most.
The knowledge, however, brought her no doubt; it helped her, rather, to a greater
     certainty.
She had done right. Her feet were indeed upon the golden stair!
And in the other houses of the mission, where everyone was disregarding sleep in the striving
     after something that was more to them than sleep, the atmosphere was electric also, the
     thoughts militant.
So they were in the streets, the alleys of the town; for on the bridge of boats--that bridge
     which spanned the broad expanse of water between the city and the great plain of India--the
     pilgrims were passing, now, in an unending stream--to take up their places as near as might be
     to the Pool of Immortality, where, with the dawn, the water would rise miraculously for the
     cleansing of sin.
"Hârî! Hârâ! Hârâ! Hârî!"
The cry was almost incessant, but the eye could see little, for the moon was young, the night
     dark.
"Hârâ! Hârî! Hârî! Hârâ!"
Hour after hour it came, that cry on the dread Creator, the dread Destroyer. Monotonous,
     patient, almost indifferent, yet absolutely insistent.
The golden-shod feet of the pilgrims, after whose souls the missionaries yearned, were on the
     golden stair also, and their golden gates would open at the 'Cradle of the Gods'; must open,
     hidden though the goal was by mist when it was day, by darkness when it was night.
What matter if it was hidden? For the gold-shod feet might falter and fall ere that goal was
     reached; but the hidden spring of cleansing at the Pool of Immortality was theirs. It would
     rise at dawn; rise as it did always, every year.
"Hârâ! Hârî! Hârî! Hârâ!"
What matter Birth or Death, if the finding of that lost paradise of purity was certain.
Out on the bridge, whence the cry came oftenest, there was no doubt regarding this certainty;
     but as each weary pair of feet stumbled on the first stones of the town, it stumbled into an
     atmosphere in which nothing seemed sure, save that there was change; that Eshwara was not what
     it had been.
To begin with, it held soldiers. Wherefore? And why had dead women been sent back to it by
     Mother Ganges to curse the men whose love had killed them?
But what wonder, when the very logs, the fishes, were stolen from the river nowadays; and
     from the people also. Then what of this strange new light? The light which fed on men's
     brains!--that came and went at pleasure--that was quite small at first, when but seven or eight
     men had been sacrificed, but which, only an hour or so agone, had showed in a huge ray, feeling
     here and there through the darkness for God knows what, then settling on it, making it
     impossible to hide aught, prying into the very Holiest of Holies! Had it not shot into Mother
     Kali's very temple, and shown the worshippers that two of her mighty arms were stuck on with
     sealing wax! What God would stand that! And how could the very Gods themselves work miracles if
     everybody could see how they were done?
They had already refused to work them for pious jogi Gorakh-nâth. What wonder? The
     Gods did not like laughter, especially the laughter of M'lléchas.[10]
Therefore, who was to tell if the spring would even rise in the Pool? So those who were wise
     would make certain of at least a modicum of salvation, and go straight to the bathing-steps;
     since the river, anyhow, must be there.
This suggestion of a cautious hedge was diligently spread by the bathing-ghat
     priests among the new arrivals; who listened patiently. But so they did also to the other
     priests whose business it was to scorn the possibility of failure, and to deny the displeasure
     of the Gods. To say that jogi Gorakh-nâth had been found out by the Huzoors
     in one of his usual tricks; that was all. So that people who wanted the genuine article, and a
     real, good, old crusted miracle, had better come as usual to the Pool.
The weary-footed, anxious-eyed climbers of the golden stairs listened patiently, silently,
     even when the antagonists began, in vehement quarrel, to bandy threats, and hint at worse
     portents to come. To their experience, their hope, it seemed impossible even to dream their
     pilgrimage in vain. The dawn would show, anyhow. So hour by hour, minute by minute, the tide of
     pilgrims set citywards till it brimmed over with faith and hope. And these are dangerous things
     when charity depends on them, and there are antagonistic claims to every alms. So Eshwara was
     restless.
Over in the gaol, also, by which the golden-shod feet passed so closely with their
     heart-stirring cry, it seemed as if Vincent Dering's thrumming, following as it did on the
     heels of Eugene Smith's success with the search light, had set what Dr. Dillon called his Hosts
     of the Devil in commotion. Indeed, that thrumming was still going on when George Dillon had
     gone raging over to conjure the experimenter, with oaths, to turn off his confounded bull's-eye
     at once, or the prisoners would go out of their judgment with thinking of the number who would
     have to die that night in order to keep up the supply of brain power!--just too, as he had been
     congratulating himself that the cholera scare was over. Seventy-two hours, and not a case! It
     was too bad!
Eugene, whom he found on the roof of his house playing with coils, batteries, accumulators,
     had suggested eagerly that if there was real trouble, he might end it by turning his light bang
     on to the gaol, and so reducing it to a paralysis of sheer terror. Dr. Dillon, however, had
     sworn violently that he would not have the poor wretches frightened unnecessarily, especially
     when that triumphant cry of those who were free to defy the devil by seeking sanctification
     before death reminded them that they could not--that they must die defiled, helpless,
     hopeless! That fear was, he said, in a way dignified, worthy of consideration. And he did not
     anticipate trouble unless there was treachery inside or out, though perhaps he might, as a
     precaution, ask Dering for an extra guard. But when the latter happened to come in, as Mrs.
     Smith's escort home, while the doctor was still there, Dr. Dillon apparently changed his mind.
     Anyhow, he pooh-poohed Captain Dering's offer to send one, saying, the more you could keep a
     gaol to yourself the better--or for the matter of that anything else! So, with a curt
     good-night to Mrs. Smith, he went back to his work, leaving Vincent to remark, carelessly, that
     Dillon seemed in a bad temper. At which Muriel smiled. There was something in the air, she
     said, conducive to bad temper. She, herself, felt she must soon have quarrelled with the
     doctor's assumption of knowing better than anyone else; so it was as well he had not stopped to
     dinner. Her quarrelsomeness did not, however, extend to Vincent, who did; indeed, she made
     herself so tenderly charming and unconsciously friendly towards him that he began to accuse
     himself of having been too irresponsive of late. The fact of being in love did not preclude
     friendship for someone else, if, indeed, he was really in love with Laila Bonaventura? In one
     way he knew himself to be so; but the idea of treating this love of his on conventional lines
     was still repugnant to him; the thought of her, as his wife, barely attractive.
So, after a time spent pleasantly enough for those two, Eugene Smith went off to his coils,
     and accumulators, and batteries, half-sulky, half-bored, and wholly ill-used at having to
     switch off, when he had at least half an hour's electricity all ready stored for use.
He was grumbling over this fact when Vincent called good-night to him before starting to
     drive back; and he answered that but for fools, who were afraid of going to their proper place,
     he might have given Dering electric light on the road.
"No, thanks!" cried Vincent, gaily, "there's enough electricity in the air to-night without
     that. I believe your machine has leaked, Smith! I feel as if I should give out sparks if anyone
     touched me!"
As he drove across the bridge Eshwara looked as if it were doing that, too. There were lights
     everywhere, twinkling, little, restless lights. The very spit, usually dark with the darkness
     of primitive life after sundown, was alive with them; for the pilgrims were camping there, as
     elsewhere. Nor were all the fisher folk abed as usual, for that, surely, was one of them
     paddling up stream on a dug-out,--just under the last span of the bridge. He saw the man
     distinctly, not five yards from him in the flash of the lamps as he drove past overhead, and
     wondered what the mischief the fellow was doing at that time of night, going up stream.
Something to be ashamed of, no doubt, else why should he have sent the dug-out beyond the
     circle of light with a swift stroke?
Truly Father Ninian was right; Eshwara was not normal. Its pulse beat irregularly, and things
     were going on which should not be going on--
A sudden shame made him glance at the shadowed pile of the palace looming above the shadowed
     town. It was all dark, save for one row of restless, twinkling lights. Those were the little
     latticed windows of Laila's sitting-room, that was fit for any king's favourite. He had seen it
     already, might see it again at twelve, if she was in one of her reckless moods when she would
     risk anything for his sake.
Truly! there were things going on!--
But this was between themselves; this could hurt no one. By and by, of course, he would
     insist on a commonplace engagement, and a wedding. Yes! a commonplace wedding. He had, despite
     his vague repugnance to her origin, made up his mind to that. No one but an utter cad could
     take what he was taking, and then shake his bridle rein and ride away. But for the present, it
     was the most absolutely perfect bit of romance in his whole life. He could not, would not give
     it up. Laila was right! This was the essence. As a rule, people mixed love, diluted it, were
     vaguely ashamed of its absorbing influence. But when you came to analyze even the diluted
     feeling, its virtue lay in this irrational content, this desire for nothing better than this
     best of pleasures--this paradise of a woman's or a man's love.
He laughed, suddenly, at the memory of Laila's quick grasp of his meaning when Muriel had
     overheard his remark about the time. Such quickness, in the latter, would have made him revolt
     from it; but with Laila it was different. A passionate gratitude to the girl to whom fear,
     remorse, the very possibility of change seemed unknown, rose up and claimed him. Dear little
     girl! She was so absolutely single-minded in her love for him. How could anyone expect him to
     forego the luxury of such love yet awhile?
In thinking Laila single-minded, Vincent thought the truth, so far as he was concerned. If
     love, passionate as Juliet's, and far more innocent in one way, far more rusé in
     another, ever existed, hers was that love. Nevertheless, its very integrity made her curiously
     cunning in regard to anything which threatened to disturb that idyll in the garden. So, at that
     very moment, when Vincent looked up at her windows asserting her absolute lack of pretence and
     single-mindedness, she was pitting her wits against old Akbar Khân in a manner worthy of her
     grandmother, Anâri Begum; since Akbar, far more than her guardian, was to be feared. The
     latter, honest man, went to his bed, beyond the chapel, at ten of the clock precisely; but
     Akbar, who from ancient habit was given to prowling about at night, and napping in odd corners,
     had many chances of discovery. During the last few days, however, when she, for her own
     purposes, had let him talk, he had become so garrulous regarding his past that she had
     recognized in him an unscrupulous confidant, with whom, in face of the possibility of requiring
     one, it was wise to remain on terms.
So, as she lounged on the sofa, she listened to his endless talk with tolerance.
"Nay!" she interrupted at last. "If, as thou sayest she will, she brings me more dresses and
     jewels, she may call me Begum, and hint at my being one, really, a thousand times over! Why
     not? Begum and Princess are the same, and my great-grandmother in Italy was that. Pidar Narâyan
     told me so to-day."
The memory of the old man's voice, when, with new-found courage, she had questioned him
     concerning those old days, made her eyes soft. Yes! he would, he must understand. So,
     by and by, when Vincent and she were tired of playing Romeo and Juliet (the story of the
     star-crossed lovers had been her only reading since Vincent had taken to quoting so much from
     it) they would make Pidar Narâyan play Friar Laurence, and marry them on the sly. That would be
     so much more amusing than a regular wedding. He could not refuse, since he had once loved as
     she loved. You could hear that in his voice; after how many years?--fifty or sixty! And the
     Princess had, of course, loved also in exactly the same way. Laila felt sure of it. That
     curious, inexpressible feeling had come to her also. Laila, trying to formulate that feeling,
     slipping her heel idly in and out of her dainty little bronze shoe as she lounged, suddenly
     remembered Vincent's song to the tambourine, and laughed. That was it!
"Golden feet upon a golden stair."
That expressed it exactly. Two pair of feet going side by side up a golden stair, to golden
     gates. So contented. Ah, God! how content! Seeking something, claiming something, yet still
     content. That feeling came, sometimes, when you were saying your prayers. A sort of yearning
      for, a sort of satisfaction in, something that was not you; so, surely if it
     came then, there could be no harm in it.
Harm! The very sisters allowed that you must love the man you were going to marry. And she
     and Vincent would be married by and by and live happily, for that was better than having a
      "statue of pure gold" erected to you! In the meantime, secrecy, so long as Vincent
     wished to play Romeo and Juliet, was her cue; therefore, the more she could blind old Akbar,
     the more he could be turned on a wrong track, the better. Especially when the turning was so
     delightfully ridiculous!
She managed, however, not to laugh her childish love of mischief into Mumtâza Mahal's very
     face when, after much shrinking into white sheets held up as screens, and quick cuddlings into
     corners at the faintest suspicion of a possible peep, that good lady, in her very, very best
     pink satin continuations, was ushered in through the dark deserted passages of the palace, to
     Laila's boudoir. For, despite the amusement, the girl's heart was beating fast with
     determination to climb her golden stairs without interruption. So she allowed herself to be
      kow-towed to, and called Begum-sahiba and she accepted the new dress and
     jewels without protest. Eagerly, in fact, since they were far more gorgeous than the first, and
     caught her taste better. The former, indeed, had been Roshan Khân's own choice, dictated by his
     acquired knowledge of the sort of things mem-sahibs admired; these latter were her
     grandmother's, purely, entirely oriental. The difference was great. Put briefly, this
     was the costume in which Anâri Begum had flouted the Nawab, the other that in which
     she had caught Bun-avatâr's fancy.
Laila took up one of the heavy, gorgeous, glittering garments. It smelt strongly of musk,
     attar of roses, and jasmin, and she snuffed at it with a smile. That was ever so much better
     than the dull lavender water, which was the only scent her guardian said a lady could use.
     Vincent would like that; he, like she did, loved strong scents. If only the stupid old frumpish
     thing would go away in time, she would put on that dress at once, and so give him pleasure.
     That was all her thought.
As she sat, with a happy smile, her face half-buried in a tiny, three-cornered corselet of
     scarlet net embroidered in seed pearls, Mumtâza and Akbar Khân winked at each other; and
     Laila's sharp eyes, catching this, brimmed over with laughter. She felt glad the rest of her
     face was hidden, until she was grave enough to reply graciously to the hints, the suggestions;
     for Mumtâza had been bound over by oaths not to go too fast, and she obeyed her
     instructions.
Even so, Akbar Khân, listening with folded hands in a mantis-like attitude, his angles all
     crushed together into humility, wondered if he was standing on his head or his heels, as he
     heard Laila admit, gravely, that she was certainly, in a way, the head of the family, in that
     she possessed its land; but that, of course, Roshan was really the heir. That it had given her
     great gratification to see how thoroughly he had adopted English ways. That, of course, it
     would be impossible for him to marry an uneducated cow of a girl. Here, for a moment, she had
     relapsed to sincerity in order to remark that it must be impossible to love a person you had
     not seen, and that for her part, she knew in an instant if she was going to like or dislike
     people. If the latter, she tried never to see them, really, again. Then, remembering her part,
     she had resumed it hastily by saying that no doubt she would see more of her cousin,--who, by
     the way, was very nice-looking,--in the future, as he was quite in society.
Old Mumtâza had hard work at this juncture to prevent herself from cracking all her
     finger-joints over the girl's head for luck, and wishing her a numerous offspring; while Akbar
     gave a gasp that was not all pleasure. He felt that he was being rushed, that the crisis might
     come before he was ready for it. At this rate, Pidar Narâyan would have no chance of dying. At
     this rate, Roshan Khân's castle in the air must topple over from sheer lack of foundation to
     such a lofty structure.
As he trotted back beside Mumtâza's curtained dhooli to that little parasite of a
     house against the palace wall, where he knew Roshan was waiting for the upshot of the
     interview, his one consolation was that bow-strings were out of fashion!
In truth, there was no more restless man in Eshwara that night than Roshan Khân. The desire
     for this paradise had grown overwhelming, and as he listened to his grandmother, while Akbar
     pointed each triumphant appeal of the old lady's with a helpless "Gereeb-pun-wâs," his
     face grew pale with emotion; until, at the mention of his good looks and Laila's desire to see
     him, he turned fiercely to the go-between, and bade him fix a time; the sooner the better!
Akbar felt inclined to tell the truth then. To admit that he had never breathed a word of
     Roshan's pretensions to the Miss-sahiba and that, so far, the negotiations only
     existed in his own imaginings. But the look on Roshan's face--he had seen it often in his youth
     in connection with women, and sacks, and bow-strings--reduced him to protestations. He would do
     his best, he said, but with Pidar Narâyan it would be difficult to manage.
Roshan strode about the little courtyard like a wild beast in a cage, biting his mustache,
     and thinking. Then he turned to the old phrase-monger.
"I have settled it. Before dawn to-morrow--not this dawn, that is too nigh on us now--but the
     next, thou shalt let me into the garden. Thou knowest the little balcony which was not lit up?
     I will stay there, waiting, till she come for an early walk among the flowers. That can be
     managed. Then, if the coast is clear, we can meet and talk. If not, there is no harm done, for
     I can slip into the stream and swim back. That will be best, since it is not possible by day,
     and at night the mems do not receive visitors, as we do, without reproach."
Roshan's knowledge of etiquette was sound, yet at that very moment Laila, ablaze with gold
     and jewels, was meeting her lover's eyes with a happy laugh.
"What's in a dress?" she paraphrased, "it is no part of me!"
Was it not? Never had Vincent seen her look like this; so absolutely desirable, so perfectly
     adorable.
He caught her in his arms and kissed her. The heavy scent upon her dress assailed him. She
     looked up into his eyes and laughed.
"But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true," she whispered, "than those who
      have more cunning to be strange."
"Juliet!" he whispered back, lost in his own mad passion. "Juliet!"
Their gold-shod feet were upon the golden stairs; the gates of Paradise were before them.
