
A SHADOW
"Understand! Of course you don't. I don't, though I've been here two years. And what's more,
     I don't want to," retorted a rather undersized Englishman, whose white drill suit made him look
     like a stem to the huge mushroom of a pith hat which he wore. Despite this protection his face
     was brown exceedingly, and faintly wrinkled through sheer exposure to sun-bright, sun-dried
     air. The fact enhanced the monkey type of his features, and made his clear, light-blue eyes--so
     set that they were shadowless below and cavernous above--look quite aggressively cool,
     inquisitive, intelligent.
"So long as we don't understand them," he went on, "and they don't understand us, we jog
     along the same path amicably, like--well! like the pilgrims to the 'Cradle of the Gods,' and
     the telegraph-posts to the Adjutant General's office up the road yonder--and I'll trouble you
     to cram more space than that between two earthly poles! No! It is when we begin to have
     glimmerings that the deuce and all comes in--" He paused in the molten gold of sunlight, which
     made the yellow sand, the corn-coloured tussocks of tiger-grass still yellower and still more
     corn-coloured, to glance round, as if measuring the distance between the long, low line of mud
     enclosure they had left but a few hundred yards behind--yet which, already, was losing itself
     in an illimitable sand stretch beyond--and a bigger tuft in the sand stretch ahead; a tuft of
     spear-points and horses, bayonets and men, waiting beside the first faint semblance of a
     reed-paved road. Then he took out his watch. Apparently he found leisure at his disposal, for
     he walked on. "There's a nursery rhyme they taught me," he continued, "when my moral nature was
     at the mercy of any fool who chose to take an interest in it--'But if poor Pussy
      understood, she'd be, indeed, a naughty creature!' It didn't run so consecutively, of
     course; in fact 'creature' rhymed to 'teach her'--but I learnt it that way. Children do that
     sort of thing a sight deal oftener than their elders think."
The younger of the two men in uniform with whom he was walking laughed--the honest, elated,
     conscious laugh of one who has not many good stories about himself, and happens on an
     opportunity for telling one of them.
"I used to say, 'Six days shalt thy neighbour do all that thou hast to do, and
      the seventh day shalt thou do no manner--'"
"Shut up, Lance!" interrupted his elder companion with a laugh. "It is a ripping excuse for
     your intolerable laziness, but I don't believe--"
"Fact, I assure you," protested Lance Carlyon aggrievedly, "and considering I really thought
     that was the proper version for ten years of my life, I--"
Dr. George Dillon took off his mushroom hat suddenly, and wiped his forehead as if to smooth
     away the wrinkles which his smiles had brought to it. "Lordy! It's a queer world," he put in.
     "There is really no good in understanding most things. As for this place--! Great Scott! What
     would happen if my fifteen hundred scoundrels, whom you saw digging like babes in the open just
     now, were to understand that I--one Englishman in charge--had virtually no force
      majeure--"
"Don't insult us, Dillon!" remonstrated Captain Vincent Dering, a certain swagger underlying
     his jest. "Eshwara is a garrison town, remember, now; I'm commandant, and Carlyon's
     staff--"
He had, in fact, ridden that morning as far as Dr. Dillon's house in charge of a troop of
     native cavalry and some Sikh pioneers who had gone on, under a native officer, to take up their
     temporary quarters in the half-ruined Fort, just beyond the old town of Eshwara. And now,
     having thus secured their breakfasts, he and his lieutenant were on their way towards the
     horses and escort they had bidden await them at the boat bridge which lay between them and
     their destination. For George Dillon was in control of a large industrial gaol, whose inmates
     had for months been digging the head works of a canal, which was to take off just below the
     town, on the farther side of the river.
"Are you?" replied the doctor, with a look of pity; "then I hope you'll both forget the fact.
     We've got on all right without you, hitherto. So if you'll stick to marking out the Viceroy's
     camp, and generally preparing the way of the Lord-sahib, I'll be obliged to you. By the way, is
     he coming to open the canal on the 10th, really?"
"So they say. That is, if you are ready for the show by then. I believe he could put it off
     till the 11th or 12th. Dashwood said something to that effect."
"Then Dashwood's an ass. The 10th is bad enough. The place will be filling up even then."
"Filling up! How?"
"Pilgrims. But on the 11th and 12th! By George! you should see them! The 'Assyrians came down
     like a wolf on the fold,' is nothing to it; only these are the Hosts of the Lord, I suppose.
     And so Dashwood suggested the 11th or 12th--the Vaisakh festival, did he? Well, he is
     an ass! But that's always the way. We try to understand feelings, instead of trying to know
     facts. However, we shall be ready for the opening, never fear. Smith expects his C. S. I. over
     it, he says, and that's enough guarantee. You know Smith, don't you, Dering? Walsall Smith--I
     think his wife said she knew you."
"Yes," he interrupted, with rather unnecessary decision, "Mrs. Walsall Smith is a great
     friend of mine, a very great friend."
"Jolly for you, having friends in Eshwara," assented Lance, in uneasy haste. "I suppose they
     are about the only people here, eh, doctor?" he went on, changing the subject; but the latter's
     clear eyes and brain were occupied for a moment in taking stock of Captain Dering's singular,
     if a trifle voyant personal attractions; one of the most noticeable of which was the
     perfect curve of his throat and cheek.
"I beg your pardon--people, did you say?" asked Dr. Dillon, after the pause. "Plenty of
     people, if you count padrés--the place swarms with missions, you know. But if you mean
     polo--" He shook his head.
Lance Carlyon's honest young face clouded, then grew cheerful again. "Well! there must be a
     lot of black partridge, and I expect there's fish in the river. Besides, it's an awfully
     picturesque place--By Jove! it is, Dering, isn't it?"
They had reached the tuft of spear-points and horses, men and bayonets, and before them lay
     Eshwara, sun-saturate, shadowless, in the April noon.
So seen, across the still lagoon of water formed by the junction of the two streams, the Hara
     and the Hari, which edged the low-lying triangular spit from which its fortified, temple-set
     walls rose, Eshwara seemed at the very foot of the blue barrier of hill behind it, whose
     serrated edge, paler than the blue sky above it, claimed three-quarters of all things visible
     for this world.
That, indeed, was the noticeable point in the picture presented to the eye. As a rule Heaven
     claims the larger half of all perspectives. Here, the three elements, earth, air, water, lay
     across the view in three broad bands of blue, curiously similar in tint; for the sky was pale
     with excess of light, the hills with excess of heat, and the water paler than either by reason
     of a white silt which it brought with it from the snows; a white silt which a recent flood had
     left in a fine film upon the sand stretches that showed here and there in the broad basin.
"It is a gypsum detritus," explained the doctor--"from the 'Cradle of the Gods'--the
     cave, you know, where the rivers rise. The pilgrims go, in fact, for this very stuff. Find it
     in the ice crannies, call it 'the clay of immortality,' smear themselves with it, and then die
     happy, in hundreds, of pneumonia! Those are the facts. I don't profess to understand them; and
     as I told you I don't want to. It's dangerous. As that cracked old Jesuit, Father Narâyan,
     admitted, with that unfathomable smile of his, when all the other parsons were at me for
     refusing to allow them access to a postulate or a catechumen, or someone of that sort, who was
     sent to my jail 'the Church has always admitted the value of invincible
     ignorance.'"
"Father Narâyan!" interrupted Lance Carlyon eagerly, "I suppose that's the Father Ninian
     Bruce who has lived here fifty years, and has a sort of Begum in tow, a descendant of General
     Bonaventura's, who was the Nawabs' favourite. I want to see that old chap; he must be a
     character. My grandmother, old Lady Carewe, used to tell me about him; long yarns, though she
     hadn't met him since she was in her teens in a convent at Rome, and he was father confessor, I
     suppose--she's a Holy Roman, you know, and was a desperate flirt too."
"So am I," said Vincent Dering quickly. "I mean a Catholic--at least my people are. So I can
     tell you one thing, Dillon; Father Ninian isn't a Jesuit. I was talking about him at the Club,
     when I knew I was coming here, and Father Delamere was indignant at the idea--said he was a
     disgrace to his cloth."
George Dillon's dry face grew dryer. "Did he, indeed! I quite agree that he is, but
     I didn't think Delamere would have admitted the fact himself! As for Pidar Narâyan, as the
     natives call him, he--he--" here the dry face melted. "Bless the man," he continued, and the
     dry voice grew soft, "he thinks he knows more about doctoring than I do, and the worst of it
     is--" here a perfectly charming smile took possession of every wrinkle--"he does, in a way; for
     the natives believe in him, and the 'saffron bag' is the best of all remedies. You see, when he
     was younger, he used often to go with the pilgrims and try to pull some of the poor devils out
     of the fire--or rather out of the snow--for the 'Cradle of the Gods' lies yonder."
He pointed to where, faint and far, a peak showed paler than the rest.
"Why don't they smear themselves here?" asked Lance stolidly.
"Why? Because they don't. Besides, there isn't much to come and go upon for a robe of
     righteousness here. Look! the breeze is blowing it away already!"
In truth the sun, which with the other three elements of earth, and air, and water, give us,
     in all religions, the whole spiritual life of man,--the world of his probation, the heaven of
     his hopes, the means of his purification, and the fire of his retribution--had scorched the
     fine film to dust, and the wind, blowing where it listed, was sweeping it away, leaving the
     sand stretches unregenerate as ever.
"An extra touch of pipe-clay!" laughed Vincent Dering, dusting his knee as he settled himself
     in his saddle. "Well! good-by, old chap. I shall see you again soon, for I shall be coming over
     to the Smiths' pretty often, and I suppose your regiment of ruffians leaves you off duty
     sometimes. Carlyon, make Dillon an honourary member of the headquarters mess!"
George Dillon, leaning with his hands in his pockets against the rail of the first pontoon,
     watching the little cavalcade start, nodded. "Thanks. I'm over pretty often at the Palace.
     Pidar Narâyan plays the fiddle, and the Begum,--as you call her,--Miss Laila Bonaventura, has a
     voice. Besides, Babylon--I mean Eshwara--amuses me."
"Why Babylon?" asked Captain Dering, stooping to straighten his stirrup.
The doctor laughed, as his lounge changed to a start homeward. "Means the same thing.
     Esh-dwarra--or in another tongue, Bab-y-lon,--is 'the Gate of God,' though Babylon stands for
     something else nowadays, doesn't it? That's why I say it's never any use to find out the
     meanings of things. They change so. Stick to facts; they don't. Well, ta-ta. I'll see you
     to-morrow, most likely, at the Palace. They have a sort of concert-practice-afternoon on
     Wednesdays--some of the Mission ladies sing jollily in parts--and the old man is sure to ask
     you. He sets great store on his ward's position; besides, I told him you were a nailer at the
     piano."
Vincent Dering made a wry face. "The deuce you did! My dear fellow, I couldn't play hymn
     tunes to save my life. I shall refuse."
"Pity," replied Dr. Dillon over his shoulder, as he swung off in strides which emphasized the
     undue shortness of his trousers, "for I heard Mrs. Smith say they wanted a good accompanist.
     She sings alto--rather well."
"Oh, does she?" said Captain Dering, in a different tone.
As they set their faces different ways, there was a smile on both, but the doctor's was
     scarcely a pleasant one; it would, in fact, have been wholly sardonic but for the touch of
     impatient weariness it brought with it.
So, through the sun-bright, sun-dried air, while George Dillon walked back to his fifteen
     hundred malefactors, the little trail of spear-points and bayonets, men and horses, drifted at
     a foot-pace across the frail bridge towards the town; drifted unsteadily, the yielding boats
     swaying, the wooden girders giving and groaning over their burden. Seen so, with but a plank
     between it and the milky water creased by the faint current, there was something unreal in the
     gay troop of colour and glitter making its way to the quaint, storeyed town, ablaze in the
     sunlight, which turned each golden temple-spike to a star. A cool breeze fluttered the
     lance-pennants, and brought that faint film of white to horse and man, warm flesh, and cold
     steel.
And far away on that pale peak, a little white cloud had rested, hiding the "Cradle of the
     Gods."
"There must be fish here," remarked Lance dogmatically. "I'll get out my rods to-morrow and
     try for a 'mahseer.'" And the earnestness of his face, as he lifted his eyes skyward
     to watch a couple of cormorants, would have suited a knight-errant of old on the quest of the
     Holy Grail.
"It won't be half bad, I expect--for a time, at any-rate," assented Vincent Dering, still
     with that content upon his face. "We will get up some fun while the camp is here, of course;
     and after that--" he paused, and the content became greater--"we'll manage for the month or so
     we have to stop. At least I shall."
His voice was soft. He might have been another knight-errant of old, riding across to the
     enchanted castle of his beloved.
"I beg pardon, sir," said a voice behind him; a voice with a strong native accent, yet with a
     curiously English phrasing in it, "but by dismounting here you will reach the Fort in a few
     minutes on foot. The road is longer."
Captain Dering turned, as if surprised, to the speaker, a native officer who sat his horse at
     the salute; then smiled, and with a clatter of accoutrements slipped to the ground.
"Come along, Carlyon. I was forgetting that Roshan Khân is up to the ropes here. You belong
     to Eshwara, don't you, risaldar sahib?"
The man to whom he spoke had slipped from his saddle also, and stood, smart as uniform could
     make him, still as discipline could hold him. He was a good-looking young Mahomedan of about
     thirty, curiously English in his movements, curiously native in his exaggeration of martial
     airs.
"Huzoor!" he assented. "We are connected with the late Nawab's house."
He spoke with absolute indifference, but Captain Dering, as they left the bazaar, which led
     from the bridge, for a short flight of steps and a narrow alley cleaving it's way through
     crowded, shouldering houses, remarked aside:--
"I believe that means he is about the nearest relation left. The Colonel, I know, wasn't sure
     about the wisdom of his coming here; but then the Colonel is that sort. So I insisted. One
     wants somebody who can tell you things in a new place. What's that, in there, Roshan?"
They had come to a long, high wall, with trees showing above it, which stretched away on
     their right hand for two or three hundred yards, until it ended in an arched tunnel through a
     massive block of buildings at right angles to it.
"The palace garden, sir; and that is the palace. There is no entrance this side."
"The women's apartments, I suppose?"
"Huzoor," assented Roshan Khân once more. "The Miss Sahib lives there now,
     and the Padré has his chapel there too. The river runs along the side, and it is
     pleasant."
"Pleasant and cool," echoed Lance, as the shadow of the tunnel closed in on them. "I'd no
     idea it was so hot outside. By Jove! what a quaint place."
They were emerging on a wide, square courtyard of which the palace formed one side, the fort
     another, a flight of steps leading down to the river a third, while the fourth was apparently,
     a wing of the palace. All three walls were absolutely blank save for a low door at each of the
     four corners; and these were, so to speak, connected with each other by pathways raised two
     steps above the rest of the courtyard. A similar footpath crossed it in the middle and so
     completed the resemblance to a union-jack; for the pathways were of white marble and red Agra
     stone, the courtyard of purple-blue brick. These paths met in a round platform in the centre,
     where, on a stone carriage, stood an old cannon.
"That's a big gun," said Vincent Dering, when, with a quickened clink of his spurred steps he
     had reached it; so, laying his hand lightly on the cylinder, he vaulted to it, as on to a
     horse, and stooped to read an inscription on the riveted band about the breech.
"Sanskrit," he said--"that stumps me! it's so confounded straight. Ah! here it is in Persian
     too--that's better."
There was a faint clash of steel on stone, for, as he read the motto aloud, Roshan's hand,
     stiffening on his sword-hilt, made ground and scabbard meet.
Captain Dering slipped to his feet again with a laugh.
"'Teacher of religion, and instructor of souls;' that's about a correct translation, isn't
     it, risaldar sahib? Well! I'd back a Maxim against old Blunderbore as a missionary
     agent nowadays. Hullo! they worship it still, do they?" He pointed to a faded chaplet of
     marigolds around the muzzle, and a red hand printed on the marble below.
The Mahomedan's face took on the expression of his race and creed; all unconsciously, too, he
     reverted to his own language.
"The idolators do that when they come to bathe; and they give alms to the saint, when he is
     inside."
"Inside!" echoed Captain Dering. "What! Inside the gun?"
Here Lance, who had promptly peered down the muzzle, came up from it excitedly, asserting
     that the saint was there now; he could see the brute's fuzzy head half way down, so he must
     have crawled in feet foremost--one of those naked brutes who smeared themselves with ashes, to
     judge by his chignon.
"Make a ripping mop," laughed Vincent Dering, after glancing down in his turn; "clean the gun
     nicely,"--then the insouciance of his face disappeared, its curves hardened--"and by
     God! I'll make him. I'm not going to have my guns worshipped! eh, Roshan?"
"Huzoor," assented the Mahomedan once more, this time joyfully, as--a decorous two
     paces behind--his spurs jingled in harmony with his captain's across the raised union-jack
     towards the river-end of the courtyard where, in a projecting bastion right upon the bathing
     steps, the low arched door stood which gave access to the Fort.
In order to reach it they had to pass the solitary visible occupant of the wide, sunlit
     courtyard. This was a man--of what rank, education, occupation, none could tell--who having
     raised a square of two-inch-high mud wall between his twice-born purity and the world, was
     preparing his daily food. Naked, save for his waistcloth, and the thread of the twice-born over
     his left shoulder, he was isolated even from his kindred. Alone with himself and his God.
Before him in the mud-plastered square, as he sat immovable, was the mud fireplace on which
     his wheaten dough-cake was cooking; beside him was a leaf-platter of curds, a brass vessel of
     milk; a sight to be seen a hundred times a day in India; one which should never be
     forgotten.
The noon was almost shadowless; yet, even so, as he led the way, Captain Dering, from sheer
     habit, swerved to step further from the sacred square. Doing so his foot slipped an instant on
     the lower step. He gave an impatient exclamation and passed on. A minute later the door of the
     fort clanged behind the little party, cutting short an English laugh.
Then, not till then, the man in that square of purity showed signs of life. He rose quietly,
     almost unconcernedly, took the half-baked cake from the embers, the leaf-platter of curds, the
     vessel of milk, and going down to the river's edge, flung his dinner into it, to feed the
     fishes.
In that stumble, the plume-like fringe of Vincent Dering's high peaked turban had sent a
     shadow to overtop the two-inch barrier between one man and his fellows.
