
L'ADDIO DEL MARITO
Once outside, where they could discern friend from foe, the troopers instantly realized their
     mistake, and rallied round Roshan.
But it was too late for that now. As he stood, centring them, there was a wild contempt, a
     vague relief, in his face. He knew now where his sympathies lay. Not with these men,
     treacherous to their salt, but with those who could hold--who had held--their own
     against all odds. Yes! even with that dead figure, still with its back to the door that must
     not be opened.
The thought stung and seared like hot iron.
No! Not with that! not with that! That was--What?--
He could have killed himself for the unwavering testimony which every scrap of him gave to
     the heroism, the defiance of such a death. He knew he would give everything to die one like it;
     and he knew he could not--not now. He knew he must die a useless death, to save
     himself from a worse one.
"There is no real harm done, Khân-jee," broke in his lance-duffadar in
     hurried excuse, seeing the expression on his face. "We can get in easily again. Those holding
     the horses say there were but a score of them all told--the cursed Sikhs--God knows how they
     got out of the Fort! I thought we had them safe. And there was a woman with them--a
      Miss-baba"--he laughed savagely. "Well! if they be brave as men, these infidel women,
     let them die like men--the hell-cats!"
Roshan Khân looked at the man, whom he had known for years, as if he had never seen him
     before. And the thought of another woman--with his own blood in her veins--who had been brave
     also, and who had died--died by his hand--returned to sweep him from every bearing, from every
     landmark, eastern or western, and leave him rudderless, drifting, in a storm of sheer despair.
     He laughed suddenly--an insane laugh--at the hideousness, the hopelessness of it all. Laughed
     like the madman he was for the time, at the horror which drove him mad.
"Kill her, if thou wilt, fool! I have done my share of that," he cried brutally, striking out
     at the voice as he had struck at the other which had told him of Vincent's victory. Striking as
     he felt inclined to strike at anything and everything; most of all at the hateful confusion in
     himself, and in his world. So, without another word, he broke through the circle of troopers,
     dashed to where his horse awaited him, and was off like a whirlwind; that strange possession of
     the Oriental races, which, in a way, claims kindred with the Berserk rage of the north,
     thrilling to his finger-tips; yet held in check, diverted from sheer, mad, uncalculating desire
     to kill, by that acquired sense of fair play.
"He goes to rouse the city," said some of his men, following him hurriedly.
"And time, too!" assented some of the conspirators. "The dawn is upon us, and if the pilgrims
     drift away, our hope is gone!"
But most of the crowd, troopers and conspirators alike, felt vaguely that the dawn had indeed
     come, that the midsummer night's dream of madness was over; that those who were wise would try,
     while they had the chance, to escape from its consequences.
And that such a chance existed, even now, was patent. The very madness of the night, its lack
     of reasonable explanation, were in their favour. And its darkness, the outer darkness of the
     storm, which had sprung up in a minute, must have hidden much. Who, for instance, was to
     say--except those impenitent ones whose evidence, if given at all, must be doubted as the
     evidence of condemned men seeking to drag others down to their fate--whether such and such a
     one had been a rebel at first? Provided, always, that there was no doubt about his staunchness
     at the last; that is, now that the dawn had come--the dawn which showed doubt, almost a
     surprise, in so many faces.
What had come to them? Why were they there?
"Kuchch saiya pur gya!" (some shadow fell on me) muttered one man below his breath,
     as he sheathed his sword.
And another, with an oath, said boldly, "This one is for the winning side," then gave the
     cry, "To the rescue, brothers, to the rescue! Cut down the mutineers"--so, promptly, began
     operations on the nearest defenceless prisoner.
Thus, almost before those who had galloped in hot haste after Roshan's lead were out of
     sight, the prisoners, even the resisting warders, had been driven into the portico, and penned
     like a flock of sheep between the troopers outside and the pioneers within.
"The Lord is King," said the lance-duffadar, piously, to a neighbour,--he had
     started back from Roshan's blow with a scowl, and watched his retreat resentfully,--"the
     Handle-end of His Sword is safest! Lo! Have at them, brothers!"--he added aloud--"have at the
     evil-born ones who would have killed the mems and the baba-logue as such scum
     did in the Great Breathing, making the faces of the soldiery black for all time! Show them our
     mettle. Forward! 'Gord--save--the--Ka-veen!'"
"Gord--save--the--Ka-veen!"
The cry grew to a shout, and Dr. Dillon, who, with a great incredulity lessening the values
     of all he saw and heard, had promptly swung himself down into the courtyard, looked through a
     crevice in the barricade--which was fast taking form under the willing hands of the
     pioneers--to see what the noise meant.
"It is all over," he said slowly, his face pathetic in its bewilderment; "the troopers are
     siding with us!"
He stood for a moment as if unable to grasp the reality, and his keen, inquisitive eyes
     seemed to search almost reproachfully for some cause, some hint of reason, in his surroundings.
     In the splintered door, in every cranny and foothold of the broken stair, and so, past the
     parapet, they continued their question to the lightening sky, against which, faint and far,
     those distant peaks where lay the "Cradle of the Gods" had begun to show dimly.
"All for nothing!" he muttered to himself, almost petulantly. "Poor Dering!" So, swiftly he
     passed down the alley,--swiftly, but hopelessly; for he knew what those iron shackles meant on
     a man's bare head.
He drew the body to one side with tender care, then knocked at the closed door and called to
     the man within. "Smith, open the door! You'd better come out--I think it's all over now; be
     quick, please."
There was a pause, then a fumbling at the bolts and bars. So, in that grey, cold light, a
     figure stood at the open door, tall, gaunt, with a hunted look in its eyes, almost a terror, as
     they looked down--down to the threshold--down for what they knew should be there.
"Dering?" asked Eugene Smith, rather hoarsely; then, seeing what lay to one side, covered his
     eyes from the sight with a cry like a woman's, and trembled all over. That strain of patient,
     idle inaction had been awful.
"Oh, God damn them!" burst out the doctor, fiercely. "And all for nothing--for nothing. At
     least I think so. Come on, Smith, and make sure."
For nothing! For nothing!
The words were echoing in Roshan's brain also, as with loose rein, recklessly, he galloped
     over the frail bridge of boats, making it quiver and thunder beneath his horse's hoofs, and
     send curved waves of light and shadow over the clear, steely surface of the water, seen like a
     polished shield in the dawn. The air was clear also; the distant hills steel grey as the water,
     the sky steel grey as the hills. And there was the bright keenness as of a glittering sword in
     the chill breeze that swept from west to east. But Roshan did not feel it; he was absorbed in
     himself, in the useless battle of his life.
For nothing! For nothing!
He did not even hear the soft yet sonorous roar, beginning like the rush of a big breaker on
     a beach, ending with a wild, musical note, like the wail of new-weaned lambs and their mothers
     on a lone hillside, which suddenly echoed out over the water, making those who galloped behind
     look at each other and whisper joyfully:--
"'Tis all right, Khân-sahib," said one, urging his horse alongside; "the pilgrims
     are waiting still--hear you not their cry? They grow impatient!"
Roshan looked at him with lack-lustre eyes. What were the pilgrims to him, or their
     impatience? What was salvation, immortality, to one whose only desire was death--death and
     forgetfulness? He dug his spurs into his horse, savagely glad to give pain, and rode on.
"Hârâ! Hârî! Harî! Hârâ!"
The roar was articulate now, and those behind looked doubtfully at each other.
"If it should be the miracle?" suggested one conspirator; but another shook his head, "How
     can that be? None know the trick save those two, Gu-gu and Am-ma, and they are safe."
"Unless it be a miracle," put in a third, almost timidly. "God's club makes no
     noise, and the night has been full of marvels."
So an uneasy silence fell upon the rest.
"Hârâ! Hârî! Hârî! Hârâ!"
There was no mistaking the cry now. It rose exultant, yet with that wailing note in it still,
     which lingers always in humanity's claim to have found its lost Paradise, its lost purity.
Yet there was no trace of doubt in the almost frantic joy on every face in the dense
     multitude which stopped the little cavalcade, as it entered the square around the Pool of
     Immortality; stopped it hopelessly, as if the moving, breathing, living mass had been a dead
     wall.
"Hârâ! Hârî! Hârî! Hârâ!"
It was almost a yell. The patience was gone utterly, and far as the eye could reach, in all
     the wide square, in every street and alley converging to it, there was the restless ineffectual
     movement of the sea, when, on a summer's day, it beats itself calmly yet persistently--rising
     and falling--upon a sheer cliff, against the impossible. There was no one to check the crowd
     now, to prevent it from finding Death and Immortality at the same time. What matter? What were
     a few hundreds of crushed bodies, when the soul found what it sought?
The riders behind Roshan threw up their hands at the sight. No hope here for the littlenesses
     of life; for principalities and powers, even for political liberty.
This was the bed-rock; this, in its unalterable aspiration--not for something better, but for
     the best--neither culture nor conspiracy could touch; this was as much beyond the control of
     kith and kin as of strangers and aliens.
"Come, Khân-sahib!" they called to the figure with the lack-lustre eyes which sat
     its horse like a statue, staring at itself, at its world, conscious only of the hideous
     discords which were, perforce, the music of its sphere. "Come! Nawab-jee! There is
     still a chance with the 'Teacher of Religion.' The jogi will have held
      his folk, for sure. They will be ready for blood, since Mai Kâli"--the speaker spat
     his Mahomedan contempt for the idolatry ere he went on--"lets none go. She's a true woman for
     that!"
So, by back alleys and crooked ways, Roshan--why he did not know, since he meant nothing by
     it--led the cavalcade past the palace, through the archway into the courtyard with its
     union-jack of raised paths.
And found it empty.
Empty of all save the jogi, Gorakh-nâth, who was busy, resignedly, in rethreading
     his chaplet of skulls, ere starting to seek safety over the British border in some far recess
     of the holy hills, whence, when this affair had blown over, he could swoop down with added
     sanctity on some other religious fair.
"He and his God stole them from me not the saying of a rosary past," he said cheerfully,
     after he had explained the position. "They went by yonder door to the old road. So what matter!
     They are in it. They will come back to Her by and by. It is so always. Men follow other leads,
     other loves. But they do not find what they seek; so they come back to Her, to the many named
     Woman. Jai! Kali Ma!"
Those behind Roshan looked at each other.
"It is the end," they said briefly. "Come, risaldar-jee--" the change of title was
     significant--"we shall have to ride far and fast if we are to live."
Once more, every atom of the man, soul and body, seemed to strike out furiously at the voice,
     at the truth and the untruth in it; at the assertion of failure, the linking of his need with
     theirs.
"Ride for your lives if you want them," he cried fiercely; "I seek death."
They left him, after unavailing protests, and rode helter-skelter on to the Fort, warning
     their comrades that the game was up, so, on towards safety. And the jogi, naked but
     not ashamed, still swinging his chaplet of skulls, followed them leisurely; for he knew himself
     safe in the superstition and the devotion of every woman in India. Since he, Her servant, could
     not fail of shelter in every Hindoo homestead, far or near, in which a woman's hand closed on a
     man's, holding him tight for herself alone, as the Great Mother holds all men.
Roshan, thus left alone, rode his horse on slowly to the central plinth, dismounted, and,
     hitching the bridle over the muzzle of the "Teacher of Religion" stood staring out
     dully at what lay before him; so quiet, so commonplace!
Nothing changed from the day, barely a month ago, when he had stood beside the old gun with
     Vincent Dering and Lance Carlyon, contemptuous of the ignorance of others, satisfied with
     himself.
And now?--what had come to him?
The madness, which his wild gallop from the gaol had calmed somewhat, returned in a fierce
     rush, and with it that one desire for revenge; for something by which to show the contempt,
     which was not now merely for the ignorant; but for those others, self-righteous, tyrannical,
     who had dared to touch him--dared to make him what he was--a prey both to ignorance and wisdom,
     savagery and culture--a laughing-stock even to himself!
And who had begun the fooling? Who had taught him as a boy?
Pidar Narâyan! Who else? Who else had begun the game giving some things, withholding others?
     And who else was within reach? Who else could be followed up and forced to fair fight? Forced
     to admit that the pupil was ahead now of the master.
He laughed a laugh of absolute exultation; and a wave of purely childish satisfaction swept
     through the mind in which there were still so many depths of childish ignorance and
     misconception; unavoidable depths in the culture of a bare score of years. Leaving his horse
     tethered to the old gun, he ran hastily across to the palace, so, finding the door open, the
     whole place quiet, went on down the arched passage. It was still dark there, but a glimmer of
     light showed the entrance to the chapel, and to the armoury beside it, which was his goal.
He had no other thought except for that armoury, until, with the tall tapers burning at the
     head and feet, he saw the dead body of the woman who had deceived him lying on the Altar steps.
     Then the pitifullest clashing of satisfaction and despair, of desire and disgust, came to him
     that ever rent a man in twain. For a moment he fought for bare reason between them, then with a
     savage cry, he flung himself beside the dead girl, caught her to him, covered her with frantic,
     cruel kisses, and, almost flinging her from him again, ran on into the armoury, the red of her
     dress, her bosom, in his eyes--the red of blood!
The armoury! Where he had had his first lesson in the foils! There they were, harmless in
     their buttons, crossed on the wall, and above them something more murderous; the dangerous
     delicate rapiers to which those others were but the prelude. No! one was gone! One Father
     Ninian had used against the jogi! One he must have with him. So much the better!
He tore down its fellow, and passing the dead girl without a look, dashed out into the
     courtyard again, his last trace of sanity gone.
The next instant his horse's feet were echoing madly along the pilgrims' road. His enemy must
     have a quarter of an hour's lead, but that was nothing; he could overtake him, anyhow, at the
     first station in the pilgrimage,--a temple under a vast banyan tree at the foot of the
     first rise, where the pious must pause to make offerings.
The road was almost empty at first; for the news that the miracle had only been deferred had
     spread instantly through the unrestful town, so to a space beyond it, making those who heard
     the tale turn back to see for themselves. But after a few minutes' wild gallop, he came up with
     those who had been beyond recall, who had gone on content with that strange lead of a strange
     God; of a saint, a sinner. Yet, after a time, forgetful of that leadership utterly. For they
     needed it no more. The danger of novelty had passed with their first step along the beaten
     track which their fathers had followed. Father Ninian, wise with the wisdom of long years, of
     secret sympathy, had known this; had counted on it in his forlorn hope of leading them into
     familiar bondage. He had told himself that he need only go as far as that first station; that
     then, during the pause for offerings, he might return, as it were, to realities, to something
     more consistent with the nineteenth century! But to him, also, as he led the way, chanting his
     offices for the day, had come a strange peace, a strange desire to go on to the end of the
     pilgrimage; a strange desire to leave those realities behind him in a world from which he was
     taking nothing, not even his love.
Surely it was time. Surely he was old enough to claim rest. No! not rest. It was something
     more than that. Surely, now that he had left every atom of earth behind him lying with a dead
     woman on the Altar steps, he also was free to find the "Cradle of the Gods"!
"My soul fleeth unto the Lord! before the morning watch I say, before the morning
      watch," he chanted; he had gone on blindly from psalm to psalm intent on the desire to
     lead those voices behind.
"Have a care, baba-jee! thou and thy God!" said a half-tender, half-jesting one as
     he stumbled among the stones, and a dark hand stretched itself out to steady the old priest,
     and a dark face turned to nod approval at other saffron robes; since here was a true pilgrim, a
     true madman, forgetful of this world, to judge by the face lifted towards those distant
     hills.
Yet the desire in him to reach them seemed to the wise old heart something that must be set
     aside. He must return. Yes! he must return. To do what? What could an old man do who had left
     life, a useless life, behind him? He crushed down that thought also, and stumbled on.
"Man is like a thing of nought, his time passeth away like a shadow!"
His voice spent itself tremulously on that one certainty, and those behind him joined their
     testimony to his all unwittingly, as they called on Hârâ or Hârî; on the Creator, the
     Destroyer, as One and Indivisible.
And in the rear again, Roshan in his search for Death, for annihilation, bore witness also,
     as he came, cursing those who stood in his way, his horse slithering among the stones in its
     effort to obey whip and spur, and sending a dry clangour of hoof-beats through the little stony
     valley to startle the sleepy snakes coiled on the distant rocks, and drive them back to their
     crannies with a hiss.
So, every instant, the distance lessened between the old man and the young one, both weary of
     life. It was broad daylight now, though the sun was still low on the horizon. The mystery of
     dawn had left the world, the very pilgrims, between their recurring cries, were chattering,
     laughing, over the every-day details of life which would make to-day as trivial as yesterday,
     to-morrow as trivial as to-day.
There had been a "Breathing" in the night, they told each other. Some shadow had fallen. Some
     God or Devil had had power. But the shackles of custom, of familiarity, were back again, the
     despotism of detail.
Only in those two strangely different minds in the van, in the rear, the mystery still
     clouded the reality.
And the distance between them lessened as Roshan drove his way through the saffron robes
     recklessly.
Yet, fast as he went, when he reached the end of the dry watercourse up which the last part
     of the rough track had wound, and stood in the hollow, backed by a further rise of the hill,
     where the quaint, dumpy, black temple hid itself under the huge blotch of the banyan
     tree--the only green thing visible, far or near--the figure he sought was not to be seen among
     the crowd.
Akbar Khân, indeed, he saw, utilizing one of the tall tapers as a pipe-light before casting
     himself on the ground to suck contentedly at the screwed banyan leaf full of tobacco
     which he had gathered by claiming a pinch in return for the loan of that same light to others.
     But with a curious shame Roshan avoided him, and passed on in his search among the jostling
     crowd, the continuous babel of trivial talk; for this was resting-time, when men and women
     could be men and women, and forget that they were on a pilgrimage; when they could even dream
     themselves back in the village under the familiar shelter of some village tree, asking no more
     than the familiar round of life.
But above the babel came every now and again the insistent clang of a bell, telling that some
     new petitioner was seeking a favour of the Gods, and making a golden oriole, which sat in the
     green leafage, flit to another bower with a sudden fluting note, full, joyful, mellow.
"What dost seek, Musulmân?" cavilled a saint, drawing back from Roshan's shadow, as
     he gabbled invocations, all he knew, on a rosary, ere solacing himself with the pipe which his
     disciple had prepared. "If 'tis the madman and his God--he hath gone yonder."
He pointed to a side track, which was a short cut to the road above.
Roshan flung himself from his horse without a word, and followed.
The distance lessened at every step now, for the old priest's breath failed him at the
     steepness of the rise.
Still, it would not delay him long, he told himself, to take that one look at the soft, white
     cloud which generally hid the goal of pilgrimage, before he turned back over the hill, as best
     he could, to find what task remained for him in the world.
He might have that one look, surely!
So, reaching the summit of this first bulwark of the unattainable, he sat down, breathlessly,
     beside an upright black stone which showed strangely distinct amid the redness of the
     surrounding rock; a plain black stone, not three feet high, chipped rudely to a blunt point.
     Father Ninian did not need the scattering of dead marigolds and dry basil leaves about its base
     to tell him that it was a fragment of an older faith than that of the temple below; a faith
     sterner, purer, founded on a clearer perception of what humanity needed in that search for the
     lost Paradise; on a closer memory of the cause which lost it.
He laid one hand on the stone almost caressingly, as, holding the pyx in the other, he sat
     down facing the distant peaks. But there was no cloud upon them. The day had dawned clear and
     still, and as he sat looking wistfully over the valleys on valleys, the hills on hills, which
     lay bathed in light between him and the "Cradle of the Gods," a sunbeam--still slanting from
     the curved edge of the eastern plains--caught the jewelled star of what he held, and stayed
     there.
It was peaceful beyond words. The hurry, the strain, not only of that long eventful night,
     but of the whole long eventful life, seemed over. All things seemed behind him. The passion,
     the pride, the courage, the manhood--all things that had made Ninian Bruce what Ninian Bruce
     had been--where were they?
Only wisdom, only a tender knowledge, seemed to remain.
The clank of steel upon stone roused him, the clank of Roshan's spurs upon the rocks; and
     Father Ninian turned to see him, a yard or two on the path below, outlined clearly against the
     distant view of Eshwara, against the world in which Ninian Bruce had lived and loved--the
     Ninian Bruce whom he had left behind.
Behind!
No! It was Ninian Bruce and none other who was on his feet in a second, a flush on his
     face--the face that was like the nether mill-stone in its stern passion, and pride, and power.
     For, in a second, the old man's soul was back in a world where a dead woman belonging to him
     lay waiting for revenge. His hand was on his hidden rapier, as he flung his first word of
     defiance at the man who had killed her.
"Murderer!"
"Your pupil at that, even!" gasped Roshan, "you began it!--your pupil whom you taught--curse
     you--"
The words failed him--he paused inarticulate--but the keen eyes and ears opposite him took in
     his meaning with the swift comprehension which had been Pidar Narâyan's always. A sort of
     contemptuous pity fought with the passion of Ninian Bruce's face.
"My pupil, certainly," he assented. "Have you come to ask me for a final lesson?"
Roshan glared at him. "You understand--you always did--that is the worst. Yes! I have
     come"--here he laughed wildly--"for what you taught me--fair play and no favour--and I mean to
     have it." In his fierce excitement he pressed closer, flourishing his rapier.
"Pardon me," came a cold, courteous voice; "I did not teach you that method of assassination,
     surely? I thought you desired fair play. If so, you might allow me to meet you on equal
     terms."
Roshan drew back with a flush from the figure which had stood its ground, which looked at him
     with bitter disdain. He scarcely seemed to recognize it. No wonder! For this was Ninian Bruce
     himself. Ninian Bruce as he might have spoken to an over-hasty antagonist in the days when he
     was the most reckless swordsman in Rome, when the world held him body and soul.
The years, his very priesthood, had slipped from him.
"I beg your pardon, sir!" muttered Roshan, standing aside. There was a savage satisfaction in
     his heart. This man was not old, the odds were equal; there was enough fire and passion here to
     please any opponent.
So, after a pause to lay aside the pyx--it found a strange resting-place on the blunt summit
     of that upright black stone--a slim, still elegant figure, divested of its priestly robings,
     took its stand, its back to the hills, its face to the world.
Still upright, still active, with its black soutane caught up and tucked into the
     sash to give free play to its limbs.
"Now, sir," came the courteous voice, "I am ready."
Something in the proud grace of bearing, the reckless contempt, made Roshan follow suit.
"The sun will be in your eyes," he said, "let us fight lengthwise to the ridge."
"We will--by and by!" came that icy voice, as the speaker, without moving, stood on
     guard. "We can omit the salute. If you are ready, I am."
For an instant Roshan hesitated, realizing what the life that he meant to take had been, what
     the man himself whom he meant to kill had been and was. The man whose figure stood out like a
     black shadow against the distant blue of the hills; and as he realized the fine fibre of his
     enemy, a sense of powerlessness to touch, to harm him, kept Roshan motionless.
"Shall I count five, and give you a start?" The question came with a shrug of the
     shoulders.
The taunt told. Roshan pulled himself together, and stood on guard also. But the sense of
     powerlessness was intolerable; he lowered his rapier for a word more--a word to raise his own
     self-esteem.
"I warn you," he said haughtily, "that the sun is in your eyes. That I have learnt more than
     you ever taught me--that this is to the death."
"It could scarcely be anything else, could it?" came the instant reply, in a voice that
     vibrated harshly, like a harpstring struck to its fullest, "with a dead woman between us!
     Engage, you devil, or I will kill you as you stand!"
Roshan gave a short, sharp cry, like a wild beast. The next instant the curious hiss of two
     meeting blades sliding along each other was the only sound. It is a strange sound, which, to
     the listeners, the onlookers, seems to say "hush" to the whole world.
"Hush--hush--sh--sh."
Then, short and sharp as that cry of Roshan's, came another sound; the beaten, baffled clash
     when steel meets steel instead of flesh.
Roshan, with an inward curse, gripped his rapier closer. He had almost been
     disarmed,--disarmed in that first encounter. Strange that he should have forgotten his
     foe,--forgotten the deadly insistence of the master's blade, slack as a snake in curves, firm
     as a vice in grip. Then that almost invisible turn of the wrist which had so nearly done for
     him. He had forgotten--these, in years of meaner adversaries. He remembered them now, and would
     not forget again. And he had such things; ay! and more, in reserve for himself.
So had his master; in reserve for both of them, if needful. And the knowledge that it
      would be needful came to Ninian Bruce at the first touch of his adversary's sword;
     for there was that in it which told the old hand that the young one was a master's also.
"My pupil has improved," he said quietly, as, abandoning the attack, he parried Roshan's
     furious onslaught with scarcely a motion of the hand, held level to his heart.
That he could do. But the other must surely come in the end, since he was old, and Roshan
     young. If in the end, therefore, why not now? The sooner the better.
A minute after the sun was no longer in Pidar Narâyan's eyes. As he had said, they were
     fighting lengthwise to the ridge; and he drew back, choosing his ground, until under his feet
     he felt the dead marigolds, the withered basil leaves that lay about the upright stone,--that
     strange pedestal on which the star-shaped pyx stood as on an altar, glittering in the
     sun-rays.
He seemed to see it, to feel it, standing there between the world below and those faint, far
     peaks. And the eyes which had seen so much felt they need see no more.
"Sta' alerta, Signor!" he cried jibingly, flinging himself savagely forward. "And
     may the Lord have mercy on your soul," he added in a lower tone; as, in an attack which held in
     it all the wildness, the fire, the passion of his youth, he drove Roshan back a step,--one step
     down the faint slope on which he had counted.
A fierce lunge or two, a swift parry, and then,--then an inch beyond safety--given
     purposely--yielded room for the riposte he sought from that other rapier.
It came with a quick cry of triumph, as Roshan felt that thin, cold steel slide silently on
     through a dull, faint resistance. A cry that ended in a gasp, as the hand which held the rapier
     dropped for a second, then flung itself upwards.
For Pidar Narâyan had given the reprise; and 'L'Addio del Marito' had done
     its work.
So, for an instant--held upright by the lingering force of the old man's hand--the two stood
     within a sword's length, their faces glaring at each other,--stern, implacable, the one in
     death, the other still in life.
Then the strength, the life, ebbed; the balance between it and death wavered, and Ninian
     Bruce, overborne by his enemy's dead weight, sank to his knee, then backwards.
But his hand still gripped the rapier. So Roshan Khân's body, as it fell forward, slithered
     down the sharp blade, sending a little jet of crimson blood backwards, till it stopped with a
     dull thud upon the hilt.
So he lay, face downwards, beside the old man, whose face looked skyward; whose head rested
     among the withered marigolds and the sweet, dead leaves of the basil, which generations and
     generations of pilgrims had offered to an unknown wisdom on their way to the "Cradle of the
     Gods."
