<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Lady Audley's Secret</title><author>Braddon, Mary Elizabeth (1835-1915).</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1862</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="4">
CHAPTER IV.
IN THE FIRST PAGE OF "THE TIMES."
Robert Audley was supposed to be a barrister. As a barrister was his name inscribed in the
     law-list; as a barrister he had chambers in Figtree Court, Temple; as a barrister he had eaten
     the allotted number of dinners, which form the sublime ordeal through which the forensic
     aspirant wades on to fame and fortune. If these things can make a man a barrister, Robert
     Audley decidedly was one. But he had never either had a brief, or tried to get a brief, or even
     wished to have a brief in all those five years, during which his name had been painted upon one
     of the doors in Figtree Court. He was a handsome, lazy, care-for-nothing fellow, of about
     seven-and-twenty; the only son of a younger brother of Sir Michael Audley. His father had left
     him £400 a year, which his friends had advised him to increase by being called to the bar; and
     as he found it, after due consideration, more trouble to oppose the wishes of these friends
     than to eat so many dinners, and to take a set of chambers in the Temple, he adopted the latter
     course, and unblushingly called himself a barrister.
Sometimes, when the weather was very hot, and he had exhausted himself with the exertion of
     smoking his German pipe, and reading French novels, he would stroll into the Temple Gardens,
     and lying in some shady spot, pale and cool, with his shirt collar turned down and a blue silk
     handkerchief tied loosely about his neck, would tell grave benchers that he had knocked himself
     up with over work.
The sly old benchers laughed at the pleasant fiction; but they all agreed that Robert Audley
     was a good fellow; a generous-hearted fellow; rather a curious fellow, too, with a fund of sly
     wit and quiet humor, under his listless, dawdling, indifferent, irresolute manner. A man who
     would never get on in the world; but who would not hurt a worm. Indeed, his chambers were
     converted into a perfect dog-kennel, by his habit of bringing home stray and benighted curs,
     who were attracted by his looks in the street, and followed him with abject fondness.
Robert always spent the hunting season at Audley Court; not that he was distinguished as a
     Nimrod, for he would quietly trot to covert upon a mild-tempered, stout-limbed bay hack, and
     keep at a very respectful distance from the hard riders; his horse knowing quite as well as he
     did, that nothing was further from his thoughts than any desire to be in at the death.
The young man was a great favorite with his uncle, and by no means despised by his pretty,
     gipsy-faced, light-hearted, hoydenish cousin, Miss Alicia Audley. It might have seemed to other
     men, that the partiality of a young lady who was sole heiress to a very fine estate, was rather
     well worth cultivating, but it did not so occur to Robert Audley. Alicia was a very nice girl,
     he said, a jolly girl, with no nonsense about her—a girl of a thousand; but this was the
     highest point to which enthusiasm could carry him. The idea of turning his cousin's girlish
     liking for him to some good account never entered his idle brain. I doubt if he even had any
     correct notion of the amount of his uncle's fortune, and I am certain that he never for one
     moment calculated upon the chances of any part of that fortune ultimately coming to himself. So
     that when, one fine spring morning, about three months before the time of which I am writing,
     the postman brought him the wedding cards of Sir Michael and Lady Audley, together with a very
     indignant letter from his cousin, setting forth how her father had just married a wax-dollish
     young person, no older than Alicia herself, with flaxen ringlets, and a perpetual giggle; for I
     am sorry to say that Miss Audley's animus caused her thus to describe that pretty musical laugh
     which had been so much admired in the late Miss Lucy Graham—when, I say, these documents
     reached Robert Audley—they elicited neither vexation nor astonishment in the lymphatic nature
     of that gentleman. He read Alicia's angry crossed and recrossed letter without so much as
     removing the amber mouth-piece of his German pipe from his mustached lips. When he had finished
     the perusal of the epistle, which he read with his dark eyebrows elevated to the center of his
     forehead (his only manner of expressing surprise, by the way) he deliberately threw that and
     the wedding cards into the waste-paper basket, and putting down his pipe, prepared himself for
     the exertion of thinking out the subject.
"I always said the old buffer would marry," he muttered, after about half an hour's revery.
     Alicia and my lady, the stepmother, will go at it hammer and tongs. I hope they won't quarrel
     in the hunting season, or say unpleasant things to each other at the dinner-table; rows always
     upset a man's digestion.
At about twelve o'clock on the morning following that night upon which the events recorded in
     my last chapter had taken place, the baronet's nephew strolled out of the Temple,
     Blackfriarsward, on his way to the city. He had in an evil hour obliged some necessitous friend
     by putting the ancient name of Audley across a bill of accommodation, which bill not having
     been provided for by the drawer, Robert was called upon to pay. For this purpose he sauntered
     up Ludgate Hill, with his blue necktie fluttering in the hot August air, and thence to a
     refreshingly cool banking-house in a shady court out of St. Paul's churchyard, where he made
     arrangements for selling out a couple of hundred pounds' worth of consols.
He had transacted this business, and was loitering at the corner of the court, waiting for a
     chance hansom to convey him back to the Temple, when he was almost knocked down by a man of
     about his own age, who dashed headlong into the narrow opening.
"Be so good as to look where you're going, my friend!" Robert remonstrated, mildly, to the
     impetuous passenger; "you might give a man warning before you throw him down and trample upon
     him."
The stranger stopped suddenly, looked very hard at the speaker, and then gasped for
     breath.
"Bob!" he cried, in a tone expressive of the most intense astonishment; "I only touched
     British ground after dark last night, and to think that I should meet you this morning."
"I've seen you somewhere before, my bearded friend," said Mr. Audley, calmly scrutinizing the
     animated face of the other, "but I'll be hanged if I can remember when or where."
"What!" exclaimed the stranger, reproachfully. "You don't mean to say that you've forgotten
     George Talboys?"
"No I have not!" said Robert, with an emphasis by no means usual to him; and then
     hooking his arm into that of his friend, he led him into the shady court, saying, with his old
     indifference, "and now, George tell us all about it."
George Talboys did tell him all about it. He told that very story which he had related ten
     days before to the pale governess on board the Argus; and then, hot and breathless, he
     said that he had twenty thousand pounds or so in his pocket, and that he wanted to bank it at
     Messrs. ——, who had been his bankers many years before.
"If you'll believe me, I've only just left their counting-house," said Robert. "I'll go back
     with you, and we'll settle that matter in five minutes."
They did contrive to settle it in about a quarter of an hour; and then Robert Audley was for
     starting off immediately for the Crown and Scepter, at Greenwich, or the Castle, at Richmond,
     where they could have a bit of dinner, and talk over those good old times when they were
     together at Eton. But George told his friend that before he went anywhere, before he shaved or
     broke his fast, or in any way refreshed himself after a night journey from Liverpool by express
     train, he must call at a certain coffee-house in Bridge street, Westminster, where he expected
     to find a letter from his wife.
As they dashed through Ludgate Hill, Fleet street, and the Strand, in a fast hansom, George
     Talboys poured into his friend's ear all those wild hopes and dreams which had usurped such a
     dominion over his sanguine nature.
"I shall take a villa on the banks of the Thames, Bob," he said, "for the little wife and
     myself; and we'll have a yacht, Bob, old boy, and you shall lie on the deck and smoke, while my
     pretty one plays her guitar and sings songs to us. She's for all the world like one of those
     what's-its-names, who got poor old Ulysses into trouble," added the young man, whose classic
     lore was not very great.
The waiters at the Westminster coffee-house stared at the hollow-eyed, unshaven stranger,
     with his clothes of colonial cut, and his boisterous, excited manner; but he had been an old
     frequenter of the place in his military days, and when they heard who he was they flew to do
     his bidding.
He did not want much—only a bottle of soda-water, and to know if there was a letter at the
     bar directed to George Talboys.
The waiter brought the soda-water before the young men had seated themselves in a shady box
     near the disused fire-place. No; there was no letter for that name.
The waiter said it with consummate indifference, while he mechanically dusted the little
     mahogany table.
George's face blanched to a deadly whiteness. "Talboys," he said; "perhaps you didn't hear
     the name distinctly—T, A, L, B, O, Y, S. Go and look again, there must be a
     letter."
The waiter shrugged his shoulders as he left the room, and returned in three minutes to say
     that there was no name at all resembling Talboys in the letter rack. There was Brown, and
     Sanderson, and Pinchbeck; only three letters altogether.
The young man drank his soda-water in silence, and then, leaning his elbows on the table,
     covered his face with his hands. There was something in his manner which told Robert Audley
     that his disappointment, trifling as it may appear, was in reality a very bitter one. He seated
     himself opposite to his friend, but did not attempt to address him.
By-and-by George looked up, and mechanically taking a greasy Times newspaper of the
     day before from a heap of journals on the table, stared vacantly at the first page.
I cannot tell how long he sat blankly staring at one paragraph among the list of deaths,
     before his dazed brain took in its full meaning; but after considerable pause he pushed the
     newspaper over to Robert Audley, and with a face that had changed from its dark bronze to a
     sickly, chalky grayish white, and with an awful calmness in his manner, he pointed with his
     finger to a line which ran thus:
"On the 24th inst., at Ventnor, Isle of Wight, Helen Talboys, aged 22."
</div></body></text></TEI>