
BOOK III.
CHAPTER III.
 ‘MY dear Laurence,’ Mr. Luke began, ‘of course human life is a mockery, if
                        you leave out the one thing in it that is of real importance. And it is
                        because you have done this, that Lord Allen thinks that culture is so little
                        worth caring for, though I doubt, by the way, if he expressed quite
                        accurately what I conclude him to have meant. However,’ said Mr. Luke,
                        clearing his throat, and looking round at the general company, ‘what was
                        said about culture just now was perfectly right—perfectly right, and really
                        capitally illustrated—as far as it went. The only fault was that, as I say,
                        the most important point in the matter was entirely left out. It is quite
                        true that culture is, as Mr. Laurence observed so happily, the sensitising
                        of the mental palate—the making it a good taster. But a taster of what? Not
                        only of social absurdities, or love affairs, or beautiful scenery, but of
                        morality, of righteousness, of Christianity. The really profound work of
                        culture is to make us judges of these—judges able to tell in an instant real
                        righteousness and real Christianity from pseudo-righteousness and
                        pseudo-Christianity, so that we may swallow the true like the healing water
                        of life, and reject the false like a sample of bad claret—that we may have,
                        in fact, just the same horror of any doctrine or dogma that is contrary to
                        sweet reason (such, for instance,’ he said confidentially to Lady Grace, ‘as
                        that of eternal punishment) that we have for young ladies who call their
                        friends “saucy,” or for young ladies’ mothers who look on a bishop’s palace
                        as a focus of the most polite society. So I think, if you only all recognise
                        this, that culture includes—in fact, essentially is—the discernment of true
                        righteousness, of true morality, you need none of you fear that to a really
                        cultivated society life will be in any danger of becoming a mockery.’ 
 ‘I was sorry,’ said Miss Merton in a low tone to Laurence, ‘to hear you say
                        that just now, because I know you don’t mean it.’ 
 Laurence, who had been sitting a little above her on the bank, moved quietly
                        down, and placed himself at her side. 
 ‘You make me feel ashamed of myself,’ he said to her, ‘when you speak like
                        this.’ 
 There was something in his manner which a little embarrassed Miss Merton.
                        She looked down, and said nothing for a moment; and then, not having quite
                        command of her voice, she answered him in a tone rather louder than she
                        intended. 
 ‘Well,’ she said, ‘and don’t you think that some definite faith or other is
                        needed by the world?’ 
 ‘Yes, I think so; I think so. I entirely agree
                        with Miss Merton,’ exclaimed somebody. But it was not Laurence. To the
                        surprise of everyone, it was Mr. Saunders. All eyes were turned on him. 
 ‘Will you allow me,’ he said, looking round him with a nervous eagerness, as
                        though doubtful if he should gain a hearing, ‘will you allow me to make a
                        few observations here—it will only take a moment—to remind you of just a
                            few things which I think ought not to be lost sight of?
                        Well,’ Mr. Saunders went on, as he seemed to have secured the ear of the
                        house, ‘in the first place as to history, just one word. The main use of
                        history, which Mr. Laurence forgot altogether to mention, is of course, as
                        Comte has so well established, to teach us his philosophy of it—to show us,
                        in other words, how entirely non compos mentis the world
                        was till our time, and that it is only in the present century that it has
                        acquired the power of passing a reasonable judgment. And next, as to facts;
                        mere facts, as facts, I think quite as useless as Mr. Laurence does, except
                        for one reason. And that reason is the way in which from every side they
                        confute, give the lie to, annihilate, the pretensions of revealed religion,
                        and of the myths which it calls its history. This, however, by the way. It
                        was not the chief thing that I wanted to say to you. Now, you all,’ Mr.
                        Saunders went on, holding up his forefinger and addressing the company,
                        ‘propose to form a picture of what the world ought to be—what I suppose you
                        hope it will be; and you say, and very rightly, that the great secret is
                        that it should appreciate properly the pleasures of human life. But, please
                        mark this, you have quite ignored the most important thing of all—the vast
                        change that all these pleasures are undergoing, that the whole aspect of
                        life is undergoing, beneath the touch of modern thought and modern
                        philosophy; nay—and this indeed is the special point I want to
                        lay stress upon—Mr. Luke just now even used those obsolete and misleading
                        words, righteousness and morality, soiled by so many unworthy associations.
                        By the way,’ he exclaimed, stopping suddenly and looking round him, ‘I
                        suppose I may speak the truth freely, as I know well enough that all to whom
                        my vaticinations would be unwelcome are sure to mistake me for a Cassandra.’ 
 ‘Mistake him for a what?’ said Lady Ambrose, in a loud undertone. 
 ‘She was a beautiful young unfortunate,’ whispered Mrs. Sinclair
                        confidentially, ‘who was betrayed by the god Apollo.’ 
 Mr. Saunders was conscious he had raised a smile. He considered it a full
                        licence to proceed. 
 ‘Well,’ he said, ‘as Miss Merton remarked a moment ago, some definite faith
                        is needed by the world; and, as I now deliberately declare, some definite
                        faith it will have—some one definite faith that will tolerate no dissent
                        from it; and it will have this before fifty years are over.’ 
 Everyone stared at Mr. Saunders, everyone except Mr. Luke, who simply smiled
                        at the sky, and said, with an air of suppressed pleasantry, ‘I had imagined
                        that our young friend’s motto was freedom.’ 
 Mr. Saunders was nettled at this beyond description. With a vindictive
                        quickness he fixed his eyes upon Mr. Luke. 
 ‘Sight is free,’ he said, uttering his words very slowly, as if each one
                        were a dagger in itself, and could give Mr. Luke a separate smart; ‘sight is
                        free,’ he said, ‘and yet the sight of all healthy men, I conceive, is in
                        agreement. It differs, I admit, when our eyes are dim with tears of
                        hysterical feeling; or when we are drunk; or when we are fighting—in this
                        last case, Mr. Luke, I am told we are often visited with illuminations of a
                        truly celestial radiance—but it is surely not such exceptional vision as
                        this that you praise as free. And it is just the same,’ said Mr. Saunders
                        triumphantly, ‘with the mind. The minds of men will never have been so free
                        as on that not-distant day when they shall all agree. And what will that
                        agreement result in? Why, in the utter banishment, the utter destruction—I
                        know no word strong enough to express my meaning—of all mystery and of all
                        mysticism, and consequently of that supposed inscrutable difference between
                        right and wrong, which has been made, in the hands of the priests, one of
                        the most hideous engines of terror that were ever employed to degrade and
                        crush mankind. Right and wrong, indeed! Righteousness and morality! There is
                        something insidious in their very sound. No —“useful,” “healthful,”
                        “serviceable,” “pleasant”—these will be the words of the future. Emancipated
                        man will know no wrong, save unhealthiness and unpleasantness. That most
                        treacherous handmaid of priestcraft, poetry, which, professing to heighten
                        the lights of life, did, in reality, only deepen its shadows, will delude
                        him no longer—she will be gone—gone for ever. Science, the liberator of
                        humanity, will have cast its light upon her; and the lying vision will
                        vanish. But why do I talk of poetry? Is not that, and every other
                        evil—reverence, faith, mysticism, humility, and all the unclean
                        company—comprised in this one word, Religion? Well, let religion—the
                            ancien régime of the world—retire, as it has done, to
                        its Versailles, and fence itself round for a little with its mercenary
                        soldiers! The Paris of the world is, at any rate, left free—and there the
                        Revolution of Humanity is begun. Science leads it, and in another fifty
                        years there will not be another religion left. Surely most here must know
                        this,’ continued Mr. Saunders, ‘although they may perhaps forget it
                        sometimes. But the fact is notorious, and I really think—’ 
 ‘Sir!’ 
 Where did that sudden, solemn exclamation come from—that single syllable at
                        which the music of Mr. Saunders’s voice, ‘like a fountain’s sickening
                        pulse,’ retired in a moment. Who had spoken? The sound surprised everybody.
                        It was Mr. Stockton—Mr. Stockton, with a face all aglow with feeling,
                        beneath his picturesque wide-awake hat, and holding in his hand a white
                        pocket-handkerchief bordered with pale blue. 
 ‘Perhaps,’ he continued, looking slowly round him, ‘I, as a man of science,
                        who have been a patient apprentice at my work for six-and-twenty years, may
                        be allowed to give some opinion on this matter. Destroy religion! Destroy
                        poetry!’ he exclaimed, in his rich, bell-like voice, that was now resonant
                        with an indignant melancholy. ‘Will science destroy either of these precious
                        and exquisite heritages of the human race? Will it extinguish one profound,
                        one ennobling, one devout feeling? Will it blight that rich culture on which
                        the present age so justly prides itself? I have followed science for
                        six-and-twenty years, I speak therefore from experience; and I boldly answer
                        “No.” How indeed should it? I know, I deplore, and I trust also forgive, the
                        common notion that it does. But how can that notion have arisen? That is
                        what puzzles me. Is not science essentially religious, essentially
                        poetical—nay, does it not deepen quite boundlessly the religion and poetry
                        already existing in the world, and fuse the two together, as they were never
                        fused before? Does it narrow our notions of life’s wonder and dignity to
                        peer into the abyss of being, and learn something of the marvellous laws of
                        things—to discover the same mysterious Something in a snow-flake, in the
                        scent of a rose, in the “topmost star of unascended heaven,” and in some
                        prayer or aspiration in the soul of man? True it is that this wondrous All
                        is Matter, and that all matter is atoms in its last analysis. No idle
                        metaphysics have clouded my brain, so I have been able to see these things
                        clearly—’ 
 ‘Yes, yes, yes,’ cried Mr. Saunders, recovering himself, his voice tremulous
                        with excitement, ‘I know all that. I know that in their last analysis a pig
                        and a martyr, a prayer and a beef-steak, are just the same—atoms and atomic
                        movement. We, the younger generation of thinkers, accept all the premisses
                        you give us without a moment’s question. We only reason boldly and honestly
                        on them, and I defy you to prove—Mr. Stockton, sir, if you will only listen
                        to me—’ 
 But there was little chance of that. Interrupted only for a moment, and
                        whilst Mr. Saunders was yet speaking, Mr. Stockton’s eloquence swept on. 
 ‘Consider ourselves,’ he said, ‘consider the race of men, and note the truly
                        celestial light that science throws on that. We have ascended,’ said Mr.
                        Stockton; ‘noble thought! We have not descended. We are rising towards
                        heaven, we have not fallen from it. Yes—we, with attributes so like an
                        angel’s, with understanding so like a God’s—to this height we have already
                        risen. Who knows what future may not be in store for us? And then, on the
                        other hand, when the awestruck eye gazes, guided by science, through the
                        “dark backward and abysm of time,” and sees that all that is has unfolded
                        itself, unmoved and unbidden, (astounding thought!) from a brainless,
                        senseless, lifeless gas—the cosmic vapour, as we call it—and that it may,
                        for aught we know, one day return to it—I say, when we realise, when we
                        truly make our own, this stupendous truth, must not our feelings,’ said Mr.
                        Stockton, letting his eyes rest on Miss Merton’s with an appealing
                        melancholy—‘our feelings at such moments be religious? Are they not
                        Religion?’ 
 ‘But,’ said Miss Merton, ‘there is nothing religious in a gas.
                        I don’t see how anything religious can come out of it.’ 
 ‘Perfectly right!’ chuckled Mr. Saunders, faintly clapping his hands.
                        ‘Nothing can come out of the sack but what’s in it. Miss Merton’s perfectly
                        right.’ 
 ‘Ah, Miss Merton,’ Mr. Stockton continued, ‘don’t be frightened by the mere
                        sound of the word matter. For who knows what matter is’—(‘Then,
                        why talk about it?’ shrilled Mr. Saunders, unheeded)—‘that great Alpha and
                        Omega of the Universe?’ Mr. Stockton went on. ‘And don’t wrong me by
                        thinking that I “palter with you in a double sense,” and that I am not using
                        the word religion in its truest, its profoundest signification.
                        Do you think, Miss Merton, for instance, that I cannot feel with you, when,
                        stirred to your inmost soul by some strain of Mozart or Beethoven, you kneel
                        before your sacrificial altar, whilst the acolyte exalts the Host, and
                        murmur with bowed head your litany to your beautiful Virgin? I say
                        advisedly, Miss Merton, that I, as a man of science, can appreciate, and to
                        a great extent share, your adoring—your adorable frame of mind.’ 
 Mr. Stockton paused. His acquaintance with Catholic ritual, and the fact of
                        thus finding herself elected, without any merit of her own, as the special
                        object of so great a man’s eloquence, produced in Miss Merton an unfortunate
                        sense of absurdity, and in another moment she was conscious of nothing but a
                        most inappropriate desire to laugh. She compromised with her facial muscles,
                        however, and only gave a smile, which she trusted would pass muster as one
                        of grave enquiry. Mr. Stockton thought that it was so, and went on; but,
                        unknown to himself, he felt all the while that it was not so, and his
                        enthusiasm, he could not tell why, became somewhat more polemical. 
 ‘Does science, then,’ he proceeded, ‘rob us of one iota of religious
                        feeling, or degrade our notions of life’s measureless solemnity? Nay, it is
                        rather the flippant conceptions of theology that would do that, by
                        connecting everything with an eternal Personality—a personality so degraded
                        as to have some connection with ourselves. The prayer of the theologian,
                        “cabined, cribbed, confined” in spoken words, is directed to a Being that
                        Science can make no room for, and would not want, if she could. The prayer
                        of the man of science, for the most part of the silent sort, is directed
                        whither? demands what? He is silent if you ask him, for his answer would be
                        beyond the reach of words. Even to hint at its nature he would feel were a
                        profanity.’ 
 ‘Do you know, Mr. Stockton,’ said Miss Merton, this time with a polite
                        meekness, ‘all this rather bewilders me.’ 
 ‘And so it does me,’ said Mr. Stockton much pleased with Miss Merton’s
                        manner; ‘and this august bewilderment, which gives fulness and tone to our
                        existence, but which we can neither analyse nor comprehend—to me comes in
                        one shape, to you in another, and is—religion. In the name, then, of all
                        genuine science, and of all serious scientific men, let man keep, I say,’
                        said Mr. Stockton, looking round him, ‘this precious and ennobling
                        heritage—let him keep it and shape it ever anew, to meet his ever-changing
                        and deepening needs. In my dream of the future I see religions
                        not diminished, but multiplied, growing more and more richly diverse, as
                        they sink deeper into individual souls. Surely, science, then, is not come
                        to destroy the past, but to fulfil it—and I confess I can myself see no
                        better way of discovering what we desire in the future than by the charming
                        analysis Mr. Laurence has been giving us of what we most admire in the
                        present.’ 
 ‘See,’ said Donald Gordon softly, ‘here is science on the one side offering
                        us all religions, and on the other none.’ 
 ‘Heigho!’ sighed Mr. Luke, very loud; ‘Let us agree about
                            conduct first, and quarrel about theology afterwards.’ 
 ‘Precisely,’ resumed Mr. Stockton, to Mr. Luke’s extreme annoyance—Mr. Luke
                        himself having still much to say, and considering that Mr. Stockton did but
                        darken counsel by interrupting him—‘Mr. Luke is perfectly right.’ (‘I should
                        like to know how you know that,’ thought Mr. Luke.) ‘Let us agree about
                        conduct—morality, by-the-by, is the plainer word—that is the great thing.
                        Let us agree about the noble and the beautiful. Let us agree heroically to
                        follow truth—ay, truth; let us follow that, I say, picking our way step by
                        step, and not look where we are going. Let us follow—what can I add to
                        this?—the incomparable life of the great Founder of Christianity. Yes, Miss
                        Merton, entertaining the views that I do, I say the incomparable life. Such
                        is the message of science to the world; such is the instinct of culture when
                        enriched and quickened by science.’ 
 This was literally taking the bread out of Mr. Luke’s mouth. Not only was it
                        repeating what he had said before, but it was anticipating, in a formless
                        undisciplined way, the very thing that he was going to say again And the man
                        who had robbed him thus was a mere Philistine—a mere man of science who was
                        without even a smattering of Greek or Hebrew, and who thought sensori-motor
                        nerves and spontaneous generation more important subjects than Marcion’s
                        Gospel or the Psalms of David. For once in his life Mr. Luke was for the
                        moment completely silenced. Laurence however somewhat soothed him, by
                        replying to him, not to Mr. Stockton, 
 ‘Yes, I believe I was wrong after all; and that true culture will really
                        prevent us from looking on life as a mere mockery.’ 
 Mr. Luke was going to have answered; but, worse even than Mr. Stockton’s,
                        Mr. Saunders’s hated accents now got the start of him. 
 ‘One word more,’ Mr. Saunders exclaimed, ‘one plain word if you will allow
                        me. All this talk about Religion, Poetry, Morality, implies this—or it
                        implies nothing—the recognition of some elements of inscrutable mystery in
                        our lives and conduct; and to every mystery, to all mystery, science is the
                        sworn, the deadly foe. What she is daily more and more branding into man’s
                        consciousness is, that nothing is inscrutable that can practically concern
                        man. Use, pleasure, self-preservation—on these everything depends; on these
                        rocks of ages are all rules of conduct founded: and now that we have dug
                        down to these foundations, what an entirely changed fabric of life shall we
                        build upon them. Right and wrong, I again say, are entirely misleading
                        terms; and the superstition that sees an unfathomable gulf yawning between
                        them is the great bar to all healthful progress.’ 
 ‘And I say, on the contrary,’ said Laurence, replying very suavely to Mr.
                        Saunders’s vehemence, ‘that it is on the recognition of this mysterious and
                        unfathomable gulf that the whole of the higher pleasures of life depend—and
                        the higher vicious pleasures as much as, if not more than, the virtuous.’ 
 Lady Ambrose started at this. 
 ‘I am not vicious,’ said Mr. Saunders snappishly. ‘When I call
                        pleasure the one criterion of action, I am thinking of very different
                        pleasures from what you think I mean.’ 
 ‘What is Mr. Saunders’s notion of the most passionate pleasure?’ said Mrs.
                        Sinclair bewitchingly. 
 ‘I agree with my great forerunner Hobbes’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘that the
                        strongest of all pleasures are those arising from the gratification of
                        curiosity; and he is the real ethical philosopher who subordinates all other
                        appetites to this, like Bacon, who lost his life through pursuing a
                        scientific experiment, or’ —he said pausing to think of another example— 
 ‘Like Bluebeard’s wives?’ enquired Mrs. Sinclair naïvely. ‘I’m afraid I
                        never give my husband his highest pleasure; for I never let him,’ she added
                        in a regretful whisper, ‘open my letters, although I read all his. But, Mr.
                        Saunders,’ she said, ‘if you are so fond of curiosity, you must have some
                        mystery to excite it.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘but mystery is a fox for us to hunt and shoot;
                        not a God to hunt and shoot us.’ 
 ‘Fancy,’ exclaimed Lady Ambrose in horror, ‘shooting a fox! what sacrilege!’ 
 This remark, so entirely spontaneous, and so entirely unexpected, produced a
                        general laugh, in which all joined but Mr. Saunders himself, and Mr.
                        Herbert. 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence at length, when the chorus had subsided, ‘may I read a
                        certain letter of my uncle’s to myself, which is printed in this very book I
                        have here? It was running in my mind just now, and is about the very matter
                        we were speaking of— the connection of religions, of Christian morality,
                        with all the higher pleasures of life.’ 
 ‘Very good,’ said Mr. Saunders. ‘Read what you please. I can only say that I
                        have at this moment in my portmanteau an analysis I have made of all the
                        Christian moral sentiments, in which I trace every one of them to such
                        disgusting or paltry origins as shall at once rob them of all their
                        pestilent prestige. I begin with the main root, the great first
                        parent of all these evils, the conception of God, which I show may have
                        arisen in seventy-three different ways, each one more commonplace than the
                        other. By-and-by, if you will not fear to confront the document, I will show
                        it to you.’ 
 Mr. Luke meanwhile had seen his way to bringing Mr. Stockton’s true
                        ignorance home to him, and had been regretting to him, in tones of insidious
                        confidence, that hardly enough stress had been laid just now on the
                        necessity of really wide reading—‘an intimacy,’ said Mr. Luke, ‘with the
                        great literatures of the world—a knowledge and comparison of the best things
                        that have been said and thought, in all the various ages, on the great
                        questions of life, without which,’ he added, ‘as you and I know, that
                        discrimination between right and wrong that we were speaking of just now,
                        can never be anything more than a make-believe.’ Nor did Mr. Luke seem at
                        all aware, as he was thus proceeding, that Laurence had found his place, and
                        had already begun to read, as follows: 
 ‘As I grow old, my dear Otho, I am coming to think over many things that I
                        have hitherto thought too little about, and, amongst others, the great
                        mystery of Christianity.’ 
 At this point, however, Laurence and Mr. Luke were both interrupted by an
                        entirely unforeseen event. 
