
BOOK I.
CHAPTER III.
 LAURENCE, though he had forewarned his guests of his menu
                        before they left the drawing-room, yet felt a little anxious when they sat
                        down to dinner; for he found it not altogether easy to get the conversation
                        started. Lady Ambrose, who was the first to speak, began somewhat off the
                        point. 
 ‘What a charming change it is, Mr. Laurence,’ she said, ‘to look out on the
                        sea when one is dressing, instead of across South Audley Street!’ 
 ‘Hush!’ said Laurence softly, with a grave, reproving smile. 
 ‘Really,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘I beg your pardon. I thought Dr. Jenkinson had
                        said grace.’ 
 ‘If he has,’ said Laurence, ‘it is very good of him, for I am afraid he was
                        not asked. But what I mean is, that you must only talk of what is on the
                        cards; so be good enough to look at your menu, and devote
                        your attention to the Aim of Life.’ 
 ‘Really, this is much too alarming,’ said Lady Ambrose. ‘How is one to talk
                        at so short a notice on a subject one has never thought about before? ’ 
 ‘Why, to do so,’ said Laurence, ‘is the very art of conversation; for in
                        that way, one’s ideas spring up fresh like young roses that have all the dew
                        on them, instead of having been kept drying for half a lifetime between the
                        leaves of a book. So do set a good example, and begin, or else we shall
                        never be started at all; and my pet plan will turn out a fiasco.’ 
 There was, indeed, as Laurence said this, something very near complete
                        silence all round the table. It was soon broken. 
 ‘Are you High-church or Low-church?’ was a question suddenly uttered in a
                        quick eager girl’s voice by Miss Prattle, a young lady of eighteen, to the
                        astonishment of the whole company. It was addressed to Dr. Jenkinson who was
                        sitting next her. 
 Had a pin been run into the Doctor’s leg, he could not have looked more
                        astounded, or given a greater start. He eyed his fair questioner for some
                        time in complete silence. 
 ‘Can you tell me the difference?’ he said at last, in a voice of
                        considerable good humour, yet with just a touch of sharpness in it. 
 ‘I think,’ said Miss Merton, who was sitting on the other side of him, ‘that
                        my card is a little different. I have the “Aim of Life” on mine, and so I
                        believe has everybody else.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said the Doctor, laughing, ‘let us ask Miss Prattle what is her aim
                        in life.’ 
 ‘Thank Heaven,’ said Laurence, ‘Dr. Jenkinson has begun. I hope we shall all
                        now follow.’ 
 Laurence’s hope was not in vain. The conversation soon sprang up everywhere;
                        and the company, though in various humours, took most of them very kindly to
                        the solemn topic that had been put before them. Mr. Luke, who was sitting by
                        Mrs. Sinclair, was heard in a loudish voice saying that his own favourite
                        Muse had always been Erato; Mr. Rose had taken a crimson flower from a vase
                        on the table, and, looking at it himself with a grave regard, was pointing
                        out its infinite and passionate beauties to the lady next him; and Mr.
                        Stockton was explaining that the Alps looked grander, and the sky bluer than
                        ever, to those who truly realised the atomic theory. No one, indeed, was
                        silent except Mr. Herbert and Mr. Storks, the former of whom smiled rather
                        sadly, whilst the latter looked about him with an inquisitorial frown. 
 Laurence was delighted with the state of things, and surveyed the table with
                        great satisfaction. Whilst his attention was thus engaged, Lady Ambrose
                        turned to Leslie, and began asking him if he had been in town much this
                        season. She was taken with his look, and wished to find out if he would
                        really be a nice person to like. 
 ‘Please,’ interposed Laurence pleadingly, ‘do try and keep to the
                        point—please, Lady Ambrose.’ 
 ‘I want to find out Mr. Leslie’s aim in life by asking him where he has
                        been,’ she answered. 
 ‘I have been in a great many places,’ said Leslie, ‘but not to pursue any
                        end—only to try and forget that I had no end to pursue.’ 
 ‘This is a very sad state of things,’ said Lady Ambrose; ‘I can always find
                        something to do, except when I am quite alone, or in the country when the
                        house is empty. And even then I can make occupation. I draw, or
                        read a book, or teach my little boy some lessons. But come—what do you think
                        is the real aim of life?—since that is what I must ask him, is it not, Mr.
                        Laurence?’ 
 ‘Don’t ask me,’ said Leslie; ‘I told you I hadn’t a notion; and I don’t
                        suppose we any of us have.’ 
 ‘That can’t be true,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘for just listen how everyone is
                        talking. I wish we could hear what they are saying. You might learn
                        something then, perhaps, Mr. Leslie, since you are so very ignorant.’ 
 It happened that, as Lady Ambrose said this, the conversation suddenly
                        flagged, and Laurence took advantage of the lull to ask if any satisfactory
                        conclusions had been come to during the past five minutes, ‘because we up
                        here,’ he said, ‘are very much in the dark, and want to be enlightened.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Storks gruffly, ‘has any one found out what is the aim of
                        life?’ As he said this he looked about him defiantly, as though all the
                        others were butterflies, that he could break, if he chose, upon his wheel.
                        His eye at last lit upon Mr. Saunders, who, considering this a challenge to
                        himself, immediately took up the gauntlet. The young man spoke with the
                        utmost composure, and, as his voice was high and piercing, everybody could
                        hear him. 
 ‘The aim of life,’ he said, adjusting his spectacles, ‘is progress.’ 
 ‘What is progress?’ interrupted Dr. Jenkinson coldly, without looking at Mr.
                        Saunders, and as though any answer to his question was the last thing he
                        expected. 
 ‘Progress,’ replied Mr. Saunders slowly, ‘has been found, like poetry,
                        somewhat hard to define.’ 
 ‘Very true,’ said the Doctor drily, and looking straight before him. 
 His accents were of so freezing a sharpness that he seemed to be stabbing
                        Mr. Saunders with an icicle. Mr. Saunders, however, was apparently quite
                        unwounded. 
 ‘But I,’ he continued with the utmost complacency, ‘have discovered a
                        definition which will, I think, meet with general acceptance. There is
                        nothing original in it—it is merely an abstract of the meaning of all our
                        great liberal thinkers—progress is such improvement as can be verified by
                        statistics, just as education is such knowledge as can be tested by
                        examinations. That, I conceive, is a very adequate definition of the most
                        advanced conception of progress, and to persuade people in general to accept
                        this is at present one of the chief duties of all earnest men.’ 
 ‘Entirely true!’ said Mr. Herbert, with ironical emphasis; ‘an entirely true
                        definition of progress as our age prizes it.’ 
 Mr. Saunders was delighted, and, imagining he had made a disciple, he turned
                        to Mr. Herbert and went on. 
 ‘For just let us,’ he said, ‘compare a man with a gorilla, and see in what
                        the man’s superiority lies. It is evidently not in the man’s ideas of God,
                        and so forth—for in his presumable freedom from these the gorilla is the
                        superior of the man—but in the hard and verifiable fact, that the man can
                        build houses and cotton-mills, whereas the highest monkey can scarcely make
                        the rudest approach to a hut.’ 
 ‘But can you tell me,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘supposing men some day come to a
                        state in which no more of this progress is possible, what will they do then?
                        ’ 
 ‘Mr. Mill, whom in almost all things I reverence as a supreme authority,’
                        said Mr. Saunders, ‘asked himself that very question. But the answer he gave
                        himself was one of the few things in which I venture to dissent from him.
                        For, when all the greater evils of life shall have been removed, he thinks
                        the human race is to find its chief enjoyment in reading Wordsworth’s
                            poetry.’

 ‘Indeed!’ said Mr. Herbert; ‘and did Mill come to any conclusion so sane as
                        that?’ 
 ‘I, on the contrary, believe,’ Mr. Saunders went on, ‘that as long as the
                        human race lasts, it will still have some belief in God left in it, and that
                        the eradication of this will afford an unending employment to all
                        enlightened minds.’ 
 Leslie looked at Lady Ambrose, expecting to see her smile. On the contrary
                        she was very grave, and said, ‘I think this is shocking.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence in a soothing tone to her, ‘it is only the way of
                        these young men in times of change like ours. Besides, he is very young—he
                        has only just left Oxford—’ 
 ‘If these irreligious views are to be picked up at Oxford,’ said Lady
                        Ambrose, ‘I shall be obliged to send my little boy, when he grows up, to
                        Cambridge. And as for what you say about “times of change”— I am not a
                        conservative, as you know—indeed, I quite go in for reform, as my husband
                        does: but I don’t think religion ought to be dragged into the
                        matter.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence, ‘let us listen to what Lord Allen is saying.’ 
 ‘He is sure,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘not to say anything but what
                        is nice.’ 
 Allen was speaking in a low tone, but his voice was so clear that Lady
                        Ambrose was quite able to hear him. 
 ‘To me it seems,’ he was saying, blushing a little as he found suddenly how
                        many people were listening to him, ‘that the aim of life has nearly always
                        been plain enough in a certain way—always, and for all men—’ 
 ‘Indeed?’ said Mr. Saunders, raising his eyebrows. 
 ‘Yes,’ said Allen, slightly turning towards him, and raising his voice
                        somewhat. ‘It has been, I think, as a single magnet, acting on all, though
                        upon many by repulsion. It is quite indescribable in words. But there are
                        two things by which you can tell a man’s truth to it—a faith in God. and a
                        longing for a future life.’ 
 ‘Lord Allen,’ exclaimed Mr. Herbert, and the sound of his voice made
                        everyone at once a listener, ‘that is very beautifully put! And it is,
                        indeed, quite true, as you say, that the real significance of life must be
                        for ever indescribable in words. But, in the present day, I fear also that
                        for most of us it is not even thinkable in thought. The whole human race,’
                        he went on in measured melancholy accents, ‘is now wandering in an accursed
                        wilderness, which not only shows us no hilltop whence the promised land may
                        be seen, but which, to most of the wanderers, seems a promised land itself.
                        And they have a God of their own too, who engages now to lead them out of it
                        if they will only follow him: who, for visible token of his Godhead, leads
                        them with a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night—the cloud
                        being the black smoke of their factory chimneys, and the fire the red glare
                        of their blast-furnaces. And so effectual are these modern divine guides,
                        that if we were standing on the brink of Jordan itself, we should be utterly
                        unable to catch, through the fire and the smoke, one single glimpse of the
                        sunlit hills beyond.’ 
 Mr. Herbert said these last words almost fiercely; and they were followed by
                        a complete hush. It was almost directly broken by Mr. Rose. 
 ‘To me,’ he said, raising his eyebrows wearily, and sending his words
                        floating down the table in a languid monotone, ‘Mr. Herbert’s whole metaphor
                        seems misleading. I rather look upon life as a chamber, which we decorate as
                        we would decorate the chamber of the woman or the youth that we love,
                        tinting the walls of it with symphonies of subdued colour, and filling it
                        with works of fair form, and with flowers, and with strange scents, and with
                        instruments of music. And this can be done now as well—better, rather —than
                        at any former time: since we know that so many of the old aims were false,
                        and so cease to be distracted by them. We have learned the weariness of
                        creeds; and know that for us the grave has no secrets. We have learned that
                        the aim of life is life; and what does successful life consist in? Simply,’
                        said Mr. Rose, speaking very slowly, and with a soft solemnity, ‘in the
                        consciousness of exquisite living—in the making our own each highest thrill
                        of joy that the moment offers us—be it some touch of colour on the sea or on
                        the mountains, the early dew in the crimson shadows of a rose, the shining
                        of a woman’s limbs in clear water, or—’ 
 Here unfortunately a sound of ‘’Sh’ broke softly from several mouths. Mr.
                        Rose was slightly disconcerted, and a pause that would have been a little
                        awkward seemed imminent. Laurence, to prevent this, did the first thing that
                        occurred to him, and hastily asked Dr. Jenkinson what his view of the matter
                        was. 
 The Doctor’s answer came in his very sharpest voice. 
 ‘Do any of us know what life is?’ he said. ‘Hadn’t we better find that out
                        first?’ 
 ‘Life,’ continued Mr. Rose, who had now recovered himself, ‘is a series of
                        moments and emotions.’ 
 ‘And a series of absurdities too, very often,’ said Dr. Jenkinson. 
 ‘Life is a solemn mystery,’ said Mr. Storks, severely. 
 ‘Life is a damned nuisance,’ muttered Leslie to himself, but just loud
                        enough to be heard by Lady Ambrose, who smiled at him with a sense of humour
                        that won his heart at once. 
 ‘Life is matter,’ Mr. Storks went on, ‘which, under certain conditions not
                        yet fully understood, has become self-conscious.’ 
 ‘Lord Allen has just been saying that it is the preface to eternity,’ said
                        Mr. Saunders. 
 ‘Only, unfortunately,’ said Laurence, ‘it is a preface that we cannot skip,
                        and the dedication is generally made to the wrong person.’ 
 ‘All our doubts on this matter,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘are simply due to that
                        dense pestiferous fog of crazed sentiment that still hides our view, but
                        which the present generation has sternly set its face to dispel and conquer.
                        Science will drain the marshy grounds of the human mind, so that the deadly
                        malaria of Christianity, which has already destroyed two civilisations,
                        shall never be fatal to a third.’ 
 ‘I should rather have thought,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, in her soft clear voice,
                        and casting down her eyes thoughtfully, ‘that passion and feeling were the
                        real heart of the matter: and that religion of some sort was an ingredient
                        in all perfect passion. There are seeds of feeling in every soul, but these
                        will never rise up into flowers without some culture—will they, Mr. Luke?
                        And this culture is, surely,’ she said dreamily, ‘the work of Love who is
                        the gardener of the soul, and of Religion, the under-gardener, acting as
                        Love bids it.’ 
 ‘Ah, yes!’ said Mr. Luke, looking compassionately about him. ‘Culture! Mrs.
                        Sinclair is quite right; for without culture we can never understand
                        Christianity, and Christianity, whatever the vulgar may say of it, is the
                        key to life, and is co-extensive with it.’ 
 Lady Ambrose was charmed with this sentiment. 
 ‘Quite so, Mr. Luke, I quite agree with you,’ she said, in her most cordial
                        manner. ‘But I wish you would tell me a little more about Culture. I am
                        always so much interested in those things.’ 
 ‘Culture,’ said Mr. Luke, ‘is the union of two things—fastidious taste and
                        liberal sympathy. These can only be gained by wide reading guided by sweet
                        reason; and when they are gained, Lady Ambrose, we are conscious, as it
                        were, of a new sense, which at once enables us to discern the Eternal and
                        the absolutely righteous, wherever we find it, whether in an epistle of St.
                        Paul’s or in a comedy of Menander’s. It is true that culture sets aside the
                        larger part of the New Testament as grotesque, barbarous, and immoral; but
                        what remains, purged of its apparent meaning, it discerns to be a treasure
                        beyond all price. And in Christianity—such Christianity, I mean, as true
                        taste can accept—culture sees the guide to the real significance of life,
                        and the explanation,’ Mr. Luke added with a sigh, ‘of that melancholy which
                        in our day is attendant upon all clear sight.’ 
 ‘But why,’ said Allen, ‘if you know so well what life’s meaning is, need you
                        feel this melancholy at all? ’ 
 ‘Ah!’ said Mr. Luke, ‘it is from this very knowledge that the melancholy I
                        speak of springs. We—the cultured—we indeed see. But the world at large does
                        not. It will not listen to us. It thinks we are talking nonsense. Surely
                        that is enough to sadden us. Then, too, our ears are perpetually being
                        pained and deafened by the din of the two opposing Philistinisms—science and
                        orthodoxy—both equally vulgar, and equally useless. But the masses cannot
                        see this. It is impossible to persuade some that science can teach them
                        nothing worth knowing, and others that the dogmatic utterances of the
                        gospels are either ignorant mistakes or oriental metaphors. Don’t you find
                        this, Jenkinson?’ he added, addressing the Doctor across the table in a loud
                        mournful voice. 
 ‘Laurence,’ said the Doctor, apparently not hearing the question, ‘haven’t
                        we talked of this quite long enough? Town and Country—let us go on to that;
                        or else we shall be getting very much behind-hand.’ 
 These words of the Doctor’s caused a rapid change in the conversation. And
                        as it appeared impossible to agree as to what the aim of life was, most
                        turned eagerly to the simpler question of where it might be best attained.
                        At first there seemed to be a general sense on all sides that it was a duty
                        to prefer the country. There, the voices of Nature spoke to the soul more
                        freely, the air was purer and fresher; the things in life that were really
                        valuable were more readily taken at their true worth; foolish vanities and
                        trivial cares were less likely to degrade the character; one could have
                        flowers; one could listen to the music of birds and rivers; a country house
                        was more comfortable than a town one; and few prospects were so charming as
                        an English park. But the voice of Mr. Saunders was soon heard proclaiming
                        that progress was almost entirely confined to towns, and that the modern
                        liberal could find little scope for action in the country. ‘If he does
                        anything there,’ Mr. Saunders said, ‘he can only make his tenants more
                        comfortable and contented; and that is simply attaching them more to the
                        existing order of things. Indeed, even now, as matters stand, the healthy
                        rustic, with his fresh complexion and honest eye, is absolutely incapable of
                        appreciating the tyranny of religion and society. But the true liberal is
                        undeceived by his pleasing exterior, and sees a far nobler creature in the
                        pale narrow-chested operative of the city, who at once responds to the
                        faintest cry of insurgence.’ 
 Slight causes often produce large results; and these utterances of Mr.
                        Saunders turned the entire torrent of opinion into a different channel. Mr.
                        Luke, who had a moment before been talking about ‘liberal air,’ and ‘sedged
                        brooks,’ and ‘meadow grass,’ now admitted that one’s country neighbours were
                        sure to be narrow-minded sectarians, and that it was better to live amongst
                        cultured society, even under a London fog, than to look at all the splendour
                        of provincial sunsets, in company with a parson who could talk of nothing
                        but his parishioners and justification by faith. Others, too, followed in
                        the same direction; and the verdict of the majority soon seemed to be that,
                        except in a large country house, country life, though it might be very
                        beautiful, was still very tiresome. But the voice of Mr. Saunders was again
                        heard, during a pause, laying it down that no true liberal could ever care
                        to live in the country now; and Lady Ambrose, who highly disapproved of him
                        and his views in general, saw here a fitting opportunity for contradicting
                        him, asserting that, though she and her husband were both advanced,
                        liberals, yet the pleasantest part of their year was that spent upon their
                        moor in Scotland. ‘And then, too,’ she added, turning to Laurence, ‘I am
                        devoted to our place in Gloucestershire, and I would not miss for anything
                        such things as my new dairy, and my cottages, with the old women in them.’ 
 ‘And yet,’ said Laurence, smiling, ‘Sir George would never go near the place
                        if it were not for the shooting.’ 
 ‘Indeed he would,’ said Lady Ambrose, a little indignantly. ‘He likes the
                        life so much, and is so fond of his gardens, and greenhouses, and—’ 
 But she was here interrupted by Mr. Herbert, who, mistaking the Sir George
                        Ambrose mentioned for another Baronet of the same name—a gentleman of a very
                        old but impoverished Catholic family—broke in as follows, somewhat to the
                        consternation of Lady Ambrose, whose husband was a great cotton-spinner, of
                        the most uncertain origin. 
 ‘Sir George,’ he said, ‘is, as I know well, an entirely honest gentleman of
                        ancient lineage. He is indeed a perfectly beautiful type of what the English
                        Squire properly ought to be. For he lives upon his own land, and amongst his
                        own people; and is a complete and lovely example to them of a life quite
                        simple indeed, but in the highest sense loyal, noble, and orderly. But what
                        is one amongst so many? To most of his own order Sir George Ambrose appears
                        merely as a madman, because he sees that it is altogether a nobler thing for
                        a man to be brave and chivalrous than it is to be fashionable; and because
                        he looks forward on his dying day to remembering the human souls that he has
                        saved alive, rather than the pheasants that he has shot dead.’ 
 Now, the husband of Lady Ambrose being known to most present for his
                        magnificent new country house, his immense preserves, and his yacht of four
                        hundred tons that never went out of the Solent, there was naturally some
                        wonder excited by Mr. Herbert’s words, since the thought of any other Sir
                        George never came for an instant into anyone’s head. Lady Ambrose herself
                        was in utter amazement. She could not tell what to make of it, and she was
                        as near looking confused as she had ever been in her life. The awkwardness
                        of the situation was felt by many: and to cover it a hum of conversation
                        sprang up, with forced alacrity. But this did not make matters much better;
                        for in a very short time Mr. Herbert’s voice was again audible, uttering
                        words of no measured denunciation against the great land-owners of England,
                        ‘who were once,’ he said, ‘in some true sense a Nobility, but are now the
                        portentousest Ignobility that the world ever set eyes upon.’ Everyone felt
                        that this was approaching dangerous ground: nor were they at all reassured
                        when Mr. Herbert, who was, it appeared, quoting from a letter which he had
                        received, he said, that morning from the greatest of modern thinkers,
                        concluded amidst a complete silence with the following passage, ‘Yes, here
                        they come, with coats of the newest fashion, with pedigrees of the newest
                        forging, with their moors in Scotland, with their rivers in Norway, with
                        their game preserves in England, with some thousands of human beings calling
                        them masters, somewhere—they probably forget where—and with the mind of a
                        thinking man, or with the heart of a gentleman, nowhere. Here they come, our
                        cotton-spinning plutocrats, bringing in luxury, and vulgarity, and
                        damnation!’ 
 These last words came like a thunderclap. Laurence hardly knew where to
                        look. The result, however, was more satisfactory than could have been
                        expected. There are some emotions, as we all know, that can be calmed best
                        by tears. Lady Ambrose did not cry. She did something better—she laughed. 
 ‘What would poor Sir George say?’ she whispered to Laurence. ‘He is fishing
                        in Norway at this very moment. But do you really think,’ she went on, being
                        resolved not to shirk the subject, ‘that Society is really as bad as Mr.
                        Herbert says? I was looking into the  the other
                        day, and I am sure nothing goes on in London now so bad as what he
                        describes.’ 
 ‘Do you know, Lady Ambrose,’ said Mr. Herbert, who concluded that he had
                        given her much pleasure by his late remarks, ‘I think the state of London at
                        the present day infinitely worse than anything Grammont or his biographer
                        could have dreamt of.’ 
 ‘Quite so,’ said Mr. Luke; ‘the bulk of men in our days are just as immoral
                        as they were in Charles the Second’s; the only difference is that they are
                        incomparably more stupid; and that, instead of decking their immorality with
                        the jewels of wit, they clumsily try to cover it with the tarpaulin of
                        respectability. This has not made the immorality any the better; it has only
                        made respectability the most contemptible word in the English language.’ 
 ‘The fop of Charles’s time,’ said Leslie, ‘aimed at seeming a wit and a
                        scholar. The fop of ours aims at being a fool and a dunce.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘society was diseased then, it is true, and marks
                        of disease disfigured and scarred its features. Still, in spite of this, it
                        had some sound life left in it. But now the entire organism is dissolving
                        and falling asunder. All the parts are refusing to perform their functions.
                        How, indeed, could this possibly be otherwise, when the head itself, the
                        aristocracy, the part whose special office is to see and think, has now lost
                        completely both its brains and eyes, and has nothing head-like left it
                        except the mouth; and that cannot so much as speak. It can only eat and
                        yawn.’ 
 ‘Society, you see, Mr. Herbert,’ said Lady Ambrose, who felt bound to say
                        something, ‘is so much larger now than it was.’ 
 ‘Oh,’ said Laurence, shrugging his shoulders, ‘in that sense, I really think
                        there is almost no society now.’ 
 ‘I don’t see how there can be,’ said Miss Merton, ‘when what is called
                        society is simply one great scramble after fashion. And fashion is such a
                        delicate fruit, that it is sure to be spoilt if it is scrambled for.’ 
 ‘I am glad,’ said Laurence, ‘you don’t abuse fashion as some people do. I
                        look on it as the complexion of good society, and as the rouge of bad; and
                        when society gets sickly and loses its complexion, it takes to rouge—as it
                        is doing now; and the rouge eats into its whole system, and makes its health
                        worse than ever.’ 
 ‘You are the last person, Mr. Laurence,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘you who go out
                        so much, that I should have expected to hear talking against society like
                        that.’ 
 ‘Ah!’ said Laurence, ‘we cannot escape from our circumstances: I only wish
                        we could. I go into the best society I can get, but I am not blind to the
                        fact that it is very bad. Of course there are a number of the most
                        delightful people in it: I am not denying that for a moment. But not only is
                        society not made up out of a few of its parts, but even the best parts
                        suffer from the tone of the whole. And taking society as a whole, I honestly
                        doubt if it was ever at any time so generally bad as it is now. I am not
                        saying that it has forgotten its duties—that it cannot even conceive that it
                        ever had any; that is of course quite true: but Mr. Herbert has said that
                        already. I am not complaining of its moral badness, but of its social
                        badness—of its want of practical skill in life as a fine art—a want that it
                        often feels itself, and yet has not the skill to remedy. Think for a moment
                        how barbarous are its amusements; how little culture there is in its general
                        tone; how incapable it is of any enlightened interest!’ 
 ‘Really,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘I think you are doing society a great
                        injustice. It seems to me that enlightened interest is the very thing that
                        is everywhere on the spread. The light of intellect is emerging from the
                        laboratory and the dissecting-room, where it had its birth, and is gilding,
                        with its clear rays, the dinner-table, and even the ball-room. A freer, a
                        truer, and a grander view of things, seems to me to be rapidly dawning on
                        the world.’ 
 ‘I fear, my dear sir,’ said Mr. Luke, ‘that these pleasing opinions of yours
                        will not bear testing.’ 
 ‘Do you mean,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘that society as a rule is not infinitely
                        better informed now than it was thirty years ago? Has it not infinitely
                        fewer prejudices and infinitely more knowledge?’ 
 ‘We should look to the effects of the knowledge, not to the knowledge
                        itself,’ said Mr. Luke. ‘We cannot test the health of a society from looking
                        over its examination papers in physical science.’ 
 ‘How would you test it?’ said Mr. Stockton, with a slight curl of the lip. 
 ‘There are many tests,’ said Mr. Luke. ‘Here is one, amongst the very
                        subjects that Mr. Laurence has ordered us to talk about—art and literature.’ 
 ‘I accept the test,’ said Mr. Stockton. ‘What, then, can be nobler than much
                        modern poetry? There is some that I look upon as quite of the highest
                        order.’ 
 ‘When I spoke of our literature,’ said Mr. Luke loftily, ‘I was not thinking
                        of poetry. We have no poetry now.’ 
 ‘Indeed?’ said Mr. Stockton; ‘I imagined you had written some yourself.’ 
 ‘Ah!’ exclaimed Mr. Luke, drawing a long sigh, ‘I once knew what Goethe
                        calls “the divine worth of tone and tears.” But my own poems only prove the
                        truth of what I say. They could only have been written in evil days. They
                        were simply a wail of pain; and now that I am grown braver, I keep silence.
                        Poetry in some ages is an expression of the best strength; in an age like
                        ours it is the disguise of the worst weakness—or, when not that, it is
                        simply a forced plant, an exotic. No, Mr. Stockton, I was not speaking of
                        our poetry, but of the one kind of imaginative literature that is the
                        natural growth of our own day, the novel. Now, the novel itself is a plant
                        which, when it grows abundantly and alone, you may be sure is a sign of a
                        poor soil. But don’t trust to that only. Look at our novels themselves, and
                        see what sort of life it is they image—the trivial interests, the
                        contemptible incidents, the absurdity of the virtuous characters, the
                        viciousness of the characters who are not absurd. Spain was in some ways
                        worse in Cervantes’ time than England is in ours; but you may search all our
                        novels for one character that has one tithe of Don Quixote’s heroism, for
                        one of our sane men that breathed in so healthy and pure an atmosphere as
                        the inspired madman. And this is not from want of ability on the novelist’s
                        part. Some of them have powers enough and to spare; but the best novels only
                        reflect back most clearly the social anarchy, and the bad ones are
                        unconscious parts of it.’ 
 ‘And as for our painting,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘that reflects, even more
                        clearly than our literature, our hideous and our hopeless degradation. The
                        other day, when I walked through the Royal Academy, my mind was literally
                        dazzled by the infernal glare of corruption and vulgarity that was flashed
                        upon me from every side. There were, indeed, only two pictures in the whole
                        collection that were not entirely abominable; and these were, one of them
                        three boulders in the island of Sark, the other a study of pebbles on the
                        beach at Ilfracombe.’ 
 ‘I know little about the technicalities of art,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘so I
                        will not presume to dispute this point with you.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Leslie, ‘here is another test quite as good as art and
                        literature—love and money, and their relations in our days.’ 
 He would have continued speaking; but Mr. Herbert allowed him no time. 
 ‘The very things,’ he said, ‘I was about to touch upon—the very things the
                        pictures the other day suggested to me. For, seeing how the work of the
                        painter becomes essentially vile so soon as it becomes essentially venal, I
                        was reminded of the like corruption of what is far more precious than the
                        work of any painter—our own English girls, who are prepared for the modern
                        marriage-market on precisely the same principles as our pictures for the
                        Royal Academy. There is but one difference. The work of the modern painter
                        is vile from its very beginning—in its conception and execution alike; but
                        our girls we receive, in the first instance, entirely fair and sacred from
                        the hands of God himself, clothed upon with a lovelier vesture than any
                        lilies of the field—’ 
 ‘Really,’ whispered Lady Ambrose to Laurence, ‘Providence has done so very
                        little for us, as far as vesture goes.’ 
 ‘—And we,’ Mr. Herbert went on, ‘with unspeakable profanity presume to dress
                        and to decorate them, till the heavenly vesture is entirely hidden,
                        thinking, like a modern Simon Magus, that the gifts of God are to be
                        purchased for money, and not caring to perceive that, if they are to be
                        purchased with the devil’s money, we must first convert them into the
                        devil’s gifts.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, with a faint smile, ‘the day for love-matches is
                        quite gone over now.’ 
 But her words were drowned by Mr. Saunders, who exclaimed at the top of his
                        voice, and in a state of great excitement, ‘Electric
                        telegraphs—railways—steam printing presses—let me beg of you to consider the
                        very next subject set for us—riches and civilisation—and to judge of the
                        present generation by the light of that.’ 
 ‘I have considered them,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘for the last thirty years—and
                        with inexpressible melancholy.’ 
 ‘I conceive,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘that you are somewhat singular in your
                        feelings.’ 
 ‘I am,’ replied Mr. Herbert; ‘and that in most of my opinions and feelings I
                        am singular, is a fact fraught for me with the most ominous significance.
                        Yet, how could I—who think that health is more than wealth, and who hold it
                        a more important thing to separate right from wrong than to identify men
                        with monkeys—how could I hope to be anything but singular in a generation
                        that deliberately, and with its eyes open, prefers a cotton-mill to a
                        Titian?’ 
 ‘I hold it,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘to be one of the great triumphs of our day,
                        that it has so subordinated all the vaguer and more lawless sentiments to
                        the solid guidance of sober economical considerations. And not only do I
                        consider a cotton-mill, but I consider even a good sewer, to be a far nobler
                        and a far holier thing—for holy in reality does but mean healthy—than the
                        most admired Madonna ever painted.’ 
 ‘A good sewer,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘is, I admit, an entirely holy thing; and
                        would all our manufacturers and men of science bury themselves underground,
                        and confine their attention to making sewers, I, for one, should have little
                        complaint against them.’ 
 ‘And are railways, telegraphs, gas-lamps—is the projected Channel tunnel,
                        nothing in your eyes? Is it nothing that all the conditions of life are
                        ameliorated, that mind is daily pursuing farther its conquest over matter?’ 
 ‘Have we much to thank you for,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘that you have saved us
                        from an hour of sea-sickness, if in return you give us a whole lifetime of
                        heart-sickness? Your mind, my good sir, that you boast of, is so occupied in
                        subduing matter, that it is entirely forgetful of subduing itself—a matter,
                        trust me, that is far more important. And as for your amelioration of the
                        conditions of life—that is not civilisation which saves a man from the need
                        of exercising any of his powers, but which obliges him to exert his noble
                        powers; not that which satisfies his lower feelings with the greatest ease,
                        but which provides satisfaction for his higher feelings, no matter at what
                        trouble.’ 
 ‘Other things being equal,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘I apprehend that the
                        generation that travels sixty miles an hour is at least five times as
                        civilised as the generation that travels only twelve.’ 
 ‘But the other things are not equal,’ said Mr. Herbert: ‘and the other
                        things, by which I suppose you mean all that is really sacred in the life of
                        man, have been banished or buried by the very things which we boast of as
                        our civilisation.’ 
 ‘That is our own fault,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘not the fault of civilisation.’ 
 ‘Not so,’ said Mr. Herbert. ‘Bring up a boy to do nothing for himself—make
                        everything easy for him—to use your own expression, subdue matter for
                        him—and that boy will never be able to subdue anything for himself. He will
                        be weak in body, and a coward in soul—’ 
 ‘Precisely,’ said Mr. Saunders. ‘And that is really, if you look
                        dispassionately at the matter, a consummation devoutly to be wished. For why
                        do we need our bodies to be strong?—To overcome obstacles. Why do we need to
                        be brave?—To attack enemies. But by and by, when all our work is done by
                        machinery, and we have no longer any obstacles to overcome, or any hardships
                        to endure, strength will become useless, and bravery dangerous. And my own
                        hope is that both will have ere long vanished; and that weakness and
                        cowardice, qualities which we now so irrationally despise, will have
                        vindicated their real value, by turning universal civilisation into
                        universal peace.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘that is exactly what the modern world is longing
                        for—a universal peace; which never can nor will mean anything else than
                        peace with the devil.’ 
 ‘Really,’ said Lady Ambrose to Leslie, ‘do you think we are in such a bad
                        way as all this? Dr. Jenkinson, I must ask you—you always know these
                        things—do you think we are so very bad?’ 
 ‘Yes—yes,’ said the Doctor, turning towards her with a cheerful smile,
                        ‘there is a great deal that is very bad in our own days— very bad indeed.
                        Many thoughtful people think that there is more that is bad in the present
                        than there has ever been in the past. Many thoughtful people in all days
                        have thought the same.’ 
 ‘Whenever wise men,’ said Herbert, ‘have taken to thinking about their own
                        times, it is quite true that they have always thought ill of them. But that
                        is because the times must have gone wrong before the wise men take to the
                        business of thinking about them at all. We are never conscious of our
                        constitutions till they are out of order.’ 
 ‘Ah! yes,’ said Mr. Luke; ‘how true that is, Herbert! Philosophy may be a
                        golden thing. But it is the gold of the autumn woods, that soon falls, and
                        leaves the boughs of the nation naked.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Leslie, ‘leaving nothing but  Bare ruined choirs, where
                            late the sweet birds sang.’ 

 ‘Thank you, Mr. Leslie,’ exclaimed Mr. Herbert across the table, ‘thank
                        you—an exquisitely apt quotation.’ 
 ‘Then you, Mr. Leslie,’ said Lady Ambrose in a disappointed voice, ‘you are
                        one of these desponding people too, are you? I never heard anything so
                        dismal in my life.’ 
 ‘I certainly think,’ said Leslie, ‘that our age in some ways could not
                        possibly be worse. Nobody knows what to believe, and most people believe
                        nothing. Don’t you find that?’ 
 ‘Indeed I do not,’ said Lady Ambrose, with some vigour, ‘and I am very sorry
                        for those who do. That Mr. Saunders,’ she added, lowering her voice, ‘is the
                        first person I ever heard express such views. We were dining only the other
                        day with the Bishop of ——, and I’ll tell you what he said, Mr. Leslie. He
                        said that the average number of churches built yearly during the last ten
                        years was greater than it had ever been since the Reformation. That does not
                        look as if religion was on the decline, does it? I know the Bishop spoke of
                        a phase of infidelity that was passing over the nation: but that, he said,
                        would soon have drifted by. Indeed, he told us that all the teachings of
                        modern irreligious science were simply reproductions of—you must not laugh
                        at me if I say the names wrong—Epicurus and Democritus—which had been long
                        ago refuted. And that was no peculiar crotchet of his own mind; for a very
                        clever gentleman who was sitting next me said that that was the very thing
                        which all the bishops agreed in saying—almost the only thing indeed in which
                        they did agree.’ 
 ‘Ah!’ said Leslie, ‘materialism once came to the world like a small street
                        boy throwing mud at it; and the indignant world very soon drove it away. But
                        it has now come back again, dirtier than ever, bringing a big brother with
                        it, and Heaven knows when we shall get rid of it now.’ 
 ‘In every state of transition,’ said Dr. Jenkinson to Miss Merton, ‘there
                        must always be much uneasiness. But I don’t think,’ he said, with a little
                        pleased laugh, ‘that you will find these times really much worse than those
                        that went before them. No—no. If we look at them soberly, they are really a
                        great deal better. We have already got rid of a vast amount of superstition
                        and ignorance, and are learning what Christianity really is. We are learning
                        true reverence—that is, not to dogmatise about subjects of which we cannot
                        possibly know anything.’ 
 ‘Just so, Jenkinson,’ said Mr. Luke;’ that is the very thing I am trying to
                        teach the world myself. Personal immortality, for instance, which forms no
                        part of the sweet secret of authentic Christianity—’ 
 ‘Yes—yes,’ said the Doctor hastily; ‘the Church had degraded the doctrine.
                        It needed to be expressed anew.’ 
 ‘Of course,’ said Miss Merton, ‘I, as a Catholic—’ 
 ‘Dear! dear!’ exclaimed the Doctor, in some confusion, ‘I beg your pardon. I
                        had no notion you were a Roman Catholic.’ 
 ‘I was going to say,’ Miss Merton went on, ‘that, though of course as a
                        Catholic I am not without what I believe to be an infallible guide, I feel
                        just as much as anyone the bad state in which things are now. It is so
                        difficult to shape one’s course in life. One has nowhere any work cut out
                        for one. There is a want of—well—’ she said, smiling, ‘of what perhaps, when
                        religion has been analysed by science, will be called moral ozone in the
                        air.’ 
 ‘Such a feeling is not unnatural,’ said the Doctor; ‘but you will find it
                        vanish if you just resolve cheerfully to go on doing the duty next you—even
                        if this be only to order dinner. And,’ he said, turning to her rather
                        abruptly, ‘don’t despond over the times: that only makes them worse.
                        Besides, they are not really at all bad. There is no need for desponding at
                        all.’ 
 ‘But there is at least excuse,’ said Laurence, ‘when we see all the old
                        faiths, the old ideas, under which the world has so long found shelter,
                        fading Like the baseless fabric of a vision, rapidly and for
                        ever away from us.’ 
 ‘I don’t think so,’ said the Doctor, as if that settled the question. 
 ‘Christianity,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘is only retiring to make way for
                        something better. Religions are not quickened unless they perish. Look
                        forward at the growing brightness of the future, not at the faded brightness
                        of the past.’ 
 ‘Why not look at the present?’ said Dr. Jenkinson. ‘Depend upon it, it is
                        not wise to be above one’s times. There’s plenty of religion now. The real
                        power of Christianity is growing every day, even where you least expect it.’ 
 ‘In what part of Christianity,’ said Leslie, ‘its real power lies, it would
                        be unbecoming in me to profess that I know. But this I do know, that if you
                        take four out of five of the more thoughtful and instructed men of the day,
                        you will find that not only have they no faith in a personal God or a
                        personal immortality, but the very notions of such things seem to them
                        absurdities.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘it was once thought a characteristic of the lowest
                        savages to be without a belief in a future life. It will soon be thought a
                        characteristic of the lowest savages to be with one.’ 
 ‘Really now—’ said Mr. Luke, in a voice whose tone seemed to beseech
                        everyone to be sensible, ‘personal immortality and a personal Deity are no
                        doctrines of Christianity. You, Jenkinson, I know agree with me.’ 
 There was nothing the Doctor so disliked as these appeals from Mr. Luke. He
                        made in this case no response whatever. He turned instead to Miss Merton. 
 ‘You see,’ he said to her in a very quiet but very judicial way, ‘the age we
                        live in is an age of change. And in all such ages there must be many things
                        that, if we let them, will pain and puzzle us. But we mustn’t let them.
                        There have been many ages of change before our time, and there are sure to
                        be many after it. Our age is not peculiar.’ 
 Here he paused, as he had a way of doing at times between his sentences.
                        This practice now, as it had often been before, was of a disservice to him;
                        for it gave a fatal facility for interruption when he could least have
                        wished it. In this case Leslie entirely put him out, by attacking the very
                        statement which the Doctor least of all had designed to bear question. 
 ‘But in some ways,’ said Leslie, ‘this age is peculiar, surely. It is
                        peculiar in the extraordinary rapidity of its changes. Christianity took
                        three hundred years to supplant polytheism; atheism has hardly taken thirty
                        to supplant Christianity.’ Dr. Jenkinson did not deign to take the least
                        notice of this. 
 ‘I suppose,’ said Miss Merton to Leslie, ‘that you think Catholicism quite a
                        thing of the past?’ 
 ‘I’m afraid,’ said Leslie, ‘that my opinion on that is of very small
                        importance. But, however that may be, you must admit that in the views of
                        the world at large there have been great changes; and these, I say, have
                        come on us with so astonishing a quickness that they have plunged us into a
                        state of mental anarchy that has not been equalled since mental order has
                        been known. There is no recognised rule of life any where. The old rules
                        only satisfy those who are not capable of feeling the need of any rule at
                        all. Every one who does right at all only does what is right in his own
                        eyes. All society, it seems, is going to pieces.’ 
 ‘I,’ said Mr. Rose, ‘look upon social dissolution as the true condition of
                        the most perfect life. For the centre of life is the individual, and it is
                        only through dissolution that the individual can re-emerge. All the warrings
                        of endless doubts, all the questionings of matter and of spirit, which I
                        have myself known, I value only because, remembering the weariness of them,
                        I take a profounder and more exquisite pleasure in the colour of a crocus,
                        the pulsations of a chord of music, or a picture of Sandro Botticelli’s.’ 
 Mr. Rose’s words hardly produced all the effect he could have wished; for
                        the last part was almost drowned in the general rustle of the ladies rising. 
 ‘Before we go, Mr. Laurence,’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘will you be good enough to
                        tell me the history of these salt-cellars? I wanted to have asked you at the
                        beginning of dinner, but you made yourself so very appalling then, that I
                        really did not venture.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence, ‘no doubt they surprise you. They were a present made
                        to me the other day by a friend of mine—an eminent man of science, and are
                        models of a peculiar kind of retort he has invented, for burning human
                        bodies, and turning them into gas.’ 
 ‘Good gracious!’ said Lady Ambrose, ‘how horrible! I insist, Mr. Laurence,
                        on your having another set to-morrow night—remember.’ 
 ‘There,’ said Laurence, when the gentlemen had resettled themselves, and had
                        begun their wine, ‘there is the new version of the skeleton at the
                        banquet-board—the two handfuls of white dust, to which we, the salt of the
                        earth, shall one day crumble. Let us sacrifice all the bulls we have to
                            Pluto illacrimabilis—let us sacrifice ourselves to
                        one another, or to Heaven—to this favour must we come. Is not that so, Mr.
                        Storks?’ 
 ‘Laurence,’ said Dr. Jenkinson briskly, ‘the conversation hasn’t kept pace
                        with the dinner. We have got no farther than “The Present” yet. The ladies
                        are going to talk of “The Future” by themselves. See— there they are out on
                        the terrace.’ 
 Mr. Storks here drew his chair to the table, and cleared his throat. 
 ‘It is easier,’ he said, ‘to talk about the present now we are alone—now
                            they,’ he nodded his head in the direction of the party
                        outside, ‘are gone out to talk about the future in the moonlight. There are
                        many things which even yet it does not do to say before women—at least,
                        before all women.’ 
 ‘My aunt,’ said Laurence, ‘is a great authority on woman’s education and
                        true position; and she has written an essay to advance the female cause.’ 
 ‘Indeed?’ said Mr. Storks; ‘I was not aware of that. I shall look forward
                        with much pleasure to some conversation with her. But what I was going to
                        say related to the present, which at dinner was on all sides so mercilessly
                        run down. I was going to claim for the present age, in thought and
                        speculation (and it is these that give their tone to its entire conduct of
                        life), as its noble and peculiar feature, a universal, intrepid, dogged
                        resolve to find out and face the complete truth of things, and to allow no
                        prejudice, however dear to us, to obscure our vision. This is the only real
                        morality: and not only is it full of blessing for the future, but it is
                        giving us “manifold more in this present time” as well. The work of science,
                        you see, is twofold; it enlarges the horizon of the mind, and improves the
                        conditions of the body. If you will pardon my saying so, Mr. Herbert, I
                        think your antipathy to science must be clue to your not having fully
                        appreciated its true work and dignity.’ 
 ‘The work of science is, I know, twofold,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘speculative
                        and practical.’ 
 ‘Exactly so,’ said Mr. Storks approvingly. 
 ‘And all it can do for us in speculation,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘is to teach us
                        that we have no life hereafter: all it can do for us in practice, is to ruin
                        our life here. It enervates us by providing us with base luxury; it degrades
                        us by turning our attention to base knowledge.’ 
 ‘No—no,’ said Dr. Jenkinson, with one of his little laughs, ‘not that. I
                        don’t think, Mr. Storks, that Mr. Herbert always quite means what he says.
                        We mustn’t take him at his word.’ 
 ‘My dear sir,’ said Mr. Herbert, turning to the Doctor, ‘you are a
                        consecrated priest of the mystical Church of Christ’—Dr. Jenkinson winced
                        terribly at this—‘and let me ask you if you think it the work of Christ to
                        bring into men’s minds eternal corruption, instead of eternal life—or,
                        rather, not corruption, I should say, but putrefaction. For what is
                        putrefaction but decomposition? And at the touch of science all our noblest
                        ideas decompose and putrefy, till our whole souls are strewn with dead hopes
                        and dead religions, with corpses of all the thoughts we loved 
                            Quickening slowly into lower forms.  You may call it analysis,
                        but I call it death.’ 
 ‘I wish we could persuade you,’ said Mr. Stockton, very temperately, ‘to
                        take a fairer view of things. Surely truth cannot in the long run be
                        anything but life-giving.’ 
 ‘Let us take care of facts,’ said Mr. Storks, ‘and fictions—I beg your
                        pardon, religion—will take care of itself.’ 
 ‘And religion,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘will take care of itself very well. Of
                        course we don’t waste time now in thinking about personal immortality. We
                        shall not live; but the mind of man will; and religion will live too, being
                        part of the mind of man. Religion is, indeed, to the inner world what the
                        sky is to the outer. It is the mind’s canopy—the infinite mental azure in
                        which the mysterious source of our being is at once revealed and hidden. Let
                        us beware, then, of not considering religion noble; but let us beware still
                        more of considering it true. We may fancy that we trace in the clouds shapes
                        of real things; and, as long as we know that this is only fancy, I know of
                        no holier occupation for the human mind than such cloud-gazing. But let us
                        always recollect that the cloud which to us may seem shaped like a son of
                        man, may seem to another to be backed like a weasel, and to another to be
                        very like a whale. What, then,’ Mr. Stockton added, ‘can be a nobler study
                        than the great book of Nature, or, as we used to call it, the works of God?’ 
 ‘Pray do not think,’ said Mr. Herbert, ‘that I complain of this generation
                        because it studies Nature. I complain of it because it does not study her.
                        Yes,’ he went on, as he saw Mr. Stockton start, ‘you can analyse her in your
                        test tubes, you can spy at her through your microscopes; but can you see her
                        with your own eyes, or receive her into your own souls? You can tell us what
                        she makes her wonders of, and how she makes them, and how long she takes
                        about it. But you cannot tell us what these wonders are like when they are
                        made. When God said, “Let there be light, and light was, and God saw that it
                        was good,” was he thinking, as he saw this, of the exact velocity it
                        travelled at, and of the exact laws it travelled by, which you wise men are
                        at such infinite pains to discover; or was he thinking of something else,
                        which you take no pains to discover at all—of how it clothed the wings of
                        the morning with silver, and the feathers of the evening with gold? Is
                        water, think you, a nobler thing to the modern chemist, who can tell you
                        exactly what gases it is made of, and nothing more; or to Turner, who could
                        not tell you at all what it is made of, but who did know and who could tell
                        you what it is made—what it is made by the sunshine, and the cloud-shadow,
                        and the storm-wind—who knew how it paused in the taintless mountain
                        trout-pool, a living crystal over stones of flickering amber; and how it
                        broke itself turbid, with its choirs of turbulent thunder, when the rocks
                        card it into foam, and where the tempest sifts it into spray? When Pindar
                        called water the best of things, was he thinking of it as the union of
                        oxygen and hydrogen—’ 
 ‘He would have been much wiser if he had been,’ interposed Dr. Jenkinson.
                        ‘Thales, to whose theory, as you know, Pindar was referring—’ But the
                        Doctor’s words were utterly unavailing to check the torrent of Mr. Herbert’s
                        eloquence. They only turned it into a slightly different course. 
 ‘Ah! masters of modern science,’ he went on, ‘you can tell us what pure
                        water is made of; but, thanks to your drains and your mills, you cannot tell
                        us where to find it. You can, no doubt, explain to us all about sunsets; but
                        the smoke of your towns and your factories has made it impossible for us to
                        see one. However, each generation is wise in its own wisdom; and ours would
                        sooner look at a fœtus in a bottle, than at a statue of the god Apollo, from
                        the hand of Phidias, and in the air of Athens.’ 
 During all this speech Mr. Storks had remained with his face buried in his
                        hands, every now and then drawing in his breath through his teeth, as if he
                        were in pain. When it was over he looked up with a scared expression, as if
                        he hardly knew where he was, and seemed quite unable to utter a syllable. 
 ‘Of course,’ said Mr. Stockton, ‘mere science, as science, does not deal
                        with moral right and wrong.’ 
 ‘No,’ said Mr. Saunders, ‘for it has shown that right and wrong are terms of
                        a bygone age, connoting altogether false ideas. Mere automata as science
                        shows we are—clockwork machines, wound up by meat and drink—’ 
 ‘As for that,’ broke in Mr. Storks, who had by this time recovered
                        himself—and his weighty voice at once silenced Mr. Saunders, ‘I would advise
                        our young friend not to be too confident. We may be automata, or we may not.
                        Science has not yet decided. And upon my word,’ he said, striking the table,
                        ‘I don’t myself care which we are. Supposing the Deity—if there be
                        one—should offer to make me a machine, if I am not one, on condition that I
                        should always go right, I, for one, would gladly close with the proposal.’ 
 ‘But you forget,’ said Allen, ‘that in the moral sense there would be no
                        going right at all, if there were not also the possibility of going wrong.
                        If your watch keeps good time you don’t call it virtuous, nor if it keeps
                        bad time do you call it sinful.’ 
 ‘Sin, Lord Allen,’ said Mr. Storks, ‘is a word that has helped to retard
                        moral and social progress more than anything. Nothing is good or bad, but
                        thinking makes it so; and the superstitious and morbid way in which a number
                        of entirely innocent things have been banned as sin, has caused more than
                        half the tragedies of the world. Science will establish an entirely new
                        basis of morality; and the sunlight of rational approbation will shine on
                        many a thing, hitherto overshadowed by the curse of a hypothetical God.’ 
 ‘Exactly so,’ exclaimed Mr. Saunders eagerly. ‘Now, I’m not at all that sort
                        of man myself,’ he went on, ‘so don’t think it because I say this.’ 
 Everyone stared at Mr. Saunders in wonder as to what he could mean. 
 ‘We think it, for instance,’ he said, ‘a very sad thing when a girl is as we
                        call it ruined. But it is we really that make all the sadness. She is ruined
                        only because we think she is so. And I have little doubt that that higher
                        philosophy of the future that Mr. Storks speaks of will go far, some day,
                        towards solving the great question of women’s sphere of action, by its
                        recognition of prostitution as an honourable and beneficent profession.’ 
 ‘Sir!’ exclaimed Mr. Storks, striking the table, and glaring with
                        indignation at Mr. Saunders, ‘I could hardly have believed that such
                        misplaced flippancy—’ 
 ‘Flippancy! it is reasoned truth,’ shrieked Mr. Saunders, upsetting his
                        wine-glass. Luckily this brought about a pause. Laurence took advantage of
                        it. 
 ‘See,’ he said, ‘Dr. Jenkinson has left us. Will no one have any more
                        wine?—Then suppose we follow him.’ 
