
BOOK I.
CHAPTER IV.
 IT was a calm, lovely evening. The moon was rising over the sea, and the sea
                        was slowly silvering under it. A soft breeze breathed gently, full of the
                        scents of flowers; and in the low sky of the west there yet lingered a
                        tender peach-colour. 
 The ladies were sitting about on chairs, grouped together, but with several
                        little groups within the group; and amongst them all was Dr. Jenkinson,
                        making himself particularly agreeable to Mrs. Sinclair. When the gentlemen
                        emerged there was a general stir, and Lady Ambrose, shutting up a volume of
                        St.-Simon’s Memoirs, said, ‘Well, Mr. Laurence, we have been talking most
                        industriously about the future.’ 
 Laurence was standing with Mr. Luke on the step of the dining-room window,
                        and both were looking out gravely on the tranquil scene. 
 ‘Do you remember,’ said Laurence, ‘that it was here, three years ago, that
                        you composed the lines that stand last in your published volumes?’ 
 ‘I remember,’ said Mr. Luke dreamily. ‘What an evening that was!’ 
 ‘I wish you would repeat them,’ said Laurence. 
 ‘What is the good?’ said Mr. Luke; ‘why rouse again the voices that haunt
                             About the mouldered lodges of the past?’ 

 ‘Mr. Luke,’ said Lady Ambrose appealingly, ‘I do so wish you would.’ 
 ‘Is Mr. Luke going to recite poetry?’ said Mrs. Sinclair, coming languidly
                        up to them. ‘How delicious!’ She was looking lovely in the dim light, with a
                        diamond star shining in her dark hair; and for a mortal bard there was
                        positively no resisting her appeal. 
 Mr. Luke, with a silent composure, pressed his hands for a moment against
                        his forehead; he gave one hem; and then in a clear melodious voice began as
                        follows:— 

‘Softly the evening descends, Violet and soft. The sea Adds
                            to the silence, below Pleasant and cool on the beach
                            Breaking; yes, and a breeze Calm as the twilight itself
                            Furtively sighs through the dusk, Listlessly lifting my
                            hair, Fanning my thought-wearied brow.   Thus I stand in
                            the gloom Watching the moon-track begin Quivering to die
                            like a dream Over the far sea-line To the unknown region
                            beyond.    ‘So for ages hath man Gazed on the ocean
                            of time From the shores of his birth, and, turning His
                            eyes from the quays, the thronged Marts, the noise and the
                            din To the far horizon, hath dreamed Of a timeless country
                            beyond.   Vainly: for how should he pass, Being on foot,
                            o’er the wet Ways of the unplumbed waves? How, without
                            ship, should he pass Over the shipless sea To the timeless
                            country beyond?    ‘Ah, but once—once long ago,
                            Came there a ship white-sailed From the country beyond, with
                            bright Oarsmen, and men that sang; Came to Humanity’s
                            coasts, Called to the men on the shore, Joyously touched
                            at the port.   Then did time-weary man Climb the bulwarks,
                            the deck Eagerly crowding. Anon With jubilant voices
                            raised, And singing, “When Israel came Out of Egypt” and
                            whatso else In the psalm is written, they passed Out of
                            the ken of the land, Over the far sea-line, To the unknown
                            region beyond.    ‘Where are they now, then—they
                            That were borne out of sight by the ship- Our brothers, of times
                            gone by? Why have they left us here Solemn, dejected,
                            alone, Gathered in groups on the shore? Why? For we, too,
                            have gazed O’er the waste of waters, and watched For a
                            sail as keenly as they. Ah, wretched men that we are! On
                            our haggard faces and brows Aching, a wild breeze fawns
                            Full of the scents of the sea, Redolent of regions beyond.
                            Why, then, tarries the ship? When will her white sail rise
                            Like a star on the sea-line? When?    ‘When?—And the
                            answer comes From the sailless face of the sea, ” Ah, vain
                            watchers, what boots The calm of the evening? Have ye not
                            watched through the day Turbulent waves, the expanse
                            Endless, shaken with storm, And ask ye where is the ship?
                            Deeper than plummet can dive She is bedded deep in the
                            ooze, And over her tall mast floats The purple plain of
                            the calm.”  ‘Yes—and never a ship Since this is
                            sunken, will come Ever again o’er the waves— Nay, not even
                            the craft with the fierce Steersman, him of the marsh
                            Livid, with wheels of flame Circling his eyes, to smite
                            The lingering soul with his oar. —Not that even. But we
                            Drop where we stand one by one On the shingles and sands of
                            time, And cover in taciturn gloom, With only perhaps some
                            tear, Each for his brother the hushed Heart and the
                            limitless dreams

 ‘Thank you, Mr. Luke, so much,’ said Lady Ambrose. ‘How charming! I am
                        always so fond of poems about the sea.’ 
 ‘Ah,’ said Mr. Luke, turning to Mrs. Sinclair, ‘these are emotions scarcely
                        worth describing.’ 
 ‘Certainly not,’ muttered Mr. Storks, half aloud as he moved off to discover
                        Lady Grace. 
 Mr. Luke stood apart, and surveyed the party with a look of pensive pity. On
                        Mr. Storks, however, whose last remark he had overheard, his eyes rested
                        with an expression somewhat more contemptuous. The brightening moonlight
                        fell softly on the group before him, giving it a particularly picturesque
                        effect, as it touched the many colours and folds of the ladies’ dresses, and
                        struck here and there a furtive flash from a gem on wrist or throat. The
                        tranquil hour seemed to have a tranquillising effect on nearly everyone; and
                        the conversation reached Mr. Luke’s ears as a low murmur, broken only by the
                        deep sound of Mr. Storks’s voice, and the occasional high notes of Mr.
                        Saunders, who seemed to Mr. Luke, in his present frame of mind, to be like a
                        shrill cock crowing to the world before the sunrise of universal
                        philistinism. 
 Laurence meanwhile had caught Miss Merton’s eyes looking at him with a grave
                        regard; and this had brought him instantly to her side, when Mr. Luke had
                        ended his recital. 
 ‘We didn’t spare the times we live in, to-night, did we?’ he said slowly to
                        her in a low voice. ‘Well, well—I wonder what it is all coming to—we and our
                        times together! We are certainly a curious medley here, all of us. I suppose
                        no age but ours could have produced one like it—at least, let us hope so,
                        for the credit of the ages in general.’ 
 ‘I must say,’ said Miss Merton, smiling, ‘that you seem to take to the age
                        very kindly, and to be very happy amongst your friends. But you did not tell
                        us very much of what you thought yourself.’ 
 ‘I don’t often say what I think,’ said Laurence, ‘because I don’t often know
                        what I think; but I know a great many things that I don’t think; and I
                        confess I take a pleasure in saying these, and in hearing others say them;
                        so the society that I choose as a rule represents not the things I think I
                        approve, but the things I am sure I repudiate.’ 
 ‘I confess,’ said Miss Merton, ‘I don’t quite understand that.’ 
 ‘Shall I tell you,’ said Laurence, ‘why I live so much in society—amongst my
                        friends, as you call them? Simply because I feel, in my life, as a child
                        does in a dark room; and I must have some one to talk to, or else I think I
                        should go mad. What one says is little matter, so long as one makes a noise
                        of some sort, and forgets the ghosts that in one’s heart one is shuddering
                        at.’ 
 Miss Merton was silent for a moment, and looked up into the sky in which the
                        stars were now one by one appearing. 
 ‘I suppose,’ she said presently, ‘you think it is a very poor affair—life’s
                        whole business. And yet I don’t see why you should.’ 
 ‘Not see why I should?’ repeated Laurence. ‘Ah, that shows how little you,
                        from your position, can sympathise with ours. I am not surprised at it. Of
                        course, it is out of the question that you should. You, happy in some
                        sustaining faith, can see a meaning in all life, and all life’s affections.
                        You can endure—you can even welcome its sorrows. The clouds of
                            ennui themselves for you have silver linings. For
                        your religion is a kind of philosopher’s stone, turning whatever it touches
                        into something precious. But we—we can only remember that for us, too,
                        things had a meaning once; but they have it no longer. Life stares at us
                        now, all blank and expressionless, like the eyes of a lost friend, who is
                        not dead, but who has turned an idiot. Perhaps you never read Clough’s
                        Poems, did you? Scarcely a day passes in which I do not echo to myself his
                        words:— 
 Ah well-a-day, for we are souls bereaved! Of all the creatures
                            under heaven’s wide cope, We are most hopeless who had once most
                            hope,
 ‘And do you think,’ said Miss Merton in a low tone, ‘that belief in these
                        days brings no painful perplexities too? Do you think that we can look out
                        on the state of the world now, and think about its future, without anxiety?
                        But really,’ she went on, raising her voice, ‘if I, like you, thought that
                        Christianity was not true, I should not waste my time in lamenting over it.
                        I should rather be glad that I had got free from a gigantic and awful
                        imposition.’ 
 ‘What!’ exclaimed Laurence, ‘should we rejoice at our old guide dropping
                        dead amongst the mountains, even though he had lost his way; if so we are
                        left hopeless, and without any guide at all?’ 
 ‘You have your consciences,’ said Miss Merton, with some decision in her
                        voice; ‘you surely don’t mean to say that you have lost them?’ 
 ‘As for our consciences,’ said Leslie, who was standing close by, ‘we revere
                        them so much that we fancy they possess some power. But conscience, in most
                        souls, is like an English Sovereign—it reigns, but it does not govern. Its
                        function is merely to give a formal assent to the Bills passed by the
                        passions; and it knows, if it opposes what those are really bent upon, that
                        ten to one it will be obliged to abdicate.’ 
 ‘Let us hope that the constitutions of most souls are more stable than
                        that,’ said Miss Merton. ‘As far as morality goes, I expect you have quite
                        enough to guide you; and if you think religion false, I don’t see why its
                        loss should trouble you. And life itself, remember, has plenty of pleasures.
                        It is full of things worth living for.’ 
 ‘Is it?’ exclaimed Leslie with sudden emphasis, and he looked into Miss
                        Merton’s face with an expression half absent and half wondering. ‘Is there
                        anything in life that you really think is, for its own sake, worth living
                        for? To me it seems that we are haunted with the power of imagining that
                        there might be, and are pursued with the knowledge that there never is. Look
                        at that lovely water before us, with its floods of moonlight—how it ripples,
                        how it sparkles away into the distance! What happiness sights like these
                        suggest to one! How happy they might make us—might, but they never do! They
                        only madden us with a vague pain, that I is like the sense of something lost
                        for ever.’ 
 ‘Still,’ said Miss Merton, ‘life is not all moonlight. Surely friendship and
                        affection are worth having?’ 
 ‘Let me beg you, Miss Merton,’ said Leslie, replying to her tone rather than
                        to her words, ‘not to think that I am always pining and bemoaning myself.
                        Fortunately the deeper part of one’s nature will often go to sleep, and then
                        the surface can enjoy itself. We can even laugh with our lips at the very
                        things that our hearts in silence are breaking for. But as for happiness,
                        that is always like prophecy, it is only fulfilled in the future; or else it
                        is a miracle—it only exists in the past. The actual things we wish for we
                        may very likely get, but they always come too late or too soon. When the boy
                        is in love, he tries to feel like a man; when the man is in love, he tries
                        to feel like a boy; and both in vain.’ 
 ‘Ah,’ exclaimed Laurence, ‘I think very differently from that. I know,’ he
                        said, turning to Miss Merton, ‘that friendship and affection are things
                        worth having; and if only pain and anxiety would leave me, I could enjoy the
                        taste of happiness.’ 
 ‘Could you?’ said Leslie. ‘When I look at what we are and what the world is,
                        I can fancy no more melancholy spectacle than a happy man; though I admit,’
                        he added as he moved slowly away, ‘that there is none more amusing than a
                        man who tries to be melancholy.’ 
 ‘Leslie is oddly changed,’ said Laurence, ‘since I saw him last.
                            I am distressed with life because I cannot find out its
                        worth. He is indignant at it, it seems, because he thinks he
                        has found out its worthlessness. And yet—I envy him his temperament. He
                        never lets any melancholy subdue him. He can always laugh it down in a
                        moment; and he will trample bravely on any of his sentiments if he is on the
                        road to anything he is proud of aiming at.’ 
 Laurence was silent for a moment, and then said abruptly:— 
 ‘I dare say you think me very morbid; but perhaps you can hardly realise the
                        intense restless misery that a man endures when he can find nothing to do
                        which he really feels worth doing. Could I only find some one thing— one
                        great cause to labour for—one great idea—I could devote my whole self to it,
                        and be happy: for labour, after all, is the only thing that never palls on a
                        man. But such a cause, such an idea—I can find it nowhere. Politics have
                        turned into a petty, weary game; religion is dead. Our new prophets only
                        offer us Humanity, in place of the God of which they have deprived us. And
                        Humanity makes a very poor Deity, since it is every day disgracing itself,
                        and is never of the same mind from one week’s end to another. And so here I
                        am utterly alone—friendless, and with nothing to help me; feeling that, were
                        it not for the petty contemptible interests I manufacture for myself from
                        day to day, life would be quite unbearable.’ 
 ‘And yet,’ said Miss Merton, ‘you have much to make you happy—much that you
                        would be sorry to lose.’ 
 ‘I have a certain position,’ said Laurence, ‘and a certain amount of wealth,
                        and I would not willingly lose anything of either of these; but that is not
                        because, in my heart, I value them; but because, if I lost them, I might in
                        my heart cease to despise them.’ 
 ‘Surely,’ said Miss Merton, ‘there is a better way of looking at the matter.
                        You came into the world with all your lower ambitions satisfied for you. The
                        ground therefore is quite clear for the higher ambitions. That is why I
                        think an aristocracy, as a rule, must always be the best governors of men,
                        for their ambitions, as a rule, are the only genuine ones. Think, too, what
                        an advantage mere wealth is. The highest labour will never produce money,
                        but generally requires it.’ 
 ‘That is just the difficulty,’ said Laurence. ‘What shall I labour for? I am
                        almost maddened sometimes, as I sit all the day idle, and seem to hear the
                        hateful wasted moments slipping away from me. And I could do
                        something, I am sure. I feel I have powers.’ 
 ‘I think,’ said Miss Merton, ‘that all I should say to you is, find
                        something to do. The power to find or make an object is, I think, a great
                        part of genius. However,’ she said, with some sympathy in her voice, ‘if you
                        are in difficulties, I am sure I wish I could help you.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence in a subdued voice, ‘I’m sure I beg your pardon for my
                        egoism. I never talked so long about myself in my whole life before; and I
                        promise never to do so again.’ 
 Leslie meanwhile had moved away towards Mrs. Sinclair, who, looking
                        particularly fascinating, was still commanding the attentions of Dr.
                        Jenkinson. The Doctor was standing by her, all deferent gallantry, and, to
                        Leslie’s surprise, was saying something to her about Sappho. 
 ‘And now,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, with a little appealing dainty smile, ‘I want
                        to ask you something about the Greek Anthology too. I can’t read much Greek
                        myself: but a gentleman who used to be rather kind to me, translated me a
                        good deal of Greek poetry, once upon a time—when my husband,’ she said, with
                        a little shrug of the shoulders, ‘used to go to sleep after his dinner.’ 
 Dr. Jenkinson here glanced suspiciously at Mrs. Sinclair. 
 ‘Now, what I want you to tell me,’ she said, ‘is something about some
                        little—ahem—little love songs, I think they were—ἐρωτικ-something or other—I
                        really can’t pronounce the name.’ 
 The Doctor started. 
 ‘And, Dr. Jenkinson, please,’ Mrs. Sinclair went on in a voice of plaintive
                        innocence, ‘not to think me a terrible blue-stocking, because I ask you
                        these questions; for I really hardly know any Greek myself—except perhaps a
                        verse or two of the New Testament; and that’s not very good Greek, I
                        believe, is it? But the gentleman who translated so much to me, when he came
                        to these little poems I speak of, was continually, though he was a very good
                        scholar, quite unable to translate them. Now, why should that have been, I
                        want to know? Are Greek love-poems very hard?’ 
 ‘Well,’ said the Doctor, stammering, yet re-assured by Mrs. Sinclair’s
                        manner, ‘they were probably—your friend perhaps—well— they were a little
                        obscure perhaps—much Greek is—or—’ 
 ‘Corrupt?’ suggested Mrs. Sinclair naively. 
 The word was a simple one: but it sufficed to work a miracle on Dr.
                        Jenkinson. For the first time in his life to a lady who united the two
                        charms of beauty and fashion, to both of which he was eminently susceptible,
                        Dr. Jenkinson was rude. He turned abruptly away, and staring hard at the
                        moon, not at Mrs. Sinclair, said simply, ‘I don’t know,’ with the most
                        chilling intonation of which those words are capable. He then moved a pace
                        away, and sat down on a chair close to Miss Merton. 
 Mrs. Sinclair turned to Leslie, with a flash in her eyes of soft suppressed
                        laughter. 
 ‘How lovely the evening is!’ murmured Leslie, responding to the smile. 
 ‘Yes,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, looking out dreamily over the sea, ‘it almost
                        realises one’s idea of perfect beauty.’ 
 ‘Really, Mrs. Sinclair,’ said Leslie, ‘you are certainly most Hellenic.
                        First you talk of Sappho, now of Ideas of Beauty. Are you a Platonist?’ 
 ‘Mr. Leslie, of course I am,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, somewhat misapprehending
                        his meaning. ‘I never heard such an impertinent question. Platonism,
                        however, is a very rare philosophy in these days, I’m afraid.’ 
 ‘Ah, and so you too think we are all of us very bad, do you?’ said Leslie.
                        ‘It may be so, of course; and yet men at least often generalise very hastily
                        and very wrongly, I am sure. How often, for instance, do we say that all
                        wives nowadays are inconstant, simply because such are the only ones we
                        remember, not because they are the only ones we know.’ 
 This speech was quite in Mrs. Sinclair’s own manner, and she looked at
                        Leslie with a smile of appreciation half humorous and half sentimental, 
 ‘Ah,’ she began to say, in a voice that had just a touch of sadness in it,
                        ‘if we could but all of us love only when we ought, and where we ought—’ But
                        here she paused. Her voice died away, and she leaned her head upon her hand
                        in silence. 
 Leslie was going to have spoken; but he was suddenly arrested by the sound
                        of Dr. Jenkinson, close beside him, talking to Miss Merton in a tone of
                        unusual earnestness. 
 ‘I don’t wonder,’ he was saying, ‘that you should feel in perplexity
                        sometimes; whichever way we look at things there will be perplexities. But
                        there is such a thing as goodness; and goodness in the end must triumph, and
                        so in this large faith let us rest.’ 
 ‘And,’ said Donald Gordon in his soft deferential voice, which always
                        sounded as if he was saying something deeply devotional, ‘don’t you think it
                        is a higher thing to be good for good’s own sake than for God’s? and,
                        whatever men may believe about having another life, and a beautiful heaven,
                        with gold streets, and with jewelled fortifications, don’t you think that
                        morality really is after all its own reward?’ 
 ‘But what of those poor people,’ said Miss Merton, ‘who cannot be moral—whom
                        circumstances have kept from being ever anything but brutalised? I dare
                        say,’ she said, turning to the Doctor, quite forgetting his sacred
                        character, ‘that I shall hardly be able to make you understand such a notion
                        as that of living for God’s glory. But still, if there be not a God for
                        whose glory we can live, and who in his turn will not leave us all to
                        ourselves, what then? Think of all those who, in spite of hard surroundings,
                        have just had strength enough to struggle to be good, but to struggle
                        only—whose whole moral being has been left writhing in the road of life,
                        like an animal that a cart-wheel has gone over, just lifting its eyes up
                        with a piteous appeal at us who will not help it—’ 
 Miss Merton looked at Dr. Jenkinson and paused. The moon shone tenderly on
                        his silver hair, and his keen eyes had something very like moisture in them. 
 ‘Yes,’ he said; ‘these are great, great difficulties. But there is another
                        life in store for us—another life, and a God. And don’t think that the world
                        is growing to disbelieve in these. Remember how many intelligent laymen
                        count themselves members of the Church of England, simply because they
                        believe in these two doctrines.’ 
 ‘It has always been inexplicable to me,’ said Mr. Storks, who had been
                        attracted by the sound of the Doctor’s voice, ‘whence this longing for a
                        future life could have arisen. I suppose there are few things the very
                        possibility of which science so conclusively disproves.’ 
 ‘And yet,’ said Laurence, who had been speaking for a moment to Mrs.
                        Sinclair, ‘I can’t help thinking at certain times that there may be a whole
                        world of things undreamed of by our scientific philosophy. Such a feeling is
                        touched by the sight of an “Ora pro animâ mea,” or a “Resurgam,” on a quiet
                        tombstone, or the sign of the cross made by a mother in hope and in sorrow
                        on the forehead of her dead child.’ 
 Miss Merton looked at Laurence with some wonder in her large expressive
                        eyes, Mr. Storks snorted, and Dr. Jenkinson blinked. 
 ‘See,’ said Donald Goidon,’ the moonlight grows brighter and brighter every
                        moment. It is almost bewildering in its dazzling paleness.’ 
 ‘And there,’ said Laurence, ‘do you catch it?—that is the light-ship on the
                        horizon, like a large low star.’ Laurence seated himself on the balustrade,
                        and, leaning on his elbow, looked up into the clear hollow skies. 
 ‘World upon world,’ he exclaimed at last, ‘and each one crowded, very
                        likely, with beings like ourselves, wondering what this whole great universe
                        is!’ 
 ‘And the vast majority of them believing in a wise and just God,’ said
                        Leslie, ‘for I see no reason why ours should be the stupidest world in all
                        creation.’ 
 ‘Yes,’ said Laurence, ‘and in each world a small select band, that has
                        pierced through such a husk of lies, and has discovered the all-golden
                        truth, that the universe is aimless, and that for good and evil the end is
                        all one.’ 
 Dr. Jenkinson had a sensible horror of the stars: and as soon as they were
                        mentioned, he turned round in his chair, giving his back to the group, Miss
                        Merton included; whilst Mr. Storks walked away, not without dignity, 
 ‘Mrs. Sinclair is going to sing in a moment,’ said Laurence; ‘some one is
                        gone to fetch her guitar.’ 
 ‘Hush!’ exclaimed Miss Merton, ‘do just listen to this.’ 
 ‘Good gracious!’ said Laurence in a whisper, ‘Mr. Storks is at my aunt at
                        last.’ 
 Mr. Storks had been watching ever since dinner for an opportunity of
                        discussing with Lady Grace the true position of woman, as settled by modern
                        science. He was peculiarly full of this subject just now, having received
                        only that morning a letter from a celebrated American physician, who stated
                        very strongly as his opinion, that the strain of what is called the higher
                        education was most prejudicial to the functions of maternity, and that the
                        rights of woman might very probably be fatal to the existence of man. As
                        soon as he got hold of Lady Grace, he led up to this point with startling
                        rapidity; having been perfectly charmed at starting to find that she fully
                        agreed with him that the prejudices of the present day were doing more harm
                        to woman’s true interests than anything else. 
 ‘It is a pleasure,’ said Mr. Storks, ‘to discuss these matters with a person
                        so thoroughly enlightened as yourself. You will of course see from what Dr.
                        Boston says how entirely suicidal is the scheme of turning woman into a
                        female man. Nature has marked out her mission for her plainly enough; and so
                        our old friend Milton was right in his meaning after all, when he says that
                        man is made for God, and woman for God through him, though of course the
                        expression is antiquated.’ 
 ‘Surely,’ said Lady Grace with animation, ‘not only the expression is
                        antiquated, but the meaning also is contrary to all true fairness and
                        enlightment.’ 
 ‘I confess, I don’t see that,’ said Mr. Storks with a look of smiling
                        deference. 
 ‘What!’ cried Lady Grace, ‘is it not contrary to reason—let me put it to
                        your own candour—for a man who knows that his wife, ages hence, will be a
                        seraph singing before the throne of God, to consider her only made for God
                        through him—to consider her, indeed, as a thing made simply for her
                        husband’s use?’ 
 This answer of Lady Grace’s took Mr. Storks quite aback. He knew not how to
                        comport himself. His jaw fell—he stared— he said nothing. He felt as though
                        he had been assassinated. But luckily at this very moment, liquid and clear,
                        and exquisitely modulated, were heard the sounds of Mrs. Sinclair’s voice,
                        singing the following song— 
 Darling, can you endure the liquid weather,   The
                            jasmine-scented twilights, oh my dear? Or do you still remember
                            how together   We read the sad sweet Idyll ‘Guinevere,’
                                  Love, in one last year’s twilight? Galeotto fu il libro, e
                            chi lo scrisse. Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo
                            scrisse.  Ah, the flowers smelt sweet, and all
                            unheeding   Did I read to you that tender tale, Oh my
                            love, until my voice, in reading   How those lovers greeted
                            ‘passion-pale,’       Trembled in the soft twilight.
                            Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse.  Then our eyes
                            met, and then all was over —   All the world receded cold and
                            far; And your lips were on my lips, my lover;   And above
                            us shook a silver star,       Through depths of melting
                            twilight. Galeotto fu il libro, e chi lo scrisse. 
                            Darling, no July will ever find us   On this earth, together,
                            more. Our fates Were but a moment cheated. Then, behind us
                              Shrilled his voice for whom Caïna waits,
                                  Shattering our one sweet twilight. Galeotto fu il libro, e
                            chi lo scrisse.  I shall know no more of summer
                            weather,   Nought will be for me of glad or fair, Till I
                            join my darling, and together   We go for ever on the accursed
                            air,   We go for ever on the accursed air,       There in
                            the dawnless twilight.
 ‘What a lovely voice!’ said Laurence to Miss Merton. ‘I wonder how she will
                        sound singing before the throne.’ 
 ‘She will be obliged to take lessons in a rather different style,’ said Miss
                        Merton, unable to suppress a smile; and then she suddenly checked herself,
                        and looked grave. ‘Mrs. Sinclair has always interested me,’ she said. ‘I
                        often come across her in London, but I hardly know her.’ 
 ‘Mr. Laurence,’ said Mrs. Sinclair, ‘you must now make Mr. Leslie sing, for
                        I discover that he can play the guitar too.’ 
 Leslie was of course pressed, and with some reluctance consented. 
 ‘I suppose,’ he said, ‘we are all of us more or less moon-struck to-night,
                        so I had best sing the silliest thing I know; and as I don’t think anything
                        can be sillier than a song I once wrote myself, I will sing that.’ 
 He touched a few chords carelessly, and yet with the manner of a practised
                        player; paused for a moment, and then again striking the instrument began to
                        sing. He was watched at first with merely a languid curiosity; and Miss
                        Prattle whispered to Lady Ambrose that his attitude was very affected; but
                        curiosity and criticism were both lost in surprise at the first sound of his
                        rich and flexible voice, and still more so at the real passion which he
                        breathed into the following words, rude and artless as they were:— 

Oh, her cheek, her cheek was pale,
     Her voice was hardly musical; But your proud grey eyes grew
                            tender,     Child, when mine they met, With a piteous
                            self-surrender,          Margaret.      Child, what
                            have I done to thee?     Child, what hast thou done to me?
                            How you froze me with your tone     That last day we met!
                            Your sad eyes then were cold as stone,
                                     Margaret.      Oh, it all now seems to me
                                A far-off weary mystery! Yet—and yet, her last sad
                            frown     Awes me still, and yet— In vain I laugh your
                            memory down,

 Leslie received loud thanks from many voices, especially from Lady Ambrose.
                        Some, however, were almost silent from surprise at the feeling, which he
                        seemed quite unconsciously to have betrayed. Mrs. Sinclair held out her hand
                        to him, when no one was looking, and said quietly, ‘Thank you so much, I
                        can’t tell you how I like your song.’ 
 ‘Well,’ said Laurence, as the party moved indoors into the lighted
                        drawing-room, ‘we have been all of us very sentimental to-night, and if we
                        can’t get better now, I hope we shall sleep it off, and wake up well and
                        sane to-morrow morning.’ 
 This being Saturday night, there sprang up some vague mention of church. The
                        nearest church however was some miles distant, and a rumour arose amongst
                        the guests that Dr. Jenkinson would perform the service and preach a sermon
                        in the private chapel. 
