<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="30">
CHAPTER VII.
There was to be a first appearance on the stage of Lord Monmouth's theatre
       to-night, the expectation of which created considerable interest in the party, and was one of
       the principal subjects of conversation at dinner. Villebecque, the manager of the troop, had
       married the actress Stella, once celebrated for her genius and her beauty; a woman who had
       none of the vices of her craft, for, though she was a fallen angel, there were what her
       countrymen style extenuating circumstances in her declension. With the whole world at her
       feet, she had remained unsullied. Wealth and its enjoyments could not
        tempt her, although she was unable to refuse her heart to one whom she deemed
       worthy of possessing it. She found her fate in an Englishman, who was the father of her only
       child, a daughter. She thought she had met in him a hero, a demi-god, a being of deep passion
       and original and creative mind; but he was only a voluptuary, full of violence instead of
       feeling, and eccentric because he had great means with which he could gratify extravagant
       whims. Stella found she had made the great and irretrievable mistake. She had exchanged
       devotion for a passionate and evanescent fancy, prompted at first by vanity, and daily
       dissipating under the influence of custom and new objects. Though not stainless in conduct,
       Stella was pure in spirit. She required that devotion which she had yielded; and she
       separated herself from the being to whom she had made the most precious sacrifice. He offered
       her the consoling compensation of a settlement which she refused; and she returned with a
       broken spirit to that profession of which she was still the ornament and the pride.

The animating principle of her career was her daughter, whom she educated with a solicitude
       which the most virtuous mother could not surpass. To preserve her from the stage, and to
       secure for her an independence, were the objects of the mother's life; but nature whispered
       to her, that the days of that life were already numbered. The exertions of her profession had
       alarmingly developed an inherent tendency to pulmonary disease. Anxious that her child should
       not be left without some protector, Stella yielded to the repeated solicitations of one who
       from the first had been her silent admirer, and she married Villebecque, a clever actor, and
       an enterprising man who meant to be something more. Their union was not of long duration,
       though it was happy on the side of Villebecque, and serene on that of his wife. Stella was
       recalled from this world, where she had known much triumph and more suffering; and where she
       had exercised many virtues, which elsewhere, though not here, may perhaps be accepted as some
       palliation of one great error.

Villebecque acted becomingly to the young charge which Stella had bequeathed to him. He was
       himself, as we have intimated, a man of enterprise, a restless spirit, not content to move
       for ever in the sphere in which he was born. Vicissitudes are the lot of such aspirants.
       Villebecque became manager of a small theatre, and made money. If Villebecque, without a
       "sous," had been a schemer, Villebecque with a small capital was the very Chevalier Law of
       theatrical managers. He took a larger theatre and even that succeeded. Soon he was recognised
       as the lessee of more than one, and still he prospered. Villebecque began to dabble in Opera
       houses. He enthroned himself at Paris; his envoys were heard of at Milan and Naples, at
       Berlin and St. Petersburg. His controversies with the "Conservatoire" at Paris, ranked among
       state papers. Villebecque rolled in chariots and drove cabs; Villebecque gave refined suppers
       to great nobles, who were honoured by the invitation; Villebecque wore a red riband in the
       button-hole of his frock, and more than one cross in his gala dress.

All this time the daughter of Stella increased in years and stature, and we must add in
       goodness: a mild soft-hearted girl, as yet with no decided character, but one who loved
       calmness and seemed little fitted for the circle in which she found herself. In that circle
       however she ever experienced kindness and consideration. No enterprise however hazardous, no
       management however complicated, no schemes however vast, ever for a moment induced
       Villebecque to forget "La Petite." If only for one breathless instant, hardly a day elapsed
       but he saw her; she was his companion in all his rapid movements, and he studied every
       comfort and convenience that could relieve her delicate frame in some degree from the
       inconvenience and exhaustion of travel. He was proud to surround her with luxury and
       refinement; to supply her with the most celebrated masters; to gratify every wish that she
       could express.
But all this time Villebecque was dancing on a volcano. The catastrophe which inevitably
       occurs in the career of all great speculators, and especially theatrical ones, arrived to
       him.
        Flushed with his prosperity, and confident in his constant success, nothing
       would satisfy him but universal empire. He had established his despotism at Paris, his
       dynasties at Naples and at Milan; but the North was not to him, and he was determined to
       appropriate it. Berlin fell before a successful campaign, though a costly one; but St.
       Petersburg and London still remained. Resolute and reckless nothing deterred Villebecque. One
       season all the Opera houses in Europe obeyed his nod, and at the end of it he was ruined. The
       crash was utter, universal, overwhelming; and under ordinary circumstances a French bed and a
       brasier of charcoal alone remained for Villebecque, who was equal to the occasion. But the
       thought of "La Petite" and the remembrance of his promise to Stella deterred him from the
       deed. He reviewed his position in a spirit becoming a practical philosopher. Was he worse off
       than before he commenced his career? Yes, because he was older;—though to be sure he had his
       compensating reminiscences. But was he too old to do anything? At forty-five the game was not
       altogether up; and in a
        large theatre, not too much lighted, and with the artifices of a dramatic
       toilet, he might still be able successfully to re-assume those characters of coxcombs and
       "muscadins," in which he was once so celebrated. Luxury had perhaps a little too much
       enlarged his waist, but diet and rehearsals would set all right.
Villebecque in their adversity broke to "La Petite" that the time had unfortunately arrived
       when it would be wise for her to consider the most effectual means for turning her talents
       and accomplishments to account. He himself suggested the stage, to which otherwise there were
       doubtless objections, because her occupation in any other pursuit would necessarily separate
       them; but he impartially placed before her the relative advantages and disadvantages of every
       course which seemed to lay open to them and left the preferable one to her own decision. "La
       Petite," who had wept very much over Villebecque's misfortunes and often assured him that she
       cared for them only for his sake, decided for the stage, solely because it would secure their
       not being parted; and yet, as she often assured
        him, she feared she had no predisposition for the career.
Villebecque had now not only to fill his own parts at the theatre at which he had obtained
       an engagement, but he had also to be the instructor of his ward. It was a life of toil; an
       addition of labour and effort that need scarcely have been made to the exciting exertion of
       performance, and the dull exercise of rehearsal; but he bore it all without a murmur; with a
       self-command and a gentle perseverance which the finest temper in the world could hardly
       account for; certainly not when we remember its possessor who had to make all these exertions
       and endure all this wearisome toil, had just experienced the most shattering vicissitudes of
       fortune, and been hurled from the possession of absolute power and illimitable
       self-gratification.
Lord Eskdale, who was always doing kind things to actors and actresses, had a great regard
       for Villebecque with whom he had often supped. He had often been kind too to "La Petite."
       Lord Eskdale had a plan for putting Villebecque as he termed it, "on his legs again." It was
       to
        establish him with a French company in London at some pretty theatre; Lord
       Eskdale to take a private box and to make all his friends do the same. Villebecque, who was
       as sanguine as he was good tempered, was ravished by this friendly scheme. He immediately
       believed that he should recover his great fortunes as rapidly as he had lost them. He foresaw
       in "La Petite" a genius as distinguished as that of her mother, although as yet not
       developed, and he was boundless in his expressions of gratitude to his patron. And indeed of
       all friends, a friend in need is the most delightful. Lord Eskdale had the talent of bein a
       friend in need. Perhaps it was because he knew so many worthless persons. But it often
       happens that worthless persons are merely people who are worth nothing.
Lord Monmouth having written to Mr. Rigby of his intention to reside for some months at
       Coningsby, and having mentioned that he wished a troop of French comedians to be engaged for
       the summer, Mr. Rigby had immediately consulted Lord Eskdale on the subject, as the best
       current authority. Thinking this a good opportunity
        of giving a turn to poor Villebecque, and that it might serve as a capital
       introduction to their scheme of the London company, Lord Eskdale obtained for him the
       engagement.
Villebecque and his little troop had now been a month at Coningsby, and had hitherto
       performed three times a week. Lord Monmouth was content; his guests much gratified; the
       company on the whole much approved of. It was indeed considering its limited numbers, a
       capital company. There was a young lady who played the old woman's parts—nothing could be
       more garrulous and venerable; and a lady of maturer years who performed the heroines, gay and
       graceful as May. Villebecque himself was a celebrity in characters of airy insolence and
       careless frolic. Their old man indeed was rather hard, but handy; could take anything either
       in the high serious or the low droll. Their sentimental lover was rather too much bewigged,
       and spoke too much to the audience, a fault rare with the French; but this hero had a vague
       idea that he was ultimately destined to run off with a Princess.

In this wise, affairs had gone on for a month; very well, but not too well. The
       enterprising genius of Villebecque, once more a manager, prompted him to action. He felt an
       itching desire to announce a novelty. He fancied Lord Monmouth had yawned once or twice when
       the heroine came on. Villebecque wanted to make a "coup." It was clear that "La Petite" must
       sooner or later begin. Could she find a more favourable audience, or a more fitting occasion
       than were now offered? True it was she had a great repugnance to come out; but it certainly
       seemed more to her advantage that she should make her first appearance at a private theatre
       than at a public one; supported by all the encouraging patronage of Coningsby Castle, than
       subjected to all the cynical criticism of the stalls of St. James's.
These views and various considerations were urged and represented by Villebecque to "La
       Petite," with all the practised powers of plausibility of which so much experience as a
       manager had made him master. "La Petite" looked infinitely distressed, but yielded as she
        ever did. And the night of Coningsby's arrival at the castle was to witness in
       its private theatre the first appearance of Mademoiselle Flora .

</div></body></text></TEI>