<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="65">
CHAPTER II.
Sadness fell over the once happy family of Millbank after the departure of
       Coningsby from Hellingsley. When the first pang was over, Edith had found some solace in the
       sympathy of her aunt, who had always appreciated and admired Coningsby; but it was a sympathy
       which aspired only to soften sorrow, and not to create hope. But Lady Wallinger, though she
       lengthened her visit for the sake of her niece, in time quitted them; and then the name of
       Coningsby was never heard by Edith. Her brother, shortly after the sorrowful and abrupt
       departure of his friend, had gone to the factories where he remained, and of which in future,
       it was intended that he should assume the principal direction. Mr. Millbank himself,
       sustained
        at first by the society of his friend Sir Joseph to whom he was attached, and
       occupied with daily reports from his establishments and the transaction of the affairs of his
       numerous and busy constituents, was for awhile scarcely conscious of the alteration which had
       taken place in the demeanour of his daughter. But when they were once more alone together, it
       was impossible any longer to be blind to the great change. That happy and equable gaiety of
       spirit, which seemed to spring from an innocent enjoyment of existence, and which had ever
       distinguished Edith, was wanting. Her sunny glance was gone. She was not indeed always moody
       and dispirited, but she was fitful, unequal in her tone. That temper whose sweetness had been
       a domestic proverb, had become a little uncertain. Not that her affection for her father was
       diminished, but there were snatches of unusual irritability which momentarily escaped her,
       followed by bursts of tenderness that were the creatures of compunction. And often after some
       hasty word, she would throw her arms round her father's neck with the fondness of remorse.
       She pursued her usual avocations, for
        she had really too well regulated a mind, she was in truth a woman of too
       strong an intellect, to neglect any source of occupation and distraction. Her flowers, her
       pencil, and her books, supplied her with these; and music soothed and at times beguiled her
       agitated thoughts. But there was no joy in the house, and in time Mr. Millbank felt it.
Mr. Millbank was vexed, irritated, grieved. Edith, his Edith, the pride and delight of his
       existence, who had been to him only a source of exultation and felicity, was no longer happy,
       was perhaps pining away; and there was the appearance, the unjust appearance that he, her
       fond father, was the cause and occasion of all this wretchedness. It would appear that the
       name of Coningsby to which he now owed a great debt of gratitude was still doomed to bear him
       mortification and misery. Truly had the young man said that there was a curse upon their two
       families. And yet on reflection it still seemed to Mr. Millbank that he had acted with as
       much wisdom and real kindness, as decision. How otherwise was he to have acted? The union was
       impossible; the speedier their separation therefore, clearly the better. Unfortunate
        indeed had been his absence from Hellingsley; unquestionably his presence might
       have prevented the catastrophe. Oswald should have hindered all this. And yet Mr. Millbank
       could not shut his eyes to the devotion of his son to Coningsby. He felt he could count on no
       assistance in this respect from that quarter. Yet how hard upon him that he should seem to
       figure as a despot or a tyrant to his own children whom he loved, when he had absolutely
       acted in an inevitable manner. Edith seemed sad, Oswald sullen, all was changed. All the
       objects for which this clear-headed, strong-minded, kind-hearted man had been working all his
       life, seemed to be frustrated. And why? Because a young man had made love to his daughter,
       who was really in no manner entitled to do so.
As the autumn drew on, Mr. Millbank found Hellingsley, under existing circumstances,
       extremely wearisome; and he proposed to his daughter that they should pay a visit to their
       earlier home. Edith assented without difficulty, but without interest. And yet, as Mr.
       Millbank immediately perceived, the change was a very judicious one; for certainly the
       spirits of Edith seemed to improve very soon after her return
        to their valley. There were more objects of interest: change too is always
       beneficial. If Mr. Millbank had been aware that Oswald had received a letter from Coningsby,
       written before he quitted Spain, perhaps he might have recognised a more satisfactory reason
       for the transient liveliness of his daughter which had so greatly gratified him.
About a month after Christmas, the meeting of Parliament summoned Mr. Millbank up to
       London; and he had wished Edith to accompany him. But London in February to Edith, without
       friends or connexions, her father always occupied and absent from her day and night, seemed
       to them all on reflection, to be a life not very conducive to health or cheerfulness, and
       therefore she remained with her brother. Oswald had heard from Coningsby again from Rome; but
       at the period he wrote he did not anticipate his return to England. His tone was
       affectionate, but dispirited.
Lady Wallinger went up to London after Easter for the season, and Mr. Millbank, now that
       there was a constant companion for his daughter, took a house and carried Edith back with him
       to London. Lady Wallinger who
        had great wealth and great tact, had obtained by degrees a not inconsiderable
       position in society. She had a very fine house in a very fashionable situation, and gave
       profuse entertainments. The Whigs were under great obligations to her husband, and the great
       Whig ladies were gratified to find his wife a polished and pleasing person to whom they could
       be very courteous without any annoyance. So that Edith, under the auspices of her aunt, found
       herself at once in circles which otherwise she might not easily have entered, but which her
       beauty, grace, and experience of the most refined society of the continent qualified her to
       shine in. One evening they met the Marquess of Beaumanoir, their friend of Rome and Paris,
       and an admirer of Edith, who from that time was seldom from their side. His mother, the
       Duchess, immediately called both on the Millbanks and the Wallingers; glad, not only to
       please her son, but to express that consideration for Mr. Millbank which the Duke always
       wished to show. It was however of no use: nothing would induce Mr. Millbank ever to enter
       what he called aristocratic society. He liked the
        House of Commons; never paired off; never missed a moment of it; worked at
       committees all the morning, listened attentively to debates all the night; always dined at
       Bellamy's when there was a house; and when there was not, liked dining at the Goldsmith's
       Compány, the Russia Company, great Emigration banquets, and other joint-stock festivities.
       That was his idea of rational society; business and pleasure combined; a good dinner, and
       good speeches afterwards.
Edith was aware that Coningsby had returned to England, for her brother had heard from him
       on his arrival; but Oswald had not heard since. A season in London only represented in the
       mind of Edith the chance, perhaps the certainty, of meeting Coningsby again; of communing
       together over the catastrophe of last summer; of soothing and solacing each other's
       unhappiness, and perhaps, with the sanguine imagination of youth foreseeing a more felicitous
       future. She had been nearly a fortnight in town, and though moving frequently in the same
       circles as Coningsby, they had not yet met. It was one of those results which could rarely
       occur; but
        even chance enters too frequently in the league against lovers. The invitation
       to the assembly at—House was therefore peculiarly gratifying to Edith, since she could
       scarcely doubt that if Coningsby were in town, which her casual inquiries of Lord Beaumanoir
       induced her to believe was the case, that he would be present. Never therefore had she
       repaired to an assembly with such a fluttering spirit: and yet there was a fascinating
       anxiety about it that bewilders the young heart.
In vain Edith surveyed the rooms to catch the form of that being, whom for a moment she had
       never ceased to cherish and muse over. He was not there; and at the very moment when
       disappointed and mortified she most required solace, she learned from Mr. Melton that Lady
       Theresa Sydney, whom she chanced to admire, was going to be married, and to Mr.
       Coningsby.
What a revelation! His silence, perhaps his shunning, of her were no longer inexplicable.
       What a return for all her romantic devotion in her sad solitude at Hellingsley! Was this the
       end of their twilight rambles, and the sweet
        pathos of their mutual loves! There seemed to be no truth in man, no joy in
       life! All the feelings that she had so generously lavished, all returned upon herself. She
       could have burst into a passion of tears and buried herself in a cloister.
Instead of that, civilisation made her listen with a serene though tortured countenance;
       but as soon as it was in her power, pleading a head-ache to Lady Wallinger, she effected, or
       thought she had effected her escape from a scene which harrowed her heart.
As for Coningsby, he passed a sleepless night; agitated by the unexpected presence of Edith
       and distracted by the manner in which she had received him. To say that her appearance had
       revived all his passionate affection for her would convey an unjust impression of the nature
       of his feelings. His affection had never for a moment swerved; it was profound and firm. But
       unquestionably this sudden vision had brought in startling and more vivid colours before him
       the relations that subsisted between them. There was the being whom he loved and who loved
       him;
        and whatever were the barriers which the circumstances of life placed against
       their union, they were partakers of the solemn sacrament of an unpolluted heart.
Coningsby as we have mentioned had signified his return to England to Oswald: he had
       hitherto omitted to write again; not because his spirit faultered, but he was wearied of
       whispering hope without foundation, and mourning over his chagrined fortunes. Once more in
       England; once more placed in communication with his grandfather he felt with increased
       conviction the difficulties which surrounded him. The society of Lady Everingham and her
       sister who had been at the same time her visitor, had been a relaxation, and a beneficial one
       to a mind suffering too much from the tension of one idea. But Coningsby had treated the
       matrimonial project of his gayminded hostess with the courteous levity in which he believed
       it had at first half originated. He admired and liked Lady Theresa; but there was a reason
       why he could not marry her, even had his own heart not been absorbed by one of those passions
       from which men of deep
        and earnest character never emancipate themselves.
After musing and meditating again and again over everything that had occurred, Coningsby
       fell asleep when the morning had far advanced, resolved to rise when a little refreshed and
       find out Lady Wallinger, who, he felt sure, would receive him with kindness.
Yet it was fated that this step should not be taken, for while he was at breakfast, his
       servant brought him a letter from Monmouth House, apprising him that his grandfather wished
       to see him as soon as possible on urgent business.

</div></body></text></TEI>