<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="25">
CHAPTER II.
A feeling of melancholy, even of uneasiness, attends our first entrance into a
       great town, especially at night. Is it that the sense of all this vast existence with which
       we have no connexion, where we are utterly unknown, oppresses us with our insignificance? Is
       it that it is terrible to feel friendless where all have friends?
Yet reverse the picture. Behold a community where you are unknown, but where you will be
       known, perhaps honoured. A place where you have no friends, but where also you have no
       enemies. A spot that has hitherto been a blank in your thoughts, as you have been a cipher in
       its sensations, and yet a spot perhaps pregnant with your destiny!

There is perhaps no act of memory so profoundly interesting as to recall the careless mood
       and moment in which we have entered a town, a house, a chamber, on the eve of an acquaintance
       or an event, that have given a colour and an impulse to our future life.
What is this Fatality that men worship? Is it a Goddess?
Unquestionably it is a power that acts mainly by female agents. Women are the Priestesses
       of Predestination.
Man conceives Fortune, but Woman conducts it.
It is the Spirit of Man that says, "I will be great;" but it is the Sympathy of Woman that
       usually makes him so.
It was not the comely and courteous hostess of the Adelphi Hotel, Manchester, that gave
       occasion to these remarks, though she may deserve them, and though she was most kind to our
       Coningsby as he came in late at night very tired, and not in very good humour.
He had travelled the whole day through the great district of labour, his mind excited by
        strange sights, and at length wearied by their multiplication. He had passed over the
       plains where iron and coal supersede turf and corn, dingy as the entrance of Hades, and
       flaming with furnaces; and now he was among illumined factories with more windows than
       Italian palaces, and smoking chimneys taller than Egyptian obelisks. Alone in the great
       metropolis of machinery itself, sitting down in a solitary coffee-room glaring with gas, with
       no appetite, a whirling head, and not a plan or purpose for the morrow. And why was he here?
       Because a being, whose name even was unknown to him, had met him in a hedge ale-house during
       a thunder storm, and told him that the Age of Ruins was past.
Remarkable instance of the influence of an individual; some evidence of the extreme
       susceptibility of our hero.
Even his bed-room was lit by gas. Wonderful city! That however could be got rid of. He
       opened the window. The summer air was sweet, even in this land of smoke and toil. He feels a
       sensation such as in Lisbon or Lima
        precedes an earthquake. The house appears to quiver. It is a sympathetic affection
       occasioned by a steam-engine in a neighbouring factory.
Notwithstanding however all these novel incidents, Coningsby slept the deep sleep of youth
       and health, of a brain, which however occasionally perplexed by thought, had never been
       harassed by anxiety. He rose early, freshened and in fine spirits. And by the time the
       deviled chicken and the buttered toast, that mysterious and incomparable luxury, which only
       can be obtained at an inn, had disappeared, he felt all the delightful excitement of
       travel.
And now for action! Not a letter had Coningsby, not an individual in that vast city was
       known to him. He went to consult his kind hostess, who smiled confidence. He was to mention
       her name at one place, his own at another. All would be right; she seemed to have reliance in
       the destiny of such a nice young man.
He saw all; they were kind and hospitable to the young stranger, whose thought, and
       earnestness, and gentle manners, attracted them.
        One recommended him to another; all tried to aid and to assist him. He entered chambers
       vaster than are told of in Arabian fable, and peopled with habitants more wondrous than
       Afrite or Peri. For there he beheld, in long-continued ranks, those mysterious forms full of
       existence without life, that perform with facility and in an instant, what man can fulfil
       only with difficulty and in days. A machine is a slave that neither brings nor bears
       degradation: it is a being endowed with the greatest degree of energy and acting under the
       greatest degree of excitement, yet free at the same time from all passion and emotion. It is
       therefore not only a slave, but a supernatural slave. And why should one say that the machine
       does not live? It breathes, for its breath forms the atmosphere of some towns. It moves with
       more regularity than man. And has it not a voice. Does not the spindle sing like a merry girl
       at her work, and the steam-engine roar in jolly chorus like a strong artizan handling his
       lusty tools, and gaining a fair day's wages for a fair day's toil?

Nor should the weaving-room be forgotten, where a thousand or fifteen hundred girls may be
       observed in their coral necklaces working like Penelope in the day time; some pretty, some
       pert, some graceful and jocund, some absorbed in their occupation; a little serious some, few
       sad. And the cotton you have observed in its rude state, that you have seen the silent
       spinner change into thread, and the bustling weaver convert into cloth, you may now watch as
       in a moment it is tinted with beautiful colours, or printed with fanciful patterns. And yet
       the mystery of mysteries is to view machines making machines; a spectacle that fills the mind
       with curious, and even awful, speculation.
From early morn to the late twilight, our Coningsby for several days devoted himself to the
       comprehension of Manchester. It was to him a new world pregnant with new ideas, and
       suggestive of new trains of thought and feeling. In this unprecedented partnership between
       capital and science, working on a spot which Nature had indicated as the fitting theatre of
       their exploits, he beheld a great source of the wealth
        of nations which had been reserved for these times, and he perceived that this wealth
       was rapidly developing classes whose power was very imperfectly recognised in the
       constitutional scheme, and whose duties in the social system seemed altogether omitted. Young
       as he was, the bent of his mind, and the inquisitive spirit of the times, had sufficiently
       prepared him, not indeed to grapple with these questions, but to be sensible of their
       existence, and to ponder.
One evening, in the coffee-room of the hotel, having just finished his well-earned dinner,
       and relaxing his mind for the moment in a fresh research into the Manchester Guide, an
       individual, who had also been dining in the same apartment, rose from his table, and after
       lolling over the empty fire-place, reading the framed announcements, looking at the
       directions of several letters waiting there for their owners; picking his teeth, he turned
       round to Coningsby and with an air of uneasy familiarity, said,
"First visit to Manchester, sir?"
"My first."
"Gentleman traveller, I presume?"

"I am a traveller," said Coningsby.
"Hem!—From the south?"
"From the south."
"And pray, sir, how did you find business as you came along. Brisk? I dare say. And yet
       there is a something, a sort of a something; didn't it strike you, sir, there was a
       something? A deal of queer paper about, sir!"
"I fear you are speaking on a subject of which I know nothing," said Coningsby, smiling, "I
       do not understand business at all; though I am not surprised that being at Manchester you
       should suppose so."
"Ah! not in business. Hem! Professional?"
"No," said Coningsby, "I am nothing."
"Ah! an independent gent; hem! and a very pleasant thing, too. Pleased with Manchester, I
       dare say?" continued the stranger.
"And astonished," said Coningsby, "I think in the whole course of my life I never saw so
       much to admire."
"Seen all the lions, have no doubt?"
"I think I have seen everything," said Coningsby, rather eager and with some pride.

"Very well, very well," exclaimed the stranger in a patronising tone. "Seen Mr. Burley's
       weaving-room, I dare say."
"Oh! isn't it wonderful?" said Coningsby.
"A great many people," said the stranger, with a rather supercilious smile.
"But after all," said Coningsby with animation, "it is the machinery without any
       interposition of manual power that overwhelms me. It haunts me in my dreams," continued
       Coningsby.
"I see cities peopled with machines. Certainly Manchester is the most wonderful city of
       modern times!"
The stranger stared a little at the enthusiasm of his companion, and then picked his
       teeth.
"Of all the wonderful things here," said Coningsby, "what on the whole, sir, do you look
       upon as the most wonderful?"
"In the way of machinery?" asked the stranger.
"In the way of machinery."
"Why, in the way of machinery, you know," said the stranger very quietly, "Manchester is a
       dead letter."

"A dead letter!" said Coningsby.
"Dead and buried," said the stranger, accompanying his words with that peculiar application
       of his thumb to his nose, that signifies so eloquently that all is up.
"You astonish me!" said Coningsby.
"It's a booked place though," said the stranger, "and no mistake. We have all of us a very
       great respect for Manchester, in course; look upon her as a sort of mother, and all that sort
       of thing. But she is behind the times, sir, and that won't do in this age. The long and the
       short of it is, Manchester is gone by."
"I thought her only fault might be she was too much in advance of the rest of the country,"
       said Coningsby very innocently.
"If you want to see life," said the stranger, "go to Staley-bridge or Bolton. There's high
       pressure."
"But the population of Manchester is increasing," said Coningsby.
"Why, yes, not a doubt. You see we have all of us a great respect for the town. It is a
       sort of metropolis of this district, and there is
        a good deal of capital in the place. And it has some first-rate Institutions.
       There's the Manchester Bank. That's a noble institution, full of commercial enterprise;
       understands the age, sir; high-pressure to the back-bone. I came up to town to see the
       manager to-day. I am building a new mill now myself at Staley-Bridge, and mean to open it by
       January, and when I do, I'll give you leave to pay another visit to Mr. Burley's weaving-room
       with my compliments."
"I am very sorry," said Coningsby, "that I have only another day left; but pray tell me,
       what would you recommend me most to see within a reasonable distance of Manchester?"
"My mill is not finished," said the stranger, musingly; "and though there is still a great
       deal worth seeing at Staley-Bridge, still you had better wait to see my new mill. And Bolton,
       let me see, Bolton—there is nothing at Bolton that can hold up its head for a moment against
       my new mill; but then it is not finished. Well, well, let us see. What a pity this is not the
       1st of January, and then my new mill would be at work. I should like to see Mr. Burley's
        face, or even Mr. Ashworth's that day. And the Oxford Road Works, where they are
       always making a little change, bit by bit reform, eh! not a very particular fine appetite I
       suspect for dinner at the Oxford Road Works, the day they hear of my new mill being at work.
       But you want to see something tip-top. Well, there's Millbank; that's regular slap-up—quite a
       sight, regular lion; if I were you, I would see Millbank."
"Millbank!" said Coningsby; "what Millbank?"
"Millbank of Millbank, made the place, made it himself. About three miles from Bolton;
       train to-morrow morning at 7-25, get a fly at the station, and you will be at Millbank by
       8-40."
"Unfortunately I am engaged to-morrow morning," said Coningsby, "and yet I am most anxious,
       particularly anxious, to see Millbank."
"Well, there's a late train," said the stranger, "3-15; you will be there by 4-30."
"I think I could manage that," said Coningsby.

"Do," said the stranger; "and if you ever find yourself at Staley-Bridge, I shall be very
       happy to be of service. I must be off now. My train goes at 9-15." And he presented Coningsby
       with his card as he wished him good night.
MR. G. O. A. HEAD,
Staley Bridge .

</div></body></text></TEI>