<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="33">
CHAPTER X.
Sidonia was descended from a very ancient and noble family of Arragon, that, in
       the course of ages, had given to the state many distinguished citizens. In the priesthood its
       members had been peculiarly eminent. Besides several prelates, they counted among their
       number an Archbishop of Toledo; and a Sidonia, in a season of great danger and difficulty,
       had exercised for a series of years the paramount office of Grand Inquisitor.
Yet, strange as it may sound, it is nevertheless a fact of which there is no lack of
       evidence, that this illustrious family during all this period,
        in common with two-thirds of the Arragonese nobility, secretly adhered to the
       ancient faith and ceremonies of their fathers—a belief in the unity of the God of Sinai, and
       the rites and observances of the laws of Moses.
Whence came those Hebrew Arabs whose passage across the strait from Africa to Europe long
       preceded the invasion of the Mohammedan Arabs, it is now impossible to ascertain. Their
       traditions tell us that from time immemorial they had sojourned in Africa; and it is not
       improbable that they may have been the descendants of some of the earlier dispersions; like
       those Hebrew colonies that we find in China, and who probably emigrated from Persia in the
       days of the great monarchies. Whatever may have been their origin in Africa, their fortunes
       in southern Europe are not difficult to trace, though the annals of no race in no age can
       detail a history of such strange vicissitudes, or one rife with more touching and romantic
       incident. Their unexampled prosperity in the Spanish Peninsula, and especially in the south,
       where they had become the principal cultivators of the soil, excited
        the jealousy of the Goths, and the Councils of Toledo during the sixth and
       seventh centuries attempted, by a series of decrees worthy of the barbarians who promulgated
       them, to root the Jewish Arabs out of the land. There is no doubt the Council of Toledo led
       as directly as the lust of Roderick to the invasion of Spain by the Moslemin Arabs. The
       Jewish population suffering under the most sanguinary and atrocious persecution looked to
       their sympathizing brethren of the Crescent, whose camps already gleamed on the opposite
       shore. The overthrow of the Gothic kingdoms was as much achieved by the superior information
       which the Saracens received from their suffering kinsmen, as by the resistless valour of the
       Desart. The Saracen kingdoms were established. That fair and unrivalled civilization arose,
       which preserved for Europe arts and letters when Christendom was plunged in darkness. The
       children of Ishmael rewareded the children of Israel with equal rights and privileges with
       themselves. During these halcyon centuries, it is difficult to distinguish the follower of
       Moses from the
        votary of Mahomet. Both alike built palaces, gardens and fountains; filled
       equally the highest offices of the state, competed in an extensive and enlightened commerce,
       and rivalled each other in renowned universities.
Even after the fall of the principal Moorish kingdoms, the Jews of Spain were still treated
       by the conquering Goths with tenderness and consideration. Their numbers, their wealth, the
       fact that, in Arragon especially, they were the proprietors of the soil, and surrounded by
       warlike and devoted followers, secured for them an usage which for a considerable period made
       them little sensible of the change of dynasties and religions. But the tempest gradually
       gathered. As the Goths grew stronger, persecution became more bold. Where the Jewish
       population was scanty, they were deprived of their privileges or obliged to conform under the
       title of "Nuovos Christianos." At length the union of the two crowns under Ferdinand and
       Isabella, and the fall of the last Moorish kingdom, brought the crisis of their fate both to
       the New Christian and the nonconforming Hebrew. The Inquisition appeared,
        the Institution that had exterminated the Albligenses and had desolated
       Languedoc, and which it should ever be remembered was established in the Spanish kingdoms
       against the protests of the Cortes and amid the terror of the populace. The Dominicans opened
       their first tribunal at Seville, and it is curious that the first individuals they summoned
       before them were the Duke of Medina Sidonia, the Marquess of Cadiz, and the Count of Arcos;
       three of the most considerable personages in Spain. How many were burned alive at Seville
       during the first year, how many imprisoned for life, what countless thousands were visited
       with severe though lighter punishments, need not be recorded here. In nothing was the Holy
       Office more happy than in multiform and subtle means by which they tested the sincerity of
       the New Christians.
At length the Inquisition was to be extended to Arragon. The high-spirited nobles of that
       kingdom knew that its institution was for them a matter of life or death. The Cortes of
       Arragon appealed to the King and to the Pope; they organized an extensive conspiracy; the
        chief Inquisitor was assassinated in the Cathedral of Saragossa. Alas! it was
       fated that in this, one of the many, and continual, and continuing struggles between the
       rival organizations of the North and the South, the children of the sun should fall. The
       fagot and the San Benito were the doom of the nobles of Arragon. Those who were convicted of
       secret Judaism, and this scarcely three centuries ago, were dragged to the stake; the sons of
       the noblest houses, in whose veins the Hebrew taint could be traced, had to walk in solemn
       procession singing psalms and confessing their faith in the religion of the fell
       Torquamada.
This triumph in Arragon, the almost simultaneous fall of the last Moorish kingdom, raised
       the hopes of the pure Christians to the highest pitch. Having purged the new Christians, they
       next turned their attention to the old Hebrews. Ferdinand was resolved that the delicious air
       of Spain should be breathed no longer by any one who did not profess the Catholic faith.
       Baptism or exile was the alternative. More than six hundred thousand individuals, some
        authorities greatly increase the amount, the most industrious, the most
       intelligent, and the most enlightened of Spanish subjects would not desert the religion of
       their fathers. For this they gave up the delightful land wherein they had lived for
       centuries, the beautiful cities they had raised, the universities from which Christendom drew
       for ages its most precious lore, the tombs of their ancestors, the temples where they had
       worshipped the God for whom they had made this sacrifice. They had but four months to prepare
       for eternal exile after a residence of as many centuries, during which brief period forced
       sales and glutted markets virtually confiscated their property. It is a calamity that the
       scattered nation still ranks with the desolations of Nebuchadnezzar and of Titus. Who after
       this should say the Jews are by nature a sordid people? But the Spanish Goth then so cruel
       and so haughty, where is he? A despised suppliant to the very race which he banished for some
       miserable portion of the treasure which their habits of industry have again accumulated.
       Where is that tribunal
        that summoned Medina Sidonia and Cadiz to its dark inquisition? Where is Spain?
       Its fall, its unparalleled and its irremediable fall, is mainly to be attributed to the
       expulsion of that large portion of its subjects, the most industrious and intelligent, who
       traced their origin to the Mosaic and Mahomedan Arabs.
The Sidonias of Arragon were Nuovos Christianos. Some of them no doubt were burned alive at
       the end of the fifteenth century under the system of Torquamada, many of them doubtless wore
       the San Benito; but they kept their titles and estates; and in time reached those great
       offices to which we have referred.
During the long disorders of the Peninsular war, when so many openings were offered to
       talent, and so many opportunities seized by the adventurous, a cadet of a younger branch of
       this family made a large fortune by military contracts, and supplying the commissariat of the
       different armies. At the peace, prescient of the great financial future of Europe, confident
       in the fertility of his own genius, in his original views of fiscal subjects, and his
       knowledge of
        national resources, this Sidonia, feeling that Madrid, or even Cadiz, could
       never be a base on which the monetary transactions of the world could be regulated, resolved
       to emigrate to England, with which he had in the course of years formed considerable
       commercial connections. He arrived here after the peace of Paris with his large capital. He
       staked all that he was worth on the Waterloo loan; and the event made him one of the greatest
       capitalists in Europe.
No sooner was Sidonia established in England, than he professed Judaism; which Torquamada
       flattered himself, with the fagot and the San Benito, he had drained out of the veins of his
       family more than three centuries ago. He sent over also for several of his brothers who were
       as good Catholics in Spain as Ferdinand and Isabella could have possibly desired, but who
       made an offering in the synagogue, in gratitude for their safe voyage, on their arrival in
       England.
Sidonia had foreseen in Spain, that after the exhaustion of a war of twenty-five years,
       Europe must require capital to carry on peace.
        He reaped the due reward of his sagacity. Europe did require money, and Sidonia
       was ready to lend it to Europe. France wanted some; Austria more; Prussia a little; Russia a
       few millions. Sidonia could furnish them all. The only county which he avoided was Spain; he
       was too well acquainted with its resources. Nothing too would ever tempt him to lend anything
       to the revolted colonies of Spain. Prudence saved him from being a creditor of the mother
       country; his Spanish pride recoiled from the rebellion of her children.
It is not difficult to conceive that after having pursued the career we have intimated for
       about ten years, Sidonia had become one of the most considerable personages in Europe. He had
       established a brother or a near relative in whom he could confide, in most the principal
       capitals. He was lord and master of the money-market of the world, and of course virtually
       lord and master of everything else. He literally held the revenues of Southern Italy in pawn;
       and monarchs and ministers of all countries courted his advice and were guided by his
       suggestions. He
        was still in the vigor of life, and was not a mere money-making machine. He had
       a general intelligence equal to his position, and looked forward to the period when some
       relaxation from his vast enterprises and exertions might enable him to direct his energies to
       great objects of public benefit. But in the height of this vast prosperity he suddenly died,
       leaving only one child, a youth still of tender years, and heir to the greatest fortune in
       Europe, so great indeed that it could only be calculated by millions.
Shut out from universities and schools, those universities and schools which were indebted
       for their first knowledge of ancient philosophy to the learning and enterprise of his
       ancestors, the young Sidonia was fortunate in the tutor whom his father had procured for him,
       and who devoted to his charge all the resources of his trained intellect and vast and various
       erudition. A Jesuit before the revolution; since then an exiled Liberal leader; now a member
       of the Spanish Cortes; Rebello was always a Jew. He found in his pupil that precocity of
       intellectual development which is characteristic of the Arabian
        organization. The young Sidonia penetrated the highest mysteries of mathematics
       with a facility almost instinctive; while a memory, which never had any twilight hours, but
       always reflected a noontide clearness, seemed to magnify his acquisitions of ancient learning
       by the promptness with which they could be re-produced and applied.
The circumstances of his position too had early contributed to give him an unusual command
       over the modern languages. An Englishman, and taught from his cradle to be proud of being an
       Englishman, he first evinced in speaking his native language those remarkable powers of
       expression, and that clear and happy elocution, which ever afterwards distinguished him. But
       the son of a Spaniard, the sonorous syllables of that noble tongue constantly resounded in
       his ear; while the foreign guests who thronged his father's mansion habituated him from an
       early period of life to the tones of languages that were not long strange to him. When he was
       nineteen, Sidonia, who had then resided sometime with his uncle at Naples, and
        had made a long visit to another of his father's relatives at Frankfort,
       possessed a complete mastery over the principal European languages.
At seventeen he had parted with Rebello who returned to Spain, and Sidonia, under the
       control of his guardians, commenced his travels. He resided as we have mentioned some time in
       Germany, and then, having visited Italy, settled at Naples, at which city it may be said he
       made his entrance into life. With a very interesting person, and highly accomplished, he
       availed himself of the gracious attentions of a Court of which he was principal creditor; and
       which treating him as a distinguished English traveller were enabled perhaps to show him some
       favours that the manners of the country might not have permitted them to accord to his
       Neapolitan relatives. Sidonia thus obtained at a very early age that experience of refined
       and luxurious society, which is a necessary part of a finished education. It gives the last
       polish to the manners; it teaches us something of the power of the passions, early developed
       in the hot
        bed of self-indulgence; it instils into us that indefinable tact seldom
       obtained in later life, which prevents us from saying the wrong thing, and often impels us to
       do the right.
Between Paris and Naples Sidonia passed two years, spent apparently in the dissipation
       which was perhaps inseparable from his time of life. He was admired by women, to whom he was
       magnificent, idolized by artists whom he patronised, received in all circles with great
       distinction, and appreciated for his intellect by the very few to whom he at all opened
       himself. For though affable and gracious, it was impossible to penetrate him. Though very
       unreserved in his manner, his frankness was strictly limited to the surface. He observed
       everything, thought ever, but avoided serious discussion. If you pressed him for an opinion,
       he took refuge in raillery, or threw out some grave paradox which it was not easy to cope
       with.
The moment he came of age, Sidonia, having previously, at a great family congress held at
       Naples, made arrangements with the heads of the houses that bore his name respecting
        the disposition and management of his vast fortune, quitted Europe.
Sidonia was absent from his connexions for five years, during which period he never
       communicated with them. They were aware of his existence only by the orders which he drew on
       them for payment, and which frequently arrived from all quarters of the globe. It would
       appear from these documents that he had dwelt a considerable time in the Mediterranean
       regions; penetrated Nilotic Africa to Sennaar and Abyssinia; traversed the Asiatic continent
       to Tartary, whence he had visited Hindostan, and the isles of that Indian sea which are so
       little known. Afterwards he was heard of at Valparaiso, the Brazils, and Lima. He evidently
       remained some time at Mexico, which he quitted for the United States. One morning without
       notice he arrived in London.
Sidonia had exhausted all the sources of human knowledge; he was master of the learning of
       every nation, of all tongues dead or living, of every literature, Western and Oriental. He
       had pursued the speculations of science
        to their last term, and had himself illustrated them by observation and
       experiment. He had lived in all orders of society, had viewed every combination of Nature and
       of Art, and had observed man under every phasis of civilization. He had even studied him in
       the wilderness. The influence of creeds and laws, manners, customs, traditions, in all their
       diversities, had been subjected to his personal scrutiny.
He brought to the study of this vast aggregate of knowledge a penetrative intellect, that
       matured by long meditation, and assisted by that absolute freedom from prejudice, which was
       the compensatory possession of a man without a country, permitted Sidonia to fathom as it
       were by intuition, the depth of questions apparently the most difficult and profound. He
       possessed the rare faculty of communicating with precision ideas the most abstruse, and in
       general a power of expression which arrests and satisfies attention.
With all this knowledge, which no one knew more to prize, with boundless wealth, and with
       an athletic frame, which sickness had never
        tried, and which had avoided excess, Sidonia nevertheless looked upon life with
       a glance rather of curiosity than content. His religion walled him out from the pursuits of a
       citizen; his riches deprived him of the stimulating anxieties of a man. He perceived himself
       a lone being, alike without cares and without duties.
To a man in his position there might yet seem one unfailing source of felicity and joy;
       independent of creed, independent of country, independent even of character. He might have
       discovered that perpetual spring of happiness in the sensibility of the heart. But this was a
       sealed fountain to Sidonia. In his organization there was a peculiarity, perhaps a great
       deficiency. He was a man without affections. It would be harsh to say he had no heart, for he
       was susceptible of deep emotions, but not for individuals. He was capable of re-building a
       town that was burned down; of restoring a colony that had been destroyed by some awful
       visitation of nature; of redeeming to liberty a horde of captives; and of doing these great
        acts in secret; for void of all self-love, public approbation was worthless to
       him; but the individual never touched him. Woman was to him a toy, man a machine.
The lot the most precious to man, and which a beneficent Providence has made not the least
       common; to find in another heart a perfect and profound sympathy; to unite his existence with
       one who could share all his joys, soften all his sorrows, aid him in all his projects,
       respond to all his fancies, counsel him in his cares, and support him in his perils; make
       life charming by her charms, interesting by her intelligence, and sweet by the vigilant
       variety of her tenderness; to find you life blessed by such an influence, and to feel that
       your influence can bless such a life: this lot, the most divine of divine gifts, that power
       and even fame can never rival in its delights—all this Nature had denied to Sidonia.
With an imagination as fiery as his native Desart, and an intellect as luminous as his
       native sky, he wanted like that land those softening dews without which the soil is barren,
       and the
        sunbeam as often a messenger of pestilence as an angel of regenerative
       grace.
Such a temperament, though rare, is peculiar to the East. It inspired the founders of the
       great monarchies of antiquity, the prophets that the Desart has sent forth, the Tartar chiefs
       who have overrun the world; it might be observed in the great Corsican, who, like most of the
       inhabitants of the Mediterranean isles, had probably Arab blood in his veins. It is a
       temperament that befits conquerors and legislators, but in ordinary times and ordinary
       situations, entails on its possessor only eccentric aberrations or profound melancholy.
The only human quality that interested Sidonia was Intellect. He cared not whence it came;
       where it was to be found: creed, country, class, character, in this respect, were alike
       indifferent to him. The author, the artist, the man of science, never appealed to him in
       vain. Often he anticipated their wants and wishes. He encouraged their society; was as frank
       in his conversation as he was generous in his contributions; but the instant they ceased to
       be
        authors, artists, or philosophers, and their communications arose from any
       thing but the intellectual quality which had originally interested him, the moment they were
       rash enough to approach intimacy and appealed to the sympathizing man instead of the
       congenial intelligence, he saw them no more. It was not however intellect merely in these
       unquestionable shapes that commanded his notice. There was not an adventurer in Europe with
       whom he was not familiar. No Minister of State had such communication with secret agents and
       political spies as Sidonia. He held relations with all the clever outcasts of the world. The
       catalogue of his acquaintance in the shape of Greeks, Armenians, Moors, secret Jews, Tartars,
       Gypsies, wandering Poles and Carbonari, would throw a curious light on those subterranean
       agencies of which the world in general knows so little, but which exercise so great an
       influence on public events. His extensive travels, his knowledge of languages, his daring and
       adventurous disposition, and his unlimited means, had given him opportunities of becoming
       acquainted with these
        characters, in general so difficult to trace, and of gaining their devotion. To
       these sources he owed that knowledge of strange and hidden things which often startled those
       who listened to him. Nor was it easy, scarcely possible, to deceive him. Information reached
       him from so many, and such contrary quarters, that with his discrimination and experience, he
       could almost instantly distinguish the truth. The secret history of the world was his
       pastime. His great pleasure was to contrast the hidden motive, with the public pretext, of
       transactions.
One source of interest Sidonia found in his descent, and in the fortunes of his race. As
       firm in his adherence to the code of the great Legislator as if the trumpet still sounded on
       Sinai, he might have received in the conviction of divine favour an adequate compensation for
       human persecution. But there were other and more terrestrial considerations that made Sidonia
       proud of his origin, and confident in the future of his kind. Sidonia was a great
       philosopher, who took comprehensive views of human affairs, and surveyed every fact in its
       relative position
        to other facts, the only mode of obtaining truth.
Sidonia was well aware that in the five great varieties in which Physiology has divided the
       human species; to wit, the Caucasian, the Mongolian, the Malayan, the American, the
       Ethiopian; the Arabian tribes rank in the first and superior class, together, among others,
       with the Saxon and the Greek. This fact alone is a source of great pride and satisfaction to
       the animal Man. But Sidonia and his brethren could claim a distinction which the Saxon and
       the Greek, and the rest of the Caucasian nations, have forfeited. The Hebrew is an unmixed
       race. Doubtless among the tribes who inhabit the bosom of the Desart, progenitors alike of
       the Mosaic and the Mahomedan Arabs, blood may be found as pure as that of the descendants of
       the Scheik Abraham. But the Mosaic Arabs are the most ancient, if not the only, unmixed blood
       that dwells in cities.
An unmixed race of a first-rate organization are the aristocracy of Nature. Such excellence
       is a positive fact; not an imagination, a ceremony,
        coined by poets, blazoned by cozening heralds, but perceptible in its physical
       advantages, and in the vigour of its unsullied idiosyncracy.
In this comprehensive travels, Sidonia had visited and examined the Hebrew communities of
       the world. He had found in general the lower orders debased; the superior immersed in sordid
       pursuits; but he perceived that the intellectual development was not impaired. This gave him
       hope. He was persuaded that organization would outlive persecution. When he reflected on what
       they had endured, it was only marvellous that the race had not disappeared. They had defied
       exile, massacre, spoliation, the degrading influence of the constant pursuit of gain; they
       had defied Time. For nearly three thousand years, according to Archbishop Usher, they have
       been dispersed over the globe. To the unpolluted current of their Caucasian structure and to
       the segregating genius of their great Lawgiver, Sidonia ascribed the fact that they had not
       been long ago absorbed among those mixed races, who presume to persecute them, but who
       periodically
        wear away and disappear, while their victims still flourish, in all the
       primeval vigour of the pure Asian breed.
Shortly after his arrival in England, Sidonia repaired to the principal courts of Europe,
       that he might become personally acquainted with the monarchs and ministers of whom he had
       heard so much. His position insured him a distinguished reception; his personal qualities
       immediately made him cherished. He could please; he could do more; he could astonish. He
       could throw out a careless observation which would make the oldest diplomatist start; a
       winged word that gained him the consideration, sometimes the confidence, of Sovereigns. When
       he had fathomed the intelligence which governs Europe, and which can only be done by personal
       acquaintance, he returned to this country.
The somewhat hard and literal character of English life suited one who shrank from
       sensibility, and often took refuge in sarcasm. Its masculine vigour and active intelligence
       occupied and interested his mind. Sidonia indeed was exactly the character who would be
       welcomed in
        our circles. His immense wealth, his unrivalled social knowledge, his clear
       vigorous intellect, the severe simplicity of his manners, frank, but never claiming nor
       brooking familiarity, and his devotion to field sports, which was the safety-valve of his
       energy, were all circumstances and qualities which the English appreciate and admire; and it
       may be fairly said of Sidonia that few men were more popular, and none less understood.

</div></body></text></TEI>