<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="11">
CHAPTER XI.
About a fortnight after this nearly fatal adventure on the river, it was Montem.
       One need hardly remind the reader that this celebrated ceremony, of which the origin is lost
       in obscurity and which now occurs triennially, is the tenure by which Eton College holds some
       of its domains; the waving of a flag by one of the scholars on a mount near the village of
       Salt Hill, and to which without doubt it gives the name, since on this day every visitor to
       Eton, and every traveller in its vicinity, from the monarch to the peasant, are stopped on
       the road by youthful brigands in picturesque costume, and summoned to contribute "salt," in
       the shape of
        coin of the realm, to the purse collecting for the Captain of Eton, the senior
       scholar on the Foundation, who is about to repair to King's College Cambridge.
On this day the Captain of Eton appears in a dress as martial as his title: indeed, each
       sixth form boy represents in his uniform, though not perhaps according to the exact rules of
       the Horse Guards, an officer of the army. One is a marshal, another an ensign. There is a
       lieutenant, too; and the remainder are sergeants. Each of those who are intrusted with these
       ephemeral commissions, has one or more attendants: the number of these varying according to
       his rank. These Servitors are selected, according to the wishes of the several members of the
       sixth form, out of the ranks of the lower boys, that is, those boys who are below the fifth
       form; and all these attendants are arrayed in a variety of fancy dresses. The senior Oppidan
       and the senior Colleger next to the Captains of those two divisions of the school, figure
       also in fancy
        costume, and are called "Saltbearers." It is their business, together with the
       twelve senior Collegers of the fifth form, who are called "Runners," and whose costume is
       also determined by the taste of the wearers, to levy the contributions. And all the Oppidans
       of the fifth form, among whom ranked Coningsby, class as "Corporals;" and are severally
       followed by one or more lower boys, who are denominated "Polemen," but who appear in their
       ordinary dress.
It was a fine bright morning; the bells of Eton and Windsor rang merrily; everybody was
       astir, and every moment some gay equipage drove into the town. Gaily clustering in the
       thronged precincts of the College might be observed many a glistening form; airy Greek, or
       sumptuous Ottoman, heroes of the Holy Sepulchre, Spanish Hidalgos who had fought at Pavia,
       Highland Chiefs who had charged at Culloden, gay in the tartan of Prince Charlie. The Long
       Walk was full of busy groups in scarlet coats, or fanciful uniforms; some in earnest
       conversation, some
        criticising the arriving guests; others encircling some magnificent hero, who
       astounded them with his slashed doublet or flowing plume.
A knot of boys, sitting on the Long Walk wall with their feet swinging in the air, watched
       the arriving guests of the Provost.
"I say, Townshend," said one, "there's Grobbleton; he was a bully. I wonder if
       that's his wife. Who's this? The Duke of Agincourt. He wasn't an Eton fellow? Yes, he was. He
       was called Poictiers then. Oh! ah! his name is in the upper school, very large, under Charles
       Fox. I say, Townshend, did you see Saville's turban? What was it made of? He says his mother
       brought it from Grand Cairo. Did'nt he just look like the Saracen's Head! Here are some Dons.
       That's Hallam! We'll give him a cheer. I say, Townshend, look at this fellow. He does not
       think small beer of himself. I wonder who he is! The Duke of Wellington's valet come to say
       his master is engaged. Oh! by Jove he
        heard you. I wonder if the Duke will come. Won't we give him a cheer!"
"By Jove, who is this?" exclaimed Townshend, and he jumped from the wall, and followed by
       his companions rushed towards the road.
Two britskas, each drawn by four grey horses of mettle, and each accompanied by outriders
       as well mounted, were advancing at a rapid pace along the road that leads from Slough to the
       College. But they were destined to an irresistible check. About fifty yards before they had
       reached the gate that leads into Weston's yard, a ruthless but splendid Albanian, in crimson
       and gold embroidered jacket, and snowy camese, started forward, and holding out his
       silver-sheathed yataghan commanded the postilions to stop. A Peruvian Inca on the other side
       of the road gave a simultaneous command, and would infallibly have transfixed the outriders
       with an arrow from his unerring bow, had they for an instant
        hesitated. The Albanian Chief then advanced to the door of the carriage, which
       he opened, and in a tone of great courtesy, announced that he was under the necessity of
       troubling its inmates for 'salt.' There was no delay. The Lord of the equipage with the
       amiable condescension of a "grand monarque," expressed his hope that the collection would be
       an ample one, and as an old Etonian, placed in the hands of the Albanian his contribution, a
       magnificent purse furnished for the occasion and heavy with gold.
"Don't be alarmed, ladies," said a very handsome young officer laughing, and taking off his
       cocked hat.
"Ah!" exclaimed one of the ladies, turning at the voice, and starting a little. "Ah! it is
       Mr. Coningsby."
Lord Eskdale paid the salt for the next carriage. "Do they come down pretty stiff?" he
       inquired, and then pulling forth a roll of bank-notes from the pocket of his pea-jacket, he
       wished them good morning.

The courtly Provost, then the benignant Goodall, a man who though his experience of life
       was confined to the colleges in which he had passed his days, was naturally gifted with that
       rarest of all endowments, the talent of reception; and whose happy bearing and gracious
       manner—a smile ever in his eye, and a lively word ever on his lip—must be recalled by all
       with pleasant recollections, welcomed Lord Monmouth and his friends to an assemblage of the
       noble, the beautiful, and the celebrated, gathered together in rooms not unworthy of them, as
       you looked upon their interesting walls breathing with the portraits of the heroes of whom
       Eton boasts—from Wotton to Wellesley. Music sounded in the quadrangle of the College in which
       the boys were already quickly assembling. The Duke of Wellington had arrived, and the boys
       were cheering a hero who was also an Eton field-marshal. From an oriel window in one of the
       Provost's rooms, Lord Monmouth, surrounded by every circumstance that could
        make life delightful, watched with some intentness the scene in the quadrangle
       beneath.
"I would give his fame," said Lord Monmouth; "if I had it, and my wealth—to be
       sixteen."
Five hundred of the youth of England, sparkling with health, high spirits, and fancy
       dresses, were now assembled in the quadrangle. They formed into rank, and headed by a band of
       the Guards, thrice they marched round the court. Then quitting the College, they commenced
       their progress 'ad Montem.' It was a brilliant spectacle to see them defiling through the
       playing fields; those bowery meads; the river sparkling in the sun; the castled heights of
       Windsor, their glorious landscape; behind them, the pinnacles of their College.
The road from Eton to Salt Hill was clogged with carriages; the broad fields as far as eye
       could range were covered with human beings. Amid the burst of martial music and the shouts of
       the multitude, the band of heroes, as if
        they were marching from Athens or Thebes or Sparta to some heroic deed,
       encircled the mount; the ensign reaches its summit, and then amid a deafening cry of "Floreat
       Etona," he unfurls, and thrice waves the consecrated standard!
"Lord Monmouth," said Mr. Rigby to Coningsby, "wishes that you should beg your friends to
       dine with him. Of course you will ask Lord Henry and your friend Sir Charles Buckhurst; and
       is there any one else that you would like to invite?"
"Why there is Vere," said Coningsby hesitating, "and—"
"Vere! What Lord Vere?" said Mr. Rigby. "Hum! He is one of your friends is he? His father
       has done a great deal of mischief, but still he is Lord Vere. Well, of course, you can invite
       Vere."
"There is another fellow I should like to ask very much," said Coningsby, "if Lord Monmouth
       would not think I was asking too many."

"Never fear that; he sent me particularly to tell you to invite as many as you liked."
"Well then, I should like to ask Millbank."
"Millbank!" said Mr. Rigby a little excited, and then he added: "Is that a son of Lady
       Albinia Millbank."
"No; his mother is not a Lady Albinia, but he is a great friend of mine. His father is a
       Lancashire manufacturer."
"By no means," exclaimed Mr. Rigby quite agitated. "There is nothing in the world that Lord
       Monmouth dislikes so much as Manchester manufacturers, and particularly if they bear the name
       of Millbank. It must not be thought of, my dear Harry. I hope you have not spoken to the
       young man on the subject. I assure you it is quite out of the question. It would make Lord
       Monmouth quite ill. It would spoil everything; quite upset him."
It was, of course, impossible for Coningsby to urge his wishes against such
       representations. He was disappointed—rather amazed; but Madame Colonna having sent for him to
       introduce
        her to some of the scenes and details of Eton life, his vexation was soon
       absorbed in the pride of acting in the face of his companions as the cavalier of a beautiful
       lady, and becoming the cicerone of the most brilliant party that had attended Montem. He
       presented his friends, too, to Lord Monmouth, who gave them a most cordial invitation to dine
       with him at his hotel at Windsor, which they most warmly accepted. Buckhurst delighted the
       Marquess by his reckless genius. Even Lucretia deigned to appear amused; especially when on
       visiting the upper school, the name of Cardiff , the title Lord Monmouth bore in his
       youthful days, was pointed out to her by Coningsby, cut with his grandfather's own knife on
       the classic panels of that memorable wall in which scarcely a name that has flourished in our
       history, since the commencement of the eighteenth century, may not be observed with curious
       admiration.
It was the humour of Lord Monmouth that the boys should be entertained with the most
       various and delicious banquet that luxury could
        devise, or money could command. For some days beforehand, orders had been given
       for the preparation of this festival. Our friends did full justice to their Lucullus;
       Buckhurst especially, who gave his opinion on the most refined dishes with all the
       intrepidity of saucy ignorance, and occasionally shook his head over a glass of Hermitage or
       Côte Rôtie with a dissatisfaction which a satiated Sybarite could not have exceeded.
       Considering all things, Coningsby and his friends exhibited a great deal of self-command; but
       they were gay, even to the verge of frolick. But then the occasion justified it, as much as
       their youth. All were in high spirits. Madame Colonna declared that she had met nothing in
       England equal to Montem; that it was a Protestant Carnival; and that its only fault was that
       it did not last forty days. The Prince himself was all animation, and took wine with every
       one of the Etonians several times. All went on flowingly until Mr. Rigby contradicted
       Buckhurst on some point of Eton
        discipline, which Buckhurst would not stand. He rallied Mr. Rigby roundly, and
       Coningsby, full of Champagne, and owing Rigby several years of contradiction, followed up the
       assault. Lord Monmouth, who liked a butt, and had a weakness for boisterous gaiety, slily
       encouraged the boys, till Rigby began to lose his temper and get noisy.
The lads had the best of it; they said a great many funny things, and delivered themselves
       of several sharp retorts; whereas there was something ridiculous in Rigby putting forth his
       "slashing" talents against such younkers. However, he brought the infliction on himself by
       his strange habit of deciding on subjects of which he knew nothing, and of always
       contradicting persons on the very subjects of which they were necessarily masters.
To see Rigby baited was more amusement to Lord Monmouth, even than Montem. Lucian Gay,
       however, when the affair was getting troublesome, came forward as a diversion. He
        sang an extemporaneous song on the ceremony of the day, and introduced the
       names of all the guests at the dinner, and of a great many other persons besides. This was
       capital! The boys were in raptures, but when the singer threw forth a verse about Doctor
       Keate, the applause became uproarious.
"Good bye, my dear Harry," said Lord Monmouth, when he bade his grandson farewell. "I am
       going abroad again; I cannot remain in this radical-ridden country. Remember, though I am
       away, Monmouth House is your home,—at least as long as it belongs to me. I understand my
       tailor has turned Liberal, and is going to stand for one of the metropolitan districts; a
       friend of Lord Durham; perhaps I shall find him in it when I return. I fear there are evil
       days for the NEW Generation !"
END OF BOOK I.

</div></body></text></TEI>