<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="70">
CHAPTER VII.
A paragraph in the Morning Post a few days after his interview with his grandfather,
       announcing that Lord and Lady Monmouth had quitted town for the Baths of Kissingen, startled
       Coningsby, who called the same day at Monmouth House in consequence. There he learnt more
       authentic details of their unexpected movements. It appeared that Lady Monmouth had certainly
       departed; and the porter with a rather sceptical visage informed Coningsby that Lord Monmouth
       was to follow; but when he could not tell. At present his Lordship was at Brighton, and in a
       few days was about to take possession of a villa at Richmond which
        had for some time been fitting up for him under the superintendence of Mr.
       Rigby, who, as Coningsby also learnt, now permanently resided at Monmouth House. All this
       intelligence made Coningsby ponder. He was sufficiently acquainted with the parties concerned
       to feel assured that he had not learnt the whole truth. What had really taken place, and what
       was the real cause of the occurrences, were equally mystical to him: all he was convinced of
       was, that some great domestic revolution had been suddenly effected.
Coningsby entertained for his grandfather a sincere affection. With the exception of their
       last unfortunate interview, he had experienced from Lord Monmouth nothing but kindness both
       in phrase and deed. There was also something in Lord Monmouth, when he pleased it, rather
       fascinating to young men; and as Coningsby had never occasioned him any feelings but
       pleasurable ones, he was always disposed to make himself delightful to his grandson. The
       experience of a consummate man of the world advanced in life, detailed without rigidity to
       youth, with frankness and
        facility, is bewitching. Lord Monmouth was never garrulous: he was always pithy
       and could be picturesque. He revealed a character in a sentence; and detected the ruling
       passion with the hand of a master. Besides he had seen everybody and had done everything; and
       though on the whole too indolent for conversation, and loving to be talked to, these were
       circumstances which made his too rare communications the more precious.
With these feelings Coningsby resolved the moment that he learned that his grandfather was
       established at Richmond to pay him a visit. He was informed that Lord Monmouth was at home,
       and he was shown into a drawingroom, where he found two French ladies in their bonnets, who
       he soon discovered to be actresses. They also had come down to pay a visit to his
       grandfather, and were by no means displeased to pass the interval that was to elapse before
       they had that pleasure, in chatting with his grandson. Coningsby found them extremely
       amusing; with the finest spirits in the world, imperturbable good temper, and an unconscious
       practical philosophy, that defied
        the devil Care and all his works. And well it was, that he found such agreeable
       companions, for time flowed on, and no summons arrived to call him to his grandfather's
       presence, and no herald to announce his grandfather's advent. The ladies and Coningsby had
       exhausted badinage; they had examined and criticised all the furniture; had rifled the vases
       of their prettiest flowers; and Clotilde who had already sung several times, was proposing a
       duet to Ermengarde, when a servant entered, and told the ladies that a carriage was in
       attendance to give them an airing, and after that Lord Monmouth hoped they would return and
       dine with him; then turning to Coningsby he informed him with his Lord's compliments, that
       Lord Monmouth was sorry he was too much engaged to see him.
Nothing was to be done but to put a tolerably good face upon it. "Embrace Lord Monmouth for
       me," said Coningsby to his fair friends, "and tell him I think it very unkind that he did not
       ask me to dinner with you."
Coningsby said this with a gay air, but really
        with a depressed spirit. He felt convinced that his grandfather was deeply
       displeased with him, and as he rode away from the villa, he could not resist the strong
       impression that he was destined never to enter it. Yet it was decreed otherwise. It so
       happened that the idle message which Coningsby had left for his grandfather, and which he
       never seriously supposed for a moment that his late companions would have given their host,
       operated entirely in his favour. Whatever were the feelings with respect to Coningsby at the
       bottom of Lord Monmouth's heart, he was actuated in his refusal to see him not more from
       displeasure, than from an anticipatory horror of something like a scene. Even a surrender
       from Coningsby without terms, and an offer to declare himself a candidate for Darlford, or to
       do anything else that his grandfather wished, would have been disagreeable to Lord Monmouth
       in his present mood. As in politics a revolution is often followed by a season of torpor, so
       in the case of Lord Monmouth, the separation from his wife, which had for a long period
       occupied his meditation, was succeeded by a vein of mental dissipation.
        He did not wish to be reminded by anything or any person that he had still in
       some degree the misfortune of being a responsible member of society. He wanted to be
       surrounded by individuals who were above or below the conventional interests of what is
       called "the World." He wanted to hear nothing of those painful and embarrassing influences
       which from our contracted experience and want of enlightenment, we magnify into such undue
       importance. For this purpose he wished to have about him persons whose knowledge of the cares
       of life concerned only the means of existence; and whose sense of its objects referred only
       to the sources of enjoyment; persons who had not been educated in the idolatry of
       Respectability; that is to say, of realizing such an amount of what is termed Character by a
       hypocritical deference to the prejudices of the community, as may enable them at suitable
       times, and under convenient circumstances and disguises, to plunder the Public. This was the
       Monmouth Philosophy.
With these feelings, Lord Monmouth recoiled at this moment from grandsons and relations
        and ties of all kinds. He did not wish to be reminded of his identity; but to
       swim unmolested and undisturbed in his Epicurean dream. When therefore his fair visitors,
       Clotilde who opened her mouth only to breathe roses and diamonds; and Ermengarde who was so
       good-natured that she sacrificed even her lovers to her friends; saw him merely to exclaim at
       the same moment, and with the same voices of thrilling joyousness.
"Why did not you ask him to dinner!"
And then without waiting for his reply entered with that rapidity of elocution which
       Frenchwomen can alone command into the catalogue of his charms and accomplishments, Lord
       Monmouth began to regret that he really had not seen Coningsby who it appears might have
       greatly contributed to the pleasure of the day. The message which was duly given however
       settled the business. Lord Monmouth felt that any chance of explanations or even allusions to
       the past was out of the question; and to defend himself from the accusations of his animated
       guests, he said,
"Well, he shall come to dine with you next time."

There is no end to the influence of woman on our life. It is at the bottom of everything
       that happens to us. And so it was, that, in spite of all the combinations of Lucretia and Mr.
       Rigby, and the mortification and resentment of Lord Monmouth, the favourable impression he
       casually made on a couple of French actresses occasioned Coningsby, before a month had
       elapsed since his memorable interview at Monmouth House, to receive an invitation again to
       dine with his grandfather.
The party was very agreeable. Clotilde and Ermengarde had wits as sparkling as their eyes.
       There was the manager of the Opera, a great friend of Villebecque, and his wife, a very
       splendid lady who had been a prima donna of celebrity, and still had a commanding voice for a
       chamber. A Carlist nobleman who lived upon his traditions, and who though without a sou could
       tell of a festival given by his family before the revolution which had cost a million of
       francs, and a Neapolitan physician, in whom Lord Monmouth had great confidence and who
       himself believed in the Elixir Vitæ, made up the party with Lucian Gay, Coningsby and Mr.
        Rigby. Our hero remarked that Villebecque on this occasion sat at the bottom of
       the table, but Flora did not appear.
In the meantime, the month which brought about this satisfactory, and at one time
       unexpected, result, was fruitful also in other circumstances still more interesting.
       Coningsby and Edith met frequently, if to breathe the same atmosphere in the same crowded
       saloons can be described as meeting; ever watching each other's movements and yet studious
       never to encounter each other's glance. The charms of Miss Millbank had become an universal
       topic; they were celebrated in ball rooms, they were discussed at clubs; Edith was the beauty
       of the season. All admired her, many sighed even to express their admiration; but the
       devotion of Lord Beaumanoir, who always hovered about her, deterred them from a rivalry which
       might have made the boldest despair. As for Coningsby, he passed his life principally with
       the various members of the Sydney family; and was almost daily riding with Lady Everingham
       and her sister, generally accompanied by Lord Henry and his friend Eustace Lyle, between whom
       indeed and Coningsby
        there were relations of intimacy scarcely less inseparable. Coningsby had
       spoken to Lady Everingham of the rumoured marriage of her elder brother, and found, although
       the family had not yet been formally apprised of it, she entertained very little doubt of its
       ultimate occurrence. She admired Miss Millbank with whom her acquaintance continued slight;
       and she wished of course that her brother should marry and be happy, "but Percy is often in
       love," she would add, "and never likes us to be very intimate with his inamoratas. He thinks
       it destroys the romance; and that domestic familiarity may compromise his heroic character.
       However," she added, "I really believe that will be a match."
On the whole, though he bore a serene aspect to the world, Coningsby passed this month in a
       state of restless misery. His soul was brooding on one subject and he had no confidant; he
       could not resist the spell that impelled him to the society where Edith might at least be
       seen; and the circle in which he lived was one in which her name was frequently mentioned.
       Alone, in his solitary
        rooms in the Albany, he felt all his desolation; and often a few minutes before
       he figured in the world apparently followed and courted by all, he had been plunged in the
       darkest fits of irremediable wetchedness.
He had of course frequently met Lady Wallinger, but their salutations though never omitted
       and on each side cordial, were brief. There seemed to be a tacit understanding between them
       not to refer to a subject fruitful in painful reminiscences.
The season waned; in the fulfilment of a project originally formed in the Playing fields of
       Eton, often recurred to at Cambridge, and cherished with the fondness with which men cling to
       a scheme of early youth, Coningsby, Henry Sydney, Vere and Buckhurst, had engaged some moors
       together this year; and in a few days they were about to quit town for Scotland. They had
       pressed Eustace Lyle to accompany them, but he who in general seemed to have no pleasure
       greater than their society had surprised them by declining their invitation, with some vague
       mention that he rather thought he should go abroad.

It was the last day of July, and all the world were at a breakfast given, at a fanciful
       cottage, situate in beautiful gardens on the banks of the Thames, by Lady Everingham. The
       weather was as bright as the romances of Boccacio; there were pyramids of strawberries in
       bowls colossal enough to hold orange trees; and the choicest bands filled the air with
       enchanting strains, while a brilliant multitude sauntered on turf like velvet, or roamed in
       desultory existence amid the quivering shades of winding walks.
"My fête was prophetic," said Lady Everingham when she saw Coningsby. "I am glad it is
       connected with an incident. It gives it a point."
"You are mystical as well as prophetic. Tell me what are we to celebrate."
"Theresa is going to be married."
"Then I too will prophecy and name the hero of the romance—Eustace Lyle."
"You have been more prescient than me," said Lady Everingham, "perhaps because I was
       thinking too much of some one else."
"It seems to me an union which all must acknowledge perfect. I hardly know which I love
       best. I have had my suspicions a long
        time; and when Eustace refused to go to the moors with us, though I said
       nothing, I was convinced."
"At any rate," said Lady Everingham sighing with a rather smiling face, "we are kinsfolk
       Mr. Coningsby; though I would gladly have wished to have been more."
"Were those your thoughts, dear Lady? Ever kind to me! But such happiness," he added in a
       mournful tone, "I fear can never be mine."
"And why?"
"Ah! 'tis a tale too strange and sorrowful for a day when like Seged we must all determine
       to be happy."
"You have already made me miserable."
"Here comes a group that will make you gay," said Coningsby as he moved on. Edith and the
       Wallingers accompanied by Lord Beaumanoir, Mr. Melton and Sir Charles Buckhurst formed the
       party. They seemed profuse in their congratulations to Lady Everingham, having already learnt
       the intelligence from her brother.
Coningsby stopped to speak to Lady St. Julians, who had still a daughter to marry. Both
       Augustina who was at Coningsby Castle,
        and Clara Isabella who ought to have been there, had each secured the right
       man. But Adelaide Victoria had now appeared, and Lady St. Julians had a great regard for the
       favourite grandson of Lord Monmouth, and also for the influential friend of Lord Vere and Sir
       Charles Buckhurst. In case Coningsby did not determine to become her son-in-law himself, he
       might counsel either of his friends to a judicious decision on an inevitable act.
"Strawberries and cream?" said Lord Eskdale to Mr. Ormsby who seemed occupied with some
       delicacies.
"Egad! no, no, no; those days are passed. I think there is a little easterly wind with all
       this fine appearance."
"I am for in-door nature myself," said Lord Eskdale. "Do you know I don't half like the way
       Monmouth is going on. He never gets out of that villa of his. He should change his air more.
       Tell him."
"It's no use telling him anything. Have you heard anything of Miladi?"
"I had a letter from her to-day; she writes in very good spirits. I am sorry it broke up,
        and yet I never thought it would last as long."
"I gave them two years," said Mr. Ormsby, "Lord Monmouth lived with his first wife two
       years. And afterwards with the Mirandola at Milan, at least nearly two years, it was a year
       and ten months. I must know, for he called me in to settle affairs. I took the lady to the
       Baths of Lucca on the pretence that Monmouth would meet us there. He went to Paris. All his
       great affairs have been two years. I remember I wanted to bet Cassilis at White's on it when
       he married, but I thought being his intimate friend, the oldest friend he has indeed, and one
       of his trustees, it was perhaps as well not to do it."
"You should have made the bet with himself," said Lord Eskdale, "and then there never would
       have been a separation."
"Hah, hah, hah! Do you know I feel the wind."
About an hour after this Coningsby who had just quitted the Duchess, met on the terrace by
       the river Lady Wallinger walking with Mrs. Guy Flouncey and a Russian Prince whom that
        lady was enchanting. Coningsby was about to pass with some slight courtesy, but
       Lady Wallinger stopped and would speak to him: on very slight subjects; the weather and the
       fête; but yet enough adroitly managed to make him turn and join her. Mrs. Guy Flouncey walked
       on a little before with her Russian admirer. Lady Wallinger followed with Coningsby.
"The match that has been proclaimed today has greatly surprised me," said Lady
       Wallinger.
"Indeed!" said Coningsby, "I confess I was long prepared for it. And it seems to me the
       most natural alliance conceivable and one that every one must approve."
"Lady Everingham seems very much surprised at it."
"Ah! Lady Everingham is a very brilliant personage, and cannot deign to observe obvious
       circumstances."
"Do you know, Mr. Coningsby, that I always thought you were engaged to Lady Theresa?"
"I!"
"Indeed we were informed more than a month
        ago, that you were positively going to be married to her."
"I am not one of those who can shift their affections with such rapidity, Lady
       Wallinger."
Lady Wallinger looked distressed. "You remember our meeting you on the stairs at —House,
       Mr. Coningsby."
"Painfully. It is deeply graven on my brain."
"Edith had just been informed that you were going to be married to Lady Theresa."
"Not surely by him to whom she is herself going to be married," said Coningsby
       reddening.
"I am not aware that she is going to be married to any one. Lord Beaumanoir admires her;
       has always admired her. But Edith has given him no encouragement, at least gave him no
       encouragement as long as she believed—but why dwell on such an unhappy subject, Mr.
       Coningsby. I am to blame, I have been to blame perhaps before, but indeed I think it cruel,
       very cruel that Edith and you are kept asunder."
"You have always been my best, my dearest
        friend; and are the most amiable and admirable of women. But tell me, is it
       indeed true that Edith is not going to be married?"
At this moment Mrs. Guy Flouncey turned round, and assuring Lady Wallinger that the Prince
       and herself had agreed to refer some point to her about the most transcendental ethics of
       flirtation, this deeply interesting conversation was arrested, and Lady Wallinger with
       becoming suavity was obliged to listen to the lady's lively appeal of exaggerated nonsense,
       and the Prince affected protests, while Coningsby walked by her side pale and agitated, and
       then offered his arm to Lady Wallinger which she accepted with an affectionate pressure. At
       the end of the terrace they met some other guests, and soon were immersed in the multitude
       that thronged the lawn.
"There is Sir Joseph," said Lady Wallinger, and Coningsby looked up, and saw Edith on his
       arm. They were unconsciously approaching them. Lord Beaumanoir was there, but he seemed to
       shrink into nothing to-day before Buckhurst, who was captivated for the moment by Edith, and
       hearing that no knight was
        resolute enough to try a fall with the Marquess, was impelled by his talent for
       action to enter the lists. He had talked down everybody, unhorsed every cavalier. Nobody had
       a chance against him; he answered all your questions before you asked them; contradicted
       everybody with the intrepidity of a Rigby; annihilated your anecdotes by historiettes
       infinitely more piquant; and if anybody chanced to make a joke which he could not excel,
       declared immediately that it was a Joe Miller. He was absurd, extravagant, grotesque, noisy;
       but he was young, rattling, and interesting from his health and spirits. Edith was extremely
       amused by him; and was encouraging by her smile his spiritual excesses, when they all
       suddenly met Lady Wallinger and Coningsby.
The eyes of Edith and Coningsby met for the first time since they so cruelly encountered on
       the staircase of—House. A deep, quick blush suffused her face; her eyes gleamed with a sudden
       corruscation; suddenly and quickly she put forth her hand.
Yes! he presses once more that hand which permanently to retain is the passion of his life,
        yet which may never be his! It seemed that for the ravishing delight of that
       moment, he could have borne with cheerfulness all the dark and harrowing misery of the year
       that had past away since he embraced her in the woods of Hellingsley, and pledged his faith
       by the waters of the rushing Darl.
He seized the occasion which offered itself, a moment to walk by her side, and to snatch
       some brief instants of unreserved communion.
"Forgive me!" she said.
"Ah! how could you ever doubt me!" said Coningsby.
"I was unhappy."
"And now we are to each other as before?"
"And will be; come what come may."

</div></body></text></TEI>