<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="46">
CHAPTER VII.
Another year elapsed; not so fruitful in incidents to Coningsby as the preceding
       ones, and yet not unprofitably passed. It had been spent in the almost unremitting
       cultivation of his intelligence. He had read deeply and extensively, digested his
       acquisitions, and had practised himself in surveying them, free from those conventional
       conclusions and those traditionary inferences that surrounded him. Although he had renounced
       his once cherished purpose of trying for University honours, an aim which he found discordant
       with the investigations on which his mind was bent, he had rarely quitted Cambridge. The
       society of his friends, the great convenience of public libraries, and the general
        tone of studious life around, rendered an University for him a genial
       residence. There is a moment in life, when the pride and thirst of knowledge seem to absorb
       our being, and so it happened now to Coningsby, who felt each day stronger in his
       intellectual resources, and each day more anxious and avid to increase them. The habits of
       public discussion fostered by the Debating Society were also for Coningsby no inconsiderable
       tie to the University. This was the arena in which he felt himself at home. The promise of
       his Eton days was here fulfilled. And while his friends listened to his sustained argument or
       his impassioned declamation; the prompt reply or the apt retort; they looked forward with
       pride through the vista of years to the time when the hero of the youthful Club should
       convince or dazzle in the senate. It is probable then that he would have remained at
       Cambridge with slight intervals until he had taken his degree, had not circumstances occurred
       which gave altogether a new turn to his thoughts.
When Lord Monmouth had fixed his wedding-day he had written himself to Coningsby to
       announce his intended marriage, and to request
        his grandson's presence at the ceremony. The letter was more than kind; it was
       warm and generous. He assured his grandson that this alliance should make no difference in
       the very ample provision which he had long intended for him; that he should ever esteem
       Coningsby his nearest relative; and that while his death would bring to Coningsby as
       considerable an independence as an English gentleman need desire, so in his lifetime,
       Coningsby should ever be supported as became his birth, breeding, and future prospects. Lord
       Monmouth had mentioned to Lucretia, that he was about to invite his grandson to their
       wedding, and the lady had received the intimation with satisfaction. It so happened that a
       few hours after, Lucretia who now entered the private rooms of Lord Monmouth without
       previously announcing her arrival, met Villebecque with the letter to Coningsby in his hand.
       Lucretia took it away from him, and said it should be posted with her own letters. It never
       reached its destination. Our friend learnt the marriage from the newspapers, which somewhat
       astounded him; but Coningsby was fond of his grandfather, and he wrote
        Lord Monmouth a letter of congratulation, full of feeling and ingenuousness,
       and which, while it much pleased the person to whom it was addressed, unintentionally
       convinced him that Coningsby had never received his original communication. Lord Monmouth
       spoke to Villebecque, who could throw sufficient light upon the subject, but it was never
       mentioned to Lady Monmouth. The Marquess was a man who always found out everything, and
       enjoyed the secret.
Rather more than a year after the marriage, when Coningsby had completed his twenty-first
       year, the year which he had passed so quietly at Cambridge, he received a letter from his
       grandfather, informing him that after a variety of movements Lady Monmouth and himself were
       established in Paris for the season, and desiring that he would not fail to come over as soon
       as was practicable, and pay them as long a visit as the regulations of the University would
       permit. So, at the close of the December term, Coningsby quitted Cambridge for Paris.
Passing through London, he made his first visit to his banker at Charing Cross, on whom he
       had periodically drawn since he commenced
        his college life. He was in the outer counting-house, making some inquiries
       about a letter of credit, when one of the partners came out from an inner room, and invited
       him to enter. This firm had been for generations the bankers of the Coningsby family; and it
       appeared that there was a sealed box in their possession which had belonged to the father of
       Coningsby, and they wished to take this opportunity of delivering it to his son. This
       communication deeply interested him; and as he was alone in London, at an hotel, and on the
       wing for a foreign country, he requested permission at once to examine it, in order that he
       might again deposit it with them: so he was shown into a private room for that purpose. The
       seal was broken; the box was full of papers, chiefly correspondence: among them was a packet
       described as letters from "my dear Helen," the mother of Coningsby. In the interior of this
       packet, there was a miniature of that mother. He looked at it; put it down: looked at it
       again and again. He could not be mistaken. There was the same blue fillet in the bright hair.
       It was an
        exact copy of that portrait which had so greatly excited his attention when at
       Millbank! This was a mysterious and singularly perplexing incident. It greatly agitated him.
       He was alone in the room when he made the discovery. When he had recovered himself, he sealed
       up the contents of the box, with the exception of his mother's letters and the miniature,
       which he took away with him, and then re-delivered it to his banker for custody until his
       return.
Coningsby found Lord and Lady Monmouth in a splendid hotel in the Faubourg St. Honoré, near
       the English embassy. His grandfather looked at him with marked attention, and received him
       with evident satisfaction. Indeed Lord Monmouth was greatly pleased that Harry had come to
       Paris; it was the University of the World, where everybody should graduate. Paris and London
       ought to be the great objects of all travellers; the rest was mere landscape.
It cannot be denied that between Lucretia and Coningsby there existed from the first a
       certain antipathy; and though circumstances
        for a short time had apparently removed or modified the aversion, the manner of
       the lady when Coningsby was ushered into her boudoir, resplendent with all that Parisian
       taste and luxury could devise, was characterized by that frigid politeness which had preceded
       the days of their more genial acquaintance. If the manner of Lucretia were the same as before
       her marriage, a considerable change might however be observed in her appearance. Her fine
       form had become more developed; while her dress, that she once totally neglected, was
       elaborate and gorgeous, and of the last mode. Lucretia was the fashion at Paris; a great
       lady, greatly admired. A guest under such a roof however, Coningsby was at once launched into
       the most brilliant circles of Parisian society, which he found fascinating.
The art of society is, without doubt, perfectly comprehended and completely practised in
       the bright metropolis of France. An Englishman cannot enter a saloon without instantly
       feeling he is among a race more social than his compatriots. What, for example, is more
       consummate than
        the manner in which a French lady receives her guests! She unites graceful
       repose and unaffected dignity, with the most amiable regard for others. She sees every one;
       she speaks to every one; she sees them at the right moment; she says the right thing. It is
       utterly impossible to detect any difference in the position of her guests by the spirit in
       which she welcomes them. There is, indeed, throughout every circle of Parisian society, from
       the "château" to the "cabaret," a sincere homage to intellect; and this without any maudlin
       sentiment. None sooner than the Parisians can draw the line between factitious notoriety and
       honest fame; or sooner distinguish between the counterfeit celebrity and the standard
       reputation. In England we too often alternate between a supercilious neglect of genius and a
       rhapsodical pursuit of quacks. In England, when a new character appears in our circles, the
       first question always is, "Who is he?" In France it is, "What is he?" In England, "How much
       a-year?" In France, "What has he done?"

</div></body></text></TEI>