<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="72">
CHAPTER II.
This was a crisis in the life of Coningsby; yet, like many critical epochs, the
       person most interested in it was not sufficiently aware of its character. The first feeling
       which he experienced at the intelligence was sincere affliction. He was fond of his
       grandfather; had received great kindness from him, and at a period of life when it was most
       welcome. The neglect and hardships of his early years, instead of leaving a prejudice against
       one who by some might be esteemed their author, had only rendered by their contrast Coningsby
       more keenly sensible of the solicitude and enjoyment which had been lavished on his happy
       youth.

The next impression on his mind was undoubtedly a natural and reasonable speculation on the
       effect of this bereavement on his fortunes. Lord Monmouth had more than once assured
       Coningsby that he had provided for him as became a near relative to whom he was attached; and
       in a manner which ought to satisfy the wants and wishes of an English gentleman. The
       allowance which Lord Monmouth had made him, as considerable as usually accorded to the eldest
       sons of wealthy peers, might justify him in estimating his future patrimony as extremely
       ample. He was aware indeed that at a subsequent period, his grandfather had projected for him
       fortunes of a still more elevated character. He looked to Coningsby as the future
       representative of an ancient Barony, and had been purchasing territory with the view of
       supporting the title. But Coningsby did not by any means firmly reckon on these views being
       realized. He had a suspicion that in thwarting the wishes of his grandfather in not becoming
       a candidate for Darlford, he had at the moment arrested arrangements which, from the tone of
       Lord Monmouth's communication,
        he believed were then in progress for that purpose; and he thought it
       improbable, with his knowledge of his grandfather's habits, that Lord Monmouth had found
       either time or inclination to resume before his decease the completion of these plans. Indeed
       there was a period when in adopting the course which he pursued with respect to Darlford,
       Coningsby was well aware that he perilled more than the large fortune which was to accompany
       the Barony. Had not a separation between Lord Monmouth and his wife taken place
       simultaneously with Coningsby's difference with his grandfather, he was conscious that the
       consequences might have been even altogether fatal to his prospects; but the absence of her
       evil influence at such a conjuncture, its permanent removal indeed from the scene, coupled
       with his fortunate though not formal reconciliation with Lord Monmouth, had long ago banished
       from his memory all those apprehensions to which he had felt it impossible at the time to
       shut his eyes. Before he left town for Scotland, he had made a farewell visit to his
       grandfather, who, though not as cordial as in old days, had been gracious; and Coningsby,
        during his excursion to the moors, and his various visits to the country, had
       continued at intervals to write to his grandfather, as had been for some years his custom. On
       the whole, with an indefinite feeling which, in spite of many a rational effort, did
       nevertheless haunt his mind, that this great and sudden event might exercise a very vast and
       beneficial influence on his worldly position, Coningsby could not but feel some consolation
       in the affliction which he sincerely experienced, in the hope that he might at all events now
       offer to Edith a home worthy of her charms, her virtues, and her love.
Although he had not seen her since their hurried yet sweet reconciliation in the gardens of
       Lady Everingham, Coningsby was never long without indirect intelligence of the incidents of
       her life; and the correspondence between Lady Everingham and Henry Sydney, while they were at
       the moors, had apprised him that Lord Beaumanoir's suit had terminated unsuccessfully almost
       immediately after his brother had quitted London.
It was late in the evening when Coningsby arrived in town: he called at once on Lord
       Eskdale,
        who was one of Lord Monmouth's executors; and he persuaded Coningsby, whom he
       saw depressed, to dine with him alone.
"You should not be seen at a Club," said the good-natured peer; "and I remember myself in
       old days what was the wealth of an Albanian larder."
Lord Eskdale at dinner talked very frankly of the disposition of Lord Monmouth's property.
       He spoke as a matter of course that Coningsby was his grandfather's principal heir.
"I don't know whether you will be happier with a large fortune?" said Lord Eskdale. "It's a
       troublesome thing; nobody is satisfied with what you do with it; very often not yourself. To
       maintain an equable expenditure; not to spend too much on one thing, too little on another,
       is an art. There must be a harmony, a keeping, in disbursement, which very few men have.
       Great wealth wearies. The thing to have is about ten thousand a-year, and the world to think
       you have only five. There's some enjoyment then; one is let alone. But the instant you have a
       large fortune, duties commence. And then impudent fellows borrow
        your money, and if you ask them for it again, they go about town saying you are
       a Screw."
Lord Monmouth had died suddenly at his Richmond villa, which latterly he never quitted, at
       a little supper; with no persons near him but those who were very amusing. He suddenly found
       he could not lift his glass to his lips, and being extremely polite waited a few minutes
       before he asked Clotilde, who was singing a very sparkling drinking song, to do him that
       service. When in accordance with his request she reached him, it was too late. The ladies
       shrieked, being very frightened: at first they were in despair, but after reflection, they
       evinced some intention of plundering the house. Villebecque who was absent at the moment
       arrived in time; and every body became orderly and broken-hearted.
The body had been removed to Monmouth House, where it had been embalmed and laid in state.
       The funeral was not numerously attended. There was nobody in town; some distinguished
       connexions however came up from the country, though it was a period inconvenient for such
        movements. After the funeral, the will was to be read in the principal saloon
       of Monmouth House, one of those gorgeous apartments that had excited the boyish wonder of
       Coningsby on his first visit to that paternal roof, and now hung in black adorned with the
       escutcheon of the deceased peer.
The testamentary dispositions of the late Lord were still unknown, though the names of his
       executors had been announced by his family solicitor, in whose custody the will and codicils
       had always remained. The executors under the will were Lord Eskdale, Mr. Ormsby, and Mr.
       Rigby. By a subsequent appointment, Sidonia was added. All these individuals were now
       present. Coningsby, who had been chief mourner, stood on the right hand of the solicitor, who
       sat at the end of a long table, round which in groups were ranged all who had attended the
       funeral, including several of the superior members of the household; among them M.
       Villebecque.
The solicitor rose and explained that though Lord Monmouth had been in the habit of very
       frequently adding codicils to his will, the original
        will however changed or modified had never been revoked; it was therefore
       necessary to commence by reading that instrument. So saying he sate down, and breaking the
       seals of a large packet, he produced the will of Philip Augustus, Marquess of Monmouth, which
       had been retained in his custody since its execution.
By this will, of the date of 1829, the sum of ten thousand pounds was left to Coningsby,
       then unknown to his grandfather; the same sum to Mr. Rigby. There were a great number of
       legacies, none of inferior amount, most of them of a less; these were chiefly left to old
       male companions and women in various countries. There was an almost inconceivable number of
       small annuities to faithful servants, decayed actors, and obscure foreigners. The residue of
       his personal estate was left to four gentlemen; three of whom had quitted this world before
       the legator; the bequests therefore had lapsed. The fourth residuary legatee, in whom
       according to the terms of the will all would have consequently centred was Mr. Rigby.
There followed several codicils which did not
        materially effect the previous disposition; one of them leaving a legacy of
       £20,000 to the Princess Colonna; until they arrived at the latter part of the year 1832, when
       a codicil increased the £10,000 left under the will to Coningsby to £50,000.
After Coningsby's visit to the Castle in 1836 a very important change occurred in the
       disposition of Lord Monmouth's estate. The legacy of £50,000 in his favour was revoked, and
       the same sum left to the Princess Lucretia. A similar amount was bequeathed to Mr. Rigby; and
       Coningsby was left sole residuary legatee.
The marriage led to a considerable modification. An estate of about nine thousand a year
       which Lord Monmouth had himself purchased, and was therefore in his own disposition was left
       to Coningsby. The legacy to Mr. Rigby was reduced to £20,000, and the whole of his residue
       left to his issue by Lady Monmouth; in case he died without issue, the estate bequeathed to
       Coningsby to be taken into account, and the residue then to be divided equally between Lady
       Monmouth and his grandson. It was
        under this instrument that Sidonia had been appointed an executor, and to whom
       Lord Monmouth left, among others, his celebrated picture of the Holy Family by Murillo, as
       his friend had often admired it. To Lord Eskdale he left all his female miniatures, and to
       Mr. Ormsby his rare and splendid collection of French novels, and all his wines, except his
       Tokay, which he left, with his library to Sir Robert Peel; though this legacy was afterwards
       revoked in consequence of Sir Robert's conduct about the Irish Corporations.
The solicitor paused and begged permission to send for a glass of water. While this was
       arranging there was a murmur at the lower part of the room, but little disposition to
       conversation among those in the vicinity of the lawyer. Coningsby was silent, his brow a
       little knit; Mr. Rigby was extremely pale and restless, but said nothing. Mr. Ormsby took a
       pinch of snuff, and offered his box to Lord Eskdale who was next to him. They exchanged
       glances, and made some observation about the weather. Sidonia stood apart with his arms
       folded. He had not of course attended the
        funeral, nor had he as yet exchanged any recognition with Coningsby.
"Now, gentlemen," said the solicitor, "if you please I will proceed."
They came to the year 1839, the year Coningsby was at Hellingsley. This appeared to be a
       very critical period in the fortunes of Lady Monmouth; while Coningsby's reached to the
       culminating point. Mr. Rigby was reduced to his original legacy under the will of £10,000; a
       sum of equal amount was bequeathed to Armand Villebecque in acknowledgment of faithful
       services; all the disposition in favour of Lady Monmouth were revoked, and she was limited to
       her moderate jointure of £3,000 per annum, under the marriage settlement; while everything
       without reserve was left absolutely to Coningsby.
A subsequent codicil determined that the £10,000 left to Mr. Rigby should be equally
       divided between him and Lucian Gay, but as some compensation, Lord Monmouth left to the Right
       Honourable Nicholas Rigby the bust of that gentleman, which he had himself presented to his
       Lordship, and which at his desire had
        been placed in the vestibule at Coningsby Castle, from the amiable motive that
       after Lord Monmouth's decease Mr. Rigby might wish perhaps to present it to some other
       friend.
Lord Eskdale and Mr. Ormsby took care not to catch the eye of Mr. Rigby. As for Coningsby
       he saw nobody. He maintained during the extraordinary situation in which he was placed a firm
       demeanour; but serene and regulated as he appeared to the spectators, his nerves were really
       strung to a high pitch.
There was yet another codicil. It bore the date of June 1840; and was made at Brighton
       immediately after the separation with Lady Monmouth. It was the sight of this instrument that
       sustained Rigby at this great emergency. He had a wild conviction that after all, it must set
       all right. He felt assured that as Lady Monmouth had already been disposed of, it must
       principally refer to the disheritance of Coningsby—secured by Rigby's well-timed and
       malignant mis-representations of what had occurred in Lancashire during the preceding summer.
       And then to whom could Lord
        Monmouth leave his money? However he might cut and carve up his fortunes,
       Rigby, and especially at a moment when he had so served him, must come in for a considerable
       slice.
His prescient mind was right. All the dispositions in favour of "my grandson Harry
       Coningsby" were revoked; and he inherited from his grandfather only the interest of the sum
       of £10,000 which had been originally bequeathed to him in his orphan boyhood. The executors
       had the power of investing the principal in any way they thought proper for his advancement
       in life, provided always it was not placed in "the capital stock of any manufactory."
Coningsby turned pale; he lost his abstracted look, he caught the eye of Rigby, he read the
       latent malice of that nevertheless anxious countenance. What passed through the mind and
       being of Coningsby was thought and sensation enough for a year, yet it was as the flash that
       reveals a whole country, yet ceases to be ere one can say it lightens. There was a revelation
       to him of an inward power that should baffle
        these conventional calamities; a natural and sacred confidence in his youth and
       health, and knowledge and convictions. Even the recollection of Edith was not unaccompanied
       with some sustaining associations. At least the mightiest foe to their union was
       departed.
All this was the impression of an instant, simultaneous with the reading of the words of
       form with which the last testamentary disposition of the Marquess of Monmouth left the sum of
       £30,000 to Armand Villebecque; and all the rest, residue, and remainder of his unentailed
       property wheresoever and whatsoever it might be, amounting in value to nearly a million
       sterling, was given devised and bequeathed to Flora, commonly called Flora Villebecque, the
       step-child of the said Armand Villebecque, "but who is my natural daughter by Marie Estelle
       Matteau, an actress at the Théâtre Français in the years 1811-15 by the name of Stella."

</div></body></text></TEI>