<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="40">
CHAPTER I.
An University life did not bring to Coningsby that feeling of emancipation usually
       experienced by freshmen. The contrast between school and college life is perhaps under any
       circumstances less striking to the Etonian than to others: he has been prepared for becoming
       his own master by the liberty so wisely entrusted to him in his boyhood, and which is in
       general so discreetly exercised. But there were also other reasons why Coningsby should have
       been less impressed with the novelty of his life, and have
        encountered less temptations than commonly are met with in the new existence
       which an University opens to youth. In the interval, which had elapsed between quitting Eton
       and going to Cambridge, brief as the period may comparatively appear, Coningsby had seen much
       of the world. Three or four months indeed may not seem, at the first blush, a course of time
       which can very materially influence the formation of character; but time must not be counted
       by calendars, but by sensations, by thought. Coningsby had felt a good deal, reflected more.
       He had encountered a great number of human beings, offering a vast variety of character for
       his observation. It was not merely manners, but even the intellectual and moral development
       of the human mind, which in a great degree unconsciously to himself had been submitted to his
       study and his scrutiny. New trains of ideas had been opened to him; his mind was teeming with
       suggestions. The horizon of his intelligence had insensibly expanded. He perceived that there
       were other opinions in the world besides those to which he had been
        habituated. The depths of his intellect had been stirred. He was a wiser
       man.
He distinguished three individuals whose acquaintance had greatly influenced his mind;
       Eustace Lyle, the elder Millbank, above all, Sidonia. He curiously meditated over the fact,
       that three English subjects, one of them a principal landed proprietor, another one of the
       most eminent manufacturers, and the third the greatest capitalist in the kingdom, all of them
       men of great intelligence, and doubtless of a high probity and conscience, were in their
       hearts, disaffected with the political constitution of the country. Yet unquestionably these
       were the men among whom we ought to seek for some of our first citizens. What then was this
       repulsive quality in those institutions which we persisted in calling national, and which
       once were so? Here was a great question.
There was another reason also, why Coningsby should feel a little fastidious among his new
       habits, and without being aware of it, a little depressed. For three or four months, and for
       the first time in his life, he had passed
        his time in the continual society of refined and charming women. It is an
       acquaintance which when habitual exercises a great influence over the tone of the mind, even
       if it does not produce any more violent effects. It refines the taste, quickens the
       perception, and gives, as it were, a grace and flexibility to the intellect. Coningsby in his
       solitary rooms arranging his books, sighed when he recalled the Lady Everinghams and the Lady
       Theresas; the gracious Duchess; the frank, good-tempered Madame Colonna; that deeply
       interesting enigma, the Princess Lucretia; and the gentle Flora. He thought with disgust of
       the impending dissipation of an University, which could only be an exaggeration of their
       coarse frolics at school. It seemed rather vapid this mighty Cambridge over which they had so
       often talked in the playing fields of Eton with such anticipations of its vast and absorbing
       interest. And those University honours that once were the great object of his aspirations,
       they did not figure in that grandeur with which they once haunted his imagination.

What Coningsby determined to conquer was knowledge. He had watched the influence of Sidonia
       in society with an eye of unceasing vigilance. Coningsby perceived that all yielded to him;
       that Lord Monmouth even, who seemed to respect none, gave place to his intelligence; appealed
       to him, listened to him, was guided by him. What was the secret of this influence? Knowledge.
       On all subjects his views were prompt and clear, and this not more from his native sagacity
       and reach of view, than from the aggregate of facts which rose to guide his judgment, and
       illustrate his meaning from all countries and all ages instantly at his command.
The friends of Coningsby were now hourly arriving. It seemed when he met them again, that
       they had all suddenly become men since they had separated; Buckhurst especially. He had been
       at Paris, and returned with his mind very much opened, and trowsers made quite in a new
       style. All his thoughts were how soon he could contrive to get back again; and he told them
       endless stories of actresses and
        dinners at fashionable cafés. Vere enjoyed Cambridge most, because he had been
       staying with his family since he quitted Eton. Henry Sydney was full of church architecture,
       national sports, restoration of the order of the Peasantry, and was to maintain a constant
       correspondence on these and similar subjects with Eustace Lyle. Finally however they all fell
       into a very fair, regular, routine life. They all read a little, but not with the enthusiasm
       which they had once projected. Buckhurst drove four-in-hand, and they all of them sometimes
       assisted him; but not immoderately. Their suppers were sometimes gay, but never outrageous;
       and among all of them, the school friendship was maintained unbroken, and even
       undisturbed.
The fame of Coningsby had preceded him at Cambridge. No man ever went up from whom more was
       expected in every way. The dons awaited a sucking member for the University, the
       undergraduates were prepared to welcome a new Alcibiades. He was neither: neither a prig nor
       a profligate; but a quiet, gentleman-like, yet spirited young man, gracious to all, but
        intimate only with his old friends, and giving always an impression in his
       general tone that his soul was not absorbed in his University.
And yet perhaps he might have been coddled into a prig, or flattered into a profligate, had
       it not been for the intervening experience which he had gained between his school and college
       life. That had visibly impressed upon him what before he had only faintly acquired from
       books, that there was a greater and more real world awaiting him, than to be found in those
       bowers of Academus to which youth is apt at first to attribute an exaggerated importance. A
       world of action and passion, of power and peril; a world for which a great preparation was
       indeed necessary, severe and profound, but not altogether such an one as was now offered to
       him. Yet this want must be supplied, and by himself. Coningsby had already acquirements
       sufficiently considerable with some formal application to ensure him at all times his degree.
       He was no longer engrossed by the intention
        he once proudly entertained of trying for honours, and he chalked out for
       himself that range of reading, which, digested by his thought, should furnish him in some
       degree with that various knowledge of the history of man to which he aspired. No, we must not
       for a moment believe that accident could have long diverted the course of a character so
       strong. The same desire that prevented the Castle of his grandfather from proving a Castle of
       Indolence to him, that saved him from a too early initiation into the seductive distractions
       of a refined and luxurious society, would have preserved Coningsby from the puerile
       profligacy of a college life, or from being that idol of private tutors, a young pedant. It
       was that noble ambition, the highest and the best, that must be born in the heart and
       organized in the brain, which will not let a man be content unless his intellectual power is
       recognised by his race, and desires that it should contribute to their welfare. It is the
       heroic feeling; the feeling that in old days produced demi-gods; without which no State is
       safe; without which
        political institutions are meat without salt; the Crown a bauble, the Church an
       establishment, Parliaments debating clubs, and Civilization itself but a fitful and transient
       dream.

</div></body></text></TEI>