<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="48">
CHAPTER I.
The knowledge that Sidonia was at Paris greatly agitated Lady Monmouth. She
       received the intimation indeed from Coningsby at dinner with sufficient art to conceal her
       emotion. Lord Monmouth himself was quite pleased at the announcement. Sidonia was his
       especial favourite; he knew so much, had such an excellent judgment, and was so rich. He had
       always
        something to tell you, was the best man in the world to bet on, and never wanted
       anything. A perfect character according to the Monmouth ethics.
In the evening of the day that Coningsby met Sidonia, Lady Monmouth made a little visit to
       the charming Duchess de G—t who was "at home" every other night in her pretty hotel, with its
       embroidered white satin draperies, its fine old cabinets, and ancestral portraits of famous
       name, brave marshals and bright princesses of the olden time, on its walls. These receptions
       without form, yet full of elegance, are what English "at homes" were before the continental
       war, though now, by a curious perversion of terms, the easy domestic title distinguishes in
       England a formally prepared and elaborately collected assembly, in which everything and every
       person are careful to be as little "homely" as possible. In France, on the contrary, 'tis on
       these occasions, and in this manner, that society carries on that degree and kind of
       intercourse which in England we attempt awkwardly to maintain by the medium
        of that unpopular species of visitation styled a morning call; which all complain that
       they have either to make or to endure.
Nowhere was this species of reception more happily conducted than at the Duchess de G—t.
       The rooms though small, decorated with taste, brightly illumined; a handsome and gracious
       hostess, the Duke the very pearl of gentlemen, and sons and daughters worthy of such parents.
       Every moment some one came in, and some one went away. In your way from a dinner to a ball,
       you stopped to exchange agreeable "on dits." It seemed that every woman was pretty, every man
       a wit. Sure you were to find yourself surrounded by celebrities, and men were welcomed there
       if they were clever before they were famous, which showed it was a house that regarded
       intellect, and did not seek merely to gratify its vanity by being surrounded by the
       distinguished.
Enveloped in a rich Indian shawl and leaning back on a sofa, Lady Monmouth was engaged in
       conversation with the courtly and classic Count M—é, when on casually turning her head, she
        observed entering the saloon, Sidonia. She just caught his form bowing to the Duchess,
       and instantly turned her head and replunged into her conversation with increased interest.
       Lady Monmouth was a person who had the power of seeing all about her, everything and
       everybody, without appearing to look. She was conscious that Sidonia was approaching her
       neighbourhood. Her heart beat in tumult; she dreaded to catch the eye of that very individual
       whom she was so anxious to meet. He was advancing towards the sofa. Instinctively Lady
       Monmouth turned from the Count, and began speaking earnestly to her other neighbour, a young
       daughter of the house, innocent and beautiful, not yet quite fledged, trying her wings in
       society under the maternal eye. She was surprised by the extreme interest which her grand
       neighbour suddenly took in all her pursuits, her studies, her daily walks in the Bois de
       Boulogne. Sidonia as the Marchioness had anticipated, had now reached the sofa. But no, it
       was to the Count and not to Lady Monmouth that he was advancing; and they were immediately
       engaged in conversation.
        After some little time when she had become accustomed to his voice, and found her own
       heart throbbing with less violence, Lucretia turned again, as if by accident to the Count,
       and met the glance of Sidonia. She meant to have received him with haughtiness, but her
       self-command deserted her; and slightly rising from the sofa, she welcomed him with a
       countenance of extreme pallor and with some awkwardness.
His manner was such as might have assisted her, even had she been more troubled. It was
       marked by a degree of respectful friendliness. He expressed without reserve his pleasure at
       meeting her again; inquired much how she had passed her time since they last parted; asked
       more than once after the Marquess. The Count moved away; Sidonia took his seat. His ease and
       homage combined very greatly relieved her. She expressed to him how kind her Lord would
       consider his society, for the Marquess had suffered in health since Sidonia last saw him. His
       periodical gout had left him, which made him ill and nervous. The Marquess received his
       friends at dinner every day.
        Sidonia particularly amiable, offered himself as a guest for the following one.
"And do you go to the great ball to-morrow?" inquired Lucretia, delighted with all that had
       occurred.
"I always go to their balls," said Sidonia, "I have promised."
There was a momentary pause; Lucretia, happier than she had been for a long time, her face
       a little flushed, and truly in a secret tumult of sweet thoughts, remembered she had been
       long there, and offering her hand to Sidonia, bade him adieu until to-morrow. While he, as
       was his custom, soon repaired to the refined circle of the Countess de C—s—I—ne a lady, whose
       manners he always mentioned as his fair ideal, and whose house was his favourite haunt.
Before to-morrow comes, a word or two respecting two other characters of this history
       connected with the family of Lord Monmouth. And first of Flora. "La Petite" was neither very
       well nor very happy. Her hereditary disease developed itself; gradually, but in a manner
        alarming to those who loved her. She was very delicate, and suffered so much from the
       weakness of her chest, that she was obliged to relinquish singing. This was really the only
       tie between her and the Marchioness, who without being a petty tyrant, treated her often with
       unfeeling haughtiness. She was therefore now rarely seen in the chambers of the great. In her
       own apartments she found indeed some distraction in music, for which she had a natural
       predisposition, but this was a pursuit that only fed the morbid passion of her tender soul.
       Alone, listening only to sweet sounds, or indulging in soft dreams that never could be
       realized, her existence glided away like a vision, and she seemed to become every day more
       fair and fragile. Alas! hers was the sad and mystic destiny to love one whom she never met,
       and by whom if she met him, she would scarcely perhaps be recognised. Yet in that passion,
       fanciful, almost ideal, her life was absorbed, nor for her did the world contain an
       existence, a thought, a sensation, beyond those that sprang from the image of the noble youth
       who had sympathized with her in her sorrows,
        and had softened the hard fortunes of dependence by his generous sensibility. Happy
       that with many mortifications, it was still her lot to live under the roof of one who bore
       his name, and in whose veins flowed the same blood! She felt indeed for the Marquess, whom
       she so rarely saw, and from whom she had never received much notice, prompted it would seem
       by her fantastic passion, a degree of reverence, almost of affection, which seemed
       occasionally even to herself as something inexplicable and without reason.
As for her fond stepfather, M. Villebecque, the world fared very differently with him. His
       lively and enterprising genius, his ready and multiform talents, and his temper which defied
       disturbance, had made their way. He had become the very right hand of Lord Monmouth; his only
       counsellor, his only confidant; his secret agent; the minister of his will. And well did
       Villebecque deserve this trust, and ably did he maintain himself in the difficult position
       which he achieved. There was nothing which Villebecque did not know, nothing which he could
       not do, especially at Paris. He was master
        of his subject; in all things the secret of success, and without which however they may
       from accident dazzle the world, the statesman, the orator, the author, all alike feel the
       damning consciousness of being charlatans.
Coningsby had made a visit to M. Villebecque and Flora the day after his arrival. It was a
       recollection and a courtesy that evidently greatly gratified them. Villebecque talked very
       much and amusingly; and Flora, whom Coningsby frequently addressed, very little, though she
       listened with great earnestness. Coningsby told her that he thought from all he heard she was
       too much alone, and counselled her to gaiety. But nature that had made her mild, had denied
       her that constitutional liveliness of being which is the graceful property of French women.
       She was a lilly of the valley, that loved seclusion, and the tranquillity of virgin glades.
       Almost every day as he passed their entresol, Coningsby would look into Villebecque's
       apartments for a moment to ask after Flora.

</div></body></text></TEI>