<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>Coningsby: or, The New Generation</title><author>Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1844</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="76">
CHAPTER VI.
The state of political parties in England in the spring of 1841 offered a most
       remarkable contrast to their condition at the period commemorated in the first chapter of
       this work. The banners of the Conservative camp at this moment lowered on the Whig forces as
       the gathering host of the Norman invader frowned on the coast of Sussex. The Whigs were not
       yet conquered, but they were doomed; and they themselves knew it. The mistake which was made
       by the Conservative leaders in not retaining office in 1839, and whether we consider their
       conduct in a national and constitutional light, or as a mere question of political tactics
        and party prudence, it was unquestionably a great mistake, had infused into the
       corpse of Whig authority a kind of galvanic action, which only the superficial could mistake
       for vitality. Even to form a basis for their future operations, after the conjuncture of—39,
       the Whigs were obliged to make a fresh inroad on the revenue, the daily increasing debility
       of which was now arresting attention, and exciting public alarm. It was clear that the
       catastrophe of the government would be financial.
Under all the circumstances of the case, the conduct of the Whig Cabinet in their final
       propositions cannot be described as deficient either in boldness or prudence. The policy
       which they recommended was in itself a sagacious and spirited policy, but they erred in
       supposing that at the period it was brought forward any measures promoted by the Whigs could
       have obtained general favour in the country. The Whigs were known to be feeble; they were
       looked upon as tricksters. The country knew they were opposed by a very powerful party, and
       though there certainly never was any authority for the belief, the country did believe that
       that
        powerful party were influenced by great principles; had in their view a
       definite and national policy; and would secure England, instead of a feeble administration
       and fluctuating opinions, energy and a creed.
The future effect of the Whig propositions of —41 will not be detrimental to that party,
       even if in the interval they be appropriated piecemeal, as will probably be the case, by
       their Conservative successors. But for the moment, and in the plight in which the Whig party
       found themselves, it was impossible to have devised measures more conducive to their
       precipitate fall. Great interests were menaced by a weak government. The consequence was
       inevitable. Tadpole and Taper saw it in a moment. They snuffed the factious air, and felt the
       coming storm. Notwithstanding the extreme congeniality of these worthies, there was a little
       latent jealousy between them. Tadpole worshipped Registration; Taper adored a Cry. Tadpole
       always maintained that it was the winnowing of the electoral lists that could alone gain the
       day; Taper, on the contrary, faithful to ancient traditions was ever of opinion that
        the game must ultimately be won by popular clamor. It always seemed so
       impossible that the Conservative party could ever be popular, the extreme graciousness and
       personal popularity of the leaders not being generally esteemed a sufficient hedge against
       the inveterate odium that attached to their opinions, that the Tadpole philosophy was the
       favoured tenet in high places; and Taper had had his knuckles well rapped more than once for
       manoeuvring too actively against the New Poor Law, and for hiring several linkboys to bawl a
       much wronged lady's name in the Park when the Court prorogued Parliament.
And now after all in 1841 it seemed that Taper was right. There was a great clamour in
       every quarter, and the clamour was against the Whigs and in favour of Conservative
       principles. What Canadian timber merchants meant by Conservative principles it is not
       difficult to conjecture; or West India planters. It was tolerably clear on the hustings what
       squires and farmers and their followers meant by Conservative principles. What they mean by
       Conservative principles now is another question; and whether Conservative principles mean
       something
        higher than the perpetuation of fiscal arrangements some of them very
       impolitic, none of them very important. But no matter what different bodies of men understood
       by the cry in which they all joined, the Cry existed; Taper beat Tadpole; and the great
       Conservative party beat the shattered and exhausted Whigs.
Notwithstanding the abstraction of his legal studies, Coningsby could not be altogether
       insensible to the political crisis. In the political world of course he never mixed, but the
       friends of his boyhood were deeply interested in affairs, and they lost no opportunity which
       he would permit them, of cultivating his society. Their occasional fellowship, a visit now
       and then to Sidonia, and a call sometimes on Flora who lived at Richmond, comprised his
       social relations. His general acquaintance did not desert him, but he was out of sight, and
       did not wish to be remembered. Mr. Ormsby asked him to dinner, and occasionally mourned over
       his fate in the bow window of Whites; while Lord Eskdale even went to see him in the Temple,
       was interested in his progress, and said with an encouraging look, that when he was called to
        the bar, all his friends must join and get up the steam. Coningsby had once met
       Mr. Rigby who was walking with the Duke of Agincourt, which was probably the reason he could
       not notice a lawyer. Mr. Rigby cut Coningsby.
Lord Eskdale had obtained from Villebecque very accurate details as to the cause of
       Coningsby being disherited. Our hero, if one in such fallen fortunes may still be described
       as a hero, had mentioned to Lord Eskdale his sorrow that his grandfather had died in anger
       with him; but Lord Eskdale, without dwelling on the subject, had assured him that he had
       reason to believe that if Lord Monmouth had lived, affairs would have been different. He had
       altered the disposition of his property at a moment of great and general irritation and
       excitement, and had been too indolent, perhaps really too indisposed, which he was unwilling
       ever to acknowledge, to recur to a calmer and more equitable settlement. Lord Eskdale had
       been more frank with Sidonia, and had told him all about the refusal to become a candidate
       for Darlford against Mr. Millbank,
        the communication of Rigby to Lord Monmouth as to the presence of Oswald
       Millbank at the Castle and the love of Coningsby for his sister; all these details, furnished
       by Villebecque to Lord Eskdale had been duly transferred by that nobleman to his co-executor;
       and Sidonia, when he had sufficiently digested them, had made Lady Wallinger acquainted with
       the whole history.
The Dissolution of the Whig Parliament by the Whigs, the project of which had reached Lord
       Monmouth a year before, and yet in which nobody believed to the last moment, at length took
       place. All the world was dispersed in the heart of the season, and our solitary student of
       the Temple in his lonely chambers notwithstanding all his efforts, found his eye rather
       wander over the pages of Tidd and Chitty as he remembered that the great event to which he
       had so long looked forward was now occurring, and he after all was no actor in the mighty
       drama. It was to have been the epoch of his life; when he was to have found himself in that
       proud position for which all the studies, and meditations, and higher
        impulses of his nature, had been preparing him. It was a keen trial of a man.
       Every one of his friends and old companions were candidates and with sanguine prospects. Lord
       Henry was certain for a division of his county; Buckhurst harangued a large agricultural
       borough in his vicinity; Eustace Lyle and Vere stood in coalition for a Yorkshire town; and
       Oswald Millbank solicited the suffrages of a very important manufacturing constituency. They
       sent their addresses to Coningsby. He was deeply interested as he traced in them the
       influence of his own mind; often recognised the very expressions to which he had habituated
       them. Amid the confusion of a general election, no unimpassioned critic had time to canvass
       the language of an address to an isolated constituency; yet an intelligent speculator on the
       movements of political parties might have detected in these public declarations some
       intimation of new views, and of a tone of political feeling that has unfortunately been too
       long absent from the public life of this country.
It was the end of a sultry July day, the last
        ray of the sun shooting down Pall Mall sweltering with dust; there was a crowd
       round the doors of the Carlton and the Reform Clubs, and every now and then an express
       arrived with the agitating bulletin of a fresh defeat or a new triumph. Coningsby was walking
       up Pall Mall. He was going to dine at the Oxford and Cambridge Club, the only club on whose
       list he had retained his name, that he might occasionally have the pleasure of meeting an
       Eton or Cambridge friend without the annoyance of encountering any of his former fashionable
       acquaintances. He lighted in his walk on Mr. Tadpole and Mr. Taper, both of whom he knew. The
       latter did not notice him, but Mr. Tadpole more good-natured bestowed on him a rough nod, not
       unmarked by a slight expression of coarse pity.
Coningsby ordered his dinner, and then took up the evening papers, where he learnt the
       return of Vere and Lyle; and read a speech of Buckhurst denouncing the Venetian Constitution
       to the amazement of several thousand persons apparently not a little terrified by this
        unknown danger, now first introduced to their notice. Being true Englishmen,
       they were all against Buckhurst's opponent, who was of the Venetian party, and who ended by
       calling out Buckhurst for his personalities.
Coningsby had dined, and was reading in the library, when a waiter brought up a third
       edition of the Sun, with electioneering bulletins from the manufacturing districts to the
       very latest hour. Some large letters which expressed the name of Darlford caught his eye.
       There seemed great excitement in that borough; strange proceedings had happened. The column
       was headed, "Extraordinary Affair! Withdrawal of the Liberal Candidate! Two Tory Candidates
       in the field!!!"
His eye glanced over an animated speech of Mr. Millbank, his countenance changed, his heart
       palpitated. Mr. Millbank had resigned the representation of the town but not from weakness;
       his avocations demanded his presence; he had been requested to let his son supply his place,
       but his son was otherwise provided for; he should always take a deep
        interest in the town and trade of Darlford; he hoped that the link between the
       Borough and Hellingsley would be ever cherished (loud cheering); he wished in parting from
       them to take a step which should conciliate all parties, put an end to local heats and
       factious contentions, and secure the town an able and worthy representative. For these
       reasons he begged to propose to them a gentleman who bore a name which many of them greatly
       honoured, for himself he knew the individual, and it was his firm opinion that whether they
       considered his talents, his character, or the ancient connection of his family with the
       district, he could not propose a candidate more worthy of their confidence than Harry
        Coningsby, Esq.
This proposition was received with that wild enthusiasm which occasionally bursts out in
       the most civilised communities. The contest between Millbank and Rigby was equally balanced,
       neither party was over confident. The Conservatives were not particularly zealous in behalf
       of their champion; there was no Marquess of Monmouth and no Coningsby Castle now to
        back him; he was fighting on his own resources; and he was a beaten horse. The
       Liberals did not like the prospect of a defeat and dreaded the mortification of Rigby's
       triumph. The moderate man who thought more of local than political circumstances liked the
       name of Coningsby. Mr. Millbank had dexterously prepared his leading supporters for the
       substitution. Some traits of the character and conduct of Coningsby had been cleverly
       circulated. Thus there was a combination of many favourable causes in his favour. In half an
       hour's time his image was stamped on the brain of every inhabitant of the Borough as an
       interesting and accomplished youth, who had been wronged and who deserved to be rewarded. It
       was whispered that Rigby was his enemy. Bully Bluck and his mob offered Mr. Millbank's
       Committee to throw Mr. Rigby into the river; or to burn down his hotel, in case he was
       prudent enough not to show. Mr. Rigby determined to fight to the last. All his hopes were now
       staked on the successful result of this contest. It was impossible if he were returned
        that his friends could refuse him high office. The whole of Lord Monmouth's
       reduced legacy was devoted to this end. The third edition of the Sun left Mr. Rigby in vain
       attempting to address an infuriated populace.
Here was a revolution in the fortunes of our forlorn Coningsby! When his grandfather first
       sent for him to Monmouth House, his destiny was not verging on greater vicissitudes. He rose
       from his seat, and was surprised that all the silent gentlemen who were about him did not
       mark his agitation. Not an individual there that he knew. It was now an hour to midnight, and
       to-morrow the almost unconscious candidate was to go to the poll. In a tumult of suppressed
       emotion, Coningsby returned to his chambers. He found a letter in his box from Oswald
       Millbank, who had been twice at the Temple. Oswald had been returned without a contest, and
       had reached Darlford in time to hear Coningsby nominated. He set off instantly to London for
       Coningsby and left at his friend's chambers a rapid narrative of what had happened, with
       information that he should call on him again on the morrow at nine o'clock,
        when they were to repair together immediately to Darlford in time for Coningsby
       to be chaired, for no one entertained a doubt of his triumph.
Coningsby did not sleep a wink that night, and yet when he rose early felt fresh enough for
       any exploit however difficult or hazardous. He felt as an Egyptian does when the Nile rises
       after its elevation had been despaired of. At the very lowest ebb of his fortunes, an event
       had occurred which seemed to restore all. He dared not contemplate the ultimate result of all
       these wonderful changes. Enough for him that when all seemed dark, he was about to be
       returned to Parliament by the father of Edith, and his vanquished rival who was to bite the
       dust before him, was the author of all his misfortunes. Love, Vengeance, Justice, the
       glorious pride of having acted rightly, the triumphant sense of complete and absolute
       success—here were chaotic materials from which order was at length evolved; and all-subsided
       in an overwhelming feeling of gratitude to that Providence that had so signally protected
       him.
There was a knock at the door. It was Oswald. They embraced. It seemed that
        Oswald was as excited as Coningsby. His eye sparkled, his manner was
       energetic.
"We must talk it all over during our journey. We have not a minute to waste."
During that journey, Coningsby learned something of the course of affairs which gradually
       had brought about so singular a revolution in his favour. We mentioned that Sidonia had
       acquired a thorough knowledge of the circumstances which had occasioned and attended the
       disheritance of Coningsby. These he had told to Lady Wallinger, first by letter, afterwards
       in more detail on her arrival in London. Lady Wallinger had conferred with her husband. She
       was not surprised at the goodness of Coningsby, and she sympathized with all his calamities.
       He had ever been the favourite of her judgment, and her romance had always consisted in
       blending his destinies with those of her beloved Edith. Sir Joseph was a judicious man, who
       never cared to commit himself; a little selfish, but good, just and honourable, with some
       impulses only a little afraid of them; but then his wife stepped in like an angel and gave
       them the right direction. They were both
        absolutely impressed with Coningsby's admirable conduct, and Lady Wallinger was
       determined that her husband should express to others the convictions which he acknowledged in
       unison with herself. Sir Joseph spoke to Mr. Millbank who stared, but Sir Joseph spoke
       feebly. Lady Wallinger conveyed all this intelligence and all her impressions to Oswald and
       Edith. The younger Millbank talked with his father, who making no admissions listened with
       interest, inveighed against Lord Monmouth, and condemned his will.
After some time, Mr. Millbank made inquiries about Coningsby, took an interest in his
       career, and, like Lord Eskdale, declared that when he was called to the bar, his friends
       would have an opportunity to evince their sincerity. Affairs remained in this state, until
       Oswald thought that circumstances were sufficiently ripe to urge his father on the subject.
       The position which Oswald had assumed at Millbank had necessarily made him acquainted with
       the affairs and fortune of his father. When he computed the vast wealth which he knew was at
       his parent's command and recalled
        Coningsby in his humble chambers toiling after all his noble efforts without
       any results, and his sister pining in a provincial solitude, Oswald began to curse wealth and
       to ask himself what was the use of all their marvellous industry and supernatural skill. He
       addressed his father with that irresistible frankness which a strong faith can alone inspire.
       What are the objects of wealth if not to bless those who possess our hearts? The only
       daughter, the friend to whom the only son was indebted for his life—here are two beings
       surely whom one would care to bless, and both are unhappy. Mr. Millbank listened without
       prejudice, for he was already convinced. But he felt some interest in the present conduct of
       Coningsby. A Coningsby working for his bread was a novel incident for him. He wished to be
       assured of its authenticity. He was resolved to convince himself of the fact. And perhaps he
       would have gone on yet for a little time, and watched the progress of the experiment, already
       interested and delighted by what had reached him, had not the dissolution brought affairs to
       a crisis. The misery of Oswald at the position of Coningsby,
        the silent sadness of Edith, his own conviction which assured him that he could
       do nothing wiser or better than take this young man to his heart, so ordained it that Mr.
       Millbank who was after all the creature of impulse, decided suddenly, and decided rightly.
       Never making a single admission to all the representations of his son, Mr. Millbank in a
       moment did all that his son could have dared to desire.
This is a very imperfect and crude intimation of what had occurred at Millbank and
       Hellingsley; yet it conveys a faint sketch of the enchanting intelligence that Oswald
       conveyed to Coningsby during their rapid travel. When they arrived at Birmingham they found a
       messenger and a despatch informing Coningsby that at mid-day at Darlford he was at the head
       of the poll by an overwhelming majority, and that Mr. Rigby had resigned. He was however
       requested to remain at Birmingham, as they did not wish him to enter Darlford except to be
       chaired, so he was to arrive there in the morning. At Birmingham therefore they remained.
There was Oswald's election to talk of as well as Coningsby's. They had hardly
        had time for this. Now they were both Members of Parliament. Men must have been
       at school together, to enjoy the real fun of meeting thus and realizing boyish dreams. Often
       years ago they had talked of these things and assumed these results, but those were words and
       dreams; these were positive facts; after some doubts and struggles, in the freshness of their
       youth, Oswald Millbank and Harry Coningsby were Members of the British Parliament; public
       characters, responsible agents, with a career.
This afternoon at Birmingham was as happy an afternoon as usually falls to the lot of man.
       Both of these companions were labouring under that degree of excitement which is necessary to
       felicity. They had enough to talk about. Edith was no longer a forbidden or a sorrowful
       subject. There was rapture in their again meeting under such circumstances. Then there were
       their friends; that dear Buckhurst, who had just been called out for styling his opponent a
       Venetian, and all their companions of early days. What a sudden and marvellous change in all
       their destinies! Life was a pantomime; the wand was waved, and it seemed that the
       schoolfellows had of a sudden
        become elements of power, springs of the great machine.
A train arrived; restless they sallied forth to seek diversion in the dispersion of the
       passengers. Coningsby and Millbank, with that glance, a little inquisitive, even impertinent,
       if we must confess it, with which one greets a stranger when he emerges from a public
       conveyance, were lounging on the platform. The train arrived; stopped; the doors were thrown
       open, and from one of them emerged Mr. Rigby! Coningsby, who had dined, was greatly tempted
       to take off his hat and make him a bow, but he refrained. Their eyes met. Rigby was dead
       beat. He was evidently used up; a man without a resource; the sight of Coningsby his last
       blow; he had met his fate.
"My dear fellow," said Coningsby, "I remember I wanted you to dine with my grandfather at
       Montem, and that fellow would not ask you. Such is life!"
About eleven o'clock the next morning they arrived at the Darlford station. Here they were
       met by an anxious deputation, who received Coningsby as if he were a prophet, and ushered him
       into a car covered with satin and blue
        ribbons, and drawn by six beautiful grey horses caparisoned in his colours, and
       ridden by postillions, whose very whips were blue and white. Triumphant music sounded;
       banners waved; the multitude were marshalled; the Freemasons at the first opportunity fell
       into the procession; the Odd Fellows joined it at the nearest corner. Preceded and followed
       by thousands, with colours flying, trumpets sounding, and endless huzzas, flags and
       handkerchiefs waving from every window, and every balcony filled with dames and maidens
       bedecked with his colours, Coningsby was borne through enthusiastic Darlford like Paulus
       Emilius returning from Macedon. Uncovered, still in deep mourning, his fine figure and
       graceful bearing, and his intelligent brow, at once won every female heart.
The singularity was that all were of the same opinion: everybody cheered him, every house
       was adorned with his colours. His triumphant return was no party question; Magog Wrath and
       Bully Bluck walked together like lambs at the head of his procession.
The car stopped before the principal hotel in the High Street. It was Mr. Millbank's
       committee.
        The broad street was so crowded, that as every one declared you might have
       walked on the heads of the people. Every window was full; the very roofs were peopled. The
       car stopped, and the populace gave three cheers for Mr. Millbank. Their late member
       surrounded by his friends stood in the balcony which was fitted up with Coningsby's colours
       and bore his name on the hangings in gigantic letters formed of dahlias. The flashing and
       inquiring eye of Coningsby caught the form of Edith, who was leaning on her father's arm.
The hustings were opposite the hotel, and here after a while Coningsby was carried, and
       stepping from his car, took up his post to address for the first time a public assembly.
       Anxious as the people were to hear him, it was long before their enthusiasm could subside
       into silence. At length that silence was deep and absolute. He spoke; his powerful and rich
       tones reached every ear. In five minutes' time every one looked at his neighbour, and without
       speaking they agreed that there never was anything like this heard in Darlford before.
He addressed them for a considerable time for he had a great deal to say; not only
        to express his gratitude for the unprecedented manner in which he had become
       their representative and for the spirit in which they had greeted him; but he had to offer
       them no niggard exposition of the views and opinions of the member whom they had so
       confidingly chosen without even a formal declaration of his sentiments.
He did this with so much clearness, and in a manner so pointed and popular, that the deep
       attention of the multitude never wavered. His lively illustrations kept them often in
       continued merriment. But when towards his close he drew some picture of what he hoped might
       be the character of his future and lasting connexion with the town, the vast throng was
       singularly affected. There were a great many present at that moment who though they had never
       seen Coningsby before, would willingly have then died for him. Coningsby had touched their
       hearts, for he had spoken from his own. His spirit had entirely magnetized them. Darlford
       believed in Coningsby: and a very good creed.
And now Coningsby was conducted to the opposite hotel. He walked through the crowd.
        The progress was slow, as every one wished to shake hands with him. His
       friends, however, at last safely landed him. He sprang up the stairs: he was met by Mr.
       Millbank, who welcomed him with the greatest warmth, and offered his hearty
       congratulations.
"It is to you, dear sir, that I am indebted for all this," said Coningsby.
"No," said Mr. Millbank, "it is to your own high principles, great talents, and good
       heart."
After he had been presented by the late Member to the principal personages in the borough,
       Mr. Millbank said:
"I think we must now give Mr. Coningsby a little rest. "Come with me," he added; "here is
       some one who will be very glad to see you."
Speaking thus, he led our hero a little away, and placing his arm in Coningsby's, with
       great affection opened the door of an apartment. There was Edith radiant with loveliness and
       beaming with love. Their agitated hearts told at a glance the tumult of their joy. The father
       joined their hands, and blessed them with words of tenderness.

</div></body></text></TEI>