
CHAPTER I.THE PORT OF CENCHRÆA.
 Flashes as of lightning shot from each side of a galley as she was being rowed into port.
      She was a bireme, that is to say, had two tiers of oars; and as simultaneously the double sets
      were lifted, held for a moment suspended, wet with brine, feathered, and again dipped, every
      single blade gleamed, reflecting the declining western sun, and together formed a flash from
      each side of the vessel of a sheaf of rays. 
 The bireme was approaching the entrance to the harbor of Cenchræa. 
 The one white sail was filled with what little wind breathed, and it shone against a
      sapphire sea like a moon. 
 Now, at a signal the oars ceased to plunge. The sail was furled, and the galley was carried
      into the harbor between the temple that stood on the northern horn of the mole, and the great
      brazen statue of Posei
      don that occupied a rock in the midst of the entrance, driven forward by the
      impulse already given her by the muscles of the rowers and the east wind in the sail. 
 This Cenchræan harbor into which she swept was one of the busiest in the world. Through it
      as through a tidal sluice rushed the current of trade from the East to the West, and from the
      Occident to the Orient. It was planted on a bay of the Saronic Gulf, and on the Isthmus of
      Corinth, at the foot of that lovely range of mountains thrown up by the hand of God to wall
      off the Peloponnesus as the shrine of intellectual culture and the sanctuary of Liberty. 
 And a furrow—like an artificial dyke—ran between this range and Hellas proper, a furrow
      nearly wholly invaded by the sea, but still leaving a strip of land, the Corinthian isthmus,
      to form a barrier between the Eastern and the Western worlds. 
 On the platform at the head of a flight of marble steps before a temple of Poseidon, in her
      open litter, lounged a lady, with the bloom of youth gone from her face, but artificially
      restored. 
 She was handsome, with finely moulded features and a delicate white hand, the fingers
      studded with rings, and a beautiful arm which was exposed whenever any one drew near whose
      admiration was worth the acquisition. Its charm was enhanced by armlets of gold adorned with
      cameos. 
 Her arched brows, dark in color, possibly owed their perfection of turn and their depth of
      color to dye and the skill of the artist who decorated her every day, but not so the
      violet-blue of her large eyes, although these also were enhanced in effect by the tinting of
      the lashes, and a touch of paint applied to their roots. 

 The lady, whose name was Longa Duilia, was attended by female slaves, who stood behind the
      litter, and by a freedman, Plancus, who was at her side with a set smile on his waxen face,
      and who bowed towards the lady every moment to hear her remarks, uttered in a languid tone,
      and without her troubling to turn her head to address him. 
 “He will soon be here,” said the lady; “the bireme is in the port. I can see
      the ruffle before her bows as she cuts the water.” 
 “Like the wave in my lady’s hair,” sighed Plancus. 
 “Abominable!” exclaimed Duilia, “when the ripple in my hair is natural and abiding, and
      that in the water is made and disappears.” 
 “Because, Mistress, the wavelets look up, see, and fall back in despair.” 
 “That is better,” said the lady. 
 “And the swelling sail, like your divine bosom, has fallen, as when——” 
 “Ugh! I should hope the texture of my skin was not like coarse sail-cloth; get behind me,
      Plancus. Here, Lucilla, how am I looking? I would have my lord see me to the best advantage.” 
 “Madam,” said the female slave, advancing, “the envious sun is about to hide his head in
      the west. He cannot endure, after having feasted on your beauty, to surrender it to a mortal.” 
 “Is not one eyebrow a trifle higher than the other?” asked Duilia, looking at herself in a
      hand mirror of polished metal. 
 “It is indeed so, lady, but has not the Paphian Goddess in the statue of Phidias the same
      characteristic? Defect it is not, but a token of divinity.” 

 “Ah,” said Duilia, “it is hereditary. The Julian race descends from Venus Genetrix, and I
      have the blood of the immortal ancestress in me.” 
 “Much diluted,” muttered Plancus into the breast of his tunic; he was out of humor at the
      failure of his little simile of the sail. 
 “By the way,” said the lady; “the stay in this place Cenchræa is positively intolerable. No
      society, only a set of merchants—rich and all that sort of thing—but nobodies. The villa we
      occupy is undignified and uncomfortable. The noise of the port, the caterwauling of sailors,
      and the smell of pitch are most distasteful to me. My lord will hardly tarry here?” 
 “My lord,” said the freedman, pushing forward, “he who subdued the Parthians, and chained
      the Armenians, to whom all Syria bowed, arrives to cast himself at your ladyship’s feet, and
      be led by you as a captive in your triumphal entry into the capital of the world.” 
 “You think so, Plancus.” She shook her head, “He is an obstinate man—pig-headed—I—I mean
      resolute in his own line.” 
 “Madam, I know you to be irresistible.” 
 “Well, I desire to leave this odious place. I have yawned here through three entire
      months.” 
 “And during these months, the temple of Aphrodite has been deserted, and the approaches
      grass-grown.” 
 “How would my Lady like to remove to Corinth?” said Lucilla. “The vessel will be taken to
      Diolcus, and there placed on rollers, to be drawn across the isthmus.” 
 “Oh! Corinth will be noisier than this place, and more vulgar, because more pretentious.
      Only money-lending Jews there. Besides, I have taken an aversion
      to the place since the death of my physician. As the Gods love me, I not see the
      good of a medical attendant who is so ignorant as to allow himself to die, and that at such an
      inconvenient moment as the present. By the Great Goddess! what impostors there be. To think
      that for years I committed the care of my precious health to his bungling hands! Plancus, have
      you secured another? I suffer frightfully at sea.” 
 “A sure token of your divine origin,” said the steward. “The Foam-born (Venus)
      rose out of and left the waves because the motion of them disagreed with her.” 
 “There is a good deal in that,” observed Longa Duilia. “Plancus, have you secured another?
      I positively cannot across Adria without one to hold my head and supply anti—anti—what do you
      call them?” 
 “Madam,” said the freedman, rubbing his hands together, “I have devoted my energies to your
      service. I have gone about with a lantern seeking an honest physician. I may not have been as
      successful as I desired, but I have done my utmost.” 
 “I prithee—have done with this rodomontade and to the point. Have you secured one? As the
      Gods love me! it is not only one’s insides that get upset at sea, but one’s outside also
      becomes so tousled and tumbled—that the repairs—but never mind about them. Have you engaged a
      man?” 
 “Yes, my Lady, I have lighted on one Luke, a physician of Troas; he is desirous of
      proceeding to Rome, and is willing to undertake the charge of your health, in return for being
      conveyed to the capital of the world at your charges.” 
 “I make you responsible for his suitability,” said Longa Duilia. 

 “Body of Bacchus!” she exclaimed suddenly, after a pause, “Where is the child?” 
 “Where is the lady Domitia Longina?” asked Plancus, as he looked about him. 
 “The lady Domitia, where is she?” asked Lucilla. 
 “The lady Domitia?”—passed from one to another. 
 “Where is she? What has become of her? As the Gods love me—you are a pack of fools. The
      more of you there are, so much the more of folly. You have let her gallop off among the odious
      sailors, and she will come back rank with pitch. Lucilla, Favonia, Syra, where is she?” 
 Duilia sat upright on her seat, and her eyes roamed searchingly in every direction. 
 “I never met with such a child anywhere, it is the Corbulo blood in her, not mine. The Gods
      forbid! O Morals!” 
 “Madam,” said a slave-girl coming up. “I saw her with Eboracus.” 
 “Well, and where is Eboracus. They are always together. He spoils the child, and she pays
      him too much consideration. Where are they?” 
 The slaves, male and female, looked perplexedly in every direction. 
 “Perhaps,” said Plancus, “she has gone to the altar of Poseidon to offer there thanks for
      the return of her father.” 
 “Poseidon, nonsense! That is not her way. She has been in a fever ever since the vessel has
      been sighted, her cheeks flaming and in a fidget as if covered with flying ants. Find the
      girl. If any harm shall have come to her through your neglect, I will have you all flayed—and
      hang the cost!” 

 She plucked a bodkin from her dress, and ran it into the shoulder of the slave-woman,
      Favonia, who stood near her, and made her cry out with pain. 
 “You are a parcel of idle, empty-headed fools,” exclaimed the alarmed and irritated mother,
      “I will have the child found, and that instantly. You girls, you have been gaping, watching
      the sailors, and have not had an eye on your young mistress, and no concern for my feelings.
      There is no more putting anything into your heads than of filling the sieves of the Danaides.” 
 “Madam,” said Plancus, for once without a smile on his unctuous face, “you may rest
      satisfied that no harm has befallen the young lady. So long as Eboracus is with her, she is
      safe. That Briton worships her. He would suffer himself to be torn limb from limb rather than
      allow the least ill to come to her.” 
 “Well, well,” said the lady impatiently, “we expect all that sort of thing of our slaves.” 
 “Madam, but do we always get it?” 
 “We! The Gods save me! How you talk. We! We, indeed. Pray what are you to expect
      anything?” 
 “The other day, lady,” hastily continued the steward eager to allay the ebullition he had
      provoked. “The other day, Eboracus nigh on killed a man who looked with an insolent leer at
      his young mistress. He is like a faithful Molossus.” 
 “I do not ask what he is like,” retorted the still ruffled lady, “I ask where she is.” 
 Then one of the porters of the palanquin came forward respectfully and said to the
      steward:—“If it may please you, sir, will you graciously report to my Lady that I observed the
      young mistress draw Eboracus aside, and whisper to him, as though urging somewhat,
      and he seemed to demur, but he finally appeared to yield to her persuasions, and
      they strolled together along the mole.” 
 Longa Duilia overheard this. It was not the etiquette for an underling to address his
      master or mistress directly unless spoken to. 
 She said sharply:—“Why did not the fellow mention this before? Give him thirty lashes.
      Where did they go, did he say?” 
 “Along the mole.” 
 “Which mole?” 
 “Madam, Carpentarius is afraid of extending his communication lest he increase the number
      of his lashes.” 
 “Well, well!” exclaimed the mistress, “We may remit the lashes—let him answer.” 
 “Carpentarius,” said the steward, “Her ladyship, out of the superabundance of her
      compassion, will let you off the thirty lashes, if you say where be Eboracus and the young
      lady, your mistress Domitia Longina.” 
 “Sir,” answered the porter, “that I cannot answer positively; but—unless my eyes deceive
      me, I see a small boat on the water, within it a rower and a young girl.” 
 “By the Immortal Brothers! he is right,” exclaimed Plancus. “See, lady, yonder is a cockle
      boat, that has been unmoored from the mole, and there be in it a rower, burly, broadbacked,
      who is certainly the Briton, and in the bow is as it were a silver dove—and that can be none
      other than your daughter.” 
 “As the Gods love me,” gasped Duilia, throwing herself back in the litter; “what
      indelicacy! It is even so, the child is besotted. She dotes on her
      father, whom she has not seen since we left Antioch. And she has actually gone to
      meet him. O Venus Kalypyge! What are we coming to, when children act in this independent,
      indecent manner. O Times! O Morals!” 
