

CHAPTER XIV.A LITTLE SUPPER.
 Longa Duilia and her entire household had returned to the capital, and were installed in
      the family mansion in the Carinæ. 
 Happily, as Corbulo had considered it, this house had escaped in the conflagration of Rome
      under Nero. This, however, was a matter of some regret to Duilia, who would have preferred to
      have had it burnt, so that it might have been rebuilt in greater splendor and in newer style. 
 Nevertheless, although externally dingy, it was a commodious mansion within, and was well
      furnished, especially with carpets and curtains of Oriental texture, that had been wrought at,
      or purchased at the bazaars of Antioch and Damascus. 
 The centre of the house was occupied by the atrium, or hall, open to the
      sky above the water tank in the midst. On each side at the further end from the entrance
      extended the “wings” that contained the family portraits enclosed in gilded boxes or shrines,
      the doors of which were thrown open on festal occasions. In the centre, between the wings was
      the tablinum, the reception-room of the house, and on the right side of the
      entrance was the family money-chest, girded with iron. 

 On the ledge of the water tank before the reception room, smoked a little altar before an
      image of Larpater, the ancestor and founder of the family, regarded as the tutelary deity of
      the house. 
 The penates, the subsidiary household gods, that had formerly been
      retained in the hall, near the altar—curious, smoked, and badly-shaped dolls, some in rags,
      some in wood, others in terra cotta—were sometimes consigned to a family chapel, but in the
      house of the widow of Corbulo, as in many another, they had been relegated to a shelf in the
      kitchen near the hearth, and a lamp was maintained perpetually burning before them. 
 In primitive times, when life was simple, the hall had been the common room of the house,
      in which the wife cooked the meals at the hearth, and where also on seats, father, wife,
      children and domestics partook together of the common meal. But now all this was altered. 
 In winter the hall was too cold to be sat in. It was inconvenient to have the cooking done
      before all eyes. Consequently a separate kitchen and separate dining-rooms were constructed,
      and the smoking altar and the image by it alone remained in the hall as a reminiscence of the
      family hearth that once stood there. 
 It is more difficult to understand the meals and meal times of the old Romans, than the
      arrangement of their houses. 
 They rose vastly early in the morning, and took a snack of breakfast of the simplest
      description, which lasted them till lunch at 10 a. m. But such as were occupied abroad rarely
      returned home for this meal. At noon they bathed, and then came the great feed of
      the day, the cœna, which we translate “supper,” but which was
      begun at half-past one in winter and an hour later in summer. 
 This lasted the entire afternoon, and even on great occasions into the night. Some
      revellers did not break up till midnight, or even prolonged the orgy to dawn. 
 It was not till the Goths and Vandals overflowed the classic world, that the supper was
      postponed until the evening. 
 The Roman citizen’s day was from dawn till noon. Then he had his snooze and his bath, and
      the remainder of the day was devoted to the mighty meal and to reading, conversation, and
      amusement. 
 “I am so pleased to see you,” said Longa Duilia, stepping forward to receive the Præfect of
      Rome, to her little supper. 
 He was a gray-headed, plain, blunt man, with very ordinary features; he was attended by two
      lictors, and by his son, Sabinus. 
 “I thank you, madam, for the courteous invitation.” 
 “I could kill myself with vexation not to have made your acquaintance earlier. You see, for
      some years I have been at Antioch, with my dearest husband, whose sword—that sword which drank
      the blood of Germans, Parthians and Armenians—excuse these tears—you see it—suspended yonder.
      But, as I was saying, we have been from Rome so long, and since my return I have lived in such
      seclusion, that we have not met—and yet, considering our relationship——” 
 “My dear lady, I was unaware that I was entitled to such an honor.” 
 “Oh! yes, of course, cousins.” 
 “Cousins!” 

 “Through Vespasia Polla, your mother. What a sweet creature she was! So distinguished in
      her manner. She had such an intelligent face, and, as I remember her, the remains of great
      beauty. Of course I was then quite a mite of a child.” 
 “This is indeed flattering.” 
 “You men have other things to consider beside pedigree. Cousins we certainly are. And how
      is that sweet lady, your wife? By all accounts as frail as the last autumn leaf on an
       acacia.” 
 “I am glad to say that, on the contrary, she enjoys rude health.” 
 “You do not say so! What fibs are told! Your son Clemens is not here? I—I have heard, does
      not go into society, a little peculiar in his views. We are not all made alike. But this, your
      son Sabinus, is formed like an Apollo. And your daughter Plautilla—so sorry! infected in the
      same way. Will not go to dinners or shows—ah! well it is her loss. It is a pleasure to reunite
      family ties. Alas! you know of my irreparable loss. I do not know whether you saw the sword of
      my darling. He fell on it. Bathed it with his blood. Every night I bedew the sacred blade with
      my tears. Excuse me—my emotion overcomes me. I would have buried myself at Gabii, clasping the
      sword to my wounded bosom for the remainder of my shattered life, had it not been for the
      health of my child. A mother’s thoughts are with her offspring. Well, now to
       table. A widow’s fare, only a small supper in a house of mourning—though more
      than a twelvemonth since the funeral—indeed, two years since my dear one died—on that sword.
      Oh! I turn away my eyes! The sight of that blade. But,
      come—that is my daughter. Salute her. A cousin. Give me your hand, Flavius. The
      table calls us.” 
 The house of a wealthy Roman at this period had not only a summer dining-room, open to the
      air, but one also for winter, well heated by stoves. Three tables were placed, so as to
      accommodate nine persons, three at each, leaving the ends of two and an open square in the
      middle. 
 Into this hollow the servants ran the “repository,” a sort of what-not, on wheels,
      consisting of a tier of shelves, all laden with dishes; and the guests put forth their hands
      and selected such meats as they fancied. 
 Knives they had, but no forks. In place of these latter they were furnished with spoons,
      having the extremity of the handle turned down as claw or hoof, or sharpened to a point, so as
      to serve to hold the meat whilst it was being cut. When so employed, the bowl of the spoon was
      held in the hollow of the hand; but when used as a spoon, then the end was reversed. 
 A sideboard was piled up with silver and gold plate. In addition in a corner stood a round
      table with three feet; on which were laid napkins neatly tied up with blue and red bands.
      These napkins contained trinkets, rings, brooches, comfits, mottoes, and were to be given to
      the guests along with the dessert. Our presentation of Christmas crackers is a reminiscence of
      the old Roman custom of making presents to the guests at the close of a banquet. 
 The males lay at table on couches, with their legs extended behind them, their left elbows
      reposed on pillows. It was against ancient Roman custom for ladies to recline, but recently
      some empresses had
      broken through the rule, and when they set the example of lounging, others
      followed. Duilia, however, was a stickler in some things, and she somewhat affected archaic
      usages, as a mark of distinction, as a token of the antiquity of the family, whose customs had
      acquired an almost sacred sanction. Ladies sat on stools. 
 The couches and seats were sumptuous, inlaid with mother-of-pearl, tortoise-shell and
      silver, and were covered with Oriental carpets. 
 Every guest was attended by a slave, bearing an ewer and napkin, so that he might cleanse
      his fingers directly they became greasy—a necessity of constant recurrence, on account of the
      absence of proper forks. 
 A baldachin of embroidered silk was stretched above the table, and the heads of the
      banqueters. This was done for the purpose of cutting off the draught, as immediately above, in
      the ceiling, was the lacunar, an opening through which the steam and savor
      of dinner might escape, and through which, when the canopy was not spread, rose-leaves,
      violets, a spray of scent, even garlands were scattered over the revellers. 
 A Roman dinner began, like one in Russia at the present day, with a
       gustus, a snack of something calculated to stimulate the appetite or to
      help digestion. 
 Then came in soft-boiled eggs, the invariable first dish, just as invariably, the meal
      closed with apples. 
 With the eggs were served salads and sauer-kraut, cabbage shredded in vinegar, Brussels
      sprouts boiled with saltpetre to enhance their green, turnips and carrots in mustard and
      vinegar. Melons were eaten with pepper, salt, and vinegar; artichokes were consumed raw, with
      oil; mallows and sorrel, olives, mush
      rooms and truffles were favorite vegetables, and were eaten along with large
      snails, oysters, sardines, and chopped lizards. 
 All this was preparatory. 
 Now entered the repository, groaning under meats and fish. At the same moment a slave
      produced and handed round a menu card. But before eating, a benediction was pronounced, the
      household gods were invoked and promised a share of the good things from the table. 
 It is unnecessary to catalogue the solids and entrées sent up at such a
      supper. Pork was a favorite dish, and there were fifty ways in which a pig could be served up.
      Octopus was much relished, as it is to this day in Italy. Wild fowl was stuffed with garlic,
      mutton with asafœtida, and some meats were not considered in condition till decomposition had
      begun. 
 The strong savor produced by those dishes was dissipated by servants holding large fans,
      and counteracted by the diffusion of aromatic smoke, and the sprinkling of guests and table
      with essences. 
 A supper consisted of several courses, but a considerable interval elapsed between each,
      which interval was filled in with conversation, or enlivened with the antics of buffoons, or
      with music, or the recitation of poetry. 
 Nothing in the smallest degree unseemly was allowed in the house of Longa Duilia, at such
      entertainments. 
 We read a good deal, in the ancient authors, of the license allowed at such times, but this
      was not general, certainly was not suffered except in very “fast” houses, and such were
      attended by none who respected themselves. 

 The widow knew how to make herself agreeable. Flavius Sabinus, the præfect, was a great
      talker, and there was a little rivalry between the two as to which should lead the
      conversation. Domitia hardly spoke, but the guests generally entertained themselves heartily. 
 Lamia was there, and near his betrothed, but found it difficult to carry on conversation
      with her. Since the questioning of Ishtar in the Temple at Gabii, she had been haunted by the
      visions presented to her inner sight, and she was unable to shake off the oppression of
      spirits and distress of mind, they had caused. 
 When supper was ended, previous to the dessert, all rose, a grace was said, and again the
      household gods were invoked. 
 All were thus standing, in solemn hush, whilst a portion for the deities was being taken
      away, when the curtain before the door was roughly drawn aside, and a young man ran in—then
      halted, bewildered by the lights and the company, and hesitated before advancing further. 
 A faint cry escaped the breast of Domitia; and she staggered back, and caught Lamia
      convulsively by the wrist. 
 Then Flavius Sabinus said apologetically to his hostess: 
 “This youth is my nephew, Titus Flavius Domitianus, the younger son of my brother
      Vespasian. Pardon his lack of breeding, lady—I bade him find me here, if matters of importance
      demanded my attention. Excuse me, I pray, if I retire with him and hear what news of weight he
      bears.” 
 Duilia bowed, and the præfect, leaving his place, went to meet his nephew. 

 Lamia felt that Domitia was trembling. He looked in her face and it alarmed him. With wide
      eyes she was staring at the intruder; her lips were slightly parted, every trace of color had
      deserted them; and between them gleamed her teeth. 
 Not till the curtain had fallen, and hidden the form of the young man, as he left with his
      uncle, did she breathe freer. 
 Then she heaved a long sigh, and said in a faint voice: 
 “It is he—the eighth crowned head—the fifth come again—the new Nero. O Lamia! Terrible is
      Fate!” 
