

CHAPTER IX.SHEATHED.
 According to an Oriental legend, the dominion of Solomon over the spirits resided in the
      power of his staff on which he stayed himself. So long as he wielded that, none might disobey. 
 But the Jins sent a white ant up through the floor, that ate out the heart of the rod, so
      that when he leaned on it, it gave way and resolved itself into a cloud of fine powder.
      Solomon fell, and his authority was at an end forever. 
 The termites that consumed the core of the sceptre of Nero were his own vices and follies.
      Its power was at an end and his fall as sudden as in the case of Solomon, and as unexpected. 
 In March he was possessed of dominion over the world, and was at the head of incalculable
      forces. In June all was dissolved in the dust of decay; he was prostrate, helpless, bereft of
      the shadow of authority, unable to command a single slave. The first token of what was about
      to take place was this. 
 In Rome the rabble was kept in good humor by the Cæsars distributing among them bread
      gratis, and entertaining them with shows free of charge. 
 During the winter, contrary winds had delayed the corn-ships from Egypt, and the amount of
      bread distributed was accordingly curtailed. Games were, in
      deed, promised, but these would serve as condiments to the bread and not as
      substitutes. Then a vessel arrived in port, and the hungry people believed that she was laden
      with the wished-for corn. When, however, they learned that her cargo was white sand for
      strewing the arena at the sports, they broke into a storm of discontent and swept, howling
      insulting words, under Nero’s windows. 
 Next day all Rome heard that Galba, at the head of the legions of Spain and Gaul, was
      marching into Italy, and that none of the troops of Nero sent to guard the frontier of the
      Alps would draw a sword in his defence. 
 The prince, now only seriously alarmed, bade his household guard conduct him to Ostia,
      where he would mount the vessel that had discharged its load of sand, and escape to Egypt.
      They contemptuously refused, and disbanded. Then, in an agony of fear, Nero left the Palatine,
      and fled across the river to the Servilian mansion that adjoined the racecourse, to light
      which he had burned Christians swathed in tarred wraps. 
 There he found none save his secretary Epaphroditus, whom he had sent there to be chained
      at the door, and to act as porter because he had offended him. Guards, freedmen, courtiers,
      actors, all had taken to their heels, but not before they had pillaged the palace. 
 He wandered about the house, knocking at every door, and nowhere meeting with an answer. 
 Night by this time had settled in, murk and close, but at intervals electric flashes
      shivered overhead. 
 Then suddenly the earth reeled, and there passed a sound as of chariot wheels rolling
      heavily through the streets; yet the streets were deserted. Trembling, despairing, Nero
      crouched on his bed, bit his nails till
      he had gnawed them to the quick, then started up and hunted for his jewel case. He
      would fly on foot, carrying that, hide in some hovel, till danger was past. But a thievish
      slave had stolen it. 
 Sick at heart, picking, then biting at his nails, shrinking with apprehension at the least
      noise, wrapping a kerchief about a finger where blood came, he looked with dazed eyes at the
      red flare of the heavenly fires pulsating through his open door. 
 He heard a step and ran out, to encounter a freedman, Phaon by name, who was coming along
      the passage, holding aloft a torch, attended by two slaves. 
 The wretched prince clung to him, and entreated that he might not be left alone; that Phaon
      would protect him, and contrive a means of escape. 
 “Augustus!” answered the freedman, “I am not ungrateful for favors shown me, but my
      assistance at this hour is unavailing. I am but one man, a stranger, a Greek, and all Rome,
      all Italy, the entire world, have risen against you.” 
 “I must fly. They will allow me to earn my livelihood on the stage. Of what value to any
      man is my life?” 
 “My lord, in what value have you held the lives of the thousands that you have taken? Each
      life cut off has raised against you a hundred enemies. All will pursue, like a pack of hounds
      baying for the blood of him who murdered their kinsfolk. Even now I passed one—Lucius Ælius
      Lamia,—and he stayed me to inquire where you might be found. In his hand he held an unsheathed
      sword.” 
 Nero shrieked out; then looked timidly about him, terrified at the sound of his own voice. 

 “Let us hide. Disguise me. Get me a horse. I cannot run, I am too fat; besides, I have on
      my felt slippers only.” 
 Phaon spoke to one of his slaves, and the man left. 
 “Master,” said the freedman, “Do not deceive yourself. There is no escape. Prepare to die
      as a man. Slay yourself. It is not hard to die. Better so fall than get into the hands of
      implacable enemies.” 
 “I cannot. I have not the courage. I will do it only when everything fails. I have many
      theatrical wigs. I can paint my face.” 
 “Sire! the people are so wont to see your face besmeared with color, that they are less
      likely to recognize a face bleached to tallow.” 
 “I have a broad-brimmed fisherman’s hat. I wear it against becoming freckled. That will
      shade my face. Find me an ample cloak. Here, at length, comes Sporus.” 
 An eunuch appeared in the doorway. 
 Breathless, in short, broken sentences, Nero entreated him to look out in his wardrobe for
      a sorry mantle, and to bring it him. 
 “But whither will—can you go?” asked Phaon. “The Senate has been assembled—it has been
      convoked for midnight to vote your deposition and death.” 
 “I will go before it. Nay! I will haste to the Forum, I will mount the Tribune. I will ask
      to be given the government of Egypt. That at least will not be refused me.” 
 “My lord, the streets are filling with people. They will tear you to pieces ere you reach
      the Forum.” 
 “Think you so! Why so? I have amused the people so well. Good Phaon, hire me a swift
      galley, and I will
      take refuge with Tiridates. I restored to him the crown of Armenia. He will not be
      ungrateful.” 
 “My lord, it will not be possible for you to leave Italy.” 
 “Then I will retire to a farm. I will grow cabbages and turnips. The god Tiberius was fond
      of turnips. O Divine Powers that rule the fate of men! shall I ever eat turnips again? Phaon,
      hide me for a season. Men’s minds are changeable. They are heated now. They will cool
      to-morrow. They cannot kill such a superlative artist as myself.” 
 “I have a villa between the Salarian and the Nomentane Roads. If it please you to go
      thither——” 
 “At once. I think I hear horse-hoofs. O Phaon, save me!” 
 Sporus came up, offering an old moth-eaten cloak. The wardrobe had been plundered, only the
      refuse had been abandoned. 
 A voice was heard pealing through the empty corridors: “Horses! horses at the door!” 
 “Who calls so loud? Silence him. He will betray us!” said Nero. “Hah! It is Epaphroditus.” 
 At the entrance, chained to a cumbrous log, was the Greek, Epaphroditus, formerly a
      pampered favorite. But two days previously he had ventured to correct a false quantity in some
      verses by his master, and Nero, in a burst of resentment and mortified vanity, had ordered him
      to be fastened to a beam as doorkeeper to the Servilian Palace. 
 “The horses are here,” shouted the freedman. “May it please my lord to mount. Sporus and
      the slaves can run afoot.” 
 Nero unwound the kerchief from his hand and
      wrapped it about his throat, drew the broad-brimmed hat over his head, enveloped
      himself in the blanket cloak, and shuffled in his slippers to the door. 
 The chained Greek at once cried out: “Master! my chain has become entangled and is so
      knotted that I cannot stir. I have been thus since noon, and none have regarded me. I pray
      thee, let me go.” 
 “Thou fool! cease hallooing!” retorted Nero angrily. “Dost think I carry about with me the
      key of thy shackles?” Then to those who followed, “Smite him on the mouth and silence him, or
      he will call attention to me.” 
 “The gods smite thee!” yelled the scribe, striving to reach an upright posture, but falling
      again, owing to the tangle in the links. “May they blight thee as they have stricken Livia’s
       laurel!”

 Mounted on an old gray horse, Nero rode to the Ælian Bridge, where stands now that of St.
      Angelo, crossed it and began to traverse the Campus Martius. 
 Electric flashes quivered across the sky. Then again an earthquake made the city rock as if
      drunk; the buildings were rent, and masses of cornice fell down. 
 A glare of white lightning illumined the whole field and lighted up the mausoleum of
      Augustus, and the blank faces of such men as were abroad. 
 The horse trembled and refused to move. It was some time before the alarm of the brute
      could be allayed, and it could be coaxed to go forward and begin the ascent of the Quirinal.
      The advance was slow; and Nero’s fears became greater as the road
      approached the Prætorian Camp, and he expected recognition by the sentinels. Yet
      in the midst of his fear wild flashes of hope shot, and he said to Phaon: 
 “What think you, if I were to enter the camp? Surely the Prætorians would rally about me,
      and I might dissolve the Senate.” 
 “Sire, they have destroyed your images, and have proclaimed Galba. They would take off your
      head and set it on a pike.” 
 Nero uttered a groan, and kicked the flanks of his steed. At that moment a passer-by
      saluted him. 
 “By the Immortals! I am recognized.” 
 “We have but to go a little further.” 
 “Phaon, what if the Senate declare me an enemy of the State?” 
 “Then you will fare in the customary manner.” 
 “How is that?” 
 The prince put his trembling hand to his brow and in his agitation knocked off his hat. 
 The freedman picked it up. 
 “The customary manner, sire! your neck will be put in the cleft of a forked stick and you
      will be beaten, lashed, kicked to death. Better take the sword and fall on it.” 
 “Oh, Phaon! not yet! I cannot endure pain. I have a spring nail now—and it hurts! it
      hurts!” 
 “Ride on, my lord; at the cypress hedge we will turn our horses loose, and by a path
      through the fields reach my villa.” 
 Half an hour after Nero had left the Servilian palace, where now stands the Lateran, Lamia
      arrived followed by two servants. He found the secretary in a heap at the door, vainly
      writhing in his knotted chains. Lamia
      at once asked him about the prince, whether he was there. 
 “I will both answer and show you whither he is fled,” said Epaphroditus, “if you will
      release me. Otherwise my tongue is tied like my limbs.” 
 “Is he here?” 
 “Nay, he has been here, but is gone. Whither I alone can say. The price of the information
      is release.” 
 “Tell me where I can find tools.” 
 Epaphroditus gave the required information and Lamia despatched a servant to bring hammer
      and chisel. They were speedily produced; but some time was taken up in cutting through the
      links. 
 This, however, was finally effected, and the secretary gathered up a handful of the broken
      chain and clenched it in his fist. 
 “Now I will lead the way,” said he, stretching himself. 
 The wretched, fallen emperor had in the meanwhile scrambled through hedges and waded
      through a marsh, and had at last found a temporary shelter in a garden tool-house of the
      villa. Phaon feared to introduce him into his house. 
 Wearied out, he cast himself on a sort of bier on which the gardeners carried citron trees
      to and from the conservatory. The cloak had fallen from him and lay on the soil. 
 His feet were muddy and bleeding. He had tried to eat some oat-cake that had been offered
      him, but was unable to swallow. 
 He continued to be teased with, and to pick or bite at his spring nails. 
 “I hear steps!” he cried. “They will kill me!” 

 “Sire, play the man.” 
 Phaon offered him a couple of poniards. 
 Nero put the point of one to his breast, shrunk and threw it away. 
 “It is too blunt, it will not enter,” he said. 
 He tried the other and dropped it. 
 “It is over sharp. It cuts,” he said. 
 At that moment the door opened and Lamia and Epaphroditus entered. 
 Nero cried out and covered his face: 
 “Sporus! Phaon! one or both! kill yourselves and show me how to do it.” 
 “To do it!” said Lamia sternly. “That is not difficult. Do you need a sword? Here is
      one—the sword of Corbulo.” 
 He extended the weapon to the prince, who accepted it with tremulous hand, looking at Lamia
      with glassy eyes. 
 “Oh! a moment! I feel sick.” 
 Then Phaon said: “Sire—at once!” 
 Then Nero, with all power going out of his fingers, pointed the blade to his throat. 
 “I cannot,” he gasped, “my hand is numb.” 
 Immediately, Epaphroditus with his hand full of chain, brought the weighted fist against
      the haft, and drove the sword into the coward’s throat. 
 He sank back on the bier. 
 Then Lamia stooped, gathered up the moth-eaten cloak, and threw it over the face of the
      dying man. 
