

CHAPTER XII.THE TABLETS.
 Elymas the sorcerer stood bowing before Domitia, his hands crossed upon his breast. 
 She looked scrutinizingly into his dark face, but could read nothing there. He remained
      immovable and silent before her, awaiting the announcement of her will. 
 “I have sent for thee,” she said. “How long, I would know, before the sixth veil falls?” 
 “Lady and Augusta,” answered the Magian, “remember that when thou lookest out upon the
      Sabine Mountains, on one day all is so distinct that thou wouldst suppose a walk of an hour
      would bring thee to them. On the morrow, the range is so faint and so remote, that thou
      wouldst consider it must require days of travel to attain their roots. It is so with the
      Future. We look into its distance and behold forms—but whether near or far we know not. This
      only do we say with confidence, that we are aware of their succession, but not of their
      nearness or remoteness.” 
 “What! and the stars, will they not help thee?” 
 “There is at this time an ominous conjuncture of planets.” 
 “I pray thee, spare me the details, and tell me that which they portend.” 
 “Is it thine own future, Augusta, thou desirest to look into?” 
 “Elymas, my story has been unfolded—to what an
      extent it has been managed by such as thyself, that I cannot judge. But of a
      certainty it was thou who didst contrive that I was carried away from my husband’s house. Then
      what followed, the Gods know how far thou wast in it, but I have heard it said that the God
      Titus would not have had his mortal thread cut short but that, when in fever, thou didst
      persuade him to a bath in snow water. It is very easy to predict what will be, when with our
      hands we mould the future. And now—I care not whether thou makest or predictest what is to
      be—but an end there must be, and that a speedy one—for thine own safety hangs thereon.” 
 “How so, lady?” 
 “The Augustus has been greatly alarmed of late at sinister omens and prophesies; and he
      attributes them to thee. Perhaps,” with a scornful intonation, “he also is aware that
      fulfilment is assured before a prophesy is given out.” 
 The Magus remained motionless, but his face became pale. 
 “I know, because at supper with his intimates, Messala and Regulus and Carus, he swore by
      the Gods he would have you cast to savage dogs, and he would make an example of such as filled
       men’s minds with expectation of evil.” 
 “Lady——” 
 But Domitia interrupted him. “Thou thinkest that I say this to alarm thee and bend thee to
      my will. If the Augustus has his spies that watch and repeat to him whatsoever I do,
      whomsoever I see, almost every word I say—shall not I also have a watch put upon him? Even
      now, Magus, that I have sent for thee, and that thou art closely consulted by me this has
      been carried to his ears, and as he knows how I esteem him, he will think this
      interview bodes him no good.” 
 “When, Lady Augusta, was this said?” 
 “The Emperor is this day returned from Albanum, and the threat was made but yesterday. Who
      can say but that the order has already been given for thy arrest, and for the gathering
      together of the dogs that are to rend thee.” 
 The man became alarmed and moved uneasily. 
 “Magus,” said Domitia, “I cannot save thee, thine own wits must do that. Find it written in
      the stars that thy life is so bound up with that of the Cæsar, that the death of one is the
      extinction of the other; or that thou holdest so potent a charm that if thou wilt thou canst
      employ it for his destruction. It is not for me to point out how thou mayest twist out of his
      grasp—thou art a very eel for slipperiness, and a serpent for contrivance. What I desire to
      know is—How much longer is this tyranny to last, and how long am I to suffer?” 
 Then the magician looked round the room, to make sure that he was unobserved; he raised the
      curtain at the door to see that none listened outside, and satisfied that he was neither
      observed nor overheard, he pointed to a clepsydra. 
 This was an ingenious, but to our minds a clumsy, contrivance for measuring time. It
      consisted of a silver ball, with a covered opening at the top, through which the interior
      could be replenished. About the base of the globe were minute perforations through which the
      liquid that was placed in the vessel slowly oozed, and oozing ran together into a drop at the
      bottom which fell at intervals into the bucket of a tiny wheel. 
 When the bucket was full, the wheel revolved and
      decanted the liquid whilst presenting another bucket to the distilling drops. 
 At each movement of the wheel a connection with it gave motion to the hand of a statuette
      of Saturn, who with his scythe indicated a number on an arc of metal. The numbers ranged from
      one to twelve, and the contrivance answered for half the twenty-four hours. 
 “Lady,” said the Magus, “before Saturn has pointed to the twelfth hour——” 
 Steps were heard, approaching the room, along the mosaic-laid passage, and next moment, the
      curtain was snatched aside, and Domitian, his face blazing with anger, entered the apartment
      of his wife. 
 “So?” said he, “you are in league with astrologers and magicians against me! But, by the
      Gods! I can protect myself.” 
 He clapped his hands, and some of the guard appeared in the doorway. 
 “Remove him,” said the Emperor. “I have given orders concerning him already. Hey! Magus!
      knowest thou what will be thy doom, thou who pretendest to read the fate of men in the
       stars?” 
 “Augustus,” answered the necromancer, “I have read that I should be rent by wild dogs.” 
 “Sayest thou so? Then by Jupiter! I will make thy forecast come to naught. Go, Eulogius!—it
      is my command that he be at once, mark you, this very night, burned alive. We will see whether
      his prophecies come true. Here is my order.” 
 Domitian plucked a packet of tablets from his bosom, bound together with a string, drew
      forth one, and wrote hastily on it, then pressed his seal on the wax that covered the slab and
      handed it to the officer. 

 Then the guard surrounded the astrologer, and led him away. 
 Domitian waved his hand. 
 “Every one out of earshot,” ordered he, and he walked to the window and looked forth. 
 It was already night; to the south the sky was quivering with lightning, summer flashes,
      without thunder. 
 “A storm, a storm is coming on,” said the Emperor; “there’ll be storms everywhere, and
      lightning falling on all sides—portents they say. So be it! as the sword of heaven smites, so
      does mine. But it falls not on me, but on my enemies. Domitia,” said he, leaving the window,
      “there has been a conspiracy entered into against my life, and the fools thought to set up
      Clemens—he, that weakling, that coward; but I have sent him to his death, and those who were
      associated with him, the sentence is gone forth against them also.” 
 “I marvel only that any in Rome are suffered to live.” 
 “Minerva gives me wisdom—to defend myself.” 
 “Any wild beast can employ teeth and claws.” 
 “Domitia,” he came close to her, “I am the most lonely of men. I have no friends; my
      kinsmen either have been, or hate me; my friends are the most despicable of flatterers, who
      would betray their own parents to save their own throats; I use them, but I scorn them. You
      know not what it is to be alone!” 
 “I! I have been alone ever since you tore me from Lamia.” 
 “Lamia!” he ground his teeth; “still Lamia! But by the Gods! not for long. And you—you my
      wife whom I have loved, for whom I would have done anything—you are against me; you take
      counsel with a
      Chaldæan how long I have to live; the Senate, the nobles hate me, and by Jupiter,
      they have good cause, for I cut them with a scythe like ripe wheat. That was a good lesson of
      Tarquin to his son Sextus to nip off the heads of the tallest poppies. And the people—you have
      been currying favor with them—against me; the soldiers alone love me, because I have doubled
      their pay; let another offer to treble it and, to a man, they will desert me. By the
      Immortals! it is terrible to be alone—and to be plotted against, even by one’s wife.” 
 He walked the room, flourishing his tablets, then halted in front of the clepsydra. 
 “What said that star-gazer about the twelfth hour?” he asked. “Walls have ears, nothing is
      said that does not reach me. So, old Saturn, with thy scythe, dost thou threaten? Then I defy
      thee—ha! I saw the storm was coming up over Rome.” 
 A long-drawn growl of thunder muttered through the passages of the palace. 
 “I saw no flash,” said the prince, “yet lightning falls somewhere, maybe to kindle the pyre
      on which that sorcerer will burn; I care not. Fire of heaven fall and strike where and whom
      thou wilt!” 
 He went again to the window and looked forth. The air was still and close. The sky was
      enveloped in vapor and not a star could be seen. A continuous quiver of electric light ran
      along the horizon. Then the heavens seemed to be rent asunder and a blaze of lightning shot
      forth, blinding to the eyes. 
 Domitian turned away, and laid the tablets on the marble sideboard as he pressed his hands
      to his eyeballs. 

 “By the Gods!” he exclaimed a moment later, “here comes the rain; it descends in cataracts;
      it falls with a roar.” 
 He paced the room, halted, stood in front of the clepsydra and looked at the dropping
      water. The water had been reddened, and it seemed like blood sweated out of the silver globe.
      At that moment the wheel revolved, and sent a crimson gush into the receiver. With a jerk
      Saturn raised his scythe and indicated the hour ten. 
 The Emperor turned away, and came in front of Domitia. 
 “None have ever loved me,” he said bitterly, “how then can it be expected that I shall love
      any? my father disliked me, my brother distrusted me—and you—my wife, have ever hated me. I
      need not ask the cause of that. It is Lamia, always Lamia. Because he has never married you
      think he still harbors love for you; and you—you hate me because of him. It is hard to be a
      prince, and to be alone. If I hear a play—I think I catch allusions to me; if it be a
      comedy—there is a jest aimed at me; if a tragedy, it expresses what men wish may befall me. If
      I read a historian, he declaims on the glories of a commonwealth before these men, these
      Cæsars became tyrants, and as for your philosophers—away with them, they are wind-bags, but
      the wind is poisonous, it is malarious to me. When I am at the circus, because I back
      green—you, the entire hoop of spectators cheer, bet on the blue—to show me that they hate me.
      At the Amphitheatre, if I favor the big shields, then every one else is for the small targets.
      A prince is ever the most solitary of men. If you had protested that you loved me, had
      fondled me, I would have held you in suspicion, mistrusted your every word and
      look and gesture. Perhaps it is because that you have never given me good word, gentle look,
      and gesture of respect that I feel you are true—cruelly true, and I have loved you as the only
      true person I know. Now answer me—you asked after my death?” 
 “Yes,” answered Domitia. 
 “I knew it.” 
 “And,” said she, in cold, hard tones, looking straight into his agitated, twitching
      countenance, “I bear to you a message.” 
 “From whom?” 
 “From Cornelia, the Great Mother.” 
 “Well, and what——” he stopped, some one approached the door. “What would you have?” 
 The mime Latinus appeared. 
 “Well—speak.” 
 “Sire, the rain extinguished the pyre, before that the astrologer was much burnt; then the
      dogs fell on him, as he was unbound, and they tore him and he is dead.” 
 “Ye Gods!” gasped Domitian, putting up his hand. “His word has come true after all.” 
 Domitia signed to the actor to withdraw. 
 “You have not heard the message of Cornelia.” 
 He did not speak. 
 “She has summoned you, the Augustus, the Chief Pontiff, the unjust Judge, to answer before
      the All-righteous Supreme Justice, above—before the scythe points to Twelve.” 
 Domitian answered not a word, he threw his mantle about his face and left the room. 
 He had left his tablets on the table. 
