

CHAPTER III.CORBULO.
 Cnæus Domitius Corbulo was the greatest general of his time, and he had splendidly served
      the State. 
 His sister Cæsonia had been the wife of the mad prince Caligula. She was not beautiful, but
      her flexible mouth, her tender eyes, the dimples in her cheeks, her exquisite grace of manner
      and sweetness of expression had not only won the heart of the tyrant, but had enabled her to
      maintain it. 
 Once, in an outburst of surprise at himself for loving her, he threatened to put her to the
      torture to wring from Cæsonia the secret of her hold on his affections. Once, as he caressed
      her, he broke into hideous laughter, and when asked the reason, said, “I have but to speak the
      word, and this lovely throat would be cut.” 
 Yet this woman loved the maniac, and when he had been murdered in the subterranean gallery
      leading from the palace to the theatre, she crept to the spot, and was found kneeling by her
      dead husband with their babe in her arms, sobbing and wiping the blood from his face. The
      assassins did not spare her. They cut her down and dashed out the brains of the infant against
      the marble walls. 
 Corbulo was not only able, he was successful. Under
      Nero he was engaged in the East against the Parthians, the most redoubted enemies
      of the empire. He broke their power and sent their king, Tiridates, a suppliant to Rome. 
 His headquarters had been at Antioch, and there for a while his wife and daughter had
      resided with him. But after a while, they were sent part way homewards, as Corbulo himself
      expected his recall. 
 They had been separated from him for over six months, and had been awaiting his arrival in
      a villa at Cenchræa, that had been placed at their disposal by a Greek client. 
 It was customary for those who did not live in Rome but belonged to a province, to place
      themselves under the patronage of a Roman noble; whereupon ensued an exchange of “cards” as we
      should say, but actually of engraved plates or metal fishes on which the date of the agreement
      was entered as well as the names of the contracting parties. Then, when a provincial desired
      assistance at the capital, in obtaining redress for a grievance in a lawsuit, or in recovering
      a debt, his patron attended to his client’s interests, and should he visit Rome received him
      into his house as an honored guest. 
 On the other hand, if the patron were on a journey and came to the place where his client
      could serve him, the latter threw his house open to him, treated him with the most profound
      respect and accorded to him the largest hospitality. So now the villa of a client had been
      placed at the disposal of Corbulo and his family, and he occupied it with as little hesitation
      as though it were his own. 
 It was a matter of pride to a Roman noble to have
      a large number of silver engraved plates and fishes suspended in his atrium,
      announcing to all visitors what an extensive clientèle he had, and the
      provincial was not less proud to be able to flourish the name of his distinguished patron at
      the capital. 
 On the evening following the disembarkation, Corbulo and his wife were seated on a bench
      enjoying the pleasant air that fanned from the sea; and looking over the terraced garden at
      their daughter, who was gambolling with a long silky-haired kid from Cilicia, that her father
      had brought as a present to his child. 
 She was a lovely girl, aged sixteen, with a remarkably intelligent face, and large, clear,
      shrewd eyes. 
 Yet, though lovely, none could say that she was beautiful. Her charm was like that of her
      aunt, Cæsonia, in grace of form, in changefulness and sweetness of expression, and in the
      brimming intellect that flashed out of her violet eyes. And now as she played with the kid,
      her every movement formed an artist’s study, and the simple joy that shone out of her face,
      and the affection wherewith she glanced at intervals at her father, invested her with a
      spiritual charm, impossible to be achieved by sculptor with his chisel or by painter with his
      brush. 
 The eyes of Domitius Corbulo followed his child, wherever she went, whatever she did. He
      was a man of somewhat advanced age, shaven, with short shorn hair, marked features, the brow
      somewhat retreating, but with a firm mouth and strong jaw. Though not handsome, there was
      refinement in his countenance which gave it a character of nobleness, and the brilliant eye
      and decision in the countenance inspired universal
      respect. Every one could see that he was not merely a commander of men in war, but
      a man of culture in the forum and the academy. 
 “Wife,” said he, “I pray you desist. It was for this that I sent you back from Antioch. You
      ever twanged one string, and I felt that your words, if overheard, might endanger us all.” 
 “I speak but into thine ear.” 
 “A brimming vessel overflows on all sides,” said Corbulo. 
 “Ah well! some men make themselves by grasping at what the Gods offer them. Others lose
      themselves by disregarding the favors extended by the Immortals.” 
 “I deny that any such offer was made me,” said the general in a tone of annoyance. 
 “What!” exclaimed Longa Duilia, “art thou so blind as not to see what is obvious to every
      other eye, that the Roman people are impatient at having a buffoon, a mimic, a fiddler wearing
      the purple?” 
 “Nevertheless, he wears it, by favor of the gods.” 
 “For how long? Domitius, believe me. In the heart of every Roman citizen rage is simmering,
      and the wound of injured pride rankles. He has insulted the majesty of eternal Rome. After
      having acted the buffoon in Italy, running up and down it like a jester on a tight-rope
      mouthing at the people, and with his assassins scattered about below to cut them down if they
      do not applaud—then he comes here also into Greece, to act on stages, race chariots, before
      Greeks—Greeks of all people! To me this is nothing, for all princes are tyrants more or less,
      and so long as they do not prick me, I care not. But here it does come close.
      In every army, in the breast of every soldier, rebellion springs up. Every general
      is uneasy and looks at the face of every other and asks, Who will draw the sword and make an
      end of this? O Morals! it makes me mad to see you alone quiescent.” 
 “When the Gods will a change, then the change will be granted.” 
 “You speak like a philosopher and not a man of action. If you do not draw, others will
      forestall you, and then—instead of my being up at the top—I shall be down in Nowhere.” 
 “Never will I be a traitor to Rome, and go against my oath.” 
 “Pshaw! They all do it, so why not you?” 
 “Because my conscience will not suffer me.” 
 “Conscience! The haruspices have never found it yet. They can discover and read the liver
      and the kidneys, but no knife has yet laid bare a conscience as big as a bean. You were the
      darling of the soldiery in Germany. You are still the idol of those who have fought under you
      in Parthia and Armenia. I am sure I did my best to push your cause. I was gracious to the
      soldiery—sent tit-bits from the table to the guard. I tipped right and left, till I spent all
      my pocket-money, and smiled benignantly on all military men till I got a horrible crumple here
      in my cheek, do you see?” 
 “Yes, shocking,” said Corbulo, indifferently. 
 “How can you be so provoking!” exclaimed Duilia pettishly. “Of course there is no wrinkle,
      there might have been, I did so much smiling. Really, Corbulo, one has to do all the
      picking—as boys get winkles out of their shells with a pin—to extract a compliment from
      you. And out comes the pin with nothing at the end. Plancus would not have let
      that pass.” 
 “Do you say that Nero is here?” 
 “Yes, here, in Greece; here at our elbow, at Corinth. He has for once got a clever idea
      into his head and has begun to cut a canal through the isthmus. It has begun with a flourish
      of trumpets and a dinner and a dramatic exhibition—and then I warrant you it will end.” 
 “The Prince at Corinth!” 
 “Yes, at Corinth; and you are here with all the wide sea between you and your troops. And
      docile as a lamb you have come here, and left your vantage ground. What it all means, the Gods
      know. It is no doing of mine. I warned and exhorted at Antioch, but you might have been born
      deaf for all the attention you paid to my words.” 
 “Never would I raise my sacrilegious hand against Rome—my mother.” 


 “Nay—it is Rome that cries out to be rid of a man that makes her the scorn of the world.” 
 “She has not spoken. She has not released me of my oath.” 
 “Because her mouth is gagged. As the Gods love me, they say that the god Caius (Caligula)
      named his horse Consul. Rome may have a monkey as her prince and Augustus for aught I care,
      were it not that by such a chance the handle is offered for you to upset him and seat yourself
      and me at the head of the universe.” 
 “No more of this,” said the general. “A good soldier obeys his commander. And I have an
       imperator,” he touched his breast; “a good conscience,
      and I go nowhere, undertake nothing which is not ordered by my master there.” 
 “Then I wash my hands of the result.” 
 “Come hither!” Corbulo called, and signed to his daughter who, with a flush of pleasure,
      left her kid and ran to him. 
 He took both her hands by the wrists, and holding her before him, panting from play, and
      with light dancing in her blue eyes, he said, “Domitia, I have not said one grave word to thee
      since we have been together. Yet now will I do this. None can tell what may be the next turn
      up of the die. And this that I am about to say comes warm and salt from my heart, like the
      spring hard by, at the Bath of Helene.” 
 “And strong, father,” said the girl, with flashes in her speaking eyes. “So strong is the
      spring that at once it turns a mill, ere rushing down to find its rest in the sea.” 
 “Well, and so may what I say so turn and make thee active, dear child,—active for good,
      though homely the work may be as that of grinding flour. When you have done a good work, and
      not wasted the volume of life in froth and cascade, then find rest in the wide sea of——” 
 “Of what?” sneered Duilia, “say it out—of nobody knows what.” 
 “That which thou sayest, dearest father, will not sleep in my heart.” 
 “Domitia, when we sail at sea, we direct our course by the stars. Without the stars we
      should not know whither to steer. And the steering of the vessel by the stars, that is
      seamanship. So in life. There are principles of right and wrong set in the firmament——” 

 “Where?” asked Duilia. “As the Gods love me, I never saw them.” 
 “By them,” continued Corbulo, disregarding the interruption, “we must shape our course, and
      this true shaping of our course, and not drifting with tides, or blown hither and thither by
      winds—this is the seamanship of life.” 
 “By the Gods!” said Duilia. “You must first find your stars. I hold what you say to be rank
      nonsense. Where are your stars? Principles! You keep your constellations in the hold of your
      vessel. My good Corbulo, our own interest, that we can always see, and by that we ought ever
      to steer.” 
 “Father,” said the girl, “I see a centurion and a handful of soldiers coming this way—and,
      if I mistake not, Lamia is speeding ahead of them.” 
 “Well, go then, and play with the kid. Hear how the little creature bleats after thee.” 
 She obeyed, and the old soldier watched his darling, with his heart in his eyes. 
 Presently, when she was beyond hearing, he said:— 
 “Now about the future of Domitia. I wish her no better fortune than to become the wife of
      Lucius Ælius Lamia, whom I love as my son. He has been in and out among us at Antioch. He
      returns with me to Rome. In these evil times, for a girl there is one only chance—to be given
      a good husband. This I hold, that a woman is never bad unless man shows her the way. If, as
      you say, there be no stars in the sky—there is love in the heart. By Hercules! here comes
      Lamia, and something ails him.” 
 Lucius was seen approaching through the garden.
      His face was ashen-gray, and he was evidently a prey to the liveliest distress. 
 He hastened to Corbulo, but although his lips moved, he could not utter a word. 
 “You would speak with me,” said the old general rising, and looking steadily in the young
      man’s face. 
 Something he saw there made him divine his errand. 
 Then Corbulo turned, kissed his wife, and said— 
 “Farewell. I am rightly served.” 
 He took a step from her, looked towards Domitia, who was dancing to her kid, above whose
      reach she held a bunch of parsley. 
 He hesitated for a moment. His inclination drew him towards her; but a second thought
      served to make him abandon so doing, and instead, he bent back to his wife, and said to her,
      with suppressed emotion— 
 “Bid her from me—as my last command—Follow the Light where and when she sees it.” 
