<?xml-model href="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TEIC/TEI-Simple/master/teisimple.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?><TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0"><teiHeader><titleStmt><title>The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Chink In The Armour, by
      Mrs. Belloc Lowndes.</title><author>Belloc-Lowndes, Marie (1868-1947)</author></titleStmt><publicationStmt><publisher>COST Action "Distant Reading for European Literary History" (CA16204)</publisher><date>1912</date></publicationStmt></teiHeader><text><body><div type="chapter" n="14">
CHAPTER XIV
The day after her memorable expedition to Paris opened pleasantly for Sylvia Bailey, though
     it was odd how dull and lifeless the Villa du Lac seemed to be without Count Paul.
But he would be back to-morrow, and in the morning of the next day they were to begin riding
     together.
Again and again she went over in retrospect every moment of the two hours she had spent in
     that great house in the Faubourg St. Germain.
How kind these two ladies had been to her, Paul's gentle sister and his stately little
     fairy-like godmother! But the Duchesse's manner had been very formal, almost solemn; and as for
     the other—Sylvia could still feel the dim, yet terribly searching, eyes fixed on her face, and
     she wondered nervously what sort of effect she had produced on the old Marquise.
Meanwhile, she felt that now was the time to see something of Anna Wolsky. The long afternoon
     and evening stretching before her seemed likely to be very dull, and so she wrote a little note
     and asked Anna if she would care for a long expedition in the Forest of Montmorency. It was the
     sort of thing Anna always said bored her, but as she was not going to the Casino a drive would
     surely be better than doing nothing.
And now Sylvia, sitting idly by her bed-room window, was awaiting Anna's answer to her note.
     She had sent it, just before she went down to luncheon, by a commissionaire, to the Pension
     Malfait, and the answer ought to have come ere now.
After their drive she and Anna might call on the Wachners and offer to take them to the
     Casino; and with the thought of the Wachners there came over Sylvia a regret that the Comte de
     Virieu was so fastidious. He seemed to detest the Wachners! When he met them at the Casino, the
     most he would do was to incline his head coldly towards them. Who could wonder that Madame
     Wachner spoke so disagreeably of him?
Sylvia Bailey's nature was very loyal, and now she reminded herself that this couple, for
     whom Count Paul seemed to have an instinctive dislike, were good-natured and kindly. She must
     ever remember gratefully how helpful Madame Wachner had been during the first few days she and
     Anna had been at Lacville, in showing them the little ways about the place, and in explaining
     to them all sorts of things about the Casino.
And how kindly the Wachners had pressed Anna yesterday to have supper with them during
     Sylvia's absence in Paris!
There came a knock at the door, and Sylvia jumped up from her chair. No doubt this was Anna
     herself in response to the note.
"Come in," she cried out, in English.
There was a pause, and another knock. Then it was not Anna?
"Entrez!"
The commissionaire by whom Sylvia had sent her note to Madame Wolsky walked into the room. To
     her great surprise he handed her back her own letter to her friend. The envelope had been
     opened, and together with her letter was a sheet of common notepaper, across which was
     scrawled, in pencil, the words, "Madame Wolsky est partie."
Sylvia looked up. "Partie?" The word puzzled her. Surely it should have been
      "Sortie." Perhaps Anna had gone to Paris for the day to bank her large winnings.
     "Then the lady was out?" she said to the man.
"The lady has left the Pension Malfait," he said, briefly. "She has gone away."
"There must be some mistake!" Sylvia exclaimed, in French. "My friend would never have left
     Lacville without telling me."
The commissionaire went on: "But I have brought back a motor-cab as Madame directed me to
     do."
She paid him, and went downstairs hurriedly. What an extraordinary mistake! It was out of the
     question that Anna should have left Lacville without telling her; but as the motor was there
     she might as well drive to the Pension Malfait and find out the meaning of the curt message,
     and also why her own letter to Anna had been opened.
If Anna had gone into Paris for the day, the only thing to do was to go for a drive alone.
     The prospect was not exhilarating, but it would be better than staying indoors, or even in the
     garden by herself, all afternoon.
Sylvia felt rather troubled and uncomfortable as she got into the open motor. Somehow she had
     counted on seeing Anna to-day. She remembered her friend's last words to her. They had been
     kind, tender words, and though Anna did not approve of Sylvia's friendship for Paul de Virieu,
     she had spoken in a very understanding, sympathetic way, almost as a loving mother might have
     spoken.
It was odd of Anna not to have left word she was going to Paris for the day. In any case, the
     Wachners would know when Anna would be back. It was with them that she had had supper yesterday
     evening—.
While these thoughts were passing disconnectedly through Sylvia's mind, she suddenly saw the
     substantial figure of Madame Wachner walking slowly along the sanded path by the side of the
     road.
"Madame Wachner! Madame Wachner!" she cried out eagerly, and the car drew up with a jerk.
That citizeness of the world, as she had called herself, stepped down from the kerb. She
     looked hot and tired. It was a most unusual time for Madame Wachner to be out walking, and by
     herself, in Lacville.
But Sylvia was thinking too much about Anna Wolsky to trouble about anything else.
"Have you heard that Anna Wolsky is away for the day?" she exclaimed. "I have received such a
     mysterious message from the Pension Malfait! Do come with me there and find out where she has
     gone and when she is coming back. Did she say anything about going into Paris when she had
     supper with you last night?"
With a smile and many voluble thanks Madame Wachner climbed up into the open car, and sat
     back with a sigh of satisfaction.
She was very stout, though still so vigorous, and her shrewd, determined face now turned
     smilingly to the pretty, anxious-eyed Englishwoman. But she waited a few moments before
     answering Sylvia's eager questions. Then,
"I cannot tell you," she said slowly and in French, "what has happened to Madame Wolsky—"
"What has happened to her!" cried Sylvia. "What do you mean, Madame Wachner?"
"Oh, of course, nothing 'as 'appened." Madame Wachner dropped soothingly into English. "All I
     mean is that Madame Wolsky did not come to us yesterday evening. We stayed in on purpose, but,
     as English people say so funnily, she never turn up!"
"But she was coming to tea as well as to supper!"
"Yes, we waited for 'er a long time, and I 'ad got such a beautiful little supper! But, alas!
     she did not come—no, not at all."
"How odd of her! Perhaps she got a telegram which contained bad news—"
"Yes," said Madame Wachner eagerly, "no doubt. For this morning when I go to the Pension
     Malfait, I 'ear that she 'as gone away! It was for that I was 'urrying to the Villa du Lac to
     see if you knew anything, dear friend."
"Gone away?" repeated Sylvia, bewildered. "But it is inconceivable that Anna could have left
     Lacville without telling me—or, for the matter of that, without telling you, too—"
"She 'as taken what you in England call 'French leave,'" said Madame Wachner drily. "It was
     not very considerate of 'er. She might 'ave sent us word last night. We would not then 'ave
     waited to 'ave our nice supper."
"She can't have gone away without telling me," repeated Sylvia. She was staring straight into
     her companion's red face: Madame Wachner still looked very hot and breathless. "I am sure she
     would never have done such a thing. Why should she?"
The older woman shrugged her shoulders.
"I expect she will come back soon," she said consolingly. "She 'as left her luggage at the
     Pension Malfait, and that, after all, does not look as if she 'as gone for evare!"
"Left her luggage?" cried Sylvia, in a relieved tone. "Why, then, of course, she is coming
     back! I expect she has gone to Paris for a night in order to see friends passing through. How
     could the Pension Malfait people think she had gone—I mean for good? You know, Madame
     Wachner"—she lowered her voice, for she did not wish the driver to hear what she was about to
     say—"you know that Anna won a very large sum of money two nights ago."
Sylvia Bailey was aware that people had been robbed and roughly handled, even in idyllic
     Lacville, when leaving the Casino after an especial stroke of luck at the tables.
"I do hope nothing has happened to her!"
"'Appened to 'er? What do you mean?" Madame Wachner spoke quite crossly. "Who ever thought of
     such a thing!" And she fanned herself vigorously with a paper fan she held in her left hand.
     "As to her winnings—yes, she won a lot of money the night she took the bank. But, remember that
     she 'as 'ad plenty of time yesterday to lose it all again—ah, yes!"
"But she meant to give up play till Monday," said Sylvia, eagerly. "I feel sure she never
     went inside the Casino yesterday."
"Oh, but she did. My 'usband saw her there."
"At what time?" asked Sylvia, eagerly.
"Let me see—"
"Of course, it must have been early, as you were back waiting for her late in the
     afternoon."
"Yes, it must have been early. And once in the Casino!—well, dear friend, you know as well as
     I do that with Madame Wolsky the money flies! Still, let us suppose she did not lose 'er money
     yesterday. In that case surely Madame Wolsky would 'ave done well to leave Lacville with 'er
     gains in 'er pocket-book."
Madame Wachner was leaning back in the car, a ruminating smile on her broad, good-tempered
     face.
She was thoroughly enjoying the rush through the air. It was very hot, and she disliked
     walking. Her morose husband very seldom allowed her to take a cab. He generally forced her to
     walk to the Casino and back.
Something of a philosopher was Madame Wachner, always accepting with eager, out-stretched
     hands that with which the gods provided her.
And all at once pretty Sylvia Bailey, though unobservant as happy, prosperous youth so often
     is, conceived the impression that her companion did not at all wish to discuss Anna's sudden
     departure. Madame Wachner had evidently been very much annoyed by Anna's lack of civility, and
     surely the least Anna could have done would have been to send a message saying that it was
     impossible for her to come to supper at the Châlet des Muguets!
"I am quite sure Anna did not mean to be rude, dear Madame Wachner," said Sylvia, earnestly.
     "You know she may have sent you a letter or a message which miscarried. They are rather
     careless people at the Pension Malfait."
"Yes, of course, that is always possible," said the other rather coldly.
And then, as they came within sight of the Pension Malfait, Madame Wachner suddenly placed
     her large, powerful, bare hand on Sylvia's small gloved one.
"Look 'ere, my dear," she said, familiarly, "do not worry about Madame Wolsky. Believe me,
     she is not worth it."
Sylvia looked at her amazed, and then Madame Wachner broke into French: "She thought of
     nothing but play—that is the truth! Play, play, play! Other times she was half asleep!"
She waited a moment, then slowly, and in English, she said, "I believe in my 'eart that she
     'as gone off to Aix. The play 'ere was not big enough for 'er. And remember that you 'ave good
     friends still left in Lacville. I do not only speak of me and of my 'usband, but also of
     another one."
She laughed, if good-naturedly, then a little maliciously.
But Sylvia gave no answering smile. She told herself that Madame Wachner, though kindly, was
     certainly rather vulgar, not to say coarse. And her words about Madame Wolsky were really
     unkind. Anna was not such a gambler as was Fritz Wachner.
They were now at the gate of the boarding house.
"We will, at any rate, go in and find out when Anna left, and if she said where she was
     going," said Sylvia.
"If you do not mind," observed Madame Wachner, "I will remain out here, in the car. They have
     already seen me this morning at the Pension Malfait. They must be quite tired of seeing
     me."
Sylvia felt rather disappointed. She would have liked the support of Madame Wachner's
     cheerful presence when making her inquiries, for she was aware that the proprietors of Anna's
     pension—M. and Madame Malfait—had been very much annoyed that she, Sylvia, had not joined her
     friend there.
Madame Malfait was sitting in her usual place—that is, in a little glass cage in the hall—and
     when she saw Mrs. Bailey coming towards her, a look of impatience, almost of dislike, crossed
     her thin, shrewd face.
"Bon jour, Madame!" she said curtly. "I suppose you also have come to ask me about Madame
     Wolsky? But I think you must have heard all there is to hear from the lady whom I see out there
     in the car. I can tell you nothing more than I have already told her. Madame Wolsky has treated
     us with great want of consideration. She did not come home last evening. Poor Malfait waited up
     all night, wondering what could be the matter. And then, this morning, we found a letter in her
     room saying she had gone away!"
"A letter in her room?" exclaimed Sylvia. "Madame Wachner did not tell me that my friend had
     left a letter—"
But Madame Malfait went on angrily:
"Madame Wolsky need not have troubled to write! A word of explanation would have been better,
     and would have prevented my husband sitting up till five o'clock this morning. We quite feared
     something must have happened to her. But we have a great dislike to any affair with the police,
     and so we thought we would wait before telling them of her disappearance, and it is indeed
     fortunate that we did so!"
"Will you kindly show me the letter she left for you?" said Sylvia.
Without speaking, Madame Malfait bent down over her table, and then held out a piece of
     notepaper on which were written the words:

Madame Malfait,—
Being unexpectedly obliged to leave Lacville, I enclose herewith 200 francs. Please pay what
      is owing to you out of it, and distribute the rest among the servants. I will send you word
      where to forward my luggage in a day or two.

Sylvia stared reflectively at the open letter.
Anna had not even signed her name. The few lines were very clear, written in a large, decided
     handwriting, considerably larger, or so it seemed to Sylvia, than what she had thought Anna's
     ordinary hand to be. But then the Englishwoman had not had the opportunity of seeing much of
     her Polish friend's caligraphy.
Before she had quite finished reading the mysterious letter over a second time, Madame
     Malfait took it out of her hand.
But Sylvia Bailey was entirely unused to being snubbed—pretty young women provided with
     plenty of money seldom are snubbed—and so she did not turn away and leave the hall, as Madame
     Malfait hoped she would do.
"What a strange thing!" she observed, in a troubled tone. "How extraordinary it is that my
     friend should have gone away like this, leaving her luggage behind her! What can possibly have
     made her want to leave Lacville in such a hurry? She was actually engaged to have dinner with
     our friends, Monsieur and Madame Wachner. Did she not send them any sort of message, Madame
     Malfait? I wish you would try and remember what she said when she went out."
The Frenchwoman looked at her with a curious stare.
"If you ask me to tell you the truth, Madame," she replied, rather insolently, "I have no
     doubt at all that your friend went to the Casino yesterday and lost a great deal of money—that
     she became, in fact, décavée."
Then, feeling ashamed, both of her rudeness and of her frankness, she added:
"But Madame Wolsky is a very honest lady, that I will say for her. You see, she left enough
     money to pay for everything, as well as to provide my servants with handsome gratuities. That
     is more than the last person who left the Pension Malfait in a hurry troubled to do!"
"But is it not extraordinary that she left her luggage, and that she did not even tell you
     where she was going?" repeated Sylvia in a worried, dissatisfied tone.
"Pardon me, Madame, that is not strange at all! Madame Wolsky probably went off to Paris
     without knowing exactly where she meant to stay, and no one wants to take luggage with them
     when they are looking round for an hotel. I am expecting at any moment to receive a telegram
     telling me where to send the luggage. You, Madame, if you permit me to say so, have not had my
     experience—my experience, I mean, in the matter of ladies who play at the Lacville Casino."
There was still a tone of covert insolence in her voice, and she went on, "True, Madame
     Wolsky has not behaved as badly as she might have done. Still, you must admit that it is rather
     inconsiderate of her, after engaging the room for the whole of the month of August, to go off
     like this!"
Madame Malfait felt thoroughly incensed, and did not trouble to conceal the fact. But as Mrs.
     Bailey at last began walking towards the front door, the landlady of the pension hurried after
     her.
"Madame will not say too much about her friend's departure, will she?" she said more
     graciously. "I do not want any embarrassments with the police. Everything is quite en
      règle, is it not? After all, Madame Wolsky had a right to go away without telling anyone
     of her plans, had she not, Madame?"
Sylvia turned round. "Certainly, she had an entire right to do so," she answered coldly.
     "But, still, I should be much obliged if you will send me word when you receive the telegram
     you are expecting her to send you about the luggage."
"Well?" cried Madame Wachner eagerly, as Sylvia silently got into the motor again. "Have you
     learnt anything? Have they not had news of our friend?"
"They have heard nothing since they found that odd letter of hers," said Sylvia. "You never
     told me about the letter, Madame Wachner?"
"Ah, that letter! I saw it, too. But it said nothing, absolutely nothing!" exclaimed Madame
     Wachner.
And Sylvia suddenly realised that in truth Anna's letter did say nothing.
"I should have thought they would have had a telegram to-day about the luggage."
"So would I," said Sylvia. And then musingly, "I should never, never have expected Anna
     Wolsky to go off like that. So—so mysteriously—"
"Well, there, I quite disagree with you! It is just what I should have expected her to do!"
     exclaimed Madame Wachner. "She told me of that visit you both made to the soothsayer. Perhaps
     she made up in her mind to follow that person's advice. Our friend was always a little
     mysterious, was she not? Did she ever talk to you of her family, of her friends?" She looked
     inquisitively at her companion.
"Yes—no," said Sylvia, hesitating. "I do not think poor Anna has many relations. You see, she
     is a widow. I believe her father and mother are dead."
"Ah, that is very sad! Then you do not know of anyone to write to about her?"
"I?" said Sylvia. "No, of course I don't know of anyone to write to. How could I? I haven't
     known her very long, you know, Madame Wachner. But we became friends almost at once."
The motor was still stationary. The driver turned round for orders. Sylvia roused
     herself.
"Can I drive you back to the Châlet des Muguets?" she asked. "Somehow I don't feel inclined
     to take a drive in the forest now."
"If you do not mind," said Madame Wachner, "I should prefer to be driven to the station, for
     l'Ami Fritz had to go to Paris." She laughed ruefully. "To fetch money, as usual! His system
     did not work at all well yesterday—poor Fritz!"
"How horrid!" said Sylvia. "It must be very disappointing to your husband when his system
     goes wrong."
"Yes, very," answered the wife drily. "But when one system fails—well, then he at once sets
     himself to inventing another! I lose a great deal more in the lower room playing with francs
     than Fritz does at baccarat playing with gold. You see, a system has this good about it—the
     player generally comes out even at the end of each month."
"Does he, indeed?"
But Sylvia was not attending to what the other was saying. She was still absorbed in the
     thought of her friend, and of the mystery of her friend's sudden departure from Lacville.
When at last they reached the station, Madame Wachner turned and grasped Sylvia by the
     hand.
"We must not let you become low-spirited!" she exclaimed. "It is a great pity your kind
     friend has gone away. But doubtless you will soon be going away, too?"
And, as Sylvia made no answer, "Perhaps it would be well not to say too much concerning
     Madame Wolsky having left like this. She might come back any moment, and then she would not
     like it if there had been a fuss made about it! If I were you I would tell nobody—I repeat
     emphatically nobody."
Madame Wachner stared significantly at Sylvia. "You do not know what the police of Lacville
     are like, my dear friend. They are very unpleasant people. As you were Anna's only friend in
     the place, they might give you considerable trouble. They would ask you where to look for her,
     and they would torment you incessantly. If I were you I would say as little as possible."
Madame Wachner spoke very quickly, almost breathlessly, and Sylvia felt vaguely
     uncomfortable. There was, of course, only one person to whom she was likely to mention the
     fact, and that was Paul de Virieu.
Was it possible that Madame Wachner wished to warn her against telling him of a fact which he
     was sure to discover for himself in the course of a day or two?
</div></body></text></TEI>