
CHAPTER XVII.
NARCISSUS TRIANDRUS STRIATUM, THE GOOD COMRADE
The winter wore away; a very long winter, and a very cold one to those at the cottage who
     were used to the mild west country. But at last spring came; late and with bitter winds and
     showers of sleet, but none the less wonderful, especially as one had to look to see the
     tentative signs of its coming. March in Marbridge used to mean violets and daffodils, tender
     green shoots and balmy middays. March here means days of pale clean light and great sweeping
     wind which chased grey clouds across a steely sky, and stirred the lust for fight and freedom
     in men's minds and set them longing to be up and away and at battle with the world or the
     elements. This restlessness, which those who have lost it call divine, took possession of Julia
     that springtime, and a dissatisfaction with the simple life and its narrow limits beset her.
     Surely, she found herself asking, this was not the end of all things—this cottage to be the
     limit of her life and ambitions; her work to grow cabbages and eat them, to keep her father in
     the paths of temperance and sobriety, and to make Johnny's closing days happy? The March winds
     spoke vaguely of other things; they whispered of the life she had put from her; the big, wide,
     moving, thinking, feeling life which would have been living indeed. Worse, they whispered of
     the man who had offered it to her, the man whom her heart told her she would have made friend
     and comrade if only circumstances had allowed him to
      make her wife. But she thrust these thoughts from her; she had no choice, she
     never had a choice; now less if possible than before, there was no heart-aching decision to
     make. The work she had taken up could not be put down; she must go on even if voices stronger
     and more real than these wind ones called her out.
One day the crocuses which Mijnheer had sent came into flower; Julia thought she had never
     seen anything so beautiful as the little purple and golden cups, partly because they had been
     sent in kindness of heart, partly, no doubt, because she had grown them herself, and she had
     never grown a flower which had its root in the inarticulate joy of all things at the first
     flowering of dead brown earth and monotonous lifeless days. The next event in her calendar, and
     Johnny's, was the blooming of the fruit trees. She had seen hillside orchards in the west
     country break into a foam of flower—a sight perhaps as beautiful as any England has to show.
     But, to her mind, it did not compare with the sparse white bloom which lay like a first hoar
     frost on her crooked trees and showed cold and delicate against the pale blue sky. After that,
     nearly every day, there was something fresh and interesting for Mr. Gillat and Julia, so that
     the March wind was forgotten, except in the ill-effect on Captain Polkington with whom it had
     disagreed a good deal, both in health and temper.
That spring, as indeed every spring, there was a flower show in London at the Temple Gardens.
     The things exhibited were principally bulb flowers, ixias, iris, narcissus and the like; the
     event was interesting to growers, both professional and amateur. Joost Van Heigen came over
     from Holland to attend; he was sent by his father in a purely business capacity, but of course
     he was expected, and himself expected, to enjoy it, too; there would be
      many novelties exhibited and many beautiful flowers in which he would feel the
     sober appreciative pleasure of the connoisseur. He came to England some days before the show;
     he had, besides attending that, to see some important customers on business, also one or two
     English growers.
Now, certain districts of Norfolk are very well suited to the cultivation of bulbs, so it is
     not surprising that Joost's business took him there. And, seeing that he had a Bradshaw and a
     good map, and had, moreover, six months ago addressed Julia's box of bulbs to her nearest
     railway town, it is not surprising that he found the whereabouts of the town of Halgrave. It
     was on Saturday night when he found it on the map; he was sitting in the coffee-room of a
     temperance hotel at the time. He had done business for the day, and, seeing that the English do
     not care about working on Sundays, he would probably have to-morrow as well as to-night free.
     Julia's town was close—a short railway journey, then a walk to Halgrave, and then one would be
     at her home—it would be a pleasant way of spending the morning of a spring Sunday. He thought
     about it a little; he had no invitation to go and see Julia, and he did not like going anywhere
     without an invitation or an express reason. She might not want to see him, or it might put out
     her domestic arrangements if he came; he knew domestic arrangements were subject to such
     disturbances. He hesitated some time, though it must be admitted that the fact that he had
     asked her to marry him and been refused did not come much into his consideration. He had not
     altered his mind about that proposal, and he did not imagine she had altered hers; his devotion
     and her indifference were definite settled facts which would remain as long as either of them
     remained, but there was nothing em
     barrassing in them to him. At last he decided that he would go, and it was the
     blue daffodil which decided him.
He had never heard what Julia had done with the bulb he had given her. It was only reasonable
     to think she had sold it, seeing it was for the sake of money she had wanted it, but no whisper
     of any such thing had reached him or his father. He longed to know about it, to hear the name
     of the man who had his treasure; for whom, in all probability, it was blooming now. It was some
     connoisseur he was nearly certain; Julia would not have sold it to another grower. He had not
     lain any such condition on her, but she would not have done that; she knew too well what it
     meant to him; he never doubted her in that matter, his faith was of too simple a kind. Still he
     determined to go and see her, partly that he might hear the name of the man who bought the blue
     daffodil, partly because he wanted to and remembered that Julia, in the old days, did not seem
     of the kind to be upset by unexpected visitors and similar small domestic accidents.
It was a hot-dinner Sunday at the cottage. These occurred alternately; on the in between
     Sundays Julia, supported by Johnny and the Captain, went to church. On those sacred to hot
     dinners she stayed at home and did the cooking, the Captain staying with her. Mr. Gillat used
     to also in the winter, but lately, during the spring, he had been induced to teach in the
     Sunday school, and now went every Sunday to the village, first to teach and afterwards to
     conduct his class to church.
It was Mr. Stevens, the Rector of Halgrave, who had made this surprising suggestion to Mr.
     Gillat. He, good man, had in the course of time been to see his parishioners at the remote
     cottage, grinding along the deep sandy road on his heavy old tricycle; but it was not during
     the visit that he thought of Johnny as a teacher; it was when
      he made further acquaintance with him at Halgrave. Johnny was the member of the
     party who went most often to the village shop; he liked the expedition, it gave him a feeling
     of importance; he also liked gossiping with the woman who kept the shop, and he dearly loved
     meeting the village children. On one of these occasions, when Johnny was engaged in making
     peace between two little girls—little girls were his specialty—the rector met him and it was
     then it occurred to him that Mr. Gillat might help in the school. It was not much of an honour,
     the school was in rather a bad way just now, and boasted no other teachers than the rector and
     a raspy-tempered girl of sixteen, but Johnny was much flattered. He thought he ought to refuse;
     he was quite sure he could not teach; the idea of his doing so was certainly new and strange;
     he was also sure he was not virtuous enough. But in the end he was persuaded to try; Julia told
     him that he might hear the catechism with an open book, choose the Bible tales he was surest
     of, to read and explain, and have his class of little girls to tea very often. So it came about
     that Mr. Gillat set out Sunday after Sunday to school, and if his reading and expounding of the
     Scriptures was less in accord with modern light than the traditions that held in the childhood
     of the nation, no one minded; the children at Halgrave were not painfully sharp, and they soon
     got to love Mr. Gillat with a friendly lemon-droppish love which was not critical.
Captain Polkington did not approve of the Sunday-school teaching, especially on those days
     when he had to clean the knives. The Sunday when Joost Van Heigen came was one of these. The
     Captain watched Mr. Gillat's preparations with a disgusted face; at last he remarked, "I wonder
     if you think you do any good by this nonsense?"
     
Johnny, who had got as far as the doorstep, stopped and considered rather as if the idea had
     just occurred to him.
"There must be teachers," he said at length, looking round at the open landscape; "and there
     aren't many about."
"You are a fine teacher!" the Captain sneered.
Mr. Gillat rubbed his finger along the edge of the Bible he carried. "I was wild," he
     confessed; "yes, I was, I don't think—but then the rector said—and Julia—"
His meaning was rather obscure, but possibly the Captain followed it although he did cut him
     short by saying, "I should never have expected it of you; if any one had told me that you, one
     of us, would take to this sort of thing, I would not have believed it. I mean, if they had told
     me in the old days, before things were changed and broken up, when we were still alive and
     things moved at a pace—when a man knew if he were alive or dead and whether it was night or
     morning."
"Yes, yes," Johnny said, but not altogether as if he regretted the passing of those golden
     days; "things were different then; we didn't think of it then."
"Teaching in the Sunday school?" the Captain asked. "Not quite! And if we had, we shouldn't
     have thought of coming to it even when we had got old and foolish."
Johnny looked uncomfortable and unhappy; then a bright idea occurred to him. "There wasn't a
     Sunday school there," he said. "You remember the hill station?"
Just then Julia called from the house, "Father, I believe we might have a dish of turnip tops
     if you would get them. Johnny, you will be late if you don't start soon."
Johnny promptly started, and the Captain, less promptly, sauntered away to find a basket for
     the turnip tops,
      muttering the while something about people whose religion took the form of going
     out and leaving others to do the work.
But by the time Joost Van Heigen arrived, the Captain was quite amiable again. He had had a
     quiet morning with nothing to do after the turnip tops were brought in and the knives cleaned,
     and Johnny had had a long tiring walk home from church in a hot sun and a high wind, which
     Captain Polkington felt to be a just dispensation of Providence to reward those who stopped at
     home and cleaned knives. Joost arrived not long after Mr. Gillat; Julia heard the gate click as
     she was taking the meat from before the fire.
"Who is that, Johnny?" she asked.
Johnny, who had just come down-stairs after taking off his Sunday coat, looked out of the
     window.
"I don't know," he said; "a young man."
Julia, having deposited the joint on the dish, went to the kitchen door. "Put the meat where
     it will keep hot," she said to Johnny; "I expect it's some one who thinks the last people live
     here still; fortunately there is enough dinner."
She pushed open the unlatched door and saw the visitor going round to the front. "Joost!" she
     exclaimed. "Why, Joost, is it really you?"
She ran down the garden path after him and he, turning just before he reached the front door,
     stopped.
"Good-morning, miss," he said solemnly, removing his hat with a sweep. "I hope I see you
     well. I do not inconvenience you—you are perhaps engaged?"
"Come in," Julia answered; "I am glad to see you!"
There was no mistaking the sincerity of her tone; Joost's solemn face relaxed a little. "You
     are not occupied?" he said; "I do not disturb you?"
     
"Yes, occupied in dishing up the dinner," Julia said, "which is just the best of all times
     for you to have come. Johnny!" she called; "Johnny, Joost is here."
Mr. Gillat, who had been carefully placing the dish where the cinders would fall into it,
     came to the door.
"This is Mr. Gillat, a very old friend of mine," Julia explained, and Joost bowed deeply,
     offering his hand and saying, "I hope that you are well, sir."
Whereupon Mr. Gillat impressed, imitated him as nearly as he could, and Julia looked
     away.
They had dinner in the kitchen on Sundays as well as week days, they made no difference
     to-day. Joost looked round him once or twice; he had never seen a place like this. It was the
     front kitchen; the cooking and most of the house-work was done in the back one, a big barn-like
     place with doors in all corners. The front one was half a kitchen and half a sitting-room,
     warm-coloured, with red-tiled floor and low ceiling, heavily cross-beamed and hung with herbs
     and a couple of hams, in great contrast to the whiteness of the kitchen at the bulb farm. There
     were brass and copper pots and pans such as he knew, but they reflected an open fire, a dirty
     extravagance unknown to Mevrouw. Joost glanced at the fire, and it is to be feared that he was
     at heart a traitor to his native customs. Then he looked at the open window where the sunshine
     streamed in—as was never permitted in Holland—and he wondered if it really spoilt things very
     much, and, being a florist, thought it certainly would spoil the tulips in the mug that stood
     on the wide sill.
During dinner they spoke English for the sake of the Captain and Mr. Gillat; Joost spoke
     well, if slowly, with a careful and accurate precision. He also observed much, both of outside
     things, as the fact that Johnny and the Captain cleared the table while Julia sat still, con
     trary to Dutch custom. And also of things less on the surface—as that Julia was
     head of the household and that Captain Polkington was not the impressive and authoritative
     person Mijnheer seemed to think. Concerning this last fact he made no remark when, on his
     return home, he described the ways and customs of Julia's cottage to his parents. The
     description served Mevrouw at least, as representative of all English households ever
     afterwards.
When dinner was done and everything cleared up, or rather Julia's part, she took Joost into
     the garden.
"Now," she said in Dutch, "let us come out and talk and look at things."
They went out and he began to admire her orderly garden and to tell her why this plant had
     done well and that one had failed. He did not speak of the blue daffodil, he thought he could
     better ask about that a little later. She did not speak of it either by name; he and it were so
     inseparably connected in her mind.
"Come along," she said, when he stopped to look into a tulip to see if its centre was as
     truly black as it should have been. "Come and see it."
He followed her obediently, but asked what it was he was to see.
"The blue daffodil, of course," she said.
He stopped dead. "You have got it here?" he exclaimed. "You have not sold it?"
"Certainly not."
"But why—why?" he stared at her in amazement. "You wanted money, it was for that you wanted
     the bulb, to sell; you told me so. Do you not want money now?"
"Oh, yes," Julia said; "but that is an incurable disease hereditary in our family."
"You do want money?" he inquired mystified. "This
      inheritance is small, not enough? Why, then, did you not sell the bulb?"
Julia shrugged her shoulders. "I could not very well," she said.
"But why not? You thought to do so at one time; your intention was to sell it if you
     had—"
"Stolen it? Yes, that is quite true, and it would not have mattered then. If I had stolen it
     I might as well have sold it; one dishonourable act feels lonely without another; it generally
     begets another to keep itself company."
Joost looked at her uncomprehendingly. "But why," he persisted, clinging to the one thing he
     did understand, "why did you not sell it? It was for that I gave it to you, to do with as you
     pleased; I knew you would do only what was right and necessary."
Julia could have smiled a little at this last word; it seemed as if even Joost had learnt to
     temper right with necessity to suit her dealings, but she only said, "That was one reason why I
     could not sell it. You expected me to do right, so I was obliged to do it; faith begets
     righteousness as dishonour begets dishonour."
"I do not quite understand," he began, but she cut him short.
"No," she said; "we always found it difficult to make things quite plain, it is no use trying
     now. Come and see the daffodil, you will understand that, at all events, and better than I do.
     It is not quite fully out yet, but very nearly, and—please don't be disappointed—it is not a
     real true blue daffodil at all."
She took him to the chosen spot and showed him the plant—a bunch of long narrow leaves rising
     from the brown earth, and in the midst of them a single stalk supporting a partly opened
     flower. In shape it was single,
      like the common wild blossom, only much bigger; but in colour, not blue as was
     expected, but streaked in irregular unblended stripes of pure yellow and pure blue. The marking
     was as hard and unshaded as that of the old-fashioned brown and yellow tulips which children
     call bulls'-eyes, and the effect, though bizarre, was not at all pretty. Julia did not think it
     so, and she did not expect any one else to either; but Joost, when he saw the streaky flower,
     gave a little inarticulate exclamation and, dropping on his knees on the path, lifted the bell
     reverently so that he might look into it.
"Ah!" he said softly; "ah, it is beautiful, wonderful!" He looked up, and Julia, seeing the
     rapt and humble admiration of his face, forgot that there was something ludicrous in the sight
     of a young man kneeling on a garden path reverently worshipping a striped flower. It was no
     abstract admiration of the beautiful, and no cultivated admiration for the new and strange; it
     was the love of a man for his work and appreciation of success in it, even if the success were
     another's; also, perhaps, in part, the expression of a deep-seated national feeling for
     flowers.
"Is it what you wished?" Julia asked gently, conscious that she was, as always, a long way
     off from Joost.
"I did not wish it," he said, "because I did not foresee it. No one could foresee that it
     would come, though it always might. It is a novelty, an accident of nature perhaps, but
     beautiful, wonderful!"
"Is it a real novelty?" Julia asked. "Just as much as your first blue daffodil was? Oh, I am
     glad! Then you have two now."
"I?" Joost said in surprise. "No, not I; this is yours, not mine; you have grown it."
"That's nothing," Julia returned easily; "you gave me
      the bulb; it is really your bulb; I only just put it into the ground, I have had
     nothing to do with the novelty."
But if she thought to dispose of the matter in that way she soon found she was mistaken;
     there were apparently laws governing bulb growing which were as inviolable as any governing
     hereditary titles. The man who bloomed the bulb was the man who had produced the novelty—if
     novelty it was; he could no more make over his rights to another than a duke could his coronet.
     In vain Julia protested that it was by the merest chance that Joost had hit on this particular
     sort to give her, that it was only an accident which had prevented him from blooming it
     himself. He said that did not matter at all, and when she failed to be convinced, added that
     possibly, had he kept the bulb, the result might not have proved the same; her soil and
     treatment were doubtless both different.
Julia laughed at the idea, saying she knew nothing about soil and treatment. But she made no
     impression on Joost and apparently did not alter the case; the laws of the bulb growers were
     not only like those of the "Medes and Persians which alter not," but also refused to be bent or
     evaded even by a Polkington.
"It is yours," Joost said, as he took a last look at the flower before he rose from his
     knees; "the great honour is yours, and I am glad of it."
There was something in his tone which reminded Julia of that talk they had had in the little
     enclosed place on the last day she was at the bulb farm. She hastily submitted so as to avoid
     the too personal. "What am I to do with the honour?" she asked. "I do not know, that is one
     reason why it is absurd for me to have it."
"You must name your flower," he told her; "and then you must exhibit it. Fortunately you are
     in time for the show in London."
     
"But I can't go to London," Julia said; "it is out of the question for me to leave home even
     if I could afford the fare, which I cannot."
Joost answered there was no need; he could arrange everything for her. "I can take the
     daffodil to London with me," he said. "It must be lifted—you have a flower pot, then it must be
     tied with care, and it will travel quite safely."
"But," Julia objected; "if it is exhibited with my name, and you say my name as the grower
     must appear, your father will hear of it and then he will know that you gave me a bulb—it
     cannot be exhibited. I do not care about a certificate of merit or whatever one gets."
"It must be exhibited," Joost said; "as to my father, he knows already, I have told him; that
     does not stand in the way."
To this Julia had nothing to say; perhaps in her heart she was a little ashamed because she
     had suspected him of the half honesty of only telling what was necessary when it was necessary,
     that she herself was likely to have practised in his case.
"Now you must call your flower a name," he said, "as I called mine Vrouw Van Heigen."

"I will call it after you," Julia said.
But Joost would not have that. "That will not do; the blue daffodil is already a Van Heigen;
     there cannot be another, it will make confusion."
"Well, I'll call it the honest man, then; that will be you."
Joost did not like that either; he thought it very unsuitable. "Why not name it after"—he
     began; he had meant to say "your father," but recalling that gentleman, he changed it to—"some
     one of whom you are fond."
Julia hesitated. "I like the honest man," she said;
     "but as you say it is not suitable, the blue daffodil is really the honest one,
     this is too mixed—I shall call it after Johnny; I am fond of him."
But Joost was romantic; it was only natural with the extreme and almost childish simplicity
     of his nature there should be some romance, and there was nothing to satisfy that sentiment in
     Mr. Gillat. "Johnny?" he said; "yes, but it is not very pretty; it does not suggest a beautiful
     flower. Why not call it after the heroine of some book or a friend or comrade? Perhaps"—Joost
     was only human—"he with whom you went walking on the Dunes."
"Him?" Julia said. "I never thought of that. He was a friend certainly, and a good comrade;
     he tried hard to get me out of that scrape; he would have stood by me if I had let him—the same
     as you did—you were both comrades to me then. I tell you what, shall I call it 'The Good
     Comrade?' Then it would be after you both and Johnny too; Johnny would certainly stand by me
     through thick and thin, share his last crust with me, or father, give me the whole of it. Yes,
     we will call the daffodil 'The Good Comrade,' and it shall have three godfathers."
With this Joost was satisfied, even though he had to share what honour there was with two
     others. Mr. Gillat, of course, when he was told, was much pleased; he even found he was now
     able to admire the wonderful flower, though before, he had agreed with Julia's opinion of it.
     To Captain Polkington not much was said about it.
"Johnny," Julia said, as they stood watching Joost pot the bulb, "you are not to tell father
     how valuable this is. He will find out quite soon enough; people are sure to bother me to sell
     it after it has been exhibited, and I am not going to."
"No," Johnny said; "of course not, naturally not."
     
So Captain Polkington had no idea why Joost carried away a carefully tied-up flower pot when
     he left the cottage that afternoon. He only thought the young man must have a most remarkable
     enthusiasm for flowers to so burden himself on a long walk.
And in due time the wonderful streaked daffodil, "Narcissus Triandrus Striatum, The Good
     Comrade," grown by Miss Snooks of White's Cottage, Halgrave, was exhibited at the Temple Show.
     And bulb growers, professional and amateur, waxed enthusiastic over it. And the general public
     who went to the show, admired it or not, as their taste and education allowed them. And among
     the general public who went, was a Miss Lillian Farham, a girl who, last September, had
     travelled north with carnations in her coat and Rawson-Clew in a corner of the railway
     carriage. Miss Farham was an enthusiastic gardener, and having means and leisure and a real
     taste for it, she had some notable successes in the garden of her beautiful home; and when she
     was in town she never missed an opportunity of attending a good show, seeing something new, and
     learning what she could. She was naturally much interested in the new streaked daffodil; so
     much so, that she spoke of it afterwards, not only to those people who shared her taste, but
     also to at least one who did not.
Rawson-Clew was back in London. He had not been back long, but already he had begun the
     preliminaries of a search for Mr. Gillat. He decided that it would be easier to find him than
     Julia, who might possibly have changed her name to oblige her family, and who certainly would
     be better able to hide herself, if she had a mind to, than Mr. Gillat. He had not as yet been
     able to devote many days to the search, and had got no further than
      preliminaries; still he could already see that it was not going to be easy and
     might possibly be long. He did not go to the show of spring flowers; he did not feel the least
     interest in it, but when by chance he met Lillian Farham she spoke of it to him and also of the
     new daffodil.
"It was grown at Halgrave, too," she said; "that is not so very far from your part of
     Norfolk, is it?"
"Fifteen or twenty miles," Rawson-Clew answered.
"Is it so much as that?" she said; "I thought it was nearer; of course, then, you can't tell
     me anything about the grower."
He could not; it is probable even if the place had been much nearer, he still could not,
     seeing that it was some years since he had been to "his part of Norfolk." However, he gave
     polite attention to Miss Farham, who went on to describe the wonderful flower of mixed yellow
     and blue.
"Blue?" Rawson-Clew's interest became more real; he had once heard of blue in connection with
     a daffodil. It was one evening on a long flat Dutch road—the evening he had tied Julia's shoe.
     She had spoken of it, she had begun to say, when he stopped the confession that he thought she
     would afterwards regret, that she could not take the blue daffodil.
"What is the name?" he asked; he meant of the grower in Norfolk, though he would have been
     puzzled to say why he asked.
Miss Farham, however, mistook his meaning and thought he was asking about the flower. "'The
     Good Comrade,'" she said, and fortunately she did not see his surprise. "Rather quaint, is it
     not?" she went on. "Easier to remember, too, than some obscure grand duchess, or the name of
     the grower or his wife after whom
     new flowers are usually called. The blue daffodil, you know, is called after one
     of the grower's relatives—Vrouw Van Heigen."
Rawson-Clew said "Yes," though he did not know it before. It struck him as interesting now;
     the Van Heigens had a blue daffodil then, and Julia went to them for some purpose besides
     earning a pittance as companion. She had not taken a blue daffodil; she said so; she also said
     at another time she had failed in the object of her coming and that failure and success would
     have been alike discreditable. Poor Julia! And now here was some one in Norfolk exhibiting a
     daffodil of mixed blue and yellow called, by a strange coincidence, "The Good Comrade." Of
     course, it was only a coincidence and yet, when reason is not helping as much as it ought, one
     is inclined to take notice of signs and coincidences.
"What is the name of the grower of this new flower?" Rawson-Clew asked.
Miss Farham told him.
"Snooks," he repeated thoughtfully; she imagined he was trying to remember if he had heard
     the name before. He was not; he was wondering if any one ever really started in life with such
     a name; if, rather, it did not sound more like the pseudonym of one who was indifferent to
     public credence, and possibly public opinion.
Rawson-Clew was not able to tell Miss Farham anything about the grower of the streaked
     daffodil; he was obliged to own that he had never heard of her before. But he made it his
     business to find out what he could in the shortest possible time; this he did not mention to
     Miss Farham. What he discovered did not amount to much, very little in fact, but such as it
     was, it was enough to bring him to Halgrave.


